Hen: Do: Carry Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthensis, et Honmi: Ord: Balnia
Eques.


THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY. From the Year MDCXIII. To MDCXLIV. IN XVIII
BOOKS.

Written Originally in Italian, By Pietro Giovanni Capriata, DR at Law.

And rendered in English By HENRY Earl of MONMOUTH.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, and are to be sold by Tho. Dring, at the George
near St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. MDCLXIII.

IMPRIMATUR,

Whitehall, January 10. 1662. William Morice.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
IT has always (Judicious Reader) among the wisest of men been esteemed a Task
most difficult, to compose the Histories of those Times wherein the Persons
chiefly concerned might (yet living) behold their great or more minute Actions
unmasked or displayed to the world; And therefore most have been, and still are
of opinion, That such an Attempt ought not to be made by any but a Person of so
resolute a Temper as might neither be swayed by Fear nor Flattery, nor yet
steered by an over-weaning Opinion; for whilst the Biass runs on the first side
men dare not speak even the truth it self; the second glosses even bad Actions,
as if to the World it would make Vice appear Virtue; and the third represents
things not as indeed they were, or were intended, but as we fondly imagine or
conceive them.

The Task performed by the Learned Capriata, Author of the ensuing History, was
not only of this difficult Nature, but had likewise many other Embroils and
Entanglements sufficient to have daunted any less Judicious Undertaker, so many
both particular and interwoven Interests of a number of petty Princes (though
all united or relying upon those three great Ones, of the Church, King of
France, and King of Spain) being sufficient to create such infinite Entrigues
as were not to be cleared or described but by a great and perspicacious
Intelligence: And yet has our Learned Author waded through all these
difficulties, and by taking no less care in clearing the Causes then describing
the Effects of these late Italian Dissentions deservedly gained the name of an
Excellent Historian.

And it was certainly a true and deliberate knowledge of all this and more that
induced the ever to be Honored Henry Earl of Monmouth (after having made so
many Excellent Italian Pieces speak English, with an Industry seldom found in
the Nobility of our Nation) to make choice of this, which is now become the
Posthume Child of so Excellent a Parent, and which may look (though there needs
no farther Remembrancer of his never dying Fame) like a new Phoenix raising it
self out of his ashes.

And surely besides the Excellency of the Composure and Delicacy of the Style,
he was invited or enticed by Delights far more sublime to the Translation of
this History. To find what Causes should engage the Potent Monarchs of France
and Spain in the Quarrels and Dissentions of these little Princes of Italy, and
how their Interests are involved or dependent, must needs be pleasant; To trace
the Policies of the grave Spaniard and sober Italian, accounted Crafts-Masters
in that Art, cannot be less delightful; but to behold such a connection of
Entrigues, as if the whole Tragedy were rather a Comedy, where the end of one
Act leaves but a greater desire and expectation of what shall succeed in the
next, must needs be the most agreeable of all.

These, or such like, might possibly be the Motives or Incentives of the Earl
of Monmouth to continue (with a Generous Soul) to communicate the Excellencies
of Foreign Nations to his own Contrymen, which else must have been hidden
to all except himself or some few more who by Travel or Industry might have
learnt the Italian Tongue; unless some other Worthy Spirit, like to his, would
have undertaken so good a Work, though few are now found so industriously to
prosecute the Public Good.

But lest, being hurried into a Discourse that may possibly require a Satyr, I
should obstruct my intended brevity, give me leave to assert thus much,
(omitting all that I might say of my own Judgment or Experience) and I think I
may do it without Hyperbole; That the History in its Original must needs be
Excellent, because the Earl of Monmouth made choice of it to Translate; and the
Translation cannot be ill rendered, because the Earl of Monmouth did it, who was
Master both of the English and Italian Tongues.

The Contents.
BOOK I. FRancis Duke of Mantua and Montferrat, being dead, Charles Emanuel,
Duke of Savoy, pretends the return of his Daughter Margaret, Wife to the late
Francis, into Piedmont, together with Mary her only Daughter. Cardinal
Ferdinando, Brother and Successor to Francis, retards his sister in Law's
return, and keeps his Niece in Mantua: Hereupon differences arise between the
two Dukes; wherefore the Duke of Savoy renewing his ancient claim to
Montferrat, which was pretended to by his Predecessors, assaults that State at
unawares; possesses himself of the Cities of Alba and Trino; endeavors the
like of Montcalvo, but not being able to get the Fort, levies people to take
it. The condition of Italy is also given in the Prooemium; then by way of
digression, the Duke of Savoys pretenses to Montferrat is discoursed upon; and
many other Interests and Accidents which occurred between the said Duke and the
Court of Spain, at several Times, and upon diverse Occasions. Page 1 BOOK II.
The Wars of Montferrat are continued to be related; as also the Provisions and
Negotiations made by the Duke of Mantua and other Princes. The Surrender of the
Castle of Montcalvo: The oppugning of Nizza della Paglia: Prince Victorio's
going to Spain: Orders sent from that Court to Italy, touching the Protection
of Montferrat, and the Restitution of the Tow^ that were taken. In execution
whereof Nizza is freed, and the other Towns restored to the Duke of Mantua. The
War of Garfagnana, between the Duke of Modena and the Commonwealth of Lucca;
which being accommodated by peace, the business of Montferrat is reassumed, and
diverse Negotiations past between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua; which whilst
they are in Treaty, Spains final Resolution comes touching the quiet of Italy,
and the security of Montferrat: Prince Victorio returns to Italy badly
satisfied with the King and Court of Spain. 31 BOOK III. The Duke of Savoy is
angry that the King should force him to lay down Arms, and to disband his men;
which refusing to do he is assaulted by a Spanish Army, led on by the Duke of
Millain; who being entered by the Vercelles into the Confines of Piedmont, and
understanding that the Duke was gone to before Novara, returns immediately to
the State of Millain to drive him from thence: Being returned, he begins to
build the Fort Scandovalle, not far from Vercelles. The Duke retreating to
Vercelles, desires succor from the French, Venetians, and other Princes; many
whereof Treat of Agreement by their Ambassador sent into Piedmont: The War
continues the mean while with the Duke; in pursuit whereof many accidents
happening, they came at last to a day of Battle near the City: Wherein the
Spanish Army being Victors, it goes before that City, whither the Duke was
withdrawn with his men; about which the Governor having employed much time to
little purpose; At last peace is concluded by the means of Princes Ministers.
59 BOOK IV. The King being but badly satisfied with the peace of Asti makes Don
Pietro di Toledo Governor of Millain; Between whom and the Duke new
differences arise ^ouching the execution of the Articles of peace: The
Venetians by reason of the Slavonians, who molest their Navigation in the Gulf,
make war in Friuli against the Archduke, and in Istria against the Emperor;
and possessing themselves of many Towns in Friuli, come before Gradisca; from
whence they depart not many days after by reason of Treaties of Agreement which
were introduced. The Duke of Savoy complaining still of the not observance of
peace, fears to be again assaulted by the Governor, and therefore prepares for
war again: He joins underhand with the Venetians, and calls Diguieres, Marshal
of France, into Piedmont; but is quickly and unexpectedly assaulted in Savoy by
the Duke de Nemours, who is somented with moneys and promises from the
Governor of Millain. The King of France, to provide against the commencing
uproars in Lombardy, sends Monsieur di Bettuve thither; and the Pope Monsignore
Lodovisio, Archbishop of Bologna. Preparations for a new war are renewed in
the State of Millain, and in Piedmont, which is again begun betwixt the Duke
and the Governor, who draws near the Confines of Piedmont with an Army. 113
BOOK V. The Duke unexpectedly assaults the Spanish Army which was entered his
State; and being beaten retreats to Assigliano; From whence finding that the
enemy went to possess themselves of Crescentino, he departs, and speedily
preventing them, defends it. The Spanish Army take Santya, and San Germano: The
Duke endeavoring to keep back their Victuals was forced to come to a Battle,
where he was again worsted. The Popes Nuntio, and the French Ambassador hold
the Governors Forces in hand by introducing new Treaties of Peace: In the
interim the Marquess of Mortara entering le Langhe takes many of the Dukes
Castles; and Don Sanchio di Luna takes Gattinara: Winter coming on, the
Governor fired Santya; and leaving a Garrison in St. Germano sends the resi of
his Army into their Quarters, and retires into the State of Millain. The Duke,
the Prince his Son being come to him from Savoy, and the Marsh^ Diguieres from
France, with new men, takes the Principality of Messerano, and makes himself
master of San Damiano Alba, and Monteggio, Tow^ in Montferrat: Wherefore
Mortara firing Canelli, abandons the Langhe. The Marshal being sent for back by
the King, returns with his men to France. The Venetians whilst they are
busying themselves to little purpose in Friuli, are molested at Sea by the
Spanish Fleet, sent by the Viceroy of Naples into the Gulf; which not being
able to draw the Venetian Fleet to fight, take three Galleys richly fraught.
149 BOOK VI. The Governor of Millain goes with his Army to before Vercelles,
and besieging it on all sides, and the Town not being able to be relieved,
after a long Siege he takes it upon Articles. The Capitulations of Peace, as
well for what concerned Piedmont as Friuli, are Treated of in the Court of
Spain, and are concluded in the Court of France; as also at Madrid. The Duke of
Savoy being assisted by the French, who came into Piedmont after the Surrender
of Vercelles, takes some Towns in Montferrat, and in Allessandria; And at last,
in pursuance of the Capitulations stipulated in the Courts of France and Spain,
the Peace is concluded in Pavia between the Governor of Millain and the French
Embessador. The Viceroy of Naples sends some ^lieoons into the Gulf in defense
of the Rag^siens, who were vexed by the Venetian ^t; which Galleoons get the
better, in fight, of the Venetians. A Conspiracy is discovered in Venice, and
some rumors are spread abroad upon the Confines of Venice toward Millain,
between the Spanish Soldiers and those of the Commonwealth; which being
appeased, a period is put to the war, and Italy is restored to her former
peace. 186 BOOK VII. In this seventh Book you have the condition of the affairs
of Italy, after the appeasement of the War of Piedmont. The death of two Popes,
as also the death of the King of Spain, and of the Emperor. The Insurrections
in the Valtoline; the occasion of new rumors which arose from hence in Italy;
of new jealousies, and of new Leagues made by many Princes against the Crown of
Spain. The Forts of the Valtoline deposited into the Popes hands. The Prince of
Wales his Journey into Spain. The Prince of Urbin's death: and the approaching
Escheat of that State: And lastly, the seeds of new troubles rising between the
Genoese and the Duke of Savoy, by reason of their having purchased the Fee-farm
of Zuccarello, whereat the Duke was displeased. Here are also touched, by way
of passage, some accidents of War, which happened in Germany, Flanders, and in
the East and West Indies. 212 BOOK VIII. In this Eighth Book you have the
Description of the Commonwealth of Genoa; her Interest and good Correspondency
with the Crown of Spain. The Diet held at Susa, wherein two attempts are
resolved upon; the one against the Valtoline, the other against Genoa; for the
execution whereof many preparations are made both in France and in Italy. The
French fall down into the Valtoline, under the conduct of the Marquess of
Coure; and driving the Churches Forces from the Forts which were deposited in
the Popes hands, they make themselves masters thereof: they likewise fall down
into Piedmont, under de Diguieres Grand Constable, and joining with the Duke of
Savoy, and with his Forces, go to the Enterprise of Genoa, and proceed far in
that State; the Pope sends his Nephew Legate into France. The Genoeses are
reduced into a very dangerous condition by hostile Arms. 257 BOOK IX. By relief
of Monyes and Victuals sent from Spain, and Men from Naples, Genoa is comforted
in the midst of her troubles; she is encouraged by the wants of the Enemies
Army, and through the disagreeing of their Commanders; and is at last wholly
freed by Friends coming into the Fi^ld with a powerful Army. The Enemies Army
retreats from the Enterprise of Genoa, an^ attempts Savona; but being overtaken
by Feria, retires to Piedmont. Feria takes the City of Acqui; he goes
afterward to Asti, and from thence to Verrua; where he stays long to little
purpose, l^aving many of his men, and being forced to give over the Enterprise,
returns with his Army much lessened, into the State of Millain: many actions
happen at the same time in the besieging and defending of Riva di Chiavenna;
wherein the Spaniards have still the better of the French; they drive the
French at last out of the Valtoline, and raise the Siege of Riva. The English
Fleet falling upon Spain, there is repulsed; and having in vain endeavored to
take the Plate-Fleet which came from America, retires into England, torn by
tempests. A Discourse upon the quality and usual Navigation of the
Plate-Fleet: the Apostolic Legate returns from France to Rome; and is sent
from Rome to Spain; whither being come, he finds the Peace concluded between
the two Crowns; and the Affairs of Italy, and of the Valtoline, composed. The
Pope, and all the Princes of the League are very much displeased with this
Peace; as also all the Princes and the Court of France. Some of them do
therefore conspire against the Kings person: in pursuance of the Peace, the
Forts of the Valtoline are restored, and demolished. New occasions of disgust
between the Genoese and the Duke of Savoy. The Duke of Guise his Fleet goes
from Marcelles, without having done any thing. The Duke of Mantua dies; and
long after, his Brother, who succeeded him in his Principality. The Genoese
Factors, who were interessed with the Crown of Spain, are much prejudiced in
their private fortunes, by reason of the alteration of Payments, and of other
Decrees, made to their prejudice, by the King. 304 BOOK X. The Duke of Nevers
succeeds Vincenzo in the Dukedom of Mantua and Montferrat; he is opposed by the
Emperor, King of Spain, and Duke of Savoy. Don Gonzallo di Cordua, the new
Governor of Millain, having divided Montferrat with the Duke of Savoy, goes
with his Army to before Cassalle; which whilst he endeavors to take, the Duke
takes Alba, Trino, Montcalvo, and many other Towns belonging unto him by the
division. A Conspiracy is discovered in Genoa, whereof the Duke of Savoy being
found the Author, he pretends the impunity of the Conspirators. The Spanish
Agents being desirous to satisfy him, favor this pretention; which
occasioneth some distasts and jealousies between the Commonwealth and the Crown
of Spain. Succors fall into Italy from France, in behalf of the Duke of
Nevers; but being opposed by the Duke of Savoy are soon dissipated. The
Spaniards take Nizza, Ponsone, and other Towns in Montferrat; and finding it
too hard to assault Cassalle, they fall to besiege it; they are forced to
forsake it by the Kings coming with great Forces into Piedmont. Which whilst
the Duke endeavors to oppose he is beaten by the Kings men, in a conflict near
Susa, wherein the King being victorious takes Susa, and forces the Duke and the
Governor of Millain to an agreement; by which Cassalle is freed, and the
States of Mantua and Montferrat secured to Nevers. The King returns to France.
Marquess Spinola is made Governor of Millain, goes from Spain into Italy, to
provide either by War or Peace, for the Affairs of Spain which are in a bad
condition, by reason of the preceding accidents. 350 BOOK XI. The Articles of
Susa not being observed forces the King of France to prepare a new Army for
Italy. Marquess Spinola, the new Governor of Millain, sends men into
Montferrat: of all which he makes himself master, except Cassalle; whether the
French, abandoning the rest of Montferrat, withdraw themselves. The Cesarean
Army falls into Italy, under Count Collalto: and entering the Territories of
Mantua possess themselves of almost all the Towns of that Dukedom; and sitting
down about the Suburbs of Mantua, take some of them: they afterward fall to
oppugn Porto, but quit it by reason of the excessive cold weather. The Duke of
Savoy professing neutrality Negotiates with both parties, and endeavors to
sell his friendship as dear as he can. The French Ar^y falls into Piedmont,
conducted by Cardinal Richelieu; w^ being kep^ ^ery scarce of Victuals,
Quarters, and other Necessaries, by the D^ of Savoy, breaks with him, and going
to Pinarola takes i^, and some of the adjacent Towns. Marquess Spinola and
Collalto come with Forc^* ^o assist the Duke, whither also comes Cardinal
Barbarino, the Popes Legate, to treat of Peace: which not being able to ^e
made, Collalto returns to Mantua, and Spinola sits down before Cassalle. The
Legate returns to Bolognia, and Cardinal Richelieu to France; by whose
departure the French Army is weakened; being reinforced it endeavors to
relieve Cassalle, but being opposed by the Duke cannot do it; wherefore being
forced to keep beyond the Poe it meets with various fortunes, and takes some
Castles. The Seige of Cassalle proceeds with much difficulty. The Siege of
Mantua is brought ^o a final end; for, not being relieved by the Venetians, who
were ^outed by the Dutch at Valleggio, and being consumed by the Plague it is
at last taken and sacked, The Duke of Savoy dies at Savigliano. 393 BOOK XII.
Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, is succeeded by his Son Victorio Amadeo; who
finding that the French had taken Carignano, goes from Savigliano to recover
it, wherein failing he comes to a conflict, wherein the French have the better.
The French go from Carignano to Avigliana, which they take. Collalto having
taken Mantua comes into Piedmont with fresh Forces. Peace is treated of in
Italy, and in Germany; and not being able to be concluded in Italy, a Truce is
endeavored; which being refused by Spinola, he dies soon after; and after his
death, is accepted of by the Duke of Savoy, by Collalto, and by the Marquess of
San' Croce, who succeeds Spinola, in the Government of Millain, and in being
General. The Truce being expired, the French come with new Forces from France
to relieve Cassalle; and being come to the Trenches of Spinola's Camp, just as
they were beginning Battle, peace is concluded in conformity to the peace
formerly made in Germany; in execution whereof, the interessed Princes Agents
met in Chirasco, and there adjust the differences between the Dukes of Savoy
and Mantua; a great part of Montferrat is assigned over to the Duke of Savoy;
and the manner of restoring the States of Mantua and Montferrat is agreed upon:
as also the like of the Towns of Piedmont and of the Grisons Towns; after the
effectual restitution whereof, the King of France demands Pinarollo of the Duke
of Savoy, together with the whole Valley of Perosa, and obtains it. The
proceedings of the King of France and of Swedland in Germany, against the
Emperor, are treated of, and the Negotiation and Conclusion of Peace between
the Commonwealth of Genoa, and the Duke of Savoy: together with the miraculous
Fabric of the new Walls made at Genca, and the strange preservation of that
City from the Plague; wherewith the whole State of Genoa was infected, and more
then half Italy. This twelfth Book and the whole present History is concluded
with the Marriage between the King of Hungary, Son to the Emperor, and the
Infanta Mary, Sister to the King of Spain; and with the Duke of Urbin's death,
and the devolving of that State to the Apostolic See. 438 BOOK XIII. The Peace
of Italy, obtained by the Articles of Ratisbone and Cherasco, gives place for a
digression of things which happened elsewhere. This present Book tells you of the
Duke of Orleans his going from Flanders into Languedock, and how, being routed
by the Kings Forces, he was taken Prisoner. The Infanta Cardinal, Brother to
the King of Spain, his Voyage from Barcellona into Italy. The Duke of Feria his
marching from the State of Millain with a great Army, going for Germany, to
make way for the Cardinal Infanta, who prepared to go for Flanders: What the
said Feria did in Flanders. From hence we pass to the Narration of the Wars in
Germany; to the King of Swethland's death, and the like of Wallestine, with a
brief Examination of his actions, intentions, and of his end. The Emperors
Army takes the Field, led on after Wallestine's death by the King of Hungary,
Son and General to the Emperor, with what he did till the Cardinal Infanta
entered Germany, who parting with a great Army from Millain toward Flanders,
joins with the Emperors Army, and fights the Army of the League of Germans and
Swedes before Nordling, wherein the Austrians have the better. The Infanta
passes with his men into Flanders, where, when he came, he found a League made
between the King of France and the united Provinces, against the Spanish Empire
in those parts, which occasions an open breach between the two Crowns; the
occasion of which breach, with the reciprocal complaints, faults, and excuses
made by both Parties are diffusedly related; and how after the Battle which
happened upon the Confines of France and Flanders, between the Armies of the two
Crowns, the Wars passed into Italy. 483 BOOK XIV. This Book tells you the
redoubled going out of the Fleet from Naples against Provence, and the
accidental disaster of the latter. The occasion, rise, encounters and progress
of the French Forces, led by the Duke of Rhoan into the Valtoline. The
endeavors of the French to alienate the Princes of Italy from the Spanish
party, and to draw them over to their King. The Pope and Venetians move not.
The Duke of Savoy goes over to the French, m^re out of necessity then of good
will. The great Duke of Tuscany is constant to the Austrians. The Dukes of
Modena and Parma, and the Lord of Mirandola, negotiate with the French: the
Duke of Parma closes with the French, the others adhere to the Spaniards. The
Commonwealth of Genoa, notwithstanding the great damages suffered by her
Citizens from the Spaniards, and notwithstanding the distastes she had received
in her reputation, refuses to declare manifest neutrality, or partiality, yet
in fact keeps confident to both parties. The State of Millain is assaulted by
the French, and by the Dukes of Savoy and Parma; who going against Valenza del
Poe, befiege it, but it is relieved, and quite freed by the Spaniards. The Duke
of Rhoan, having routed the Dutch and Millain Forces, remain absolute lord and
master of the Valtoline. 528 BOOK XV. The King of Spain, for the preservation
of the State of Millain, sends a new Governor, new men, and good store of
money, thither. The Duke of Savoy returning thither with his men, and with
those of France, takes Bremi, and reduces it to a Fort Royal; and by frequent
inroads troubles that side of the Country. The Duke of Parma's Dominions are
assaulted by the Spanish Forces, after his going for France; and are defended
by Marquess Villa, who is sent thither by the Duke of Savoy, with a good
strength of Horse and Foot, and are defended by strong diversions till the
Spring; in the beginning whereof, the Duke of Parma returns from France,
endeavors by means of the Colleagues Forces to get into his Country, goes to
Nizza Della Paglia; being to throw down a great Trench which was made upon the
bank of Scrivia, he turns back; and repassing the Poe, endeavors to effect his
design on that side; but meeting with strong opposition there also, he is
forced to return; and passing again with some men over the Poe, he tarries with
them in Nizza, till such time as the Duke of Savoy, going with the body of the
Army into the Confines of Novara, to annoy that part of the State, may divert
the Governor from guarding the grand Trench, and leave free passage by that
way for the Duke of Parma; Who by several accidents abandoning the design,
marched with a few men toward the Sea; where getting into a little Vessel he
passes Incognito into Lavigiana, and gets into his own Territories. The Duke
of Savoy passes succesfully the Tesino, and causes such terror and confusion
in Millain, as the Governor is forced to abandon the Trench, and defend
Millain. And going with all his men toward the Enemies Camp, he assaults it in
Tornavento; but the Duke freeing himself from the assault returns to the
greater L^ke; where being come, and fearing the Governor who was gone to
Romagnano would assault him on that side, resolves to return toward Piedmont.
The Governor seeing the State freed of the Enemies Army, betakes himself,
partly, to recover the Towns taken by the Enemy, partly, to resent himself on
Piedmont, and the Duke of Parma's State; and having sent what Forces he could
thither, he proceeds so far, as the Duke who was retired to Piacenza maintains
a siege till such time as, seeing no succor, he is forced to compound with the
Governor. The War of Parma being appeased, the Governor turns upon the Towns
in the Langhe, which were yet held by the Enemy; and having taken some of them,
he hears that the Duke raises Forces in the Canavese; he marches toward him,
and having in vain provoked him to battle, he sends Don Martino of Aragon with
a strong body of men to discover Vercelli, against whom Marquess Villa, who was
returned from the State of Parma, coming forth with a no less number of men, a
great skirmish is had, wherein the Marquess has the better. The Governor
understanding afterward, that Count Verrua was gone to besiege the Roccad'
Arazzo, he prepares to defend it: And succeeding fortunately therein, his
happiness was embittered by a great defeat which the Duke gave to Don Martino
of Aragon before Monbaldone. After which the Duke returning victorious to
Vercelli, within a month after dyed. Some Islands in Provence are taken by the
Fleet which came from Naples. A French Fleet comes from Britany, enters the
Mediterranean, with which another joins which was provided in Provence; both
which keep in the Ligustick Sea, doing but little good, and less in Sardignia,
and Winter in Tolone; but putting to Sea in the Spring, they recover the
Islands which were taken the year before by the Spanish Fleet. The Pope labors
to compose the Wars between Christian Princes, but in vain. A League is
concluded between the Crown of Spain and the Grisons, by which the Valtoline
returns, upon some conditions, under the ancient Dominion of the Grisons. The
State of Millain is at last freed from the French Forces, by the recovery of
Bremi. 572 BOOK XVI. The Duke of Savoy being dead, differences arise between
the Duchess Dowager, and the Princes, her Husbands Brothers, touching the
Guardianship of the young Children, and the Regency of the State. The Duchess
in the Princes absence is sworn Governess and Regent; being compelled by the
King of France, she renews League with him. The Governor of Millain goes to
before Vercelli, and after a long Siege takes it upon Articles. The Princes of
Savoy assisted by the Spaniards and Piedmontese take many Towns, and make much
progress; they go to before Turin, and having tarried before it some days,
retire without doing any thing; falling as before, to overrun Piedmont, they
are received every where; till Forces being sent to the Duchess from France,
under the Duke of Longueville, she recovers Chiavasco, and other Towns which
the Princes had taken. The Prince Cardinal, fearing Corneo, goes to defend it;
and Prince Thomaso, going once more with the Spanish Forces to before Turin,
surpriseth the Town; and the Governor of Millain coming in unto him, with all
their Forces, attempt the taking of the Citadel, whither the Duchess was
retired. The Siege is suspended by a Truce, which being ended, the French under
the new General, Count Hartcourt, take Cheri; but being presently besieged by
the Governor of Millain, they are forced through Famine to quit it, and
retreat in the face of the enemy to Carmagnuola. 628 BOOK XVII. You shall read
in this Book the Treaties of Agreement between the Dowager and the Princes; and
the interests between the Princes and the Governor of Millain; how the
Governor goes with a powerful Army to Cassalle; how it is relieved by
Harcourt; how he fought the Governor before he could bring in the succor, and
had the better of the Fight, and did not only relieve, but perfectly free the
place. Harcourt, being victorious, goes presently to Turin; he takes the
Capuchins Bridge over the Poe; fortifies himself there; and afterward begirts
the City with a vast Line, and endeavors to get it by Famine, Prince Thomaso
being in it; but ere long he sees the Governor upon the Hills with a powerful
Army, coming to relieve the besieged Prince; the Governor finding it
impossible to bring the succor by that way, strives to get a pass over the
River, toward Montcalleri: and having gotten it, he passes over the Poe;
where quitting the Hills, he takes up new quarters; and thinking to make the
French abandon the enterprise by Famine, he possesses himself of the Avenues
by which Victuals were brought to the Camp; so as they would have been quickly
made to remove, had not the Prince Thomaso, who was impatient of delay, made
the Governor to fall upon the Enemies Trenches, and to relieve him so; which
falling out unfortunately, and the Governor not thinking himself any longer
safe in his quarters beyond the Poe, returns to his quarters upon the Hills,
where he tarried, assisting the besieged in what he was able, till the City was
surrendered; which happened two months, and eleven days, after the unfortunate
assault given to the French Trenches, that the besieged City might be relieved.
Prince Thomaso comes out of Turin, and retreats to Inurea; where he is desired
by Monsigniore Mazzarini, who was come Ambassador from the King of France into
Piedmont a little before Turin was surrendered, to join with the French: but
Count Siruela coming to him from the Governor of Millain, he makes new
capitulations with him, to join with the Crown of Spain; and the Count Della
Rivera, being sent by the same Governor, to the same purpose, to the Prince
Cardinal, the Ambassador Mazzarini having notice thereof forces Prince
Thomaso to join with the French upon conditions; one of which was, that the
Prince should go to Paris within one months space; which condition was not
observed; for the Prince instead of going to France passes secretly to Nice,
where he and his brother re-conform their union to the Crown of Spain, to
Rivera; the Ambassador Mazzarini who went to Nice, to confirm the one Prince,
and to draw the other over to the French party, labored the contrary very
much; at the same time the Governor of Millain is sent for into Spain, and is
succeeded in that Government by Count Siruela; the French go to Montcalvo, take
the Town at their first arrival, and afterward the Castle, which yields
without expecting succor. 686. BOOK XVIII. The Crown of France, and French
Commanders, being but badly satisfied with Prince Thomaso, for his
non-observance of the Capitulation made by him, go to drive him out of Inurea;
which being better defended then assaulted holds out till the Governor sends
succor: who going afterward to before Chiavasso Forces the French almost to
quit the Enterprise, that they may relieve Chiavasso; and Don Vincenzo Gonzaga
coming to the French quarters before Inurea forces them, to their much
prejudice, to give over the Enterprise wholly; and the Prince enters joyfully
into the City. The Dowagers Generals recover Ceva, Mondovi, and the Castle of
Carru, and then joining with the French go to before Cuneo, and take it. The
Spaniards take Montcalvo. The Prince of Monaco drives out the Spanish Garrison,
and introduces the French, to the great prejudice of the Spanish Affairs; the
misfortunes whereof are by a short digression related. Cardinal Richlieu dies.
The Conde Duca falls from all Authority and Greatness in the Court of Spain.
The differences between the Dowager and the Princes are at last composed. The
Princes forsake the Spanish party and adhere unto the French. Prince Thomaso
joining with the French, after some small actions done to the prejudice of
Spain, goes with the Duke of Longueville with a strong Army to before Tortona,
which after a long time is taken; but some months after is re-taken with much
ado by the Spaniards: in which interim Prince Thomaso recovers Asti and all the
Towns that were held by the Spaniards in Piedmont, except Vercelli. 744
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK I.
The Contents.
FRancis, Duke of Mantua and Montferrate, being dead, Charles Emanuel, Duke of
Savoy, pretends the return of his Daughter Margaret, Wife to the late Francis
into Piedmont, together with Mary her only Daughter. Cardinal Ferdinando,
Brother and Successor to Francis, retards his Sister in Law's return, and keeps
his Niece in Mantua: Hereupon differences arise between the two Dukes;
wherefore the Duke of Savoy renewing his ancient claim to Montferrat, which was
pretended to by his Predecessors, assaults that State at unawares; possesses
himself of the Cities of Alba and Trino; endeavors the like of Moncalvo, but
not being able to get the Fort, levies people to take it. The Condition of
Italy is also given in the Prooemium; then by way of digression the Duke of
Savoys pretenses to Montferrate is discoursed upon; and many other Interests
and Accidents which occurred between the said Duke, and the Court of Spain, at
several Times, and upon diverse Occasions.

ITALY hoped long to continue that Peace which She had already enjoyed for so
many years, when by the unexpected death of Henry the Fourth, King of France,
she was freed of the great suspicion of War, which she had cause to apprehend,
by reason of the great preparations of that Kingdom: This hope was much
augmented, when Philip the Third, King of Spain, was friends with Charles
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, and laid down those Arms, and dismissed those men,
wherewith he threatened that Duke; so to oppose the French in the Dukedom of
Millain; which Duke Emanuel having at the same time made great preparation of
Arms, and holding strict Intelligence with King Henry, made it be doubted that
he intended to trouble Italy, and to assault the State of Millain, had he not
been interrupted by the death of Henry the Fourth of France, just when he was
ready for so great an Enterprise: And the less it was expected that King Philip
should let slip the occasion of resenting himself when the Duke was bereft of
his assistance from France by the death of King Henry, the more was his
goodness praised, and his mildness pleasing; for not minding what might
peradventure have happened if affairs had succeeded otherwise, he had more
respect to the good of Christendom, to the peace of Italy, and to his Alliance
with the Duke, then to the desire of revenge; a great incitement to all men,
but more to powerful Princes, when they think themselves injured, not only by
their inferiors, but by their equals: The Kings rage was much mitigated
toward the Duke by the great desire which the Princes of Italy seemed to have
thereof, by the intercession of Pope Paul the Fifth, and by the efficacious
entreaties made with much affection by Philebert, the Dukes second Son to the
King his Uncle, who was sent by his Father into Spain, to give satisfaction on
his behalf; but the Authority and favor of Mary Queen of France, was of no
less help herein; who by the death of her Husband having the Government of her
young Son the King, and being Regent of the Kingdom, did very seasonobly
interpose her self in this Reconciliation: For, though the Intelligence held
with the Duke, and the great preparations of that Kingdom, had caused great
Commotions and diffidence in the Court of Spain; yet it not being manifest
against whom the Arms and ends of that King were intended, it so fell out, That
his magnanimous thoughts ceasing by his death, as also the doubts and
suspicions conceived in Spain, by reason of those great preparations, the same
Peace and good correspondency continued between Spain and France, which
(though, if the King had lived, was very likely to have been disturbed) was
never demonstratively broken; And it making for the Queen to keep peace with
Spain, so to shun the troubles and contestations, which her Authority, and the
guidance of her Son King Lewis his affairs, a Minor of ten years old, might
probably meet with amidst Arms and Commotions in France, which was yet full of
many humors and Fractions, and of so many Religions; and wherein the wounds
and scars of the late civil Wars were not yet well healed, she wisely chose
rather to be aiding to the Duke by Negotiation then by Forces, which she must
have sent into Piedmont. The necessity of her backing the Dukes cause being
made to appear in Spain by reason; and the readiness of her Self and Kingdom
also by some preparations upon the Confines of Italy; the King pardoning so
great offenses, at the mediation of such Intercessors; partly admitting of the
Dukes justification, with such dissimulation as is sometimes used by Princes;
he gave order for the disbanding of his Army in the State of Millain, which was
designed to have assaulted Piedmont.

Affairs being thus composed, and Peace being proclaimed, to the satisfaction
of all men, the public Affairs of Italy were in so good a posture, and so
consolidated in a continual quiet, as there was no sign seen of any the least
appearing storm, which could any ways shake the solid Basis of her peaceful
condition, or the tranquillity of her former quiet; For the French, who were
the only, and without all question, the most powerful means to cause Novelty
and Commotions in Italy, being detained by their Kings minority, and busied in
the necessary care of the preservation of the Domestical affairs of the
Kingdom, were unable to employ themselves for the space of many years in
foreign affairs. Whence it was to be believed, that they would not, unprovoked,
disturb that peace which had been, with some Anxiety, endeavored by
themselves, and for their own interests: And the Spaniards, who being Masters
of the Islands of Sicily and Sardigna, of the Kingdom of Naples, and State of
Millain, did rule over the greatest and best part of Italy; though as being
Superior to the other Potentates, they might easily cause and continue
Commotions in her; yet being naturally apt to preserve peace, and having by the
experience of many years known how happy it was for them to keep the chief
place of Authority in Italy, by means of their so ample Dominions, peacefully
and quietly, it was no question but that they would be solicitous in preserving
her quiet for the future, as they had professed themselves to be in the former
and present Occurrences. The Dutch and Switzers adhered unto the Authority of
Spain; the latter by reason of the straight League with the State of Millain,
whereby they reaped much advantage, both to the private, and to the public:
And the former in respect of the Kings of Spain, who were the chief of the
House of Austria; so powerful in Germany by reason of the many Adherences and
great States which she has there, and of the Imperial Crown which has
continued in her by so many successions; by which means those Kings did not
only preserve Italy unprejudiced by the Forces of those two fierce Nations, so
formidable by reason of their vicinity and power; but did the better secure the
Majesty of their own Empire, and the large Precinct of their Dominions; and do
also keep the Kingdoms of Spain in more security (which are at the present
richer then any other Kingdom, through the immense Treasure which are
abundantly subminstred to them by the unexhausted Mines of the Indies and new
World) by a Fleet of seventy Galleys, distributed in the Havens of Spain,
Genoa, Naples, and Sicily: The other Princes of Italy, divided into unequal
Seigniories, did therefore reverence, and yield observancy to, so great and so
well grounded a power; the lesser whereof did for sundry respects absolutely
adhere thereunto, and enjoyed quiet under the protection thereof; and the
greater placing the groundwork of Principality upon Peace, minded more the
preservation of their Dominions by counsel, then enlarging their Confines by
Arms; and all of them, though they saw so great a foreign Empire radicated in
the bowels of Italy, yet not having for many years been thereby molested, and
therefore accustomed to enjoy their own Territories a long time in a happy and
secure Peace, they were better contented to bear with the condition of the
present Times, though upon some disadvantage, then out of a desire of absolute
liberty, to irritate those Forces against them, whereunto they were not of
themselves equal: Nay, that which better preserved the Public peace was, lest,
as in former times, Quarrels amongst themselves, had made way for the Spanish
greatness into Italy, and confirmed it there; they might now make it more
formidable by affording it matter of more progress, whereby to augment it self:
Therefore all former strife and contention being forgotten, and all turbulent
and ambitious thoughts being laid aside, they were very intent in quenching all
seeds of scandal or dissatisfaction which might discompose that Union and
telligence, wherein the near and eminent danger (the truest Ligament of any
whatsoever Agreement or Convention) did keep them tacitly conjoined in the
de^ence of themselves. France, a powerful and neighbor Country, and Riv^l to
the Spanish Name out of ancient pretensions, as a stout Counterpoise to the
greatness of the Spanish Nation, did also add much to the safety of their
Affairs, and did the more confirm the King of Spain in his good will to the
peace of Italy, and in his not disturbing nor distasting the Italian Princes in
their ancient peaceful possessions. Italy being for the aforesaid reasons thus
secure for foreign N^tions, and balanced within her self, and well
established in peace by the counterpoise of reciprocal apprehensions, both of
the Natives, that by troubling their Affairs their liberty might be hazzarded;
and of Foreigners, that the Empire might be prejudiced; every one, and not
without reason, was persuaded, that being now escaped the so terrible Tempest
wherewith she was threatened, she would easily, nay, of her self, settle her
former peaceful condition, and long continue in it.

But all humane reasons and judgments are easily exposed to even the sleightest
accidents. Francis, Duke of Mantua and Montferrate, dyed of an unexpected death
about the end of the year 1612. Mary, his young and only Child, survived him,
whose Mother was Margaret, eldest Daughter to the Duke of Savoy; in which
Francis his death, though the main course of common Affairs seemed not to be
much concerned, (the Bond of common Concord remaining uninjured;) yet did his
death shake the Foundations upon which the Public Peace seemed to be so firmly
grounded, and occasioned much misery and calamity to Montferrat, and to the
neighboring people, by the Wars which immediately insued in those parts. The
great Rains, fierce Winds, and terrible Thunders, which happened but a little
before in Lombardy, wherewith the fields were for many days overflowed, to the
great prejudice of the ground, and terror of the Inhabitants, seemed to be a
sad Augury of this. These States fell, for want of Heirs Male, upon Cardinal
Ferdinando, Brother to the deceased Duke; Who, though he was acknowledged by
all to be the true Heir, and that the People, Officers, and the whole Court,
did with much joy congratulate his Accession to the Dukedom; yet because it was
thought that the Dowager Duchess might be with child, he would not as then
accept either of the Crown or Title of Duke; but deferred doing so, contenting
himself with the Government of the Dominions, till he might be sure he was true
and Legitimate Heir. And Prince Victorio Amadeo, eldest Son to the Duke of
Savoy, coming not long after to Mantua to consolate the Dowager his Sister, and
to bring her back to her Paternal Country; he desired leave that he might
likewise carry the little Daughter along with him to Piedmont: which desire
having been much insisted upon formerly by the Duke, Grandfather to the young
Lady Mary, begat not a little commotion in the Cardinal, and in the whole
Mantuan Court; who very well knew how such demands strike at the Foundation and
safety of the States: And it being thought too dangerous to give way thereunto,
as also unseasonable then to deny, the result of so weighty a business was
defe^ed; hopes being sometimes given therein, difficult^es sometimes objected;
till it might be more certainly known whether the Dowager Dutc^ess were with
child or no; who, for better satisfaction, it was resolv^d should keep in the
(...) of Mantua, the mean while also: But their delays making the Duke more
fervent in his desires, he did all ^e could to remove them; he also made herein
use of the favor and Alliance which he had with the Catholic King; in whose
Court, (whether by means of Officers, or no, it is not known) the young Lady
Mary was Proclaimed Heir to Montferrat; Whereof they affirmed women were, by
the Laws, capable; and that women had more then once inherited it; For it was
said to have passed by the means of Violante, Daughter to William the Fifth,
surnamed the Great, from the Paternal Family of Ala^ame, into that of the
Paleologi; and it came into that of Gonzaga, by no other means then by Margaret
Paleologa, who succeeding therein, past it over to those that descended from
her by Frederick Gonzaga: That therefore it ought not to be held a new thing if
that State should now be seen to pass by Female succession into another Family,
which was come into the Family of Gonzaga: That Succession, in the first place,
belonged unto the Children, without distinction of Sex, all other Relations
being wholly excluded: That it was thus Ordered by the Civil Law, and Law of
Nature, according to which the Succession of great Kingdoms, yea, even that of
Spain was governed: That therefore it was too inhumane a thing to permit that
that Infant, descended from the Austrian Blood, Niece by the Sisters Side to
the King, should be brought up with so much danger in those her so tender years
with her Rival; who by excluding her, aspired at the Succession of so great a
State: But that it was no less dangerous not to take such order, as that the
succession of Montferrat might not occasion some important ensuing disorder in
I^aly. The Italians thought that these, or the like pretensions, might make
great impression in that Court, when they saw the Duke of Savoys demands were
so much favored in Italy by the Kings State-Ministers; and that they did
afterward endeavor that that Infant should by common consent of all parties
be placed in Millain, as in a place in the midst between the Dukedoms of Savoy
and Montferrat; but the people and Court of Mantua were much more troubled,
when they saw greater demonstrations added to so pressing desires: For many
persons of quality being in that City, who we^e come to accompany Prince
Victorio, part whereof were Savoyards, and part Millanesi, and Spaniards, who
were sent thither under several p^etences from Millain; the Mantuans began much
to distrust that the Duke had ^ome more hidden end: The Cardinal was therefore
forced to have a greater care of the custody of the Child, and to give order
that tha^ Corpse de Guard should be kept round about the City, and that the most
convenient places should be diligently looked unto; so to obviate any
inconvenience which might happen in such a Commotion: and the Child being
declared, as well in Italy as in the Court of Spain, to be Heir of Montferrat,
a greater desire was daily found to be in the Spanish State-Ministers, of
having ^er either consigned over, or deposited; which desire could the less be
concealed, for that at the same time, by their means, and in her behalf, the
Cause touching the Succession of that State was studied by some of the best
Lawyers, and in some of the Academies of Italy; wherefore not only Cardinal
Ferdinando grew jealous, but even those who had a care of his particular
Affairs, and of the Affairs of Italy in general: Nor was this without reason;
for great were the pretensions which the House of Savoy ^ad to Moniferrat,
against the House of Gonzaga; and much strife and contention had formerly past
between the two Families in that Point. It was likewise thought that the
Citadel of Cossalle, of a very large circuit, well Garisoned, and which was
very strong, might prove prejudicial to the State of Millain, if it should fall
into the hands of a Prince who did not wholly confide in the King; as there
were many reasons then to make it be believed the Cardinal did not: So as, so
many endeavors concerning the Child, afforded reason of suspicion, that if she
should come into the Duke of Savoys hands, he might by marrying her to one of
his Sons, intend to add new claims to that State; so also it was not a little
doubted, that if she should chance to fall into the Kings hands, his Officers
might make use thereof as of a means whereby to disturb the affairs of
Montferrat: and because if either of these should happen, it would be contrary
to the quiet and satisfaction of the Italian Princes, they did in private and
in public exhort Cardinal Ferdinando not to suffer that the Child might by any
means be taken out of his power: And the Queen of France, Sister to the said
Cardinals Mother, gave order to the Marquess of Trinello, whom she sent
Ambassador in Extraordinary upon other occasions to the Pope, that taking
Mantua in his way, he should advise the Cardinal not to give way to the Dukes
demands, but to withstand the fervent endeavors of the Kings Agents; publicly
professing also, that she would protect him in what particularly concerned the
present Occurrences: She made these her Resolutions be known to all the Italian
Princes, and especially the Duke himself, who by the Spanish favor appeared to
be more then meanly set upon these Endeavors: Nor did the Emperor Matthias,
who was nearly allied to the Cardinal by his Wife, Daughter to a Sister of Duke
Vicenzo, the Cardinals Father, show himself less favorable in this Cause. The
Duke proceeded, from friendly endeavors, to justify his demands by the
Prerogative granted by all Laws to the Mother to have the Guardianship of her
Children: The Cardinal said, that it was not, notwithstanding, lawful for her
to carry her Daughter out of her Fathers Dominions, nor to withdraw her from
the ^ight and company of her nearest friends, under the name of Guardianship.
He likewise urged the minority of the Mother, who was incapable of being
Guardian to another, she her self being in need of one by the same Laws which
she had alleged. And though this Exception made also against the Cardinals own
Person; yet the Emperor, Supreme Judge of both their Persons, and of both their
Estates, confiding in his Integrity, and judging that a Prince was not
incapable of being Guardian to a young Child, who was without any exception
judged to be capable of the Government of two Dukedoms; declared him to be his
Nieces lawful Guardian, and gave him order, that not suffering her to go out of
Mantua, he should not trust her custody with any other: But it was the
pretensions to Montferrat, which, though not publicly owned as yet, was
thought to be the chief scope of this Negotiation; and which, in all men's
opinion, was the hidden fire which inflamed the ones desire, and made the other
more diffident. These Flames breaking out afterward into so much a greater
combustion, by how much they were at first suppres'd by dissimulation; it will
be necessary to proceed to their Declarations, as well for what belonged to the
House of Savoy, as also to the Princess Mary, who is Guardianship was that which
was only then disputed between these two Princes; so to know the better what it
was that secretly brought this business into many streights and difficulties;
as also whence the so many rumors arose, which were after publicly given out.

Montferrat now in the possession of the Family of the House of Gonzaga, Dukes
of Mantua, as being then an Appendix to the sacred Empire, was given by the
Emperor Otho the first, in ^e, to his Son in law Alareme of Saxony, and to
those that should descend from him, both Male and Female: In whose Line Male
the Dukedom of Montferrat, continuing a long time, fell at last upon Violante,
Daughter to William the fifth surnamed the Great, and Sister to John, the last
of Alarem's line Male: who being married to Andronicus Paleologi, Emperor of
Constantinople, made Theodorus, her second Son by Andronicus, Heir to that
State, in^iling it upon those that should descend from him. Theodorus married a
Daughter of his, named also Violante, to Aimone then Count of Savoy; with an
addition of Dowry, by (as was afterward pretended by th^se that descended from
her) an express Article, that if her Line Male should at any time fail, her
said Daughter Violante should succeed to the Dukedo^ of Montferrat; and after
her death those that should descend from her. Theodorus his Line male failing
the year 1533. by the death of Marquess Johanni Georgio Paleologi; Charles the
third, then Duke of Savoy, who was descended from Violante, began to pretend to
the succession of that State, excluding Marg^ret, Wife to Frederick Duke of
Mantua, who being Daughter to William the Second, elder Brother to Jovan
Georgio, and remaining in possession of Montferrat, by the death of her Uncle,
defended it against Charles of Savoy, as her proper and Paternal State. Charles
alleged, as the first ground of his pretension, that since he and Margaret did
both of them equally descend from Theodorus; and Montferrat being to pass from
the Male Line to the Female, he, Charles, ought by reason of his sex, to be
preferred before Margarite, though she were of Parentage, and nearer in
succession to Jovan Georgio, last possessor of the State in Controversy. Thus
(said he) goes the Succession of all such Marchionate Fee Tenure and
birthright; by all Laws: He produced for his second Argument the aforesaid
Matrimonial Agreement, whereby he pretended to be preferred before any Female,
or before any one that was descended from Theodorus by the Female Line, as come
from Violante: For his last plea, he made use of the Lady Bianca's l^st Will
and Testament, who was Heir to the first William Paleologus, Marquess of
Mont^errat, who dyed without any Issue male; which B^anca being married to
C^arles the first, Duke of Savoy, did at her death nominate him Charles the
Third, for Heir General; so, as if the succeeding to that State had belonged to
her, since her Father dyed without Issue Male, he inferred that the right of
the same Succession was past to him by the universal institution. Charles laid
these three ground-works for his universal Succession to Montferrat: To boot
wherewith, he laid also a particular claim to a good part of the same State;
which being given by Jovan Giacomo Paleologus, and by John his Son, to Amedeus
the first, Duke of Savoy, 1435. was the very same day given by Amedeus, to
those that had given it him from themselves, and for those that should descend
from them on the Fathers side; all which being extinct (as Duke Charles
pretended) in Jovan Georgio, he said that that part was, without all dispute,
fallen to him, as to the Sovereign Lord. On the contrary, Margaret alleged
that the Succession of Montferrat bolonged to her, as the nearest Heir to her
Uncle the last Lord thereof; and denying that the Heir male should by any legal
disposal be preferred before the next of kin; yea, when the Succession should
go out of the Male Line, she disputed the reality of the Matrimonial Contract
urged by the Adversary: And howsoever, she said, that that Contract did no ways
operate to the prejudice of Succession which did belong unto her by other means
then by the person of Theodorus, without the Emperors consent: She said that
no heed was to be given to the Lady Bianca's Testament, she never having had
any thing to do in that State, as being excluded by others of Paleologus his
male kindred: how much less then could the kindred on the Fathers side be
excluded from inheritance by Will, who had more right thereunto then the
Testatrix her self. Then she alleged that the Donation of Jovan Giacomo, and
Georgio Paleologi, was null in it self, and against the Nature of the Fee-farm:
And moreover, that it was by violence extorted from the said Amedeus; when
John, eldest Son to John Giacomo, being sent to a Festival in Piedmont, was
afterward detained Prisoner there; so as John Giacomo was constrained for his
Sons Liberty, and John for his own, to give way unto their will, into whose
custody John was unadvisedly fallen: And that therefore the said Donation was
revoked 30. years after by a long and solemn Decree which the Emperor
Frederick made, Out of which Reasons Margarets cause prevailing, the Emperor
Charles the fifth, who as Lord, and Supreme Judge of the Fee, had sequestered
the possession after the death of Marquess John Georgio, ordered that it should
be freely restored to her, as lawful Heir to her Uncle; rejecting by name the
Dukes three Actions to the Universal State; but made good the Testament of the
Lady Bianca^, in relation, notwithstanding, to the Dowry of 80000. Crowns; for
the payment whereof she might have recourse to the improvement of the State
made by her Father, Marquess William: And without deciding any thing else
touching the Donation made in favor to Amedeus of Savoy, he left it free for
all pretenders to alledg any thing they could at any time about it. The
Pretenders were no ways satisfied with this Sentence; Duke Charles thought that
it was given by the Emperor in favor of Margar^t; and pronounced by Frederick
out of reason of State, so to Balance the Princes of Italy in an equal power,
which might be inferior to his; lest that Duke Charles might counterpoise the
State of Millain, by the addition of Montferrat to Piedmont, which he could not
apprehend from Margaret, nor Frederick; who possessing two States disjoined
within them selves, would by consequence be necessitated to depend totally upon
the State of Millain: On the contrary, Frederick, and those that were for him,
complained privately; as if the question touching the Donation had been left
undecided, for no other end, but that Pretentions and Concurrences being kept
(...) foot between the Parties, the I^deavours and Inclinations of such as
pretended toward the Affairs and Interest of common Judicature, should also be
kept the more firmly on foot in Italy: And, notwithstanding, though Margaret
and F^ederick were quiet, Duke Charles appealed from the Sentence: which (as he
said) was made more in respect of the present times, then with any
consideration had to the merits and justice of his claim: Wherefore thinking
himself injured, he appealed to Cesar's Self, and his Appeal was admitted: But
the business proceeding on, at length he obtained another Edict from the
Emperors Self, That no time might prejudicate his Title, nor the prosecuting
of his Appeal; and thinking, (...) that these were not times for such a
business, he rested content with the D^ee, and (...) proscecuting judgment;
chiefly because having lost Savoy, and almost all Piedmont, a little before, by
wars made by the French; both he, and his Son Emanuel Philebertus minded more
the regaining of what they had lost, ^hen the recovery of that by Law which
they were then in suit (...) with Frederick: Yet these differences kept these
Princes and their Successors at continual odds; in so much as Charles Emanuel,
the now present Duke of Savoy, having obtained another Decr^e from the Emperor
Rodolphus the Second, in the year 1587. by which his pretentions were not only
preserved ^nprejudiced by lapse of time, but confirmed as much as was
requi^ite; and being nearly allied to Philip the second, King of Spain, whose
second Daughter Katherine he had married; he afforded no little jealousy to
Duke Vicenso, Nephew to Margaret, that by occasion of such Decrees and
assistance, he would in some sort revive his ancient Pretentions, and trouble
his possession in t^t State: Wherefore, for his greater security, he built the
Citadel from the very ground which is almost contiguous to the City of Cassalle.

The Dukes pretentions to Montferrat were upon these terms; but that which was
spoken of in name of the young Princess had in it more of show then substance:
For though women, by ancient Investment, were entitled to the Succession of
that State, and had really succeeded therein twice; it was only when there was
not, nor did not appear to be, any Male remaining of that Line. Thus did
Violante and Margaret Inherit it; but when there was any Male left of the
Family, though of remote Branches, the Daughters of the late Possessors were
excluded, as they had been twice before: Thus Bianca, Wife to Charles the
first, Duke of Savoy; and Joan, Wife to the Marquess of Saluzzo, both of them
Daughters to the first William Paleologus, Marquess of Montferrat, came behind
Boniface, next Brother to their Father William: And the Marquess Boniface the
second, Brother to the same Margaret, dying without Issue, Iovan Georgio, her
Fathers Brother, was preferred in the Possession before her: Nor was she
admitted to succeed in that State, till the whole Male Line of the Paleologi
was extinct in the aforesaid Iovan Georgio: By which he who is acquainted with
the Nature of Fee-farm, and with ancient observance thereof, may easily
conceive what the right of pretense was which that Maid had to strive for
succession in that State with her Uncle: But as Princes through Ambition are
usually ready to embrace any apparent color to aspire unto the State^ of other
men; and the worse^ Cause is often ^avoured by the condition of times, by force
of Arms, and the power of the Pretende^s; So on the contrary, the apprehensions
of not being able to preserve their own Dominions, makes them careful in
avoiding all occasions whe^eby others may ge^y the least shadow which may
disturb them in the cle^r possession of what i^ their own; whe^efore the
greater the inde^vours were which: were made in the behalf of the young Maiden,
and how much greater the Authority of the Intercessors was, the more jealous
was Cardinal* Ferdinando, that the objects of these demands were not such as
were publicly given out. To these were added other no less trouble some
demands, concerning the Dowry and Jewels of the Dowager Dutc^ess, and touching
the execution of the Emper or Charles the fifth's Decree in the Dowry of the
Lady Bianca; which together with the In^erest which was due, was said to amount
to the sum of 800000. Ducats: But what did yet import more, the Duke seeing
himself (...) in his demands which concerned his Niece, by the Cardinal; did
openly lay claim to Montferrat, as that which belonged to him by ancient
pretense; which though they had been silenced for a while, he began now at this
time, and upon this occ^sion, hotly to revive. The first two demands were
readily yi^lded unto, upon the allowance of some ^me, and downright denial of
any interest. Touching that of Montferrat, though at the first, to avoid
exasper^ting the Duke, some intentions of friendly agreement were made known;
at last the Answer was, That there were competent Judges before whom their
Predecessors had long pleaded their Title thereunto.

These were the Negotiations, which being treated of with some bitterness, was
feared would prove (as they did) the Seeds of further disturbances: But on the
other side (as hope goes often along joined together with fear) in this
fluctuation of contrary opinions and pretenses, some benign Rays appe^red,
which promised a no less Union and Friendship be^ween these two Princes, then
had been before the last Dukes death. Some youthful desires and inclinations
appeared in the Cardinal toward his Brothers Widow: It was therefore thought
that for his own satisfaction, for the quiet of those Inhabitants, and for the
security of his own Affairs, (leave being first had from the Pope, who did not
app^ar unwilling to consent thereunto) he would willingly embrace mar^iage with
the Dowager Duchess; which though it was at first diversely rumoured in the
Courts of those Princes, and throughout Italy; yet was it approved of by such
as wished well to peace, and by the wisest men, who did best understand the
Affairs of Montferrat, as the only remedy for the appearing evil: Nor was it
thought out of any respects, that the Duke of Savoy would appear ave^se to this
Marriage: And particularly in consideration of the Cardinals conditions, which
came not short of those of his Brother; and for the good of his own D^ughter,
for whom there was hardly a better Match to be at the pr^sent found: The Kings
consent, which was almost requis^e in such Resolutions, was more doubted; the
uniting of great Italian Princes being usually suspected in the Court of Spain:
And it was known, that in that respect the first Marriage of the said Infanta,
was not much approved of there; yet it was somewhat hoped that the King would
prefer his Nieces good before the other respects; the rather because that she
being totally of the Spanish side, she might be an excellent means to turn her
future Husbands mind, who was openly declared to be of the contrary faction:
And as the differences concerning the Child, and the Dowries, would vanish by
this Marriage; so it was thought that the disputes about Montferrat (all former
Suits giving way to this new Conjunction) would be at least quieted a while, if
not quite extinguished: And it made much for the Duke, at the same time, to
Match his Daughter well; and, together with public peace, (preserving
friendship with the House of Gonzaga) to make use of the present occasion, as
of an Honorable pretense to terminate his demands touching his Niece, and his
other pretensions, with some credit: wherein being much dipped, it was impossible
for him to obtain the one without the Cardinals consent, and to prosecute the
other by reason of the times: And yet (so often do Princes minds alter) the
Duke of Savoy, who was so ready, and so well pleased to marry his Daughter to
Francis then Prince of Mantua, did not consent to her Marriage now when she was
a Widow, with his Brother who succeeded him in that Dukedom: And the King, who
wa^ not then well satisfied with that Match, did not only now consent to it,
but desiring it might be effected, propounded it not long after affectionatly
to both of them. This change in them proceeded (as it usually does in great
Princes resolutions) from the (...) and mutation of times; But if we shall sift
more narrowly into the occasion thereof, it will be necessary, that breaking
off the Thread of our begun Narration for a while, we look a little backwards
into the ends and designs of their former proceedings; which though it may
peradventure seem to deviate somewhat from our purpose, is notwithstanding
requisite to be known, for the better knowledge of several accidents, whence
the occasion of many important effects rose, which shall be by us hereafter
related; and therefore it will be no lost labor, nor useless, to wind up that
in this place, and upon this occasion, which if pretermitted, would obscure the
Thread of this present Narration; and if divided and recounted in several parts,
would be a greater interruption thereunto.

The Dukes of Savoy, whose State lies between the Confines of France, and the
Dukedom of Millain, get this of good by the situation thereof; That being
placed between two powerful Kings, of Nations which do disagree; though they be
far inferior to either of them in forces, yet cannot they be not only not so
easily oppressed by so neighboring powers, but receive firmer establishment and
security in their Affairs by that Neighborhood: For it being dangerous to the
affairs of both the Kings, that either of them should draw nearer the others
Confines, by suppressing the Dukes of Savoy; and these Dukes being moreover
very fit to be made use of in such Enterprises as the one King might sometimes
attempt against the other, their friendship is willingly embraced by them both,
and better secured by tie of near Alliance: And as out of these respects Henry
the Second, King of France, gave his Sister in Marriage to Emanuel Philebertus,
Father to the present Duke; and the Emperor Charles the fifth, who was King of
Spain, wrought it so as Beatrice, Daughter to Emanuel King of Portugal, and
Sister to the said Charles his Wife Isabella, was married to Duke Charles,
Grandfather to the present Duke; so for the same respects Philip the Second,
King of Spain, contracted a more then customary Union with this present Charles
Emanuel, by giving him his second Daughter, Katherine, for Wife, with a Portion
of many yearly Revenues assigned to him in the Kingdom of Naples, to boot, with
great Pensions which were paid unto him before Marriage out of the State of
Millain, to keep him the more interessed in the maintaining of those
Territories: High aspiring thoughts began then to appear in this Prince, and
much greater then became his Fortune; Ardent desires of new Acquisitions;
greater inclination to war then to peace; and therefore he applied himself to
military Exercises; and just as we read of Alexander the Great, that not
bounding himself within the limits of Macedon and Greece, he thought the whole
World too little for him: It might, peradventure, be affirmed of this present
Duke, That esteeming himself too much streightened within the Precincts of
Savoy and Piedmont, he sought to enlarge his State and Fortune, by the
prejudice of his neighbors. This his disposition was increased by this his
Alliance, which like fire in well-prepared metals, set this young Prince his
mind on flame, and made his hopes the greater; and thinking that the civil wars
of France made much for this his purpose, he first assaulted and took Saluzzo,
which was possessed by the King of France in Piedmont: and entering into war with
those of Geneva, he afterward entered Armed into Province and Dolpheny,
intending to make himself Master of those Provinces; And if Fortune had smiled
upon these his high designs, his hopes led him on so far, as not to think
himself inferior to any that pretended to that Crown; but the Valor, Fortune
and Right of Henry the fourth, getting the better over all other Competitors,
who appeasing the Tumults, and allaying the Factions, possessed himself of that
Kingdom by right of Succession: The Duke was forced not only to forego his
Enterprises unluckily undertaken in France; but if he would retain the Towns
which he possessed on this side of the Mountains, he must pay a very great price
for them. In the progress of these Affairs there therefore arose no slight
accidents, which disturbed the good Intelligence which ought to have been
maintained between the King of Spain and the Duke, by reason of their so near
Alliance; for the Duke, when he first busied himself in the affairs of France,
built much upon the assistance which he had reason to expect from the King his
Father in law; not so much in respect of his Alliance, as that the things which
he undertook were of no small help to the Kings self; who at the same time
assisting the Catholic League of the French Princes both with men and moneys,
against King Henry who was then a Hugon^t, made himself Master of many Towns in
Britany, and in other parts of that Kingdom; and therefore made his ends and
intentions be much suspected: But though the Father in law might for those
respects be inwardly pleased with his Son in law's Actions; yet wisely
foreseeing how much those Enterprises did exceed his Forces, and the mischiefs
which might thereby accrue unto him, he professed the contrary; and seeming
^ather desirous of the peace and safety of his Son in law's Dominions, he
dissuaded him from those Enterprises; fearing also lest by provoking France
thereby, he might draw many bad humors into Italy, whereby his peaceful
possessions might be disturbed, and the common Affairs endangered; And yet that
he might not seem to abandon him, rather then to encourage and foment him in
those wars, he furnished him with forces; but not such as were answerable,
either for readiness or numbers, to the necessity of the Times; and no
otherwise then with limitation, that they should serve only to defend his own
Dominions, if they should happen (as they did) to be assaulted by the French;
but not to offend or disquiet others: Wherefore the Duke finding the Spanish
Commanders directions contrary to his designs, in his most urgent occasions;
and thinking himself thereby injured, he was much troubled: And as he who sees
himself fallen from high hopes which he had ^ancied to himself, uses to think
it a shame that he has not compassed his ends, and to believe that he is
deluded more by the will of others, then by his own persuasion; the Duke
esteeming that for so many respects he might freely have promised himself
abundance of help from his Father in law, thought he had reason to hold himself
too severely treated by him; wherefore beginning to be jealous of the Kings
mind and Magnanim^ty, he doubted that, (though he peradventure might for his
own particular ends be well enough pleased to see him busied in those wars)
endeavoring to keep him in a moderate condition for the greater security of
his own affairs in Italy, and that he might depend the more upon him the King;
he had rather held him unfortunately in hand by those weak succors in those
wars, then assisted him to the acquiring of more Dominion and Grandezza, as he
the Duke had hoped: and this his dislike was the more increased, when he found
that the Kings Authority was not afterward sufficient to include him in the
peace which was afterward made between the said King and the King of France,
without the restitution of Saluzzo: The Duke thought that his Father in law
being now very old was the less careful to leave his Son, who was but then
young, in peaceful possession of his State by that Agreement, for that he had
not appeared to solicit his interests; for many places of much importance being
by virtue of this peace restored to the French, the Duke thought that if his
Father in law had stuck a little closer to him, he might still have kept the
little Marquesite of Saluzzo, which it was likely King Henry would not have
stood much upon, having by this Peace many very noble Towns of France restored
to him, which were possessed by the King of Spain in the time of war: But the
King, who had made public profession that he had possessed himself of the Towns
of that Kingdom, to no other end but to keep the Heretics from being Masters
of them, with intention to restore them afterward to whosoever should be
lawfully chosen King of France; covering the necessity of his own interests,
which forced him to make that Peace, with the cloak of fair proceeding, seemed
as if the time of his promised restoring them was then come; since King Henry
was declared by all the Orders of France, and by the Apostolic See, to be
lawful and Catholic King; and that therefore the Duke having professed that he
had possessed himself of Saluzzo upon the same pretenses and promises; and being
by the same reason bound to restore it, the King as he would not that by the
Dukes interests prevailing over his, that peace should be disturbed; so could
he not without manifest repugnancy allow of that retention in another, which he
did allow unto himself: But because the Duke alleged that that Marquesite
appertained to him of ancient right, the King thought that he had sufficiently
provided both for the public quiet, and for his Son in law's Indemnity, by
obtaining (as he did) that the Dukes pretentions should by the Articles of
Peace be referred to Clement the Eighth, who was then Pope: which Reference
when it should be (...), the universal Peace was aftewards to be agreed upon
between the King of France, and him, and the Duke: But the Pope deferring, or
not resolving to decide these differences, the Duke resolved to go to Paris,
hoping by his presence, and by his doing Homage, to make that King favorably
to relinquish unto him the controverted Marquesite.

The King of Spain, and the whole Spanish Court, were much troubled at this
Resolution; fearing lest the Duke, being ill satisfied with their proceedings,
should close with the King of France, to their prejudice: But their suspicions
were vain, as vain were his hopes; for a settled resolution of re-having
whatsoever was taken from the Crown in the late troubles prevailing in the King
of France, over all other considerations, he was not to be moved by any
endeavors or artificial offers; but did absolutely demand the Marquesite or
some Territories equivalent thereunto: And he was so steadfast in this
Resolution, as being tempted by the Duke to assault the State of Millain, and
from thence to proceed to the getting of the Imperial Crown; the Duke offering
him to assist him in any of these, or in any other Enterprise, and to
confederate with him, so as he might enjoy the Marquesite, The King did
constantly refuse to do it; so as the Duke, not being able to obtain any better
Conditions, was forced to yield the Marquesite unto him within a certain
limited time (without any prejudice, notwithstanding, to his right, (which was
again referred unto the Pope) or else all that part of Savoy which lies between
the Rosne and the Lioness, called the Country of Bresse. Thus the Duke returned
to Piedmont not well pleased with the King; and not observing what was agreed
upon, the King took Savoy immediately from him, threatening to descend armed
into Piedmont: And though notice was come to the Court of Spain of the Dukes
endeavors with the King of France, in prejudice to the Crown of Spain, and to
the public quiet; yet other respects prevailing, upon this occasion, over his
anger conceived against the Duke, the King caused a powerful Army to be
prepared in Millain for the defense of Piedmont, and to oppose King Henry, if
(as it was feared) falling into Italy, he should turn his forces upon other
Enterprises: But this Commotion was once again quieted; for the Pope
interposing himself, the Duke chose rather actually to surrender up Bresse unto
the King, then the Marquesite of Saluzzo; reserving, notwithstanding, in favor
to the King of Spain, passage through that Country, that his men might go from
Italy into Flanders, for the defense of those Provinces, which did so much
import the Crown of Spain: Yet subject of di^content arose out of this
Agreement; for the Duke thinking that he had not a little advantaged the
condition of the Crown of Spain, in having totally excluded the French out of
Italy, by the so great lessening his former Territories; thought he deserved a
very good ^ecompence: On the contrary, the Spania^ds, though they had persuaded
the Duke to that Agreement, yet they thinking that he had got more advantage
(...), having excluded the French out of the bowels of his State, pro^essed
that the Restitution of Saluzzo would have been less prejudicial to them, the
smallness whereof would have been but of little avail to the French affairs in
Italy, though it had been possessed by them; whereas by the Concession of Bresse
they were totally deprived of the passage reserved, to the evident prejudice of
the affairs of Flanders; since the Duke having received no caution from the
King in that behal^, but his bare promise, it was absolutely in the French men's
pleasure, whether they would obse^ve it, or no: and yet the Duke thinking that
the advantage was not sufficiently acknowledged, held himself to be much
injured, that the King, instead of the Grandezza, and the bettering of his
estate, which he had hoped for, by his alliance contracted with him, and by his
continual adherence to that Crown, should suffer him to be deprived of so noble
a part of his Pater^al (...), without any recompense, This his pretention was
ma^e the gr^ater by the same Kings giving of Burgundy and the Low Countries in
Portion with Isabella Clara Eugenia, his eldest Daughter, married at this time
to Albertus, Archduke of Austria; for though the Duke (...) from the Crown of
Spain, in Portion with his Wi^e, in Pensions assigned over afterward to his
Children, and in other Donatives, little less then 200000 Ducats of yearly
Rent; yet holding the disproportion to be too great which was made between his
Wi^e and he* Sister, he thought there ought some amends to be made him, at
least by the reason of that equal hand which the Father ought to bear to his
Daughters: Failing whereof he was much troubled; and could the l^ss bear with
his aforesaid Loss. The King, his Father in law, died a little before his
journey into France; and a little before Katherine, Wife to the Duke, and
Daughter to the King: So as by the death of the one the knot was slackened
which fastened him to the Kingdoms of Spain; so the Court of Spain, and the
Government thereof being much a^ered after the other was deceased, those evil
seeds began to get root, which not long after produced fruits of often
distastes, which exasperated the minds of both parties, and did at last totally
allienate the Dukes devotion from the Court of Spain: For Philip the second, as
wise a King as Spain ever had, relying upon himself in the Government of so
many Kingdoms, satisfied the Grandees of the Court with honorable usage, not
making use of them in public Affairs, except of some ^ew, in whom he found the
capacity of understanding annexed to their greatness of birth: for other things
he chose men more excellent for worth, then eminent for title or dignity;
assisting in the public Government with incredible diligence, and sustaining
the weight of so great an Empire himself, which past humane judgment; for in
him alone did Majesty and regal Authority shine forth: His Commands and
Resolves were punctu^lly observed by the Natives, and greatly reverenc^d by
Fo^reigners; being by them acknowledged to proceed from the award and absolute
will of so wise and so great a King: Hence it was that the Duke himself, not
being able to avoid them, was enforced patiently to give way thereunto, though
they were oft-times not answerable to his ends.

His Son King Philip the third succeeded him, a good and pious Prince; but one
who could not entirely inherit his Fathers infinite wisdom, neither by reason
of his years, (not exceeding the age of twenty three;) nor of his experience:
Therefore the condition of times being changed together with the Prince; great
men grew to be of more Authority with the King in the Administration of State
Affairs; which was more largely, and more indifferently shared out unto them by
him, then by Philip the second. Amongst these, Don Francisco Scandoval, and
Roxas, Duke of Lerma, were highest in favor with the King; upon whose liking
all important Resolutions, as also the distribution of Offices, the Government
of Provinces; and the Crown Revenues, did depend; r^ther as upon a Moderator,
then Court-Minister: The eyes of all men we^e therefore, with much applause,
fixed upon him as upon the chief manager of so great a Monarchy; Who being of a
good and pleasing disposition, and for his understanding sufficiently capable
of so great Employment, sat long at the Helm of Government in so great an
Empire, not only with Loyalty to the King, but with general satisfaction: It is
true, that being grown very jealous of his own Grandezza, he diligently studied
the preservation thereof; which finding that he might the more easily do in
times of peace, he hated all novelty, and neglected no means whereby the
Affairs of the Crown might be quietly proceeded in, both at home and abroad:
Nor was it hard for him to do it, the public interests of the Kingdom
concurring thereunto in many respects; as also the peoples desire, and the
minds of the great ones; who being rich and happy, loved rather to enjoy the
public and their private fortune in peace and quietness, then to increase it
by uncertain and dangerous war: But the Affairs of Italy, and particularly
those of Lombardy, did depend, almost absolutely, upon the Authority and
Arbitrament of Don Pierd d' Azevedo Henriques, Count of Fuentes, a man of high
employment and great worth; who being sent by the new King to be Governor of
Millain, governed that State long with extraordinary Authority: And being good
both at peace and war, and generally held to be of a military spirit; seeming
more inclined to Arms then quiet; he, without altering the public peace, held
up the Kings Affairs at so high a pitch, and brought them unto such reputation
in Italy, as they were never formerly done by any Governor.

The government of Affairs being in this posture, the Duke, though the new
King, forgetting former distastes, had made one of his Sons Grand Prior of
Castil^; and another Son of his the like of Crat^; the latter worth 30000
Ducats a year, the other of 100000 Ducats, did continually aspire, out of his
accustomed pretenses and desires, to the augmentation of his Fortune; which was
impossible to be afforded him, either without lessening the Kings Revenue, or
without disturbance to the public peace, to which the Government of the Crown
was then so much inclined: And therefore whilst beyond all expectation he found
all access to further greatness blockt up under the new King; he had some
colorable pretense to vent his anger, which by reason of the King his Father
in law's Majesty, he had kept long concealed; for not being of like employment
and Authority in the Resolutions o^ that Court, as he had been formerly, he
began to complain thereof with less respect, thinking that it proceeded rather
from the State-Ministers being ill-minded toward him, then from the King
himself. Hereunto was added, that it being necessary to make the Duke of Lerma
chief in Court, as the Arbritrator of the Kings Resolutions; and in Italy,
Fuentes, Governor of Millain, for the relation and executing of things
resolved upon; and not finding himself satisfied with their proceedings, or
pleased in his ends, which did totally differ from their ends and intentions;
and finding sometimes, at least seeming to find a certain ambition in them, and
in other Court-Ministers, which does usually accompany eminent power, and the
Princes immoderate favor, whereby he thought they meant to keep him under, he
could by no means bear with it: He openly exclaimed against them, as if making
use of the Kings name and Authority for the establishment of their own
greatness, they would arrogate unto themselves the more Authority over him, who
was a free Prince, and Cousin to the King; Hereupon anger and ranckor broke
forth between the Duke and the Kings Ministers of State, especially between
him, and Scandoval, and Fuentes; so as tokens of ardent indignation appearing
in the Duke, and the like in them, for the practices he had held with Henry, to
the prejudice of that Court, and of the universal peace, they at last seemed as
if they were not able to pay the Pensions which appertained to him; as if the
exasperating him were the only cure for that wound, for which gentler
applications would be too disproportionate. Their hatred grew the greater, when
the Duke demanding his Pensions of his Father in law, and after his death, of
his Cousin, he resolved to send his eldest Son, Prince Philip Emanuel, with two
other Sons of his, into Spain, that they might be brought up in the Kings
Court; upon whom (the King not having as yet any Sons) the succe^on of so many
Kingdoms might probably fall: The Duke being come with this intent to the Sea
side, and having agreed upon the time of their Imbarking, and upon other things
concerning their Voyage in Oneglia, with Prince Doria the Kings Lord Admiral;
wherein they were to be conducted by Don Carlo Doria, Duke of Tursi, and Son to
the Admiral, it so fell out, as Don Carlo de^arting unexpectedly from Villa
Franca, whether he was come with the Kings Galleys to Imbark those Princes, he
left both their Father and them much astonished at his unexpected departure:
wherefore the Duke credibly believing that a resolution of such importance
proceeded not from Don Carlo, but rather from the Court Ministe^s of State, and
particularly from the Duke of Lerma, who for his own interest would be loath to
see the Kings Nephews so near their Uncle; he therefore, and for that the King
did not appear afterward to resent it, thought himself therein very much
injured; and yet being resolved that his Children should pursue their intended
journey, he sent them to the Court; where they were graciously received by
their Uncle, and were by his command treated with all the demonstrations of
Honor, and with the Title of Infants of Spain; a name which is given to the
younger Children of that King: But on the other side, the Statesmen, and great
ones of the Kingdom, fearing that it might much prejudice their own greatness,
and their Administration of public a^fairs, that Authority should be added to
those that were so nearly allied to the King; they did not only keep them at
distance from the public Negotiations of the Kingdom, but from any privacy
with the King; and not being able to suffer their so much preeminency, they
seldom visited them, or discoursed with them, rendering the Grandezza of their
condition almost irksome to them through solitariness: They were honored only
with Titles and exterior demonstrations; but were not otherwise in any favor
or Authority at Court.

The eldest Prince died not long after, who upon the like occasions had great
disputes with the Duke of Lerma; and the rest returned into Italy, if not
displeased with the King, at least but badly satisfied wi^h the Court, as not
finding that countenance and welcome as they thought became their condition:
These and the like accidents, though out of private occasions, and proceeding
rather from the State-Officers, then from the King, wounded the Duke to the
very soul, who was much exasperated by former proceedings; and if he had met
with any occasion, he would peradventure have been willing to have vented his
disdain; but neither the times, nor the condition of his own affairs,
corresponding with his desire of resentment, he was forced to clo^e his
passions, and to expect a more opportune time; whilst thus fought with by
inward ha^red, such occasions at last happened, when he least expected them, as
brought those opportunities home unto him; then which if he had sought after
them, he could not have met with greater.

William dalle March, Duke of Iuliers and Cleves, died about this time; in
whose death all his whole Family failing, many several German Princes pretended
to the Succession of those States: Amongst the rest Leopold, one of the
Archdukes of Austria, and the Princes of Brandenburge and Newburg; which
latter two joining against the Archduke, possessed themselves of all that
appertained to those Dukedoms, except Iuliers, which fell into his power.
Leopold's Cause was not adhered unto only by the House of Austria, and by the
King of Spain; but by all the Catholic German Princes; who thinking it
pernicious for the Catholic Religion, that those States should fall into the
hands of Heretic Princes, contracted a League in the behalf of the Archduke;
and chose the Duke of Bavaria for their Captain General: The two (...) finding
themselves too weak against such a League, had recourse to the King of France;
whose Kingdom after so many calamities of preceding wars, having now enjoyed
peace for many years; and consequently flourishing more in Arms, people, and
riches, then it was ever known to be before; himself being obeyed by all the
Orders of this Kingdom, and reverenced by all the Princes of Christendom; and
not thinking it became him that the Crown of Spain and House of Austria should
grow to a greater height, took upon him the protection of those Princes; and
with caution to the Catholic Religion of those Inhabitants he promised to
assist themin the possession of the controverted States; in whose cause the
Protestant Princes of Germany did also adhere: And the King of France being
made their Head; they prepared openly to oppose the Archduke: the King
perce^ving that from hence great combustions were likely to arise, applied his
mind to much greater designs. Betaking himself therefore not only to make stout
preparations of Arms throughout his whole Kingdom, but also to negotiate new
Leagues and Unions with For^eigners, he solicited many of the Italian Princes,
to whom he thought the neighborhood of the Spaniards was either suspicious or
troublesome; promising them great Rewards, and increase of Dominions, if by
joining their Forces with him they would take up Arms in Italy against the King
of Spains Dominions: The chief of these were the Venetians and the Duke of
Savoy; the former, in respect of the great opinion which was held not only of
their forces and wealth, but of their Counsel and Wisdom: The other, for the
Neighborhood of his Dominions, and for the vivacity of his military Spirit,
naturally inclined to new Enterprises; as also out of the distastes and bad
satisfaction which he had often received from the Spanish State-Ministers*
Count Fuentes, who though he was very old, and upon the confines of death, was
yet alive, and much feared and reverenced; and the Affairs of Spain flourished
much (as has been said) under his Government.

The (...), notwithstanding, either professing to abhor turbulence and novelty;
or fearing to provoke the Spaniards, refusing the first great offers made to
them by the King of France, would have no hand in a business of such moment,
which was like to work great Revolutions in the world, not without danger to
their own Affairs: The Duke, who on the contrary, though strangely scandalized
at the Court of Spain, would not let slip such an occasion willingly, and was
therefore willing to listen to the Kings great offers; whereof one was, to
marry the Kings eldest Daughter to Prince Victorio; yet calling to mind the
long and bitter wars which the Kings of France had made upon his Father and
Grandfather, by whom they were beaten almost out of all their Dominions: And on
the contrary, his recovery, and being kept in long possession of them by the
favor and adherence of the Crown of Spain; the annual Revenues which he
received from thence, which would upon any the least occasion be taken from
him; to boot with the troubles and wars which he was to undergo by incensing
the Spaniards; in all these respects he began to doubt, lest to pass from the
one adherence to the other, would be too dangerous for him, and for his
Children, who were, by so straight interests, and by so near alliance joined to
the King of Spain: wherefore not totally excluding, but keeping the Treaty on
foot with the French, he thought to make use of this occasion as of the means,
whereby retaining his former friendship with the King of Spain; but upon better
conditions, he might get a greater esteem put upon himself and his affairs: Or
totally foregoing Union with Spain, which he thought would be now reduced to
subjection and slavery, endeavor to link himself close with France; and by the
^avour and assistance thereof arrive at that Grandezza and Augmentation of
State, which having long looked for in vain from the Crown of Spain, he could
never attain unto: He therefore demanded one of the Daughters of Spain for Wife
to his Son, together with a Portion in Land, which might serve in recompense
for his ancient pretenses; and other annual Revenues and honorable places for
his other Children; to the end that they might live in Port and Splendor
sutatable to the Nephews of so great a King: And to remove the obstacles and
difficulties which he might meet with in these desires, he thought it necessary
to win the Duke of Lerma, and to interest him in these his demands; for when he
should have got him, he hoped he should succeed the more easily in all the
rest. Laying aside therefore all former contentions and emulations, ^e loaded
him (as it is said) with hopes and mighty promises, which depending absolutely
upon his own will, might bring unusual greatness and splendor upon his Family
and descendants, whe^eby to make so powerful a Minister of State give way unto,
and facilita^e whatsoever he should demand of the King for his Sons: And at the
same time, keeping on the Treaty of the new League, and his Sons Marriage, in
Paris, he hoped that each of these Crowns would grow to such jealousy by
reason of this double Negotiation; as that, the one not to lose him, and the
other to gain him, they might both of them vie who should give fairer
conditions for this Marriage, when it should be hotly negotiated at the same
time in both these Courts: Choosing therefore for Agents, in these his so great
designs, Count Verrua, a Counselor who was in great favor with him, and
Monsieur Jacob, he sent them both at the same time, the former into Spain, the
latter into France, where both of them negotiated their Commissions. The Duke
of Lerma greedily embracing this occasion in the Court of Spain, that by
assisting to make this Ma^ch he might aggrandize his own Family; so the Treaty
of Marriage between Prince Victorio and the Kings Daughter, seemed to proceed
on fairly: For though the King would not Treat of his eldest Daughter, whom he
had destined to a much greater Marriage; yet not being averse to part with his
youngest Daughter, this Match, though not totally ag^eed upon, yet was it
likely to be speedily concluded; And Don Phileberto, the Dukes second Son, was
destined to be made Admiral at Sea; and the Dukes third Son, the Cardinal, was
to be furnished with the ch^ef Church Livings which should be vacant in that
Kingdom, to a large proportion. In pursuit of which Negotiation, there were two
Galleys already provided by the Duke in Italy, to bring the Prince Victorio
into Spain, together with two of his Sisters, that they might be brought up
there with the Queen; yet many were not fully of an opinion, that this would
really succeed: As if the Duke had juggled in this Marriage with* Spain, or
that he had done it out of cunning to accelerate the Negotiations in France,
which were carried on with hopes of prosperous success, by Jacob: For the King,
having drawn England, and the States of Holland, into the new League, and
giving out that he would ^ut the Princes of Brandenburge and Newburg, into full
possession of the Dukedoms pretended unto by them, had already prepared a
powerful Army; with which, and with the Forces of the Colleagues, it was
thought that he really intended war against Flanders, and those parts of the
Low Countries which were under the King of Spain. And at the same time he put a
Fleet in order at Marselles, with intention to assault Genoa and Millain; and
offered the Duke of Savoy an Army of 20000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, to be paid by
him the King; to the end that the Duke might enter into the (...) of Millain
with 12000 Foot, and 2000 Horse of his own; which State he propounded to the
Duke of Savoy; as a surplus of Portion in respect of the future Marriage. These
practices, were they either true, or but reported, did no good to the Treaties
of Spain, which seemed to be as good as already concluded: for the King of
Spain, growing incensed thereat, did not incline any more to the Marriage of
his Daughter; and the Duke of Lerma, who had cordially listened to Verrua's
proposals, finding that he was not well looked upon by the Court where the
practices held between him and Verrua were known; to show himself averse to the
Dukes interests and intelligence, who was grown odious to the Court for the
same respects, did all he could to clear himself thereof: And the whole Court,
out of the same reasons, being at the same time scandalized with the Duke of
Savoy; he, thinking that he could promise himself no good from that Crown, and
despairing to make any progress in that Court, quite foregoing any thought of
further pursuing his Affairs there, and betaking himself to the Kingdom of
France, he endeavored to join in League, and to make Alliance with that King.

Hence it was, (that we may return to where we gave over) that the Duke of
Savoy, to the end that he might have greater adherences in Italy, as also that
he might interest other Princes in his ends and designs; married forthwith two
of his Daughters (wherein King Henry had a hand) the eldest to Don Francisco,
then Prince of Mantua; and the other to Alphonso, Prince of Modena; which was
not done without much jealousy, that the Dukes, their Fathers, did privately
partake in the same ends and designs: And at this very time another Marriage
coming strangely to light, which was very privately treated of in Rome for the
Prince of (...), the Popes Nephew, with a natural Daughter of King Henry; it
made people very jealous of the Popes Intention: This suspicion reached also to
many of the Lords of Rome, which by many A^guments drawn from their endeavors
and inclinations, seemed to follow King Henry's party. King Henry was then in
greater Fortune, Authority, and Grandezza, then peradventure any of the
preceding Kings of France had for a long time been; he was admired by all
Christendom; wherefore part of Italy being full of expectation, other part full
of fear, of these so great preparations, Italy was partly inclined unto, and
did tremble at the name and reputation of the French Forces: But to the end
that the Differences touching Montferrat might not disturb so great hopes as
were promised by this Conjunction; the Duke of Savoy thought it not good to
look too narrowly into them then, though they fell into consideration in the
conclusion of the Marriage with the Prince of Mantua; and therefore he thought
it bett^ to hasten the conclusion of that Marriage, leaving those differences
undecided. On the contrary; the King of Spain, finding whether the confederacy
or Affinity of the Italian Princes did at that time tend, and endeavoring to
disturb it, I ^oured, though in vain, that the same Marriages might be crossed;
but King Henry's so unexpected death, having either dissipated the ends, or
allayed the jealousies of that so great Unon; and the Duke being afterward
pacified, and joined with the King of Spain; and the Kingdom of France
foregoing the Match with the Duke, as having, after the Kings death,
entertained new Negotiations of a double Marriage with Spain, whereby Lewis,
the new King of France was to marry the King of Spains eldest Daughter, and
King Lewis his Sister, (she who in her Fathers time was intended for Prince
Victorio, was (also to marry the Prince of Spain; to the conclusion of which
Marriages there was no le^t at that time, but the tender years of those that
were to be married; Therefore the King and Court of Spain confiding much more
in this new Conjunction, then they had formerly distrusted the Union of the
Italian Princes, and their Intelligence with the French, did at the same time
endeavor that the Marriage might be concluded between the Cardinal and the
Dowager Duchess; a thing which made very much for the preservation of peace in
Italy, and for the new Union which was agreed on with the King of France. On
the contrary, the Duke of Savoy's intentions seemed to differ according to the
condition of times, from what they were when he married his Daughter to the
Prince of Mantua; for failing of the Grandezza which he hoped for if King Henry
had lived, by his death, and by the straight Union of the two Crowns, he did
not listen to the new Marriage of his Daughter; for that thereby his designs of
enlarging his Principality by some other means, and the leaving it greater to
his posterity, then he had received it from his Ancestors, would be disturbed:
He saw Montferrat, a great State, and very convenient for him, as lying almost
in the bosom of Piedmont, furnished but with few forces, and lesse^ Garrisons,
far from the City of Mantua, was now almost vacant, between the uncertain
Succession of the offspring which was to come, and his Nieces questionableness
therein: He knew how many Reasons he himself had to pretend thereunto; how much
the Dukes, his Predecessors, had labored to get it; and having not only had it
in his thoughts whilst his Son in law was alive, but given manifest signs of
his desire thereof, he thought the occasion was now very ripe, and the time
fit, to execute his secret designs of making himself easily Master thereof, if,
when he should have got his Daughter and his Niece into his possession, he
might honest his ends by the Title of Succession of the Male Issue which he
hoped for by his Daughter, or at least by that of his Niece, who was already in
being: and when by showing those of Montferrat their true Lord and Master, he
might either cunningly bring them to accept of him for the Protector of their
State, and young Duke, or force them by arms to obey him: Nor were there some
wanting who encouraged him in these designs by fair hopes and promises of the
peoples rising.

Guido de Conti di St George was then in the Court at Turin, the chief of the
Nobility of Montferrat, rich in Inheritances and personal Estate, and powerful
in friends and adherents: This man had not many years ago a Cardinal to his
Uncle, of very much esteem; and who, as it was commonly believed, would have
been Pope, had he not been kept from it (as was thought) by the contrary
endeavors of Duke Vincent; who, it may be, was jealous to see a subject of his
so highly exal ed; or resenting the displeasure he had received from him,
whilst being le^t Legate by Pope Clement the Eighth in Ferrara, which was but
newly regained to the Church, he entered with Sword in hand into the State of
Mantua, touching the difference of Confines; where he did much prejudice to the
Towns neighboring upon the State of Ferrara: and though the Count's
Predecessors had formerly been raised to great Authority and Honor, from but
mean fortune, by the extraordinary favor of Duke William, Father to Duke
Vincent; yet the memory of former good turns being of less force with the
Count, then the prejudice and injury which he had newly received, he was but
badly inclined to the House of Gonzaga: And therefore not thinking himself
looked upon by the Duke according to his quality, and that his ways were
narrowly pried into, he had almost given over his Country, and was retired into
Piedmont, where he was in no little Authority and favor with the Duke; by whom
he was highly graced with the Order of the Annuntiata, and other employments
and dignities; he being as much alienated in mind from his Prince, as in person
from his Country, out of revenge, and out of hopes of farther preferment,
professed he had much Intelligence with the Inhabitants of Montferrat; and
promised much to the Duke in their behalf. The recourse and inclination which
the Citizens of Cassalle, and formerly to Emanuel Philibertus, Father to the
present Duke of Savoy; when William, Duke of Mantua, usurping upon their
pretended liberties, got absolute dominion over them; and their being still but
ill satisfied therewith, gave more of credit to these his promises: And as the
business seemed in these respects to be easy enough of it self to be effected,
so neither did the Duke want other reasons which would secure him from meeting
with any impediments from elsewhere; for though Montferrat, and the Dukedom of
Mantua had formerly been under the protection of Spain, wherefore the Dukes of
Savoy not taking themselves to the way of Arms, had only civilly made trial of
that of Reason;) yet this protection seemed to (...) in the person of the
Cardinal; for that he having in the Court of Room, where he was chosen
Protector of France by the Queen his Aunt, exercised that Charge not only with
extraordinary affection and inclination to the French, but sometimes much
distasted the Spanish Agents: He seemed upon occasions to make less account of
the favor and grace of that King and Nation; and though being by his Brothers
death near possessing the States, he thought it neither reaso^able nor safe for
him to abet the Cardinal Protector of France; but necessary to preserve the
friendship and countenance under which his Ancestors had for so many years
happily enjoyed the Principallity; wherefore he had immediate recourse to the
King of Spain for the favor of his wonted protection; he could not as yet
obtain his desire, for the King deferred and protracted the expedition of this
affair, not without much jealousy in the Cardinal and in all his Court;
wherefore the Duke, who was not ignorant of these difficulties, thought he
might probably hope, that that King and Nation, either out of anger to the
Cardinal, or for the safety of the State of Millain, for which it did not make
that Montferrat (especially in respect of the Citadel of Cassalle) should fall
into the hands of a Prince in whom the Crown did not confide; and who having
discovered himself to adhere to France, was likely to incline more thereunto in
the future troubles, then unto its adversary: and though, for the aforesaid
reasons, the King had doubtlesly mo^e cause to suspect the very person of Duke
Charles Emanuel; yet (as the desire of obtaining ones ends makes the means of
obtaining it appear more likely and easy) he peradventure persuaded himself,
that many other things would cause that King, and that Court, not to oppose his
intention; the Alliance which he and Duke Francis his Sons had with him, the
design which amidst these troubles the Kings party might peradventure have of
securing themselves of Cassalle; the desire which it was probable the King and
his Officers might have of giving him satisfaction, so to avoid giving him
occasion of disordering Italy again: and because it made not for the Kings
advantage to satisfy him by the lessening his own Dominions, he thought that
out of all, or out of some of the aforesaid Reasons, the King passing by his
ancient, and now doubtful protection of Montferrat, ought, at least, not to
hinder him from possessing himself of that State whereunto he had long
pretended: Hereunto was added the straight and ancient friendship between the
Duke and the new Governor of Millain; to whom, as to a chief Minister of
State, the charge of acquainting the Court with the condition of the Affairs of
Italy, does belong: So that as the Authority and rigidness of Count Fuentes had
continually hindered the Duke in compassing his ends and enterprises; so this
man's easiness, and the great friendship which he professed to have for the Duke
considered, it was thought they would make him more aptto attempt novelties;
since he might assist the Dukes affairs sundry ways, at least till such time as
the Duke having possessed himself of a good part of Montferrat, the King might be
necessitated (it being the lesser evil) to suffer him to keep it.

Don John, of the most noble Family of Mendosa, Marquess of Inoioso, did then
govern the State of Millain, Count Fuentes being dead a little before; He was
newly raised to so great a Government, from a lesser condition, by the
extraordinary favor of the Duke of Lerma, whose Creature he was: The Duke of
Savoy had given him, many years before, the Marquesite of St Iermain^, in
acknowledgment and reward for the service which he had forme^ly done him in the
Wars against the French; and therefore being made Governor of Millain some
Months before, he in his passage entered into Asti, where he was received with
great civilities by the Duke, and much private discourse past between them. In
these very Ruptures, Count Guido, who had deserved very well of the Crown of
Spain, and was a great Confident to the whole Spanish Nation; for having fought
on the Kings behalf in the wars of Flanders, past several times secretly
between Turin and Millain, and had had private discourse with the Governor of
Inoioso; wherefore, and for the news which was given out in Italy of great
gifts that he had received from the Duke, he was much suspected in the troubles
which insued after between these Princes: and as out of the aforesaid Reasons
the Duke thought the Court of Spain might favor him in this Enterprise; so he
imagined upon better grounds, that he had no reason to doubt the French: For he
had found, two years before, by his own experience, how much that Queen did
de^est war in the Kingdom during the minority of her Son; and though her Nephew
the Cardinals danger should make her take a contrary resolution, it was to be
believed that those Forces and those Succors would rather have been
prejudicial then of any help to the Adversary, as those which would infallibly
have made the Spaniards join in favor with the Duke, against the Cardinal, as
against one who did trouble Italy; and who, with little of reputation or safety
to the Kings Dominions, did call in Foreign Nations, a thing which was much
abhorred by the Spaniards in this Province: As for the Princes of Italy, he
thought them much less able to disturb this Enterprise; since not any one of
them, whilst the King was savourable unto him, could succor Montferrat, which
was far distant from all their Dominions, and every where surrou^ed by the
State of Millain, Piedmont, and by the River of Genoa: He was likewise
encouraged by many things wherein he knew he did far exceed the Cardinal; the
Authority he had won by being esteemed a Prince of great Courage, Saga^ity,
exceeding diligent, and very dexterous at all great Affairs: And moreover, by
his long experience, very well acquainted with the affairs of the world, and
well versed in State Affairs, by reason of his Intelligence held with many
Christian Princes: That he was by his natural disposition, by his long
experience in war, so much exercised in Military Affairs, as that he was not to
be equaled therein by any Prince of those times: The opinion which was held of
his Vivacity and warlike Spirit, practiced both in good and bad Fortune, which
made him capable of any whatsoever weighty employment; that he was, for State
and natural ^orces; a Prince powerful enough in Italy; and that by reason of
his confining upon many warlike nations he might easily come by many Soldiers,
which he might feed in the fertile soil of Piedmont: wherefore thinking that
all difficulties were to yield to his will and courage; he imagined that Cardi^
Ferdinando, being as yet but a young man, newly settled in his Principality,
wanting many of those things wherein he knew himself did so much abound, not
being able to contend with him upon such disadvantages, would either yield unto
him, or atleast come to some composition, as Iovan Giacomo, and (...) (...),
had formerly done with his Progenitor Ama^.

Having considered all these things, and being of a great Spirit, and full of
extraordinary confidence; and incited by an ardent desire of enlarging the
limits of his Dominions (a thing which over-sways all other humane affections)
being moreover inflamed with indignation for the injury which he afterward
pretended was done him; they appeared greater, and more secure to him, then
peradventure they would prove; they therefore prevailed more with him then the
consideration of any difficulties which he was likely to meet with in this his
resolution; which either not dreaming of, or not caring for, he thought it
necessary, as it becomes all great Spirits to do, to make use of the present
condition of times; thinking (as he was wont to say) that they would be as
favorable unto him, as they had been the contrary to his Grandfather, when by
the Decree of the Emperor Charles the fifth, he was excluded the possession of
Montferrat: Therefore neither wholly refusing, nor yet wholly consenting to his
Daughters Marriage, he demanded that she should first come into Piedmont, and
bring her Daughter with her; and that his pretentions to Montferrat should
first be decided, under pretense that he would have no cause of contention left
behind him and Cardinal Ferdinando, when he should be become his Son in law.

It was not yet three Months since Duke Francis his death; and therefore,
though it was not certain whether the Dowager Duchess was with child, or no,
yet the thought thereof growing daily less, and the Cardinal being with some
resentment incited thereunto by the Duke her Father, he at last consented that
she should return to Piedmont: And he began to take upon him the Government of
the State in his own name, without any consideration of the Child that might be
born, and took upon him the Title of Duke of Mantua, not foregoing that of
Cardinal. The endeavors nor hopes of the future Marriage, were,
notwithstanding, quite given over when the Dowager Duchess departed: wherefore
when she was ready to take her leave, she entreated the new Duke, even with
tears in her eyes, that he would give her leave to carry her Daughter (at
least) to Modena, that she might be brought up there with her Sister Isabella,
where she did rather choose to live, then to return, without her Daughter, home
to her Father: Upon the occasion of her departure, Prince Victorio was again
returned from Turin to Mantua, and Princess Isabella her self from Modena, who
joining in their fervent entreaties with the Dowager Duchess, they endeavored
to make Duke Ferdinando grant her request: The young Prince could not gain say
such Intercessors, though he had formerly refused many other endeavors to the
same purpose: Being therefore overcome by the intreat^es of these Princes, or
wrought upon by the tears and affectionate speeches of the Mother, he
condescended to a request of so great Importance; but upon condition, that the
Duke of Modena should return back his Niece whenever he or the Emperor
should desire; and that in case her Mother should return to Turin, the Match
unconcluded, the Dukes of Savoy and of Modena should be obliged to send her
back to Mantua.

This Agreement being yielded unto upon Prince Victorio's Paroll, if it were
not the chief cause, and original of the troubles which did afterward ensue,
was a great occasion of their commencement; but the Duke of Modena foreseeing
how much trouble and difficulty he might incur if he should meddle in this
affair; and how hard it would be for him to keep the condition stipulated
without offending some of the parties; and perchance also the Emperor or the
King, if they should demand the young Lady, and being unwilling to enter into
Oaths or Cautions, required of him by the Duke of Mantua, absolutely refused to
rece^ve her: Wherefore the Dowager Duchess and the young Prince, failing in
this their hope, returned to Piedmont without the young Lady. When they were
come to Millain, the Governor desiring their satisfaction, did of himself
mediate with the Duke of Mantua, that the Niece might be left with him upon the
same conditions; which not being granted him, he desired that the Duke of
Modena would oblige himself to stand to covenanted Conditions; which having at
last, but not without the Duke of Savoys urgent pressing, obtained, Don Diego
di Leva was suddenly dispatched away from Millain to Mantua, to see the first
Agreement executed; but the Duke of Mantua's mind was for many respects already
altered; for no small commotion was raised in his Court; nor were there small
complaints made of him for this his so easy consenting to trust his Niece with
others; and the great desire the Governor had to have her by any whatsoever
means out of his hands, made him look more narrowly into the importancy of the
business: It was also said by many, That when she should be come to Millain
many would swear Loyalty to her. Hereunto was added Cesar's command touching
the retention of his Niece, which peradventure he had forgot when he promised
to part with her: And that which bore most weight with it was, He thought
himself free from his promise, which being made when the Duke of Modena tied
himself to Conditions in the disposing of her, the Duke having already
dissented, all Obligations seemed to be dissolved, which without a new
Agreement could not be in their full former vigor, by the sole consent of the
said Modena. Being therefore become more wary out of the aforesaid respects, he
would not ag^in commit the same fault whereof he thought he was as happily
acquitted as he easily had at first run into, by his good nature, and (as he
himself said afterward) through an excess of love: wherefore the Bishop of
Diocesarea, who was in his Court, being sent to Millain, the Duke was not so
strict in satisfying those Princes and the Governor, as that the Bishop, who
was a great Confident of the Duchess, should appease her anger for this his
new denial, by keeping the Treaty of Marriage on foot: But the Reasons alleged
by the Bishop were not admitted of by the Prince; for pretending that
whenever the Duke of Modena had accepted of the demanded Conditions the
Promise should, without all question, have been observed to them, he complained
freely thereof in a Letter sent back by the same Bishop; and going with his
Sister from Millain, he went to Vercelly, where they were much expected by the
Duke their Father. The Duke of Savoy thought himself much injured, that his
Daughter, contrary to his will, had been so long detained; that his Niece was
denied him, wherein, he said, the word passed to his Son was broken; and
hereupon he took occasion, under pretense of just resentment, to assault, and
make himself Master of Montferrat.

Whilst the Duke of Savoy was wholly intent upon this, the Bishop returned
with Authority from Duke Ferdinando to conclude the Marriage, whereof the
Governor had the first time given him no small hopes; and with Commission also
to satisfy Prince Victorio by word of mouth, touching the complaints contained
in his Letter: Wherefore being sent by the Governor to Vercell^, the Duke of
Savoy, who would not listen to the two things concerning which the Bishop was
sent, began to press his pretentions to Montferrat hard upon him, and the
assignation of his Grandchild, touching which he had no Commission to say any
thing: There were at this time in Piedmont between three and four thousand
Soldiers listed, part of those that were raised at the time of King Henry's
death; and were not disbanded, though the King was pacified with the Duke; and
though they had been often demanded by the Queen of France, to free those of
Genoa from the apprehensions they had of them, or to secure the peace of the
Kingdom from the scandals that might thereby arise: Yet the Duke, appearing
willing to dismiss them, feigning sometimes to do so, by sending some of their
Companies out of his State, he concealed the rest as much as he might,
distributing them into several parts of Piedmont: At last when the Duke his Son
in law was dead, he had filled up their numbers, professing openly that he
would make use of them against those of Be^ne, in recovery of some Castles
which they had taken from his Ancestors; but his Son in law being dead, and
growing warm in his inde^vours for his Grandchild, and in his pretentions, he
intended to make use of them in the enterprise of Montferrat.

Montferrat being divided into two several bodies, may for the clearer
understanding thereof, be distinguished into two parts; the upper on this side
Tanaro, and the lower on the other side of Tanaro: The latter, which lies more
Southwardly, is between the River of Savona, and the Territories of Asti and
Alessandria; there is in it two Cities, Acq^; and Alba; and two Forts, San
Damiano, and Ponsone: But the upper part of Montferrat, which is much greater
then the lower, beg^ns just where the River Sesia falls into the Poe, and
extending it self toward the Alps, between the Territories of Vercelli and
Asti, does inte^ it self, or rather loses it self in Piedmont, and coming
within six miles o^ Turin, draws nearer the foot of the Alps: the P^e ^uns
along the length of this part; there are no strong Holds in it but Cassalle,
the Metropolis and Frontier of the whole State toward Millain; and Trino,
which confines upon Vercelli, Montcalvo, and Asti; for what remains, it is not
divided from Piedmont, either by Rivers or Mountains, or secured by any Fort:
The Boundeurs of particular places do distinguish the Jurisdiction of the two
Princes. This State was not any way prepared for so sudden an assault; for the
Duke of Mantua's Officers, and all the Inhabitants, being comforted in
expectation of the Marriage which was in Treaty, thought themselves to be in
secure peace, and looked for nothing less then to be assaulted; and so much the
less, for that to boot with Montferrat, having been always in the Kings
protection, whereby they thought they should not be subject to novelties; Duke
Ferdinando was also assured by the Governor of Millain, that the Duke of Savoy
would not move without his knowledge; and that, howsoever, he would be ready to
assist him: and under color of not giving the Savoyard further occasion of
Arming, the Governor had exhorted the Mantuan to casheir many of the
Montferrat Militia, and to Quarter them elsewhere, who were Mustered in that
State since his Brothers death; when efore the Duke of Savoy making use of this
occasion, resolved to invade Montferrat by night in several parts, on the
Twenty second of April; and having ordered the Count de Verrua, and Captain
Alessandro Guerrino, to move at the appointed time; the latter from Ch^arasco,
whereof he was Governor, to fall upon Alba; and the other from Asti, to
possess himself of Montcalvo: He himself, accompanied by the Princes, Victorio
and Thomaso, his eldest and his youngest Sons, by Count Guido St George, and
other Lords of Piedmont, parted from Vercelli with 600 Foot, some Troops of
Horse; and Carirages of Ammunition, and marched that very night toward Trino;
whither being come a little before day break, he sent the Commendator della M^a
with some Soldiers to fasten a Petarde; after whom he sent 300 Provincials,
commanded by Captain Rovigliasco; and keeping a little behind with the rest of
his men, he waited till when the Petard should have played he might enter
together with them: The mean while he sent some to take a Castle near the Poe,
called Gabbiano, which yielded without making any resistance. The Portcullies
of Trino was beaten in two by the Pe^ard; but Motta advancing further to force
the Gate with another Petard, which was prepared for that purpose, whilst
meeting with some hinderance, some little delay was made; the day began to
clear up; and these within getting upon the Walls, slew the Petardier, and hurt
some others by Musket shot, amongst which the Commandator della Motta; the
Barons of Hermansa, and Tornone: Wherefore the Duke, failing in his first
design of surprising that Town, betook himself to play upon the walls with
Artillery which he had caused to be brought from Vercelli; and to keep off
succor he cut a Trench cross the way which leads from Cassalle, placing some
Horse in Garrison there, and some Soldiers to guard the way which leads to
Palazz^lo, (...), and (...), places near to Montferrat; The Militia of which
places, hearing of the Dukes coming, marched to get into Trino; but were beaten
back by the Commandator della Manta: The number of the Dukes men multiplied
this mean while by the coming in of more; and the Battery being begun by
Cannon, and being by approches advanced to certain Kills, from whence they
might commodiously play upon the Walls, and then give an Assault; those of the
Town, the third day after the first assault, surrendered the Town of their own
accord, their Lives, Goods, and Privileges, being preserved: The rewards
promised him by the Duke of Savoy, and Intelligence held with Count Guido, were
of mo^e force with the Captain of that Place, then the Loyalty which he owed to
his Prince. This Count writ to his friends, that these Arms were taken up for
the preservation of that State on the behalf of the Princess Mary, to whom he
said it did of right belong; for which he was afterward banished, and branded,
with other aceustomed punishments, as guilty of high Treason: The same night
the City of Alba was assaulted and taken by Guerrini; who having fallen upon
the Walls on sundry sides* by break of day, with 600. Foot, and a Troop of
Horse, threw down the Gate toward Tanaro with a Petard; by which the Soldiers
entering, and scaling the Walls in other parts, they made themselve; Masters
thereof without much opposition, before the Citizens could put themselves in
order to defend the Walls; amongst which the Cavalier della Motta, the chief
man of the City, was slain, together with some others: and Silvio Via, Captain
of Horse, who kept the Castle for Duke Ferdinand, being abandoned, was quickly
forced to surrender it: The City was this mean while miserably sacked by the
Dukes Soldiers; yet women were kept unviolated, and sacred things un-injured,
otherwise then was done in other parts of Montferrat: yet they proceeded
severely with the Bishop of that place; for being violently dragged from the
sacred Altar, where he was upon his knees, he was ill beaten, and had a Ring
plucked off which he wore upon his finger; and being led Prisoner in shameful
manner through the City, he was forced to purchase his liberty with his moneys;
which when he had disburs'd, he had notwithstanding a Guard put upon him in his
own Palace, and at last forced to forego the City, and to keep in Nivello, a
place belonging to the Empire: It was thought that the Duke of Savoy held
Intelligence here also; for whom the Prince did suspect were Imprisoned
afterward. Alba being taken and sacked, all the Towns and Villages thereabouts
came into Guerrini, for ^ear of being plundered, and of having their Country
laid waste; Diano, a neighboring Castle, and of some consideration, yielded
unto him within three days; but the assault which was intended to be given that
very night to Montcalvo, was deferred till the next night; for the Soldiers
who were deputed thereunto did a little delay their coming to Asti; from whence
Count Verrua parting the next night with a good number both of Foot and Horse,
he sent the Cavalier Redortiers before to fasten a Petard: Some Companies of
Montferrians were already gotten into that Town; and yet the Town being very
weak, and abandoned by the Garrison, it was taken at the first Assault, and also
sacked; but greater provisions being requisite for taking the Castle, which was
strongly situated, Verrua returned to Asti; from whence he sent more men and
Artillery, and began diligently to oppugn it. The mean while the Duke
published a Manifesto in Print, wherein relating what had past between him and
Duke Ferdinando in relation to the Dowager Duchess his Daughter, the Princess
his Grandchild, and his pretentions to Montferrat; he complained that Duke
Ferdinando had not kept his word to the Prince Victorio; and replied unto the
Reasons alleged to the contrary; and by a short Narrative of his right to
Montferrat, endeavored to justify what he had done: He therefore supplicated
the Pope, the Emperor, the Catholic King, and all the Princes of Christendom,
that they would approve of this his taking up of Arms, in just resentment of
the injuries done him by the Duke of Mantua, and for the recovery of what ^ad
been so unjustly taken from his Ancestors, and so long possessed by his
Adversaries, so much to his prejudice; concluding that he would not refu^e to
listen unto, and to accept of such Propositions as should be offered unto him
for the accommodation of these differences, if they were accompanied with
reason and convenience. And to make men conceive the better of this Enterprise,
and make himself the more formidable* he gave out that he held Intelligence
with the King of England, and with the States of Holland; from whom he expected
great succor by Sea.

The End of the first Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK II.
The Contents.
THE Wars of Montferrat is continued to be related; as also the Provisions and
Negotiations made by the Duke of Mantua and other Princes. The Surrender of the
Castle of Montcalvo: The oppugning of Nizza della Paglia: Prince Victorio's
going to Spain: Orders sent from that Court to Italy, touching the protection
of Montferrat, and the Restitution of the Towns that were taken. In execution
whereof Nizza is freed, and the other Towns restored to the Duke of Mantua. The
War of Garfagnana, between the Duke of Modena and the Commonwealth of Lucca;
which being accommodated by peace, the business of Montferrat is reassumed, and
diverse Negotiations pass between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua; which whilst
they are in Treaty, Spains final Resolution comes touching the quiet of Italy,
and the security of Montferrat: Prince Victorio returns to Italy badly
satisfied with the King and Court of Spain.

WHen the Princes of Italy had news of these Commotions, and heard of what had
happened in Montferrat, they were not a little astonished; For foreseeing the
mischiefs that were threatened Italy thereby, no man could imagine how the Duke
had begun that War, to the so great prejudice of the public Peace, and to the
so great danger of the Common Affairs: Being much perplexed, they argued, out
of circumstances, and by probabilities, whether it were done merely out of the
Dukes own deliberation, or by participation had, and Intelligence held with the
Court of Spain. It was hard for any to persuade themselves, that that King
should consent to the oppression of a State, the protection where of he had
ever sincerely prosessed; especially since it was impossible this should happen
without causing commotions in Italy, and without making way for Foreign
Nations to enter; things totally repugnant to those sound Foundations whereupon
the safety of his Dominions, and the power of his Authority was so happily
built: But it did no less repugne the total Affairs of his Crown, that the Duke
of Savoy should add so rich, and so well peopled a Dukedom to his Dominions, it
being so near, and lying so opportunely for the State of Millain, left his
Power being thereby doubled, he mig^ have a mind to novelties, and that
afterward aiming at greater matters, he might bend his thoughts to the
prejudice of the Public Peace; or at least, if he should keep quiet, he would
be less pliable, and depend less upon the Authority of that Crown. The Dukes
natural Genius made this opinion appear more probable; it being hard for him to
con^ine himself within the boundeurs of his own Fortune; wherefore he had been
hardly detained formerly from showing the bad satisfaction which was discovered
to be in him, and contrary to the ends of that Crown, and to his last straight
Intelligence held with King Henry of France; which being accompanied by Arms,
and by the conjuncture of Times, had made it appear how much disdain, and the
desire of greater Affair, had prevailed over him; wherefore all augmentation of
Power or Authority was to be apprehended in him. Yet notwithstanding (as men
are naturally easy to believe those things which they fear most) there were
but very few who did not firmly believe the contrary; as not believing that the
Duke would have begun such a business upon his own bottom, whereby he would
have drawn France upon his back, and have irritated Italy: They therefore
concluded, it was impossible he should have put himself and his own Affairs
into so manifest trouble, unless he had been backed by that King.

This opinion was the more confirmed by the flow proceedings of the Spaniards
to extinguish this fire which the Duke had kindled; and this, in process of
time, did so much increase this opinion, as the many evident demonstrations
which the King did by his actions manifest (the which, the more evident they
were, the more were they interpreted to a sinister sense) were not sufficient
to remove it: The more every one did believe this, the more were they puzzled
in finding out the ends which could make that King and his State Ministers put
on such a resolution: And as the supposing of this proved afterward vain; so
of necessity must they be but r^ve concerning their imagined ends. Many
believed that they were permitted this enterprise, to the end that they might
by terror of Arms get that young Lady, which they could not do by Authority or
inde^vours: Others reasoning more subtly, suspected that they might willingly
foment dissension between these Princes, out of hopes that the Duke of Mantua,
not being able of himself to defend that State, should (as he had often
formerly endeavored) change it upon disadvantagious terms; the greater part
whereof he should have divided with the Duke of Savoy, out of a desire to make
himself master of the Castle of Casalle. Those who discoursed more moderately,
thought, that the Kings State Ministers were willing to see the Duke of Mantua
reduced to these streights, to necessitate him to have recourse to their King,
to the end that being either favored or disfavour'd by him therein, it might
be known how much the adherence of that Crown did redound to the advantage of
the Princes of Italy. Those of Italy being agitated by these thoughts, and
doubtful what the sequel would prove, they were not less anxious for fear of
the future mischief, then uncertain what remedies to prepare which might be
adequate to the eminent danger. The mean while the Dukes forces caused great
commotion and fear in Montferrat, where like ^under the blow was felt, before
the lightning was seen. That State was then unprovided of Arms, Men, or
Ammunition, with a powerful Enemy within the bowels thereof; who had already
made himself master of two of her chief Towns, and was ready to take the third;
and who pillaged many Towns and Villages, abandoned by their Inhabitants, who
yielding to the Enemy, ran readily to swear ^ealty unto him. The Governor, and
Mantuan Officers, surprised at so unexpected an accident, were astonished,
thinking no less of their own weakness to defend themselves, then on the Dukes
readiness to offend them, they much distrusted the chief Montferratins, whom
they knew to be compared with by Count Guido against their Prince. They
likewise distrusted the Governor of Millain, by reason of his dearness with
the Duke of Savoy; out of the ordinary ambition of Agents, to a^vantage their
Masters condition, by any whatsoever way: and much more, finding how little his
actions did answer to his preceding promises; when either to appease them, or
to bereave them of necessary provision upon such like occasions, he assured
them, that the Duke of Savoy would not move, or if he did, that he would oppose
him in defense of Montferrat. Being uncertain therefore what to do, all things
were full of terror, tumult, and confusion, which was made the greater by the
miserable Country people, and by the inhabitants of weaker Towns, either
assaulted, or exposed to be assaulted by the Enemy; who therefore to shun the
calamities of War, and the excessive cruelty of the Dukes Soldiers, ran half
naked, with their Wives, and Children, into Casalle and the neighboring parts
of Millain, filling some with compassion, and some with great ^errour.

Carlo de Rossi, one of Parma, did then govern Montferrat, who had immediately
dispatched away Manfrin^ (...), a Gentleman of Millain, an experienced Commander
in the Wars of Hungary, and Lieutenant General of that part of Montferrat, to
beyond Tanaro; and sent diverse other Captains to other places, providing where
he thought it most necessary to do so. And yet seeing the Enemy strong in the
State, and therefore considering the present mischief, before the future evil;
he resolved, though in vain, to have recourse for help to the Governor of
Millain; and being resolved to relieve Trino, he endeavored to send in 2000
foot thither, who might enter in privately by night, before it should be
surrendered. But as they were passing over certain waters, (being people taken
up here and there, and unexperienced) they were so astonished at the hea^ing of
Gunshot, as they shamefully turned back, and left the Powder and Ammunition
which they brought to relieve the place, in the Enemies hands. In this so great
and sudden perturbation, the unexpected coming of Charles Gonsaga, Duke of
Nevers from France, was of no small moment; who going at that time upon other
occasions to Rome, came with two Galleys to Savona; where hearing of the Duke
of Savoy's March, of the taking of Alba, and that diverse other places were
besieged, left his journey, and went immediately to Casalle: It is not to be
expressed with what joy and consolation he was there received by people of all
ages and conditions. His Father Lodowick was son to Frederick Gonsaga, by
Margaret Paleologa: but his elder ^rother George, succeeding by birthright in
the State, he went to France, where he served that Crown long, and married the
daughter of the Duke of Nevers, one of the Peers of France. Who inheriting that
State, together with other Territories, and the honor of Peer of France,
conveyed them all over to this Charles. Who being in^icht with so many
Possessions, so great Allies, and Titles of Honor, he is numbered amongst the
chiefest Lords of that Kingdom. The people did the e^ore rejoice infinitely,
seeing a Prince come into their relief, who was considerable for his quality,
for his known valor, and for the confidence they had in him, by reason of his
relation to that State, and to the Lord thereof: but chiefly for the
extraordinary affection he showed, to employ his life in their service; and
comforted them with unquestioned succor which he assured them they should soon
receive from France. Duke Ferdinando, hearing the unexpected news of the taking
of his Towns, and not being able in so short a time to do much, he betook
himself for help to his Friends, and to the Authority and favor of the
chiefest Christian Princes; particularly to France; from whence, both in
respect of the Queen, and of that Nation to which he had been so kind, he had
as much reason to expect succor, as he thought he might distrust assistance
from Spain. But having received Letters in the very instant of these ruptures,
from Spain, of the so long desired protection of that Crown; though the Duke of
Savoys unexpected onset, and the Spanish Agents proceedings, made him somewhat
jealous thereof; yet considering how far distant assistance from France was,
how hand to get, and in several respects how uncertain, he inde^vour'd by
Letters, and by express Messengers sent to Millain, to make the Governor
thereof secure the eminent danger of that State, according as he had promised
to do. And to the end he might prepare for his defense, no less by Reason, then
by Arms, and the favor of his Friends; he also published a Manifesto in answer
to that made by the Duke of Savoy; wherein amongst other things he complained,
that when he had an Ambassador in that Dukes Court to treat of new alliances
with him, he had assaulted his State unexpectedly by night, contrary to the
Laws of God and Nations; and that having surprised his principal Towns, he had
committed Rapine, Plunder, and all kinds of cruelty against all sorts of
people; no^ pardoning the chastity of Virgins, nor sacred ornaments, dedicated
to the Worship of God; and that he had also exercised his savageness upon the
lives of poor Priests. Then re-assuming the treaties held with Prince Victorio,
at his parting from Mantua; he showed that he was absolved from his word
gainsaying the reasons alleged by the Duke of Savoy touching his pretenses to
Montferrat, by the Authority of the Emperor Charles the fifth's Decree; he
added, he had notwithstanding been ready to do that by the way of friendship,
which had been awarded him by competent Judges; But that the Duke of Savoy,
contrary to all reason, and contrary to the Institutions of his Ancestors, who
had treated of these differences in a civil manner with the Emperors, had by
^orce of Arms been his own (...): That therefore he was not against the Popes,
the Emperors, and all Christian Princes, being against him, if they should
approve of his adversaries actions as just; but that, on the contrary, he did
earnestly pray and supplica^e the said Princes, that seeing him so unjustly
assaulted in his own Dominions, they would appear in his favor against those
Arms which had been taken up so scandalously, and to the disturbance of the
Common peace and quiet, to deprive him of that State which had been so law^ully
poss^st by him and his predecessors: And not seeing the Governor o^ ^illain
any ways concerned in so great a novelty; nor ^ving been able to work upon him
by Letters or Embassies, he resolved to go himself in person to Millain. But
this, as all his other endeavors, proved vain; for the Governor, though he
had been enjoined the protection of Montferrat in his general Instructions; yet
he ^xcused the slowness of his proceedings, pretending that he would not give
an oc^sion o^ War between the King and Duke, by taking up Arms, without
particular order from the Court. And yet that the Duke of Mantua might not
depart without having obtained any thing of him, he gave way that Don Her^le
Gonza, and the Count Di san Second^ should go with the^ (...)' Arms from
Millain to the defense of Montferrat* and that all the Soldiers which should
be sent thither from Mantua, might pass through the State of Millain. Moreover,
to raise jealousy in the Duke of Savoys Dominions, he sent some Companie^ of
Spanish Foot to the Confines of Vercelles, but with express command not to go
further. And having given order for the raising of 4000 Sw^ffers, he deputed
Lodovico Gambaloita, and Ieronimo Rho, Camp-masters, to raise two Regiments of
3000 Foot ap^ece in Lombardy; which being done but slowly, for want of money,
they were no proportionate ^emedy for the present evil; for Montferrat was
likely to be left in prey to the Enemy, unless it were speedily and powerfully
succored. Duke Ferdinando returned therefore from Millain, ill satisfied; and
by thi^ rigidness arguing but little of good that was intended him from Spain,
and therefore despairing of help from thence, he forbore not to express it. The
mean while he sent his brother Vincenzo into Montferrat with 500 Horse and 1000
Foot; and having sent notice to France of his condition, he expected succor
from thence; but for all this his cause was stuck unto by the Italian Princes;
for the Venetians, and the great Duke of Toscany, weighing the importance of
this business, and the consequences which might succeed thereupon, declared
themselves on the behalf of the Duke of Mantua; the State of Venice resolved to
pay a certain sum of money for the maintaining of the Citadel of Cassalle; and
both they and the great Duke gave themselves diligently to raise Soldiers for
the relief of Montferrat; lest the Duke of Savoy holding intelligence with the
King of Spain might share therein with him; or if there were no intelligence
between them, that by molesting Duke Ferdinando, the King might necessita^e
him, when he should be abandoned by his friends, to throw himself into the arms
of-the said King, and by exchange for somewhat of less value, surrender
Montferrat unto him, which he could not by any other means keep from his
adversary; and so the condition of Italy might be impaired by such a change. A
consideration which many thought might as well have kept the Duke of Savoy from
such novelty; because it would be more inconvenient for him, then for any
other, that Montferrat, which was as it were in the bowels of Piedmont, and so
very near Turin, should be possessed by the Spaniards, who by building Forts in
fitting places, might keep him in perpetual subjection. This Counsel was not
therefore generally approved of, whose wisdom every one desired might at this
time have been greater, and that it might have prevailed over his desire of
possessing himself of Montferrat, or over his resentment of the injury he
conceived he had received; and that temporizing, according to the example of
his Predecessors, he might have wai^ed for other opportunities and occasions,
whereby he might have experimented his Title, or his Fortune, without
indangering the quiet of Italy, more to his own convenience, and with less
danger to others. But the news of these commotions* being heard in France,
though they caused much trouble there, yet the Queen being resolute not to
occasion any alteration in her Kingdom by taking up Arms, after many
consultations, held it best to betake her self to those means by which not many
years before she had composed the Duke of Savoys affairs. She therefore
resolved to assist her Nephew in a civil way: especially since in regard of the
double alliance between her children, and those of the King of Spain, from the
conclusion whereof a strict union was expected, and a firmer friendship then
had been formerly hoped for between those two Crowns: she had just reason to be
confident her mediation and endeavors would not prove vain in that Court. But
on the other side, for the Kingdoms greater honor, and the more safety of her
Nephews affairs, she gave out that she would assist him by Arms; and made some
preparations, more in show then reality; which being afterward heard upon the
Confines of Savoy, caused some jealousy in the Duke; and it may be the news of
their coming was not without some good to Italy. This mean while, the Duke of
Savoy, seeing his Counsels favored by success, much more then he had reason to
hope for; little apprehending the far-off Forces of France, and being confident
that the Spaniard would not trouble him nearer hand; especially since Prince
Victorio was returned to Piedmont, not without satisfaction from Millain;
whence he had sent thither, to let the Governor know, how well it became the
King, in point of honor, to resent the injury that was done him in the persons
of his children; Therefore growing daily bolder, and spreading his sails
broader to the prosperous winds of Fortune, he advanced farther in the conquest
of Montferrat; not punishing those who withstood him, more with Fi^e and Sword,
then those with extraordina^y Contributions who had willingly submitted;
insomuch as in a short time he made himself master of almost all the upper
Montferrat. Where the Soldiers trampling upon all things both sacred and
profane, made the Inhabitants, without any distinction of age or sex undergo
all the evils and adversities which the licentiousness, av^rice, and
libidinousness of War could occasion: So as the Dukes name became shortly no
less odious, then formidable; though to prevent scandal, and inconvenience, and
to acquit himself of so great excesses, he had caused some of his most insolent
Soldiers to be severely punished. And being encouraged and grown proud by
success, and not thinking that any of the Italian Princes could oppose him in
this enterprise, though they did not approve thereof, he recalled his
Ambassador from Venice, and dismissed the Venetian Ambassador that was resident
with him, as the Ambassador of a Prince that was his Enemy: Not complaining so
much that the Commonwealth had declared it self to adhere to his adversary, as
of the manner how; because no endeavors had preceded the Senates Declaration,
as seemed fitting to have been done to a Prince that was a friend: And
understanding at the same time that Innocenzo de Massimi, Bishop of Bertinoro,
and Vice-Legat of Ferrara, who was sent unto him upon the present Occurrences,
with the Title of Extraordinary Nuntio, had endeavored somewhat, with the
Governor of Millain, tending to the favor of Duke Ferdinando; he forbo^e
giving him Audience for some days, making use of his conceived anger as of a
pretense wherefore not to listen to his proposals, and consequently not to
slacken the War by any Treaty of Peace: But not knowing how, civilly to avoid
the coming of Francisco Gonzaga, Prince of Castiglione, who was come to
Piedmont from the Emperor, though he was unwillingly come to Treat with him,
as equally suspecting the person sent, and the sender, and detesting the
occasion of his coming, yet he resolved to give him Audience in Moncalleri.

The Prince had order from Caesar to threaten him with an Imperial Bando, or an
Edict of the Emperor against him, unless he should instantly restore the
places he had taken, and forbear further offending Montferrat with Arms, which
was a State held in fee-Farm from the Empire; but the Prince not thinking it a
seasonable time to exasperate the Duke, mitigating his Embassy, and turning
the Threat into Exhortations, persuaded him to pursue his pretentions by Law,
and not by Arms. It was sore for the Duke to interrupt this so fortunate way
which he was in, and to withdraw when he was almost possessed of Victory: He
therefore bethought himself to take occasion by this present stop, of
justifying his Cause, and not refraining his proceedings, to propose such
Articles, as not being likely to be accepted by his Adversary, might
necessi^ate him to declare a difference in the King of Spain, and might
consequently win himself more favor from that Crown. His Answer was, That he
was ready to desist from the Enterprise; and referring the whole difference to
Caesar and the King, that he would deposite the Towns of Montferrat into their
hands, which was no more then to put them absolutely into the hands of the
King, and of his State-Ministers, of whom Ferdinando was jealous, for the
aforesaid Reasons, which jealousy was increased in him by this his Adversaries
so great confidence: For Caesar having no Forces in Italy would not in
likelihood make any use of the trust imposed in him, but by way of color: And
yet the Prince of Castiglione, who was not diffident of the Court of Spain, as
the Duke was, was not displeased with the proposal, especially as the present
condition of affairs stood: He therefore went for Mantua, believing certainly
to persuade the Duke thereunto; but he found himself absolutely averse; were it
either out of the aforesaid Reasons, or for that Caesar had by Letters exhorted
him not to admit of any middle way, without being first fully possessed of all
things, or that he began to be of better hopes, finding that he was favored by
the Venetians and great Duke, and that he began to find the King of France well
inclined toward him.

In this Interim Montcalvo was surrendered to Count Guido, who had pla^d upon
it with Artillery, and made many assaults upon it; in so much as those within
finding themselves void of all defense, did at the first Article to surrender,
if they were not relieved within three days: And the Governor of Cassalle
having in vain desired but only one thousand Foot from the Governor of Millain
to put thereinto; it would without all doubt have fallen into the Dukes hands
within the time prefixed, had not the Cavalier Ottavio Valperga d'Conti di
Rivara, who came out of Pontestura with 500 of his men, got safe into the
Castle; where leaving men and Ammunition, he went out again the next night, and
passing through the Enemy, with more prejudice to them then to his own men, he
returned to from whence he went the day before: This Relief did for a while
delay, but did not totally hinder the Surrender; for Count Guido shut up all
the avenues to the Castle by a continued Trench; and making some Mines
underneath the Bulwarks, and beating down the Parapets, he brought the Enemy to
utmost despair; who not being able to keep any longer upon the Walls, and
seeing no hopes of succor, surrende^ed fifteen days after the beginning of the
Siege.

Montcalvo being taken, there did not any thing remain in the Duke of Mantua's
obed^ence in the upper Montferrat, but Cassalle and Pontestura, and what the
Garrisons of those places could defend. Pontestura was not strong of it self;
but standing upon the Poe, and very fit for the Enterprise of Cassalle, it had
been somewhat fortified at the beginning of these Commotions, and furnished with
a reasonable Garrison; which Garrison the Duke of Savoy (intending peradventure
to advance Cassalle) summoned upon pain of life to surrender within a short
time. Prince Vicenzo was at this time in Cassalle with his Mantuans, and the
Duke of Nevers was there also; but fearing lest they should leave the City
unprovided, or distrusting the valor of their men, if in their going to
succor Pontestura, they should light upon the Dukes men, who were encouraged
by such success, they would not send to assist it, as was necessary they should
have done; but thought it better to secure Cassalle, which was the chief place
of the whole State, and not to hazard those men which were the prime forces
that the Duke of Mantua could assemble at that time: But on the other side, the
loss being too great which would be had if Pontestura should not be succored,
they got leave of the Governor of Millain, that some Companies of Spanish Foot
should en^er thereinto with the Kings Colors, in reverence whereunto the Duke
^orbore the Siege: And thinking that to attempt Cassalle would be a weighty
business, and too great for his Forces; especially since he had disposed of the
most of his men in the Garrisons of the Towns which he had already taken:
Therefore altering his resolution he turned to the lower Montferrat, where the
Country about Acqui had not as yet been touched by his Forces: There was but
two Towns therein which could dispute the whole Dominion thereof with him, Nice
and San Damiano; for the City of Acqui was not able to make any long
resistance; and the other Castle of Ponzone, which lay toward the Sea, served
rather to guard the Pas^, then to defend the Country: And as for San Damiano,
though it was strongly situated, and munited with Artillery, and an
extraordinary Garrison, yet being divided from Montferrat, and environed by the
Territories of Montferrat, it was not sufficient of its self to hinder his
advancing. The Duke was therefore content to annoy it with only a few Soldiers
and some Pieces of Artillery, not doubting but that when he should have
possessed himself of the other parts thereabouts, it would fall into his hands:
He therefore went with all his Forces to the expugning of Nice, as that which
being placed upon the Frontiers of his Dominions, hindered him from making
himself Master of the parts about Acqui, and of all the neighboring Country,
This is a Town great enough, situated in a Plain, abounding in Victuals, and
capable of a great Garrison: The figure thereof is like a broken Pyramide, by
the side whereof a small River, called Nizza, runs on one side, and on the
other side the River Belbo, somewhat greater, which serve her for a great
Ditch; and these waters, mingling together a little forwarder, they finish the
imperfect Pyramid of the said Town: The Walls are very old and weak, and as
those of the ancient form, for the most part without Flanks or Bulwarks; only
on the point which looks toward Alessandria there is a Castle with some
Towers, but much ruinated by time; The Basis which looks toward Piedmont is of
a large extent; and though it has neither Rampires nor Flanks, yet is it
munited with a large deep Ditch: Hither, as to a place upon the Frontiers, and
very fitting for the capaciousness and safety thereof, were come the best
Militia, with many Commanders, and persons of good esteem in the neighboring
parts; who, (the Townsmen not numbered) amounted to the number of 2000 Foot,
and 200 Horse, under the Command of Lieutenant Castiglione; who having
fortified the Town in fitting places, and enlarged the Walls with Plat-forms,
cleansed the Ditches, and repaired the Towers, had, with much industry, made it
tenable. Into this place was likewise entered Antoniotto and Carlo, Brothers to
Rovere; the one Commissary of the Militia, and the other of the States
Munition, together with many Captains and Officers of good condition, and well
affected to their Prince.

Count Guido was deputed by the Duke to this Enterprise; who drawing near Nizza
with 2000 Foot, 400 Horse, and three Pieces of Artillery, did immediately
repulse 500 Foot, and 200 Horse, who being come out against him were not able
to endure the sight of the Enemy, but retreated basely, and in disorder to
within the Town; wherefore the Count being Master of the field quartered
himself between the Covent of the Gapuchins, and the Wall of the Town which
looks toward Piedmont; and though he expected more men and Artillery, yet
having tried in vain how they were minded that were within the Town, he began
to batter, and making several Troops of Dragoons go out, he endeavored to keep
the De^endants from standing upon the Wall; and to face them that they might
not keep him from quartering there; But their Artillery was of so small bore,
and the Enemies Walls were made so strong by Plat-forms, as all battery proved
in vain, as also all Skirmishes, by reason* of the number of the Defendants,
who repulsed the enemies Horse by showers of Musket Shot from the Walls and
most eminent places; the which they might the more easily do, for that it being
then a very wet season, the Dukes men could not well keep abroad to fight, nor
make their necessary approaches by Trenches; for to boot that it was impossible
for them to keep their Matches lighted, or their Powder dry, they could no
sooner dig a Ditch in that ground, which was naturally moist, but it was
presently filled up by springs and rainwater, and the ground became so
slippery and dirty, as neither man nor Horse could keep their feet: with which
difficulties Count Guido, having for many days wrastled in vain, and the rain
continuing still to fall abundantly, he was advised by many of his men to send
his Horse to possess themselves of some neighboring place, and go with his
Foot to San Marzano, and wait till the weather should prove fairer, and till
the rest of their expected men, their Ammunition and greater Guns, might come
unto them, which were now kept back by the floods of waters; that then they
might reassume the Enterprise more commodiously, and with better preparations:
But the Count, who valued his Soldiers trouble and inconvenience less then the
loss of reputation, did not approve of this; wherefore resolving,
notwithstanding all difficulties, to continue what he had begun, he played upon
the Towers and most eminent houses, by continual battery, to beat off the
defenders, and keep his men from being so easily injured from thence, as they
were. Not many days after, some more Soldiers being come unto him, and the
rain beginning somewhat to cease, he made some Troops of Horse pass over La
Nizza, that they might possess themselves of a certain Covent, from whence they
might easily hinder the succor which was said would be sent from Inoisa, a
Town of Montferrat; but Castiglione and the other Commanders, who were always
ready to undergo all trouble and danger, having notice of the precise hour of
the coming of the succor, sent out diverse Companies several ways, who
skirmishing with the Enemy in sundry places, kept them play till the succor of
Victuals and Ammunition was conveyed into the Town. The Count resolving
afterward to oppugn the opposite part of the Town, sent some Horse to
discover the place. Whereof Castiglione being aware, though he feld the trees
round about, and placed Soldiers in several passes to keep the Enemy off, yet
could he not hinder him from making of himself master of the Field there also;
for his men no sooner saw the enemy, then basely foregoing their Stations, they
withdrew to within the Walls; so as the Banks and Baracadoes being there
finished, they were at continual skirmishes: Nor did they forbear making works
on the other side, and approaches, and playing continually upon the Wall, and
the inward buildings with the greater Artillery, which was come at last, and
wherewith they threw down the Monastery of Nuns; and the ruins of the walls
and neighboring houses falling into the ditches, those without might have made
an assault, had not the courage and readiness of the defendants supplied all
wants; who coming out into the ditch, and facing the Enemy, did daily fight
them; and speedily mending the breaches which the Enemy had made, stood in good
order upon the wall, and kept the Enemy off; wherefore the Count caused a
Cannon to be brought to a neighboring hill, wherewith he scowred all that
tract of wall, and kept the Soldiers from standing there; and playing upon the
wall in another place with other three pieces of Cannon, he endeavored to make
way for an assault, which peradventure might have succeeded, had not
Castiglione secured the wall from the battery, by raising some Rampires.
Insomuch as though the Enemy was ready to fall into the Ditch, having been very
diligent in bringing on their Trenches, and made their Scaling-Ladders ready,
thinking to give an assault, yet the breadth of the ditch, and the numbers, and
valor of those that defended it, kept them from falling on. Whilst Nice was
thus no less gallantly oppugned by Count Guido, then manfully defended by
Castiglione, the Duke of Savoy came from Turin to Chirasco, and having taken
order there for the raising of more men, and for the sending them to before
Nice, he came to Alba, the more to encourage the enterprise by the nearness of
his person.

On the other part, Prince Vicenzo, and the Duke of Nevers came to Acqui, and
endeavored to raise Soldiers, thinking to relieve Nice, and to free it from
the danger it was in, by the daily access of new men to Count Guido; and yet
they could hope for but few Soldiers from thence, since almost the whole upper
Montferrat was brought under the Duke of Savoy; and the Militia of the County
of Acqui, and of the neighboring parts, were (as has been said) brought for
the most part into Nice: If these, who were the flower of the Country, durst
not look the Enemy in the face, what trust could they put upon the rest
without, who doubtlesly were but the scum, when they were to be brought to the
sight of the Trencbes, and Cannon, as necessarily they must be.

Four hundred French were at this time come by Sea, amongst which were many
Gentlemen, and people of good account, who were friends and adherents to
Nevers, who at the first hearing of these rumors, came from France to assist
him; and being backed by Galleys belonging to the Kingdom, came in the Seas of
Genoa in small Barks, to find him out, rather as Travelers than Soldiers; for
though the State of Genoa had, with an intention of keeping neutral, inclined
at the beginning of these Commotions not to give passage to 2000 Tuscans, which
the Great Duke had destined for the assistance of Mantua; yet being much
troubled lest Montferrat should change its Lord, at last winked at any one that
should pass privately through her Territories in assistance thereof: But these
people, who came from France in haste, not being very well provided, proved not
so advantageous as the condition of the time required, save only that they gave
some reputation to the Affairs of Montferrat, and that witnessing the readiness
of that Nation, and the zeal thereof toward the Duke of Mantua, it made the
News which was divulged in Italy, of the great preparations of that Kingdom, be
believed. And yet the necessary delay which the French succor required, making
their hopes of the relief of Nice but small, doubtlesly when the Duke of Savoy
should have got it, he would have been Master of all this part of Montferrat,
which was all reduced to underneath the Duke of Savoy's obedience, save
Cassalle, and Pontestura: And consequently all men being full of fears and
jealousies, they murmured greatly against the Governor of Millain, that he
should so long suffer so great a violence; that he should so little value the
Kings reputation; he was held to be the Pie^ra d^ (...), the S^ of offense, or
stumbling block; to be the original mover and first fautorer of so violent and
detestable an enterprise; for how durst the Duke else have dared to attempt a
State which was taken into the protection of so great a King? How else durst he
despise the Majesty of that Crown, and the so near and powerful Forces of the
State of Millain? Nay, they murmured against the King himself, and the Spanish
Nation, as if they had openly conspired with the Duke of Savoy, against the
Duke of Mantua, in a nick of time when the King of France was not able, by
reason of his Minority, to oppose their designs: Wherefore all Italy was in a
rage; and seeing the harmony of concord out of tune, and the common safety and
public quiet disordered, began to distrust the King, and that Nation, whose
ambition and desire of rule was not bounded with Montferrat: And as the private
men did not forbear expressing their sense and back bitings in Libels, clapped up
in diverse public places, even in the City of Millain; so the Potentates of
Italy began to waver in their friendship and inclination to that Crown, and
bethought themselves of new remedies, whereby to provide against those dangers
which they thought the safety of the common Affairs might be subject unto by so
great a novelty. But in this fluctuation of minds and accidents Orders came
from Spain, which causing much joy, showed how vain their murmurings and bad
opinions were of that King and Nation: The News of these so great Commotions
was come to that Court, both from Italy and France; and though they fell upon
many considerations, yet the Justice and Equity of the Cause prevailing before
all other respects with that King and Counsel, as likewise the Peace of Italy,
and the not permitting that any other Princes should grow greater by the
oppression of another; (principal foundations whereupon having always wisely
balanced the Affairs of Italy, they had also the better secured their own) it
was with extraordinary readiness resolved in that Court, according to the great
and urgent importunities of the Pope, and Princes of Italy, and according to
the Queen of France her desire; that the Duke of Mantua should immediately be
put into the full possession of whole Montferrat. In conformity whereunto, it
being known that Prince Victorio was come to Barcelona, being sent by his
Father to draw the King and that Court to favor his Cause, he was immediately
commanded to tarry in Montferrat, not far from Barcelona, and not being
admitted to see the King, to tarry there till restitution of whole Montferrat
should be made by the Duke his Father. Which action was of much satisfaction to
all Italians, and showed how much the King and Court of Spain were unconcerned
in these commotions. On the contrary, it was cause of infinite distaste to the
Duke of Savoy, he thinking peradventure that the King of Spain being not
content to favor his adversary in his sentence; but that out of an ambition of
purchasing the name of a just and uncorrupted Prince, he would not stick to
suppress him, even in his own son, in whom he had placed his final hope; and
whatsoever he was to expect from that Court, which had made him covet that the
world might know he was more in favor with that King, then the other Italian
Princes.

These Orders being come, the Governor was ready to obey them; but his Orders
being very slowly proceeded in, the Swissers not being as yet arrived, nor
Rho's nor Gambaloita's Regiment yet filled, and Nice being sorely beset both by
day, and night, the Town began to be out of hope of holding out long; for the
relief thereof it was therefore necessary at the present to make use of almost
the whole ordinary Garrison of the State of Millain: Wherefore Don Antonio di
Leva Prince of Ascoli, one of the Grandees of Spain, who being at that time in
the State of Millain, was chosen by the King to be Camp-Master General, was
sent thither with six Companies of Light Horse, (whereof Don Sanchio de Salina,
Lieutenant of the Cavalry of the State, was Captain) with 3000 Spanish Foot,
commanded by the Camp-Masters Luigi di Cordova, and Giovan Bravo di Laguna, and
some few Italians assembled together by Lodovico Gambaloita, which did not in
all make 4000 Foot, and 600 Horse, who joining at I^cisa, a Town in Montferrat,
with Prince Vincenso and the Duke of Nevers, who had with them 600 other Horse,
and about 2000 Foot, amongst which were French, they marched in company toward
Nice. But the Duke seeing that his designs were withstood on one side by Cesars
command, and on the other side by the King of Spains Forces, and finding also
that Italy was against him, and the French much irritated; and consequently
knowing that it was impossible for him to withstand so many Potentates who were
joined together against him in the behalf of the Duke of Mantua, whom he
peradventure had hoped to have suppressed, and undoubtedly to have vanquished at
the first push, making virtue of necessity, resolved to yield to the condition
of times, and to give way unto the Kings will, whose Forces having never
formerly withstood, he had not yet a mind to oppose, nor learnt to be
contumacious: For having endeavored, and peradventure not in vain, to make a
little delay of the succouring of Nice, rather that he might say he had been
Master thereof, then with intention of keeping it; at last, seeing the Prince
of Ascoli near at hand, and Castiglione resolute to defend it, he sent the
Count of Ver^a into the Camp, with Orders to Count Guide to remove his men from
thence, having notwithstanding given notice thereof before to the said Prince;
to the end that seeming to do it willingly, merely out of the reverence and
observancy which he bore to the King, his resolution might not be attributed to
necessity, but as in acknowledgment of the favors he had received. Thus the
Kings Forces and those of the Duke of Mantua drawing jointly near Nice, Count
Guido began to march off; and before he had been gone a mile, seeing Prince
Ascoli appear with his Army in order, he, to the end that he might march off
with more reputation, made his men halt, and f^g the Kings Squadrons, and
ordering his men as if ^e were ready to receive battle, if provoked; for he
exceeded them in number of men, and in Artillery, though not in his Soldiers
valor, having but few paid men with him, and all the rest (...) gathered
together out of the Shops at Asti and Vercelli: But Commissary Berna^o Barbo, a
Gentleman of Millai^, stepping out with some Spanish Commanders, he parlyed
with the Counts di Verrua and di St George, who did advance to this purpose;
and it was agreed upon between them, that if the Duke of Savoy's men would
march off, the Kings Forces should not meddle with them. Thus Count Guido
marched with his men toward Piedmont, without giving or receiving molestation.
Though Nice were freed* yet Arms between those of Piedmont and of Montferrat
were not laid down; for the Duke of Savoy's men did not only diligently keep
what they had gotten, but proceeded to take in other places: And on the other
side, those of Montferrat being encouraged by the relief of Nice, and by the
King of Spains appearing for their Prince, being also exasperated by the bitter
injuries received from the Piedmontesans, and assisted by those of Mantua and
France, drove out the Duke of Savoy's Garrisons, and endeavored to return
under the Dominion of the House of Gonsaga, and of their Natural Lord. (...)
Rivara went with some few men from Pontestura to recover the Castle of
Gabbiano; but Count Guido coming in on one side with a greater number of
Soldiers from Montcalvo, and many Horse and Foot on the other side from Trino,
he retreated to Pontestura, not doing any thing. Monteggio which is seated on a
little hill, rose, and betook it self to defense; but being assaulted on three
parts by the Colonels Tassino and Permen^to, and a woman fighting valiantly
amongst the Country people, it was re-taken. Montemagno, Vignale, and Casorso,
which were likewise risen and fortified by Trenches, were again brought under
by Count (...) who was come from Montcalvo. The Castle of Vesema was by the
Captai^ thereof basely surrendered to the Piedmontesans. (...), a place ^er
Trino and Casalle, being also risen, and which trusting to i^ plashy
situation, denied to pay tribute, was taken, sacked, and b^t by the Comm^ndator
della Manta, Cassano, San Stefano, and some other places in the Valleys of
Tinello, and Belbo, were possessed by the Dukes men. L'Alcare, a place within few
miles of Savona, was recovered by those of Mantua, and after re-gained by those
of Piedmont. The like happened in other places of less moment; and the Mantuan
Soldiers being gone to before Canelli, and not being able to take it, turned
upon Moas^, Alice, and Vesema, Towns in Montferrat, and drove out the
Piedmontesans: and passing afterward to (...), a Town in Pie^ont, they sacked
it. Some Horse-Companies of Savoy being a^aulied at unawares in Grana, by three
Companies of Mantuan Horse, led on by the Marquess Alphonso Gaerrier^, (...)
assisted by the Country People, were routed and put to fl^ght, some of them
were slain, and their Ensigns and Baggage lost. But the Duke of Nevers, egged
on by some of his men, who were unwilling to return into France, without having
given some proof of their valor, went with them, and with 50 of the Duke of
Mantua's Soldiers, to surprise C^teniglia by night; but being discovered, he
wheeled about to a neighboring place called C^lli; whither not being able to
come before the Sun was up, after a fierce assault he was repulst, and had some
of his men slain; and returning back by the Hills, lost two small pieces of
Ordnance, which being sent with a small Guard by the way of the Valley, were
taken by the Piedmontesans. In this interim 4000 Swissers were come to the
State of Millain; and Don John di Castro had brought 1000 Spaniards from
Naples; and the Camp-masters Gambaloita, and Rho, had filled up their
Regiments, so as the Governor had 12000 Foot and 2500 Horse, ready to send
into the Field. There were likewise 13000 Foot, and 500 Horse come to Mantua,
through Garfagnana, and Modenese; a gallant and powerful aid, sent by Cosmo the
second, great Duke of Tuscany, under his brother Prince Francisco, and governed
by excellent Commanders; who were likewise accompanied by many of the Tuscan
and Roman Nobility; and although the Duke of Modena favoring the Duke of
Savoy, by reason of alliance, denied them passage thorough his Territories,
which he was ready upon his Confines to make good with Arms; yet receiving
notice from the Governor of Millain, that it was for the Kings service that
those men were to pass, he was contented not to hinder them; and yet the Duke
of Savoy went from his word, and deferring, day after day, to restore what he
had gotten, seemed rather inclined to the contrary; for he daily reinforced
all the Garrisons of the Towns which he was by word obliged to restore; he took
more men into pay; he held intelligence in the Court of France, with those
Princes who he thought would be desirous of novelties; and therefore more
likely to join with him in his cause; either by reason of the ancient emulation
which they bore to the Duke of Nevers, or being discontented with the present
Government; and finally, keeping his men still in Arms against the
Montferrians, he intended nothing but preparation for War; wherefore the
Italians who were jealous of any the least delay, began again to waver. The
proceedings of the Spanish Agents increased their suspicions, who dealing very
gently with the Duke of Savoy, and carrying themselves contrary to the
conceived expectation of the King of Spain's orders, were not ready answerable
to the commands they had received; and therefore it was feared, that by their
being armed, they aimed more at the oppression, then protection of Montferrat.
For they did no ways impede the Dukes Forces; which (as has been said) overran
Montferrat without any respect. And the Prince of Ascoli (who was afterward
boldly impeached to have held private intelligence with the Duke of Savoy)
having spent four days in going with his Army from Alessandria to Nice, which
was but 12 miles, seemed in effect to have consented to that delay, which in
resolute terms he had denied to do in presence of his Captains, to the Marquess
of Neviglie, who was sent to Alessandria to stop him. And after those of
Piedmont were gone from before Nice, he under pretense that they might return
when he should be gone, left a Garrison in the Town with the Kings Colors,
which seemed rather to have possessed themselves thereof, then to have freed it.
The Governor of Millain's self, after having mustred the Army, to the end that
all things might be fully understood by him, and by the King, instead of
forcing the Duke of Savoy to obey the Kings orders, began to abhor Nevers his
French men, nor would he suffer the Tuscan succors to pass into the State of
Millain; and turning to the Mantuan Officers, told them it stood not with the
Kings honor, that their Prince should make use of other assistance then his.
The Duke of Mantua thought it somewhat sore, to bereave himself of their aid
who were so readily come from so far of to assist him, and to put himself
absolutely into their hands which before he had so much distrusted: especially
since thereby he might have highly offended the Queen of France, and have
alienated that Nation from him, a strong curb (as all men thought) to the
avarice of the Spanish Ministers, and to the small inclination which they had
to him.

But since it becomes a man sometimes, in urgent, and great extremities, to
submit to another discretion. Duke Ferdinando finding the French promises and
aid to be far off, and uncertain; that the Pope was free of nothing but good
will; that he could make but little use of the Tuscan succor without the
Governors good will, who by denying them passage did not only make them of no
uses to him upon the present occasion, but a continual excessive charge; that
the Venetian aid were but weak, and that they were not only, as the Tuscans, to
depend upon the Governors good will, but uncertain, and not very safe. For the
fear being once removed, that the Spaniards should possess themselves of
Montferrat, it made for the interest of that Commonwealth, that the Duke of
Savoy should make himself master thereof; to the end that by weakening a
neighboring Prince, a Potentate might be raised in Lombardy, of almost equal
Forces to the State of Millain; whom by reason of the far distance of their
Confines, he had not only no reason not to fear, but might be confident, he
might by powerful diversions be a security to him, if at any time he should be
assaulted, or troubled by the Spanish Forces. On the contrary, he saw that the
Spaniards, (of whom he was assured by the Queen of France) were interested in
this present Insurrection, for ends contrary to those of the Venetians. Having
therefore cast up all things, he knew that he, and his affairs were so far
engaged, as he must of necessity satisfy those in whose power it lay either
speedily to suppress him, or to raise him up: wherefore he resolved at the
last, much to the dissatisfaction of the Duke of Nevers, to adhere unto them.
Which resolution, though it was not well approved of by the Italian Princes,
who thought it contrary to the safety of his Affairs; yet it proved afterward,
by the event, good. For the Governor not being able any longer to delay the
execution of the Kings Commission, and fearing the coming of the French, which
was much more spoken of by all men then was true; and moreover being desirous
to satisfy all the world; and so many Princes as had conceived ill impressions
of him, he compelled the Duke of Savoy to make restitution, without any further
delay. On the other behalf, the Duke of Savoy, fearing to be taken between the
Armies of France, which he understood were stirring upon the Confines, and the
Governors Forces, which were ready to compel him; and having resolved by
obedience to overcome the King and Court of Spain, presupposing that this his
so great and ready liberality would be recompensed by as great a ^avour, he at
last gave way to the Kings will* whereunto nothing did so much induce him (as
by way of comp^t he afterward protested) as the Governors word given unto him
in the Kings name, that his Grandchild should within a few days be (...) unto
him: that he would obtain pardon for the Rebels, and recompense for the losses
and expenses of the War: and that finally, his pretenses to Montferrat should
be decided within a short time. And because the Duke, for his honor sake,
hated to deliver over what he had taken, directly into the hands of his
adversary, the business was thus carried; that he should deliver it all into
the hands of the Princes of Castiglion^ and Ascoll, as State-Ministers, the one
of them of the Emperor, and the other of the King of Spain, to be disposed o^
to him that had most right thereunto: that the said Princes should then
immediately assign them over to the Duke of Mantua, as to him to whom by the
Laws they ought to be restored, he having been bere^ thereof. Thus did neither
the Duke of Savoy prejudice his own interest, by referring his cause to
Justice, nor the Duke of Mantua, who was suddenly repossest of what was his,
suffer any damage or delay, and the Kings Ordinances were obeyed, being altered
only in appearance, not in substance.

The aforesaid Princes went each with an equal portion of men to Trino, where
the Gate was thrown open unto them; by which, whilst they and their people
entered, the Dukes Garrison went out by another Gate; after whom, the Kings men
went out at the same Gate; who being but then entered, and making no abode
there, left the Town in free possession to Prince Vicenzo, who was entered with
those of Mantua, immediately after the Kings men* The like was done three days
after by Alba, and Montcalvo, and the other Towns of Montferrat, and the
Spanish Garrison was likewise taken out of Nice; as also the Siege from before
San Damiano, which held still for Duke Ferdinando. Who within three months
after the first assault was merely by the Kings Authority, almost without
unsheathing a sword, entirely put into possession of that State, which he had
almost totally lost. The Italians were not a little pleased at this
restitution, wherein the King showed such celerity and constancy; and as it is
usual with men, when they find themselves freed from what they had long feared,
to run headlong into the contrary affection; so these being long possessed with
jealousies and fears, it cannot be expressed how much they admired the Kings
goodness, and magnanimity. Who preferring the justice and honesty of the Cause
before all other respects, would not yield that the assaulted Prince should be
injured. And it appearing to every one, that he had showed himself in this
action rather to win the good will of those who are possessed of States, then
injuriously to become master of the States which they possess, it was evidently
seen and witnessed, that his intention was not to thirst after other men's
possessions, as the more powerful Princes often do; but rather that he did
abhor the unjustly possessing himself thereof, and the Tyrannous oppression
of petty Princes. Jealousies being therefore turned into much confidence, all
men rejoiced to see examples of moderation in so great a King, which are so
rare and singular in these times. These unexpected successes made it be
generally believed that the Duke of Savoy, being abandoned by all, would have
totally given over the begun enterprise. But affections deeply rooted in men's
minds are hardly plucked out. He thought that his so much readiness, and
reverence, his so great, and rare example of observancy and devotion to the
King; (whereby he had much confirmed the Authority and reputation of that Crown
both in Italy, and elsewhere) might make him deserve to be protected by his
Majesty, at least for the advantage of his pretentions: which (as he said) he
was promised by the Governor, should soon be composed in a friendly manner.
Nor did he confide a little in his Sons intercession, a Prince of much
expectation, well beloved by the King, and by that Nation, which as much as the
Disputes between his Father and his Uncle would permit him, he seemed to be
very ambitious of: and to whom, to boot with his near relation in blood to the
King, the expectation of his paternal inheritance might purchase much favor;
which being by succession to fall upon him, he could not believe that that
Court would let slip so opportune an occasion of making the young Prince always
well-affected to that Crown. Moreover, having been in outward appearance very
severely dealt with, he thought that the King, tempering his past rigor, would
favor him the more in future essentialities. Wherefore the Duke, in hope of
some good success by his Sons Negotiation, withdrew his Forces to within his
own Confines, and was quiet and peaceful; and seeming to confide much in the
King, professed to depend totally upon his Majesty, as the sole protector of
this business.

In this interim, the war in Lombardy, which seemed either to be wholly at an
end, or suspended by a tacit Truce, broke ont in great fervency between the
Duke of Modena, and Commonwealth of Lucca in Garfagnana,: which War, the less
considerable the smalness of the affair was (which was but about a few handful
of Confines) of more moment did the fervor and great preparations, wherewith it
appeared to be made, make men think it to be of some moment: as also the many
Nobles which flocked thither from both sides; for the Princes, Alphonso and
Luigi, the Dukes first and second Sons, had militated therein: It was
occasioned at first by some Reprisals of Oxen and flocks of Sheep; from whence
they came to Confiscations and Banishment, and at last to Arms: For the
Lucchesi out of apprehension of the great assistance which was sent from
Tuscany to Mantua, having assembled together almost the whole Militia of their
State, which amounted to 16000 fighting men for the desence of their Country;
the danger and fear of their affairs ceasing, bethought themselves to make use
of them by insesting other men's Territories; they sent the Mass of their men to
prejudice the Duke of Modenas Country, which they burnt, and rigorously
destroyed at unawares, meeting with no resistance; for the Inhabitants being
busy in husbanding their Farms, as in secure peace, were dispersed abroad in
the Country: And not herewithal contented, they took some small open Towns
belonging to the jurisdiction of the said Duke: Then making Mount Perpoli the
Seat of War, they fortified it in all convenient places, and quartered above
10000 fighting men there.

The Duke of Modena being no less scandalized that his Country should be burnt
and destroyed by the Lucchesi, sent as many men as he could raise in his own
Country, which ^amounted to as many as the enemy were, under the Command of
Count Hipolito Bentivoglio; at the sight whereof the Lucchesi, who before ran
over the Country, and laid it waste, betook themselves to the fortified places:
Wherefore the Modenesi having erected other Bulwarks, and munited other Passes,
they also fortified their Towns of most importance; particularly Castelnuovo,
the Metropolis, and residence of the Governor of Grafagnana under the Duke;
and Mulessana, a place not far from Castelnuovo; in which places, lying near
Mount Perpoli, Prince Alphonso kept with 100 Horse and 1000 Foot, to face and
suppress the Lucchesi that were fortified in the Mountains. Diverse skirmishes
past this mean while, both here and in other parts thereabouts, with various
fortune; wherein there happened nothing remarkable, save the great obstinacy
and fervency where with they fought on both sides: For the Lucchesi, pretending
to be several ways injured by the frequent molestations which they received
from the Modenesi upon their Confines, thought to provide so by war, as that
the Dukes men should for the future keep themselves within their own Precincts:
And the Dukes men holding themselves to be no less injured then did the
Lucchesi, who had entered their Dukes Confines in hostile manner for slight
occasions, which, as they said, might have been decided by the Civil Law, were
mightily incensed, and desired by all means to show how much they resented the
injuries done them; but the Mountainous Country, which would not suffer them to
draw out their men, and make trial of their Forces, hindered their desire of
revenge: And the Lucchesi, contented with the resentment they had made, kept,
for the most part, in their strong holds, and fortified Towns, not coming out
but upon advantageous terms, nor affording the enemy much occasion to prejudice
them: True it is, that 400 Lucchesi having at the sight of Prince Luigi
abandoned a certain Station, whereby the Modenesi might freely march to before
Gallicano, they were so bold as to make that attempt; especially since that
Enterprise made much for the final end of the War: For Gallicano is a large
Town, and of great importance; not only as being the Magazine of Victuals and
Ammunition for the war, but for that if it should be gotten, the Lucchesi would
be as it were besieged in Monte Perpoli, and almost in the power of the Enemy,
as not being to be succored. There was a strong Garrison in Gallicano; which,
by reason of the loss of the abandoned Station, was forthwith reinforced; so as
coming forth against the Prince, who drew near it, they fought a while without
any advantage on either side; but 400 Foot coming in to assist the Lucchesi,
the Modenesi were forced to give way, till such time as being succored by more
men, they forced the Lucchesi back into Gallicano; and making themselves
masters that very night of a Fort called il Pian de Termini, which served as a
Cavaliere to the place, they did not only keep the Defendants from coming upon
the walls, and going through the Streets, but hindered also the carrying of
Victuals from thence to Monte Perpoli: wherefore to free themselves from this
inconvenience, the Lucchesi built another Fort in a higher place then that
which was taken by the Prince; from whence the Modenesi being infested, the
Prince resolved to beat them from it: He went thither early in the morning with
good store of men, amongst which were many of the Nobility, and began to give a
hot assault, which being sustained with no less servor, the fight continued
four hours; the eminency of the situation, which was secured by Trenches and
Rampires, making for the advantage of the Lucchesi, from whence they much
indamaged the Assailants by Musket sho^ who not being able to resist any
longer, they began to run; not were their Commanders, and many Gentlemen, who
with their Swords in hand would have staid them, nor the danger nor example of
their Prince, who fighting valiantly amongst the^ foremost encouraged them to
persevere in the Enterprise, able to stop them. Many of the Modenesi fell in
this assault, amongst which some Personages of esteem, by what was argued by
the spoils which were taken from their dead bodies by the Lucchesi; but this
ostentation lasted but a while; for this loss was soon recompensed by the
taking of Monte Fegatese, a great Town of the Lucchesi's, which was burned and
put to fire and Sword by the Dukes men; who, the Garrison running away, entered
the Town, and there got good store of booty, especially of Cattle, which were
brought thither by their owners, for greater safety: Then the Modenesi, seeing
how little amends they had made for the loss which they received at the
beginning of the war; and how h^rd it was to wage war with men who were
fortified in high places, they fell upon the Country, which they laid waste,
barking the Trees, and cutting down the Vineyards; in imitation whereof the
Lucchesi, w^o after the first commotion had foreborn ransacking, did yet worse,
leaving nothing unruined which had escaped their first fury.

The Prince leaving men enough in Pian de Termini, from the Enterprise of
Gallicano, which appeared every day to grow more difficult, went with the rest
of his men to take in Castiglione, a great Town, and the chief in those parts;
whither it was hard to bring relief, because it was environed by the Dukes
Forces. This place was from the beginning furnished with a great Garrison; and
hearing that the Modenesi came afterward down from the Alps, Cavalier Casare
Boconvisi was sent from Lucca with 200 select Foot, beside; many Citizens, who
of their own accord went along with them; so as these being joined to the test,
made up the number of 1200 Soldiers, besides the Townsmen, who were of able
bodies, and ready to defend themselves: wherefore the Modenesi carried the
greatest force of war against this place; and began to play upon the Castle
gate with thirteen pieces of Cannon, which within a few days they threw down,
together with a Tower, and a great part of the wall, and had made the way ready
for an assault: But having behind them some of the Lucchesi's Sconces
fortified, they (...) going on for fear of being annoyed from thence; they
therefore continued to batter the Houses from the nearest and most convenient
places, not without much danger and prejudice to the Defendants; who though
they were not safe neither in their houses, nor in the streets, yet were they
not wanting to shelter themselves the best they could with Trenches and
Plat-forms, raised in fitting places, and with deep Ditches dug behind the
Rampires. This mean time Treaties of Agreement were not omitted, which were
from the beginning of the war mediated by the Governor of Millain, at the
request of the Lucchesi; who having to this purpose sent Count Baldassar Biglia
to Modena, and Scaramucchia Visconte to Lucca, could not as yet effect it: But
considering afterward how much the loss of Castiglione would redound to the
dishonor of his King, who had taken upon him the protection of that
Commonwealth, he ordered Count Biglia to go into the Town, to set up the Kings
Standard, and to say that he kept the Town in the Kings name; which being
suddenly done, the Battery ceased, and afterward all other offenses, by the
intercession of the Governor; so as the treaty of agreement being reassumed,
it was at last concluded upon these conditions. That the Confines should remain
bounded as they had formerly been, upon the same occasion, by Count Fuentes;
and that the place of this new difference not being comprehended, it should be
left to be agreed upon by some deputed to the same purpose: That the Lucchesi
should quit all the Towns and places which they had taken in Modena, and should
demolish whatsoever they had erected upon their own grounds; that the Duke of
Modena should do the like; who giving his word that he would not molest the
Lucchesi, who were the first that should disarm, he should likewise disarm
afterward, and dismiss all his men: That the Commonwealth of Lucca should keep
no more then their usual Garrisons within their walled Towns, and a Gentleman
which the Governor would send thither to keep them in the Kings name, who was
to restore them to the Signiorie, when all had laid down Arms.

The affairs of Garafagnana, wherein the whole summer had been spent, being
thus composed, those of Montferrat grew to be troubled again, and to decline
from the good way they were in. The Duke of Savoy kept still in Arms, and as it
were ready to fall upon Montferrat again, hoping by his Forces to make his
adversary more pliable to his pretensions: The Duke of Mantua was therefore
forced to keep many strong Garrisons in Casalle, and in other places of most
concernment. Commerce was not only wholly interdicted between those of
Montferrat and Piedmont, but private men proceeded to continual reprisals, and
the Magistrates to the confiscation of such goods as those of the contrary
party possessed in their Territories. The Governor was not permitted to disarm,
whilst the occasions lasted which forced him to take up Arms: Montferrat was
therefore in continual motion and suspension, being neither in perfect peace,
nor open war; and because this redounded to the great trouble and charge of the
Millaneses, and to the prejudice of the Kings honor, who had openly professed to
protect Montferrat, many counseled the Governor to send the Army into
Piedmont, and to keep it there till such time as the Duke, to free himself from
the trouble of quartering, should resolve to dismiss his Foreign Forces. The
Governor seemed at first willing to follow this advice; and to this purpose
sent first Don Sanchio di Luna, Keeper of the Citadel of Millain, and then Don
Franceso Padiglia General of the Artillery into Piedmont, to demand Quarter of
the Duke for the Kings Army, who bringing back answer in general terms, and
words relishing more of civility and ceremony, then of substance, or positive,
by which it was conceived the Duke was inclined to the contrary; the Governor,
dismissing the Swissers, and sending the Spanish Horse and Foot to their usual
Quarters, by a sudden and contrary resolution, sent Prince Ascoli with the rest
of the Soldiery to quarter in Montferrat. Who choosing Villanova for his
quarters, within four miles of Casalle, distributed his men in several parts of
that State; where he kept them all the next Winter, to the excessive damage of
those people, exhausted already by their former sufferings, and by the late
War. This new, and unexpected resolution of the Governors, renewed the first
jealousies: and the Italians conceiving that the King did not proceed so
sincerely as they imagined, began to suspect him more then before* and
therefore mistrusting the Spaniards, they began to fear that the restitution of
the Towns in Montferrat was but a counterfeit show, to lull them asleep, and to
keep the French Forces from falling furiously into Italy. All men did firmly
believe, that the Spaniards detaining their ancient grudge against the Duke of
Mantua, and keeping secret intelligence with Piedmont, did suffer them to keep
armed, that so they might have occasion to oppress that State, under the
honorable title of protecting it, or atleast, to the end that the Duke of
Mantua, wearied out with length of negotiation, and Court irresolutions,
consumed by so long quartering, and agitated by continual fear of their
Enemies, and of their Protectors Forces, might be brought to desperate
conditions; and so they might make themselves masters of that State, without
any noise, without fighting, and without disturbing the peace of Italy. These
diffidences were increased by the new, and strange comportments of the Kings
Officers, and Spanish Commanders in Montferrat, who believing perhaps that
their Kings intention was such, did confirm the general opinion with undoubted
speeches; and as if they were to change condition of Government, they
solicited the Montferrians, who were weary of so many troubles, to desire the
Spanish Government that they might be rid of their vexations. And adding
actions to their words, they suffered their Soldiers to be licentious,
arrogating much authority to themselves, to the diminution of that Duke, whose
Officers, as being unarmed, were fain to wink at diverse things, to avoid
greater mischief; wherefore they became of less esteem amongst the Kings
Soldiers and Commanders, who now seemed to be chief masters. All men were
likewise scandalized at the daily coming of munition for War from Millain to
Piedmont; and which was yet worse, that Prince Ascold should give them safe
conduct through Montferrat; he, and the Governor defending their doing so,
partly under pretense of friendship between the King and Duke, which was not as
yet broken; partly esteeming any provision the Duke could make against what the
King ordained touching the affairs of Montferrat, ridiculous; as if it were
impossible the Duke should ever dare to gainsay it. But men's minds were chiefly
troubled at the coming of Don Alphonso Piemontello, General of the Horse in the
State of Millain, to Mantua, to demand the young Princess in the Kings name.
With him went not only the chief Officers, and Commanders in War, to frighten
that Prince, and to make him part the more easily with his Niece; but as if the
business were already taken for granted, and that they went rather to receive
then to demand the young Lady, many Coaches were sent along with Pie^ntello, to
bring her and her train to Millain, no man doubted but that this action of the
Kings was a strong argument that he was rather minded to alter, then to compose
the present Affairs; For that child was then thought the chiefest means to work
novelty. And besides, that the demanding of her when Montferrat was encumbered
with the Spanish Army was a demand which argued violence, and seemed therefore
contrary to that good inclination which the King had always professed; so much
solemnity, and such preparations, made the Embassy seem rather a protestation,
or tacit threatening in case of denial, then a simple Negotiation.

When Pimontello came to Mantua, he found the young child sick; and the Duke
not being able to expose her to that journey without evident danger, he made
use thereof to deny the sending of her, and not so only, but he also fenced
himself by the Emperors Rescript; whereby he was prohibited to deliver her up
to any one; and yet seeming in general words to be ready to pleasure the King,
he added that in the interim he would send into Spain to treat of this Affair;
such a business was not of so easy disgestion, or so soon to be granted; it
being opposed in that Court by the Duke of Savoy's great importunity,
accompanied with the fresh remembrance of his ready restoring the Towns he had
taken; by the entreaty, and pretentions of the Dowager Mother, Nephew to the
King; by the presence of Prince Victorio; and by the Kings word past to the
Duke, by the Governor of Millain. The Duke of Mantua being therefore to make
use of some one who might be more then usually wise and industrious to handle a
business of such importancy, he trusted the managing thereof to Monsigneur
Scipio Pasquale di Cosenza a Prelate much esteemed and favored by him. Who
being sent extraordinary Ambassador to the King, acquainted him and his
State-ministers with the merits of the Dukes cause: desiring that it might not
only be taken notice of by his Majesty, as by a just Prince, by the way of the
known Law of equity; but that it might be protected, defended, and favored by
him, as by a Protector. He added, that to deposite the young Lady, especially
after the Duke of Savoy had taken up Arms, would be an acknowledgement that
that Commotion had been just and lawful; as also all the other violences and
hostilities committed against Montferrat: which besides that it did repugne his
Majesty's most holy deliberations, and just Demonstrations; the Duke of Mantua
could not with honor adhere thereunto; since it would always appear unto the
world, that he had condescended thereunto, contrary to all Reason, for fear of
being again assaulted. He then showed what the Dukes intentions were; he did
not conceal what the inconveniences were which might be the result thereof; he
made it be known how much men were scandalized, how much Caesar's Decrees, and
the very Laws of Nature were contradicted, if that young Lady should by his
Majesty's command be forced to go out of her paternal Country where she was
born, out of the Dominions where she was nourisht, and separated from their
sight and company who were so near allied to her in blood. He wished it might be
considered, how much it would redoun'd to his Dukes dis-reputation, if his
Majesty persisting in his demand should make the world see how little he did
confide in his faith and integrity; that it was impossible that he who had been
so ready and so zealous in protecting his Dukes Dominions, would now so highly
injure him in his honor.

These, and other Reasons alleged by the Ambassador were much seconded by the
Queen of France, her pretentions: who solicited from Mantua, made a third in
this Affair; desiring that the young Lady's education might be allotted to her,
as to one nearer of kin to her then the King was, in case the Duke of Mantua
should not be trusted with her. Whereupon the King, were it either that he
approved of the Reasons alleged, or to avoid giving dissatisfaction to the
Queen, dissisted further pursuing his demand. Many will have it that the King
required this at first, more out of his own genius, and tender affection to his
Nephews the Princes of Savoy, then by any advice of his Counselors, or out of
any sinister intention to the Duke of Mantua, and that it not being
intrinsecally approved of by any one, no not by the Duke of Lerma, from whom he
was seldom wont to differ in opinion, it had not its just perfection; it being
known, that at the same time when Pimentello was sent to Mantua, the answer
which that Duke was to make was suggested to him by the Governor of Millain,
and the manner which he was to observe upon this occurrency, to the end that he
might retain his Nephew. And doubtlesly, the Governor did this by order from
the Spanish Ministers of State, who were desirous to moderate the Kings desires
by delays. Many were much troubled to think what the truth of this might be,
the business being spun out at length, and what the issue thereof would be, not
being known.

During these doubtful proceedings, the Duke of Mantua fell sick; and there
being but little hopes of his recovery, it was feared by the Italians, that his
unseasonable death in these turbulent times might hasten the Spaniards secret
designs; for he not having any issue, and his brother not being likely to have
any, his Dominions would fall upon the Duke of Nevers, the next of kin to the
house of Gonsaga; who being born in France, was, for his great adherences, and
many possessions which he had there, esteemed to be more French, then Italian.
Nor was there any that did doubt, but that the Spaniards would rather suffer
any other condition, then that a Frenchman should possess so great a State in
Italy. Wherefore all men's minds were possessed with fear and confusion,
foreseeing what troubles, and revolutions would ensue upon the Dukes death:
which seemed to be confirmed by bad Auguries, and prodigies. For in the same
year of 1613, on the 11 of October, there arose a terrible tempest at Sea, the
like to which was never seen, which beginning at Provence, and running along
with much terror, to the uttermost parts of the Kingdom of Naples, did so
agitate the Ligustick and Tuscan seas, as entering even into the Havens, which
were otherwise very safe, it sunk almost all the ships therein, to the great
prejudice of the Merchants, and to the terror of all lookers on; the same
tempest penetrated into Lombardy, where it threw down houses, rent up trees by
the roots, and did such mischief as had never been before, so as many (as it
often falls out when men are astonished with amazement) beg^n to hold these
accidents prodigious, as so many signs wherewith the heavens did threaten much
greater calamity to come; to these Prodigies were added the troubles of France,
which having been quiet till then under the Queens regency, was not a little
disturbed. For the Princes of the Kingdom were not able to suffer that Concino
Concini, and his wife, both of them being Florentines, and the Queens great
favorites, should be preferred before them in Authority, and in the conduct of
public Affairs. They were likewise much troubled at the Kings Marriage with
the Infanta of Spain, fearing lest such an union might tend to the diminution
of that Authority which they by all means endeavored to arrogate unto
themselves in that Kingdom. And the opposition of France being held to be a
great curb to the Spanish Forces in Italy, therefore that Nation being divided
within it self, and troubled with civil Wars, Italy remained at the Spaniards
discretion; whose ends and designs not being to be withstood by any other
Forces, there was no means left of keeping their King from attempting any
whatsoever novelty, whereby to increase their Kings Empire to the universal
prejudice. The Duke of Mantua's self, whose loss was then chiefliest concerned,
seemed more to abandon his own cause then any other* for not being content to
have incensed France against him, and distasted the Princes of Italy, by his
usage of the Duke of Nevers French; he seemed to throw himself too much into
the King of Spain's hands, and to depend to much upon the Spanish
State-Ministers. And this course not being commonly approved of then, though it
proved to be very good afterward, he seemed little to mind the eminent danger
of his own Affairs. The more for that conferring the Bishopric of Casalle upon
Monsigneur Pasquale, a natural Subject of the Kings, he had also made Don
Alphonso d' Avalos Governor over all Montferrat, who though he was an Italian
born, and a kin to him, yet being originally come from Spain, and prosessing
to be more a Spaniard then an Italian, being also held to be such a one by the
King and his State-Ministers; the Duke seemed to have but poorly provided for
the so turbulent condition of his Affairs, by these two Elections, at which the
Queen and State of Venice were much the more incensed: who publicly seeming to
favor the Duke desired to curb the Forces and power of his Protector as much
as they could; and yet the Queen being careful of her Niece: Affairs, she sent
the Marquess di Coure into Italy, a Lord of much authority and reputation, and
one who had with much grandezza discharged the office of several chief
Embassies. She sent him with title of Ambassador in extraordinary for the
Occurences of Italy; to the end that treating as well with the two Dukes, as
with the Governor of Millain, and Commonwealth of Venice, he might compose
Affairs in a peaceable manner. But when he came to Piedmont, he could not see
the Duke; who not desirous to treat with any in this business, but the King,
and Court of Spain, from whence he expected much favor, he went a little
before the Ambassador came thither, to Nice in Provence, to quiet some
commotions which were raised in those parts. So as the Ambassador passing to
Millain, and then to Mantua, and from thence to Venice, kept in Italy till the
beginning of the next year, which was 1614.

This year produced, at last, effects which showed the good intention of the
King: and did once more free the Italians of the fears which they had conceived
by the last years successes. For the King having on one side often comforted
the Duke of Savoy, and on the other side, pressed much upon the Duke of Mantua,
not without some sharpness, to the end that each of them willingly laying
aside somewhat of rigor, they might come to agreement: and finding much
backwardness in both these Princes, at last, that he might not be failing to
his protection of Mantua, he resolved to declare himself so, as no man should
have occasion afterward to doubt his will, nor to be troubled at the
uncertainty of his inclination. He dispatched away Prince Victorio, to whom he
made the instrument be given, which contained his final resolution. Which not
being conformable, but rather totally repugnant to his, and to his Fathers
mind, the Prince refused to accept: so as being offended with the Court, and as
angry as he durst be with the King, he went by Sea into Italy. The Instrument
ordained that the Duke of Savoy should totally lay down Arms, that he should
give it under his hand, that he would innovate nothing to the prejudice of the
Duke of Mantua 's Dominions; that he should remit all his pretenses to
Montferrat, to the Emperor, as to the Supreme Judge: that he should marry his
daughter to the Duke of Mantua, and that upon this marriage all Rebels should
be pardoned; and there should be no more discourse of any damage that had been
done by the late War. To this was added, that if the Duke should refuse to
consent to the aforesaid things, the King would be necessitated to employ the
Forces of his Kingdom in the protection of Montferrat, and to obviate the
troubles which might ensue in Italy.

The Duke of Savoy was highly offended at this, seeing himself not only wholly
fallen from the high hopes which he had conceived, and hoped to obtain from
that Court by his Sons means, of getting part of Montferrat; but also from that
reputation which he had thought to have won, by being so nearly allied unto the
King; whilst instead of being maintained by his Majesty of Spain, in a business
of such concernment, he was dealt with all as rigourously, as if he had been a
stranger, without any regard had to his honor, or to tde Kings word, which (as
he said) was plighted to him. Nor was he less distasted to see himself excluded
from his pretentions in the young Lady; wherein thinking that the justification
of his commotion did consist in being the original cause thereof, he was no
less grieved thereat in point of honor, then in point of interest, seeing the
ends marred whereunto he aspired, peradventure by the Maidens means. And as
Pimentello's journey to Mantua had put him in hopes of obtaining her, so
failing therein, he thought himself scorned and deluded, and led on with vain
hopes, which he did not a little rescent; the great obsequiousness which he had
showed to the Kings Authority by his being so ready to restore, and witnessed
so many other several ways, did imbitter his resentments; as also the severity
used to his two Sons at Court; the one whereof (as has been said) was to his
so much mortification detained for above a month in Montferrat; and the other,
which was Prince Philiberto, Lord high Admiral at Sea, and who usually resided
with the King, being without any occasion sent at the same time that his
brother came to Court, to reside, and consequently almost confined, at Porto
St. Maria, the very utmost Precincts of Spain; to the end that (as the Duke
complained afterward) he might fall sick in that ill air; and that being
deprived of the contentment of seeing his brother, he might not then join in
the treaty of the common affairs. All which things as he had already past over
which much patience, hoping to be at last dealt with the more advantagiously;
so seeing the same method to be held till the last, he could the worse digest
it. And therefore joining these, and many other severe passages together, he
could not endure that the world should know how little esteem was had of him,
and how little both he and his Sons could promise themselves, from their
alliance with the King.

Being thus much disturbed, he, together with his Son, who was come from Spain
to Niece, went to Turin: Where speaking with the Ambassador Coure, who was
upon his return for France, it was believed, that b^g scandalized with the King
of Spain, he would have made any agreement with the Duke of Mantua by the
French Ambassadors means, only that the King of France might have the honor
thereof, and not the King of Spain; and that to that purpose the Popes Nuntio
should go from Turin to Mantua; by which means the settlement would soon have
been had; had not the Governor of Millain, foreseeing how dishonorable it
would have been to the King of Spain that the differences between the Italian
Princes should be adjusted by other means then his, very seasonably opposed it,
and wrought so that the Duke of Mantua should not accept of any of the proposed
Treaties. And the same instrument being sent from Spain to the Governor, which
the Prince had refused, he (being ordered to do so by the King) sent it to the
Duke of Savoy, to the end that he might assent thereunto: The Duke answered,
That for his part he was ready to disarm, if the King would do so to; he
demanded that the terms and manner of this Action should be punctually agreed
upon: He made some difficulty in passing his word that he would not injure
Montferrat; saying, That since he had foregone all his Holds in that State only
to satisfy the King, all men might be sure, that out of the same respect he
would not molest it any more. He did not consent to remit the differences to be
decided by Caesar, out of diffidence perhaps of him; but said, notwithstanding
he would refer it to such friends of both sides, who being chosen by the
Emperor, might decide it: Lastly, He complained that the King should compel
him to marry his Daughter contrary to her own will; but refused not to do it
when the common differences should be decided. This last Point was moderated by
the King, who explained himself that he had propounded the Marriage as a thing
which might be acceptable to them both, and good for the common quiet, and
their reciprocal friendship; but not that they should be forced thereunto
contrary to their inclinations: In all the rest he persisted, and particularly
in the first, of disarming; wherein abhorring all conditions or reciprocalness,
the Kings pleasure was, That if not as Superior to the Duke in Empire, yet as
incomparably greater in power and extent of Dominion, which made him profess
himself to be Arbitrator of Italy, and the Moderator of differences between her
Princes, he should absolutely lay down Arms: And yet, that if the difference of
Montferrat should be accorded, all the rest might likewise cease; the
Governor, not having Force enough at his command to compel the Duke to disarm,
according to the Kings appointment; he tried a new form of composure between
the two Dukes; each of which having at his desire sent three Deputies to
Millain, to find out some means of adjusting differences; diverse proposals were
made, but all of them so discrepant, and so far differing from their opinions,
as after many days the business of that confer^nce was found to prove vain; and
at this time Forces being come to the (...) of Millain from Naples, Germany,
and from the Switzers; and the same directions coming again from Spain, that
the Decree should be put in execution, as much at least as concerned the three
first Articles; the Deputies of Savoy were given to understand, that the
business not being to be spun out any longer, it was in vain to pursue that
begun Negotiation, and that therefore the Kings Decree must, without any delay,
be executed. The Duke thought himself too imperiously dealt with; and not
willing to give way thereunto, either in respect of his own honor, or out of
anger to the King, to show himself any whit more obsequious then at first, he
betook himself to make yet further provision for war; and being desirous to
take the honorable pretense of protecting Montferrat from the Spaniards, as
also to appease the French, and reconcile the Italians, he published an Order,
wherein allowing Commerce between his Subjects and those of Montferrat, he
commanded that none should injure them in their goods nor persons. Montferrat
remained therefore for the space of fourteen Months after the first assault,
free from troubles of War, wherewith she had been so much molested; and from
the inconveniency of Quartering, wherewith she had been much afflicted.

The End of the second Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
THe Duke of Savoy is angry that the King should force him to lay down Arms,
and to Disband his men; which refusing to do, he is assaulted by a Spanish
Army, led on by the Duke of Millain; who being entered by the Vercellese into
the Confines of Piedmont, and understanding that the Duke was gone to before
Novara, returns immediately to the State of Millain to drive him from thence:
Being returned, he begins to build the Fort Scandovalle, not far from
Vercelles. The Duke retreating to Vercelles, desires succor from the French,
Venetians, and other Princes; many whereof Treat of agreement by their
Ambassadors sent into Piedmont: The war continues the mean while with the
Duke; in pursuit whereof many accidents happening, they come at last to a day
of Battle near the City: Wherein the Spanish Army being Victors, it goes before
that City whither the Duke was withdrawn with his men; about which the
Governor having employed much time to little purpose; At last peace is
concluded by the means of Princes Ministers.

THe Wars of Piedmont succeed those of Montferrat, wherein the Duke of Savoy
sees those Forces turned against him, which he formerly hoped to have been
assisted by against Montferrat: Wherein the Kings good intention contests
against the Dukes anger; the latter being occasioned through hatred and ill
will, which the Duke desired to vent against the Spanish State Ministers, and
which he had conceived upon several occasions; and the other through a singular
example to Puissant Princes, in showing them how much they are bound to defend
and maintain those whom they have taken into their protection. The present war
proceeded from the precedent, as it is often seen in humane bodies, that one
malady draws on another: The Kings Title was the protection of Montferrat, and
together with the peace of Italy, the quiet and safety of the States which he
therein possesses: The Dukes pretense, the exempting Kingly Command, the
preservation of the Independency and Sovereignty of Principality, and his
necessary defense against the Spanish Forces; upon which he endeavored to lay
all that odium which he found to lie commonly upon himself, as being the first
Author of the troubles, accusing the Spaniards of ambition and covetousness to
possess his State. Indeed none of right judgments could believe that the King,
who h^d but a little before showed himself to be so magnanimous and sincere a
Protector of the Duke of Mantua; which Duke had formerly, upon all occasions,
showed himself to be no very good friend to him, should now, without any just
Title or apparent color, become a violent usurper of another man's States, to
whom he was straightly allied by Kindred; especially in a time when the others
great observancy of the King, and confidence in him, so notably witnessed to
the world, was sufficient not only to cancel the memory of all past offenses;
but to make him merit the favor and particular protection of that Crown;
according as the Duke himself had so abundantly professed before: And yet
though the King was in all men's opinions no ways liable to any such suspicion;
yet there were those who discoursed variously upon the Kings Command given to
the Duke, according as men are variously inclined in their judgments. No man
thought it lawful for a Prince, how much Superior soever in State or Forces,
to command another, who was no subject of his, to disarm, or to prohibit him
doing what he thought best in his own Dukedom: That otherwise the Dominions and
Supreme power of Princes would be confounded, if under this or that pretense,
how just or reasonable soever it may appear, such authority should be granted
more to one then to another: That the Kings of Spain had, when they lifted,
sent great Armies into Italy, not without great jealousy to the Italian
Princes, who were unequal to them for Forces or Dominion: Therefore that was
not to be blamed in others, which they had so often permitted unto themselves,
especially since the Duke of Savoy's Forces were neither such, nor so great, as
to give just occasion of jealousy either to the King, or to any Italian
Potentate: And that he having already, to please the King, readily restored all
that he had taken, it was to be imagined that he would innovate nothing in the
future, as he had already openly declared he would not do: And that if either
the quiet or security of his own Dominions, or his Clients (as the King
alleged) should oblige him so to do, it would be sufficient in such a case, to
be ready armed for what occasion soever should happen; But that it was not
lawful to invade another Territories by way of anticipation, out of vain
suspicions: That this pretense, and this Command was not only without reason,
but new, and without example; it not having ever been heard or read of that the
like had been done amongst free Princes, exempt from any subjection. On the
other side, the protection of Montferrat was pleaded, which could not be
perfectly made good whilst it was not defended, as well against the future
eminent danger, as from the present injury and prejudice: That it is a no less
trouble to oppress a State with forces, then to ruin it with perpetual fear of
neighboring Arms: That therefore the Title of War was no less just and honest
which was made out of probable fear of being offended, then to remove injuries
received, or to revenge them: That the Duke had given just occasion of
suspicion some years before; that he would have endeavored to disturb Italy
with his own and foreign Arms; and that the King after reconciliation had
accused him for being still in Arms, contrary to Article; That hence he had the
convenience to fall upon Montferrat: That things continuing in the same
posture, and the Duke keeping himself armed without any probable occasion, and
holding still Intelligence with the French, his ends and intentions were much
the more to be suspected; and that by what appeared, he was but ill satisfied
with the King for his no ways pleasing resolves upon the present occasion: So
as he could not consent thereunto without great danger of more novelties; That
it was lawful for any one to do what he listed at home, wherein none could
justly hinder him; but that notwithstanding all men should so live and govern
themselves, as that their neighbors might quietly maintain what was theirs
without any cause of jealousy: That the King had temporized long before he
proceeded to any such Command, using gentle and respectful terms toward the
Duke; whereat the very Princes of Italy, who grew jealous of the Kings
patience, appeared to be openly grieved: And that though the King had often
taken up Arms, yet never without necessary and evident occasion; which ceasing,
he had forthwith laid them down, without injury to any one, and without
invading one foot of ground belonging to any neighboring Prince: That the Duke
ought to have imitated the King in this example rather then in the former;
since without any war made against him, he had of himself taken up Arms: And
therefore as the passing a man's word not to offend is accepted, where there is
necessity of keeping armed; so it is of no weight where that consideration
ceasing, it is necessary to come to execution; which any man may endeavor to
do by Arms, when no other means has proved profitable; for to keep still in
Arms upon the Confines, is a thing too prejudicial to the Prince and people,
full of suspicion, and moreover subject to the like dangers and inconveniences
which are sought to be prevented by keeping in Arms: But the Dukes offer to
disarm jointly with the Governor, as it answered the major part of the
opposite reasons, so did it draw the present question to a nearer point; for
the same respects of public peace, reciprocal security, and satisfaction,
being in such a case equally to be pleaded on all sides, it was only to be
considered, whether the parity of reason which agrees amongst equals, disagree
amongst unequals: In which ambiguity the Duke was compelled to accommodate
himself to the condition of times, and to give way to the will of the more
powerful, or by defending the liberty and Sovereignry of his State, show by
arms what is often seen to happen, That Fortune, Valor, and the variety of
Humane actions, can equal the disequallity of Forces and States.

Many, notwithstanding, who approved of the Cause, dissallowed of the Kings
Resolution; thinking that doubtlesly it had been more expedient, and better
done, not to irritate the Duke still more, whose mind was already sufficiently
ulcerated for former distastes, by his appearing now to favor his adversary so
much; nor to press him more, and necessitate him by new Commands to the utmost
necessity; nay, even to desperation; which forced him to resent the action by
throwing off all observance and respect that he might have allowed him the
satisfaction of being somewhat better armed then usual, and to have dissembled
this fervency (as had been done some years before) which because the precedent
and present passages had showed, and would show not to be profitable; and the
continual expense whereof made it daily more prejudicial, it was to be believed
that after having somewhat taken fire again, it would have quenched of it self;
whereas on the contrary, by blowing the coal, instead of quenching it, they
endangered the making it flame higher, and prove more perilous: But the
respect of the Kings Honor and regal Majesty prevailed with the Kings Council,
which being well rooted in the continued peace of Italy, and in the observancy
born unto him, even until this present, by the Italian Princes, and now more
confirmed by the Dukes last Obsequies and reverend carriage, had so possessed the
Spanish State-Ministers, as promising themselves much more then they ought to
have done, they did undoubtedly believe that the Duke would not do otherwise
upon this occasion then he had done formerly, and lately in the business of
Montferrat; and that howsoever, any the least appearance of war would be
sufficient to suppress any Commotion whatsoever, and make him desist;
especially when both France and Italy, being offended with him for his having
assaulted Montferrat, did concur in making him look well about him, and incited
the King to make war upon him upon that account. Many lay the fault of these
alterations, in a great part, upon the Duke of Lerma's ancient emulation and
private ambition; who being desireous to take from the Dukes pretentions, and
to abate the edge of his genius, easily forgot and laid aside the useful
consideration of what importance his conjunction would be, and the good
correspondency of the House of Savoy with the Crown of Spain; of the
preservation whe^eof the preceding Kings had been very careful, and studied the
continuance thereof: Howsoever, that Court having resolved that the Duke should
give no more occasion of new scandals, but that he should lay down Arms, and
suffer others to live in peace, the Governor of Millain received order to
prepare a sufficient Army to assault him in his own Dominions if he should
resist the Kings resolutions; but to the end that what was resolved of might be
done more justifiably, and with less disturbance to the French and to the
Italian Princes, it was given out, that those Arms were not raised to suppress
the Duke, and that the Kings intention was not to bereave him of any part of
his Territories, but only to possess himself of some places in Piedmont, with
^ention of restoring them presently after he should have humbled himself, and
yielded to the Kings demands; They hoped that by carrying the business thus
moderately, without disturbing the Affairs of Italy, and with less jealousy to
the Potentates thereof, they might preserve the authority of the Kings Orders
and peace, with advantage and honor to the Crown.

But the Duke was otherwise minded; who being exceedingly exasperated at the
little account which was made of his interests in that Court, was ashamed of
the obedience that he had showed thereunto: Being therefore resolved not to be
frighted at the Spanish Threats and preparations, he prepared sollicitously to
defend himself; Nor did he altogether despair to do it; for though he knew
himself very unable to make defense, yet he could not believe that the French
and Venetians, and Princes of Italy, would ever suffer him to be suppressed, to
their own so great inconvenience and prejudice: Being moreover overborn by his
immoderate anger and implacable hatred to the Spaniards, he in almost a
despairing manner, minded more his revenge then the preservation of his own
affairs: And as men grow most fierce when they expect the worst of evils; so he
aspiring at greater matters, and promising himself more then he could hope for,
undertook to hold Intelligence with foreign Princes, who emulated the Spanish
greatness, by whose favor and assistance he exceedingly hoped to stir up all
Europe against the Spanish Grandezza: He did persist the rather herein, by
reason of the Kings and his Ministers of States inclination to preserve Italy
in peace; as also by reason of Orders come from that Court to the Statesmen of
Italy, that they should embrace all occasions to suppress the present uproar
with the Duke, and that he would reserve himself for the last remedy, to break
the peace with him, in case he should grow contumacious; So as thinking, that
come what would come, it might be in his power to keep himself unprejudiced by
war, if he would accept of what now he refused, he thought it would be more
glorious for him to submit to the Kings commands rather enforced, then of
freewil; and after he had tried the fortune of war rather then before he had
looked the enemy in the face: Yet the Dukes distastes were not at first such,
nor so desperate, but that some way of accommodation might have been found, had
not a Letter written by the Duke of Lerma to the Governor of Millain, which
was divulged by him, made the malady uncurable: Directions were therein given,
That the Duke should precisely disarm, and that in case he should not obey,
That he the Governor should enter Piedmont with all his forces, and make him
know it behoved him to obey the Kings pleasure, whose Ministers (for so it was
added) were ill satisfied with so many difficulties and such resistance: He
concluded, That it was firmly believed, that when the Duke should know this
resolution, he would not forbear observing the Kings Orders.

This Letter, like a spark of fire in well-prepared materials, made the
combustions, which afterward ensued, the greater; the Duke being touched to
the quick, and thinking that Lerma in this Letter showed no respect unto him,
but that he was therein treated as a subject, did so detest it, as being much
disturbed in mind, and little less then mad, all his endeavors were to use the
greatest demonstrations of resentment, and of disrespect to the Authority of
Spain, that he could devise: Neither did he himself conceal the reason of such
combustions; for he was wont to say openly, that word Obey, had made him take
up Arms. Thus words are oftentimes of more force then deeds, and outward
demonstrations offend more then reallities: The Breach began from a
protestation which the Duke caused to be made to the Governor, when he saw
that there was no means of composition left; wherein, going over the war of
Montferrat from the very beginning thereof till the restitution of the places
he had taken, he said, That he was induced to make that Kestitution out of
hopes that his Niece should have been delivered up into his hands, according to
the promise made him (as he said) by the Governor, in the Kings name; and that
all Rebels should be pardoned, and losses by war; and under promise also of a
quick and friendly composure of the differences touching the State which he had
restored; He complained that he saw nothing made good which was promised,
notwithstanding the many importunities made in the Court of Spain, even by the
Prince his Son, after having been detained there for almost a whole year, the
Month being therein computed, wherein he was detained in Montferrat, to his so
great mortification. He added, That as for the Instrument presented to the said
Prince in Court, it was neither answerable to what was promised him, nor to his
just demands; so as he could not in honor accept it: Then he proceeded to
relate, How that after the said Instrument was presented unto him at Turin from
the Governor, he at the Governors desire had begun to treat of accommodating
differences, and how that after many debates he was told, that there was no
more composition to be thought of, but to do what the King had ordered: And
finally, ripping open what had been said and replied in that business, he
concluded that the Governor had not only not made good any of his promises,
but had hindered the composure of differences, which was by himself begun to no
other end hat to keep him the Duke in hand, that the mean while he might have
time to prepare for the war which was already plotted against Piedmont:
Wherefore he made his protestation that he would make all necessary and fitting
preparations to defend himself: That he would give notice to the King, and to
all Princes, particularly to those of Italy, how ill affected the Governor was
to him and to his family, which was so devoted to the Crown of Spain; in the
service whereof both he and his Predecessors had so often hazzarded their lives
and fortunes.

At this time Prince Philiberto the Duke of Savoy's second son, and Lord High
Admiral of Spain, coming with the Spanish Galleys into Italy, brought 2000
Spaniards, who being landed near Genoa, and bent for Millain, he steered
toward Naples and Scicily, where the rendezvous for the Kings Galleys was
appointed, as those also of other Princes, to oppose the Ottoman Fleet, which
being put from Constantinople, it was held for certain that it came to
prejudice the Kings Territories, to revenge the loss of 8 Galleys taken the
preceding Autumn by Don Pietro di Girona, Duke of Ossona, a Grandee of Spain,
and Viceroy of Naples, with the Saylors and Shipping of that Kingdom led by
Octavio of Aragon, who lighting upon them at unawares in the Levant Seas,
easily made himself Master of them, and brought them in triumph into Sicily.
With these and other people brought from several parts into the State of
Millain, the Governor had an Army in the field of 1600 Horse and 20000 Foot,
4000 whereof who were Swissers, not being, by reason of the ancient League, to
fight against the Duke, they were put into several Garrisons in the State of
Millain; and the rest marching toward the Confines of Piedmont, the Governor
came forth of Millain, on the 20th of August, with the Standard general, and
went to Candia, a Town in the Novarese; near to the Dukes Dominions. Here
whilst he was mustering his men, and expected other provisions for War, he gave
order to Don Lewis Gaetano, who was Ambassador for the King with the Duke,
that he should make his last trial to bring him to condescend to the Kings
will; and that if he should make any difficulty upon the manner of disarming,
he should promise him that the Governor would pass his word unto him in the
Kings name that he would neither injure him, nor the Pope, nor the Emperor;
and that in case of denial, he should protest, as he in the sight of God and
man did protest, that all the wrongs that should be done by War, and the
effusion of Christian blood, should be caused for his not having accepted that
which had been with so much reason demanded of him; and that then taking his
leave, and according to the Law of Nations, demanding a safe conduct, he should
come to within the State of Millain. For the better justification of the War,
the Prince of Castiglione went to Turin, to do the like in the Emperors name
the Dukes Sovereign Lord.

But all this did no good; for the Duke professing that he was much afraid he
should be assaulted in his own Dominions by the Governors neighboring Army,
as soon as he should have laid down Arms: and that therefore thinking, or
seeming to think, that all caution came short of the danger, and that his
utmost safety was therein concerned, he could not admit of any offer which was
not consonant to his safety and dignity; and therefore alleging that the Pope
would not accept of his word with an obligation to make it be kept, and the
Emperor had not Forces in Italy sufficient to over see the observing of it,
tacitly reproaching the Governor for being faulty in his first word, and that
therefore he had no reason to confide the ein: He therefore concluded that they
should jointly disarm, offering to be himself the first who should dismiss some
of his men; and protesting that he would not have taken up Arms, had it not
been for the Governors threats, accompanied with so great a strength to
suppress him; and that therefore he was now ready to defend himself to the
last: In sign whereof, drawing off his Collar of the Golden Fleece, he gave it
to the Ambassador Gaetano, who refusing to accept it, he sent it after him to
his house, that he might send it to the King; and though these and many other
actions were clear evidences that the Dukes will was totally alienated from the
King, and that he would stand upon resistance; yet could they not disdeceive
many Italians, nor the Governor, and Spanish Ministers in general, nor m^ke
them alter their opinion; for thinking that being so inferior a Prince, and so
unable to resist the Forces of the Grown, he would not dare to stand the trial
of the threatened War, they were of opinion, that having showed all the
demonstrations of courage even to the very last, he would, at the appearance of
the Spanish Arms and Standards, yield, just as he had done the year before,
before Nice; and therefore rather out of certainty then confidence, and
thinking that it would much detract from the Majesty and reputation of the
Kings Affairs, if they should by fortifying themselves seem to doubt that the
Duke would assault any of the Towns in the State of Millain, they did not care
to furnish even the Frontiers toward Piedmont, though they abounded in
Swissers; nor did they fear to be assaulted on any other side.

Wherefore the Venetians approving as then of the Kings resolutions, did nor at
all seem to favor the Duke; but rather persevering in their former distastes,
they appeared wholly averse to his ends and interests. The Governor resolving
to go with his Army to before Vercelles, past his men over into Montferrat by a
bridge built upon the River Sesia, near to Villata; and being come to Villa
nova, he went on the 7th of September with his Troops in good order toward
Vercelles, nine miles distant from Villa nova. La Motta, the first Town in
Piedmont yielded forthwith unto him, and afterward Carenzana; where,
distributing his Soldiers in those places, he quartered that night: But the
Duke thinking diversion to be a better way of defense then opposition; and
having what Horse, what Foot, little less then 10000 in Vercelles, of which
5000 French, he resolved to march into the State of Millain. Having therefore
made a bridge of boats over the same Sesia which divides his Dominion from the
State of Millain, and choosing out 6000 foot, and 1000 horse, he went with them
and with two fieldpieces into the Territory of Novara: From hence he sent 1500
foot, and 3^0 horse, Commanded by Calusio, son to the Count of Verrua, along
the River toward the Bridge della Villata, with order to burn it, thereby to
bereave the enemies Army of the Victuals and Ammunition which thereby were
brought to them from the State of Millain. He went with the rest straight
toward Novara; whither being come about Sunrising, he advanced with Count
Guido and some horse, and appeared upon an eminent Hill near the City: There
were not above 500 men in the Garrison, yet the Novaresi, betaking themselves
presently to Arms, fired a piece of Cannon upon them: But the Duke, though he
saw the Novaresi astonished at his coming, and the City wholly unprovided of
defense, so as probably he might have hoped to take the Town, he
notwithstanding retreated, and advanced no further, were it either out of the
respect which he still bore unto the King (as he afterward freely declared) or
as others would have it, out of fear of being probably assaulted by the Spanish
Army, which coming upon him nigh^ at and, and finding him engaged in that
enterprise with but a few Forces, might easily have suppressed him.

The Kings Commanders, nay, the whole Camp, when they heard that the Duke was
gone to Novara, knew how rare an occasion this would be. Don Alfonso
Pimentello General of the Cavalry, and Don John Vives, the Kings Ambassador to
the State of Genoa, who was then in the Camp, and Cavaliere Melzi, an ancient
Captain, and very good at Counsel, propounded, That foording immediately over
the Sesia, by the advantage of their Cavalry, or by their Wagons, accommodated
like to a Bridge, and leaving a reasonable baggage with the Garrison in
Carenzana, or sending it into Montferrat, they should go and cut off the Dukes
way in his return; for, said they, one of two things must needs happen, that
either the Duke being beleaguered in an Enemies Country, and having no
victuals, must yield within twenty four hours; or that fighting upon great
disadvantage, he must needs be a loser, not without manifest danger to his own
person; for he would certainly be taken Prisoner by the Horse, which were
dispersed every where about the Country. This Proposition being approved of by
the whole Council would assuredly have been followed, had not it been opposed
by Prince Ascoli; who alleging the depth of the water, the danger of foording
over the Rivers, and the doubt lest the Duke falling upon them in their passage
might much prejudice them, turned the Governor from this resolution: He added
moreover, That it was neither the Kings mind, nor the intention of the war,
that the Duke should be suppressed, but only that he should be infested till
such time as he should lay down Arms, and prepare to obey the Kings other
directions. He therefore concluded, that it was by no means fitting to
adventure the reputation of the Kings Forces, which would sufficiently decline
upon any the sleightest encounter; and that since the safety of Novara might be
cautiously provided for, safe and secure resolutions ought to be preferred
before such as were dangerous and uncertain. The difficulty of foording over so
small a River, nor the danger of the Dukes coming upon them, could not alter
the Governor from his first opinion; for the waters were not then very deep;
and the Duke being gone that very night for Novara, he could not, no not though
he had flown, have hindered their passage. Yet one man's Authority prevailing
over the universal opinion of the Council, an opportunity was lost of
overcoming, and of putting an end to the war the very day that it was begun: It
was notwithstanding ordered, according to the opinion of the Prince himself,
that the Army should return the same way it had come; that it should go to the
Bridge of Villata; and that repassing over the Sesia there, it should go to
relieve Novara; but with express command to Don Alfonso Pimentello, who led the
Van, not to fight upon any whatsoever occasion. The Van had not well passed
over the Bridge, when the burning of certain little Cottages was seen from afar
off, and the noise of fighting heard; wherefore 200 Horse were sent toward
that part, to discover what the matter was, who light upon the Marquess
Calusio, who was sent, as has been said, by the Duke, to burn the Bridge, and
lay the Country waste; and in a skirmish with 200 Horse, which were sent by
Pimentello, he was forsaken by his Cavalry, which at the first charge were
routed, and fled, many of them, together with Calusio himself, being taken
Prisoners, and many slain; some of the Foot, when they saw the Horse run, threw
away their Arms, ran away, and were cut in pieces; the greater part of them
keeping close together, and retreating in good order, made use of the moorish
situation, and of the banks, through which the Enemies not being able to
follow them, they had opportunity to make head in fitting and advantageous
places, and to face Lodovico Guasco, one of the Captains of the 200 Horse, who
with his Company of Curassiers followed them by oblique ways, and was still
upon their flanks; and after having assaulted them more than once, many of his
men being slain, and having his own horse slain under him, he suffered them at
last to get safe into Vercelles; and though their number was lessened, yet they
wan more preys, then their horse, which fled at the very first onset, without
making any resistance. This was the first encounter of the War of Piedmont, and
the first action that happened therein. The Spanish Army went to quarter at
Candia, a mile beyond Villata, instead of going to Palestra, a little higher
upon the river whither, they might better have gone: for being near the way
which leads from Novara to Vercelles, it had been a more convenient place to
have hindered the Dukes return. And this would have proved the better, for that
the Duke parted that very night from Novara, and returned to the Confines of
Piedmont, and quartered there that night, with his men very weary and tired
with their march the preceding day and night. Here the Governor had
notwithstanding another occasion of worsting him, had he been as mindful to
embrace it, as fortune was favorable in presenting it. For there was neither
river, nor other obstacle between him and the Duke, so as he might commodiously
and upon advantage have assaulted him, there not being above a mile between the
places where they were quartered.

The next day the Duke fired Palestra early in the morning, to revenge the
burning of Caranzana the night before by the Dutch, and went for Vercelles
without being molested; nothing being done to impede him in his return. Thus
having freed his own State from the Enemies Army, the very day that it entered
thereinto, and revenged the injury he had received, in the same manner as was
done to him, he returned to Vercelles; where he staid, observing the Enemies
proceedings. The Governor being returned to the State of Millain began
presently to build a Fort, which he raised from the very foundation, in the
Territories of Novara, a little distant from the Sesia, and not much more then
a mile from Vercelles; which in honor of the Duke of Lerma, he called the Fort
of Sandoval. He gave out, that he built it to no other end, but to secure
Novara, in case that when the Governor should enter again into Piedmont, it
should be re-assaulted by the Duke, as in such case he threatened he would do.
But the Fabric being great, and capable of many men, flanckt by five Bulwarks,
and near upon a mile in compass, it was not without good ground judged to be a
building not begun for the occurrences of the present War, but of long
continuance, and to fortify the State of Millain on that side at all times
from foreign Armies. For this same thing was almost resolved upon many years
before in Spain, though it was not proceeded in, to shun giving of jealousies
to the Italian Princes, and to the Duke, who was then a friend to the Crown.
But now there being a manifest breach, it was thought, as indeed it was true,
that the Kings Officers made use of this occasion, to put their former
resolution in practice. In this interim Prince Philiberto returned from Naples
with the Galleys wherein were between five and six thousand foot, part
Spaniards, and part Neapolitans, who being unbarked in the waters of Genua,
where he left also most of the Galleys, he went with some few into Spain, being
honored, and attended, not only as Admiral, but as the Kings Nephew: but in
reality being environed by Spanish Officers, who were appointed to wait upon
him by the Duke of Lerma, he appeared rather to be kept as an Hostage, his
Navigation was to no great purpose; for the Turkish Fleet, which was much less
then it was said to be, after having appeared within sight of Sicely, before
the Prince his coming, retreated to Navarino, a Haven in Morea. True it is,
that Don Diego Pimentello who was sent with two good Galleys very well
appointed, to discover them, had the luck to take two of the enemies Galleys;
which being well manned came also to discover the Christian Fleet; and lighting
upon them about Navarino, he stoutly assaulted them, and in a short space made
himself master of them, a Victory which was the more remarkable for that it
happened almost in view of the enemies Fleet, which was not above 20 miles
distant from where the fight was made. But it is not to be expressed how all men
were amazed, and confounded with wonder in Lombardy, and generally throughout
Italy, who expected mighty things from the Governors going into Piedmont; when
they saw him return so soon without doing any thing; and as the resolution of
returning would have made some amends, and have repaired the reputation of the
Kings Forces, wherein they suffered very much; if following the enemy, they had
vigourously re-entred Piedmont at their heels; so the keeping with the whole
Army, for above two months, about the Fort which was erecting, did necessarily
detract from their honor; and so much the more, for that mighty things being
looked for from them, no mean successes would have satisfied expectation. On
the other side, the Duke making less account of the discomforture given to his
men, then of the enemies going out of Piedmont, thought the least harm that
befell the enemy, a great comfort to his own affairs. And therefore thinking
that at the very beginning of the War he had made the world see that the
Spanish Forces were not invincible, he hoped that the Italians being awakened
thereby, as by a warlike trumpet, would the sooner join with him, both in
Forces, and in intelligence against strangers. Therefore not being upon this
occasion wanting to himself, but making his cause the common cause, he was well
pleased, that diverse writings, and composures should be thrown abroad in Italy,
but especially in his own Dominions; wherein stiling him the head, and author
of the recovery of their ancient Liberty, the Italian Potentates were exhorted
to throw off the foreign yoke, by which they had been so long oppressed. And
still continuing with more fervency the endeavors long before begun in France,
and Germany, with the Princes who did emulate the Spanish Grandezza, with the
King of England, and with the States of Holland, he strove to make them join
with him, that so they might unanimously oppose that power which did overshadow
a great part of Europe. But believing particularly, that the Venetians, the
great harm which would ensue unto them by his suppresion being considered,
would not give him over in so great a danger; he therefore having composed the
differences which had been between them and him, touching the War of
Montferrat, by the intercession of the Ambassadors of France and England, then
resident in Venice; he resolved to send Iacomo Pissina with title of
Ambassador to Venice, to exhort them upon this occasion to embrace his cause
with their Forces, and the defense of the common safety, and liberty; who being
brought into the College, may be supposed to have spoken to this effect;

It is most certain, Serene Prince, and wise fathers, that diffidence has
always been the ruin and undoing of friendship; as on the contrary, affiance
and trust has always been held the streightest bond to keep Princes
perpetually colleagued in friendship to one and the same end. The distrust that
the Duke my Master, joining with the Spaniards, conspired against the common
sa^ety, when upon just occasion he took up arms against Montferrat, made you
readily embrace the Duke of Mantua's cause, which was then held to be the
common cause. Out of this Reason, the Duke my Master, as best knowing his own
intentions, which he by open manifestoes published to the world, thought this
Commonwealth more inclined to favor his adversary then him. And that therefore
constriuing his intentions to be otherwise then they have been since known to
be, by reciprocal diffidence the ancient friendship so long preserved between
him and this Commonwe^lth has on the sudden been turned to enmity. Now, since
all men may assertain themselves, by what has happened at Novara and Vercelli,
that the Dukes intention never was, nor can ever in the future be, different
from the common end of the Princes of Italy, and particularly from that of this
most glorious Commonwealth; which is, manfully to make good, and constantly to
maintain the common safety, dignity, and liberty, against the common enemies;
he therefore has reason to hope, that past distastes being turned to as much
confidence, the former good correspondency will be redoubled; and that in so
just and honest a cause, in so useful and necessary a War, he may presume to be
favored by the Venetian Forces. For if you did resolve to patronize the Duke
of Mantua against a Prince so straightly joined in interest and good will with
this Commonwealth, only out of fear that he might assault Montferrat, with an
intention to annex it to the Spaniards; how much more ought you now prepare to
defend the Duke of Savoy, whilst he is assaulted by the ambitious Spaniard, for
the preservation of the public dignity, by those Forces, whe^eby under a
color of preserving peace in Italy, and which they are the first that do
disturb, they endeavor to possess themselves of Piedmont, so lawfully enjoyed
by him, and by his predecessors; the Spaniards, as all men may see, would be
believed to be the Arbitrators, the Patrons of Italy, the Supreme Moderator of
her Potentates; they therefore think it reasonable, that all Italian Princes,
as if they we e^so many of their Subjects, should obey every the least beck of
that King, nay of any of his Ministers. And terming the slavery of Italy,
peace, the obedience thereof security: and on the contrary, the freedom
thereof, contumacy; and its generosity, turbulency of spirit; they by these
artifices strive to make themselves gracious, and others odious to the people.
And now having begun to exercise this their superiority, to the no less general
prejudice, then to the universal loss of reputation, upon the weakest, they
will arrogate the like over the greatest. They of late commanded the Duke of
Modena and the Lucchesi, to lay down arms, and were immediately obeyed, without
any reply. They now endeavor the like with the Duke of Savoy: whom, after
having secured Montferrat from all Hostility, they command to lay down Arms,
and to disband his Soldiers: and because he keeps 2000 Soldiers more then
usual in his Dominions, they threaten him. Was there ever known so unjust, and
so imperious a command? with what reason does that King and that Nation, who,
as all men know, are but as of yesterday in Italy, give Laws to the Dukes of
Savoy, who held the Scepter of Piedmont 400 years, before he was master of one
foot of Land in Italy? will there none then dare to show their faces, and
gainsay such insolent commands? shall the generosity of the Italian name be so
totally extinct, as that all Italy shall obey those whom they have formerly
commanded? who sees not that by these beginnings they aim at the reducing of
the power and liberty of the Princes of Italy into a Precarious power, into a
Precarious liberty, depending upon every nod of theirs? but why talk I of a
Precarious power, of a Precarious liberty, these beginnings tend manifestly to
the reducing of the Duke of Savoy into miserable slavery, and to the
subjugating of Piedmont: nor ceasing here, to the making themselves absolute
Lords of Italy: the Monarchy whereof having long fancied unto themselves in
Idea, they now begin to try how it may succeed, by the suppression of the Duke
my Master, and by counterfeiting with the other Italian Potentates. And
cloaking this their ambitious and avaricious thirst with the fair pretense of
public peace, they are no less intent upon the usurping of other men's
Dominions, then were the Persians of old; who aspiring at the oppression of
Greece, demanded a little water, and some few clods of earth, for no other end,
but that upon denial they might have some colorable pretense to make War upon
them, and tyrannically to subjugate them. If then the safety, and dignity of
all Italy be endanger to be ruined, by the abasing of my Master, by the
suppression of Piedmont, will this Commonwealth, contrary to her custom,
contrary to the constitutions and examples of her Predecessors, stand idle
spectators of other men's miseries? careless lookers upon the common danger and
calamity? shall she sleep, and be drowned in a dull Lethargy, which confesses
that she continually watches over, and stands sentinel to the common liberty?
the Romans did of old make War, and sent forth powerful Armies against Philip
King of Macedon, and Antiochus King of Asia; not out of any desire of
acquisition, or of enlarging their Empire, not out of any hatred to those
Kings, nor to revenge any injuries received from them; but only to free the
Grecians from the tyranny of those Princes: but out of Roman generosity, which
could not suffer that those people, who had been anciently born, and who had
long lived freed, and masters of themselves, should be subjected by barbarous
Kings. And yet Greece was a Nation far distant from Rome, much differing from
the Romans in Laws, Customs, Language, and Religion; so as the Romans needed
not to have cared much for their Country nor Condition, nor been much moved at
their misery, and will you; who represent that ancient and august Commonwealth,
to the life, in Wisdom, Actions, and much more in generosity of Mind, refuse to
assist in the freeing, not of a Province, or foreign Nation, but of this,
which was anciently the Paincess of Provinces, which is your Mother, your
Country, the seat of your Empire, and of the Majesty of your Commonwealth? from
whose dignity, safety and freedom, you reap so much splendour, and security?
but, why make I use of so remote examples, when there are not wanting those
which are fresher and more suitable to the times and present occurrences? it is
not much above 400 years since Italy, and particularly all that which lies
between the Apenine, and the Alps, being oppressed by the Dutch Empire, many of
the Cities of Lombardy took courage to shake off the yoke of that fierce
Nation: so as joining in League, wherein your Ancestors, having manfully for
many years made War with Germany, which had her foot upon their necks, the
peace of Constance did ensue, by which nothing remained to the Germans, but the
bare name of Supreme Empire, and the Italians repossest themselves of their so
much desired liberty. Shall not that then which made so many people, dispersed
in so many Cities, oppressed by so severe a yoke, able to venture for, and to
atchieve liber^y, be sufficient now to associate some few, and free Chieftains?
will it not be able to infuse courage into free, great, and powerful Princes?
and ascertain them that the same thing, begun with more prosperous presage
shall have a more fortunate end? shall peradventure the doubt of success make
you hesitate, whose forefathers d^d manfully withstand the Forces of so many
Princes joined together against them? shall the Commonwealth of Venice be
afraid of Spain, which being without either King or Government, drowned in
luxury, and riches, and divided into so many parts, and Regions, as that the
vastness of its Empire does counterpoise, or injure it self? should it fear to
resist that power, against which the Hollanders, who were then but a weak
people, did rebel, and of Subjects have made themselves freemen, of slaves
Lords? nothing can appear really difficult to generously minded men. The Duke
of Savoy has no sooner sacrificed his State, and Life, in so laudable an
enterprise, but immed^tely the French, despising their Kings commands, are come
in to his aid, and will very suddenly appear in greater numbers. Nor will he
want assistance from Holland, and England; as also from many of the German
Princes, who favor my Master, and are tacitly confederated with him, if for
no other end, at least to abate so great a surquedry, and so odious a pride:
and shall not that which works upon foreigners, prevail with this
Commonwealth, which to boot with the same Reasons, is incited so to do by the
safety of her friends, by the protection which she professes to take of the
oppressed, and (which imports most) by the imminent danger of her own liberty?
but if pe^adventure so great and important occasions should contrary to the
expectation of all men, be so little considered by her, as in so urgen^ a
necessity she should not defend the common interest, think, I beseech you, what
opinion will be had of her wisdom? what esteem will be put upon her generosity,
and grandezza? what will the other Italian Princes say, who being anxious for
the common interest, what the end of the War of Piedmont will prove, depend
upon your Authority, knowing that the safety of their Dominions and fortune
depends upon your Counsels and Resolves; Who doubts that our Princes shall no
sooner know your inclination, shall no sooner see the Ven^tian Colors
displayed; and that the people who are subject to the Spaniards shall no sooner
see your arms glister, but that those wearied with their pride, and these vexed
with their unsupportable tyranny, will move, and will expose themselves, their
children, and all that is dear unto them, to enjoy that dignity, that golden
liberty, whereunto these Skies, and this Country does invite them. Make use
then of this so fair, so rare, and so opportune an occasion, wherein all Italy,
all Europe is concerned; which being embraced by the Duke my Master, gives
assured signs of happy success. Mark, I beseech you, how he, accompanied but
with a handful of men, has quickly cooled their threats, has at the first
push turned their intentions of oppugning Piedmont into care of fortifying
themselves in the State of Millain. One small Victory, one brush given them,
will throw them down headlong from that height from whence they with such
arrogance pretend to prescribe Laws to Italy, will alienate their friends from
them, will put heart into their Subjects, and make them see upon how weak
foundations this their vast Monarchy is built. And they losing their courage,
wherewith in their prosperity they are so puffed up, will yield to us the glory
of so gallant an action; whereby, to boot with our natural liberty, we shall
purchase perpetual and immortal praise to our posterity.

These words were as attentively listened unto as efficaciously spoken by the
Ambassador; who being dismi^d with general words, the business was propounded
in the Consiglio de Peg^di; where a Senator stood up, worthy, for the acuteness
of his wit, and for his affection to his Country, of all those Honors which
his no riper years did debar him of, who spoke thus.

If our opinions had been demanded by the Duke of Savoy when things not being
come to an open breach between him and the King of Spain, he had no need of our
assistance, as now being demanded when the breach is begun, our Counsels may
seem superfluous and unseasonable; I think our Answer ought to have been such,
as if being observed by him, it might totally have eased him of the necessity
and occasion of making this demand: Therefore since we were not acquainted with
it at the first, we must now consider advisedly, not what had then been
expedient for us to advise, but what we are now to resolve upon, not only for
our own honor and safety, but for the like of all Italy, touching our
abandoning or adhering to the Duke of Savoy, assaulted by the King of Spain:
For I believe you are all of opinion, That according to the Rules of civil
Government, Princes; who betake themselves, sometimes more out of necessity
then choice, to side with such Interests whereinto others have run either out
of hatred or some other disturbances, ought to endeavor that greater
inconveniences may not ensue. I believe that the ambition and desire of
Government is common to all men; but that the Spaniards do more abound in this
then others, cannot be denied; and that that Nation which is not satisfied with
great possessions which she injoys both in Europe, and in so many other parts
of the world, does still desire the agrandizing thereof by the suppressing of
others, is not to be doubted: And though hitherto (thanks to the peace of
Italy, and to the great care which is had, that they govern not such States as
are not subject to them) they have not obtained their ends; yet in my opinion
he thinks amiss who believes, that if occasion were offered, they would cease
from thirsting after other men's possessions: For the Citations sent from
Millain against many Princes of Italy, when Count Fuentes was Governor, and
which though they do not declaredly concern our Commonwealth, do at least
tacitly threaten her, are not as yet totally extinct, though they be laid aside
for the present: And if we may argue from smaller things to greater, with what
cunning, not to say Authority, have they gotten Finale, Monaco, Pi^mbino,
Corregio, and many other Towns in Lunigiana, under their Dominion? wherein, in
my opinion, it is not so much to be considered how much for the present the
summa totalis is concerned in those Towns, as the consequences which they draw
after them; and that from thence we ought to measure their Intentions and ends,
which do not aim only at the getting of those little Castles, but at much
greater designs. Monaco and Finale curb and command the River of Genua;
Piombino the State of Tuscany; how much subjection do the midway Towns of
Luneggiana enforce upon both these States? the same may be said of Correggio,
in respect of the States confining thereupon. Porto Longone, fortified by them
by so many Fabrics, almost in the face of Italy, how clearly does it show the
ambition they have, with safety to themselves, to bridle this Province; and who
doubts, but that as much as the liberty of any of our Princes is lessened, so
much the Spanish power is augmented, even to our prejudice? Nor is our
Commonwealth kept harmless from their ambition. How much does the Popes being
set on against us, by so many favors, Covenants, and preparations for war in
time of interdiction, show that that King and Nation have no good intentions
toward us? the continual molestations of the Uscocchi, fomented by them
against us; Our League with the Garrisons which they by so many Plots endeavor
to oppose; The Fort Fuentes, built in the jaws of the Valtoline, to the
perpetual yoke of that Nation, and to the apparent shame of our League; who
sees not how much they redound to the suppression of our honor, and of our
Affairs? They now endeavor to erect new Forts against the Duke of Savoy; and
because he will neither acknowledge nor obey his Commands, they assault his
Dominions; whether with an intention to bereave him of them, or no, I will not
at this time either affirm or deny; although it may be justly suspected, if not
fully asserted, by the many preparations and great demonstrations made by that
Nation, and probably feared by their wonted ends; but howsoever, I consider
that it does not become the interests nor dignity of our Commonwealth, to
permit that that Prince should basely submit to such Commands, nor that we by
abandoning him give possession to that Nation of so absolutely commanding and
compelling the Italian Princes to obey her; for men's thoughts in^arge
themselves by degrees; and the greater the things be which they attain, the
greater do the ends which they propose to themselves grow; and when they have
gotten one thing, they think they have gotten nothing, which makes them pretend
to more advantageous and higher things: And in State Affairs, he who
condescends in reputation, and at the first, must resolve to yield afterward
to all things: Wherefore, questionless, when they shall have forced the Duke to
what they now demand, they will afterward compel him to greater matters, which
will prove a pernicious president to other Princes, and to us our selves, when
occasion shall serve: And it is to be believed, that in such a case no man will
care for what shot shall befall us, as justly deserving the same punishment
which we have suffered others to undergo: But suppose that the Dukes Forces and
friends shall prove inferior to the greatness of his Spirit, or that finding
himself forsaken by others, he either willingly yield to the Command or power
of the stronger: or that disarm he, or disarm he not, he shall howsoever be
suppressed; Who sees not what the common danger will be? Who sees not a fair way
made to that Monarchy which that Nation fancies unto her self? Who sees not
Italy fallen into miserable slavery, and into as deplorable a condition as ever
she was in since the declination of the Roman Empire? It being then the part of
wise Princes, timely to foresee, and to provide early against dangers which are
not far off, I should think it very necessary that this Commonwealth, though
otherwise desirous to preserve peace, should in some sort or other undertake
the Dukes defense; Lest whilst we shall stand idly looking upon other men's
evils, it befall not us as it befell our Forefathers, when the Kingdom of
Naplos, being assaulted by Charles the Eighth, the State of that Prince was
possessed and overcome before sought withal; who whilst he is in safety, and
master of the Walls and Gates of Italy, may give entrance unto strangers, and
keep our Liberty, and the like of all the Princes of Italy, safe both in war
and peace.

Many, and particularly those of the younger sort, praised this Opinion which
was fortified with so many Reasons; but another Senator, no less venerable for
age then for wisdom, and for his long experience in places of Magistracy, and
Embassies happily discharged by him, stood up and spoke thus.

I have always been of opinion, most worthy Senators, That he who will advise
wisely of weighty Affairs, ought not so much to consider the quality or state
of present things, as to consider intentively, and diligently to examine things
that are passed: Therefore if we will conder Italies condition in former times,
I mean, when the Spaniards did not domineer here, and shall compare them,
without passion or envy, with the present times: I believe that all men will
join in opinion with me, that certainly the present times are to be preferred
before the former. We have seen, (not to speak of more remote times) we have
seen, I say, or may conceive by History, in what condition Italy was, when the
French, or Kings of Aragon, were Lords of Naples; when the State of Millain was
subject either to the Visconti, Sforzeschi, or to the French: To what bitter
wars was Italy subject, and more particularly our Commonwealth? The Aragonn^
had no sooner made themselves masters of the Kingdom of Naples, and so became
Italian Princes, but they began sometimes to trouble Tuscany, la Marca
sometimes, and sometimes the Churches Territories, and the Gen^esses; and
turning all things topsy turvy, they forbear not through ambition to extend
their Empire beyond the Confines of that Kingdom. The Visconti of Millain did
yet worse; and the Sforza's succeeding the Visconti as well in the State as in
the lust of Government, kept themselves not within the Confines of Millain and
Genua, And so troublesome was Lodovico Sforza to our Forefathers, as being
forced to join in League with Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, they resolved
to drive him out of his Dukedom, to the end that Italy being freed of that
firebrand, they might afterward so quiet the Nation, and by that means secure
it from the Kings of Naples, as they might no longer fear their own safety; and
that the King of France being brought by their forces into Italy, and made
master of Millain, might be the chief Protector of their State: What the
success of those hopes did afterward prove, I think is sufficiently known to
all men; and how the King of France rewarded that good turn with bitter wars,
cruel calamities and persecutions; For if ever our Commonwealth was near being
utterly exterminated after the war of Chioggia, it was then, when that King, to
recover Cremona, and Gieradada, which by Articles of agreement did belong to
us, did incite the Arms of Christian Princes against us: and making him their
head against our Progenitors, in that great league of Cambraye, stuck not to
assault them with all his Forces; and had been the chiefest cause of our ruin,
if such a tempest had not been stoutly withstood, and prudently repaired by our
forefathers. Not long after neither we, nor the other Potentates of Italy,
being able to endure foreign Dominion in Italy, we jointly endeavored to
repossess the Sforza's in the State of Millain; which our forefathers did,
though not without Wars, and infinite troubles: for they did not think that
either the peace, or liberty of Italy, could be secure, as long as the
Spaniards, being masters of the Kingdom of Naples, as they then were, should
likewise succeed in the State of Millain* as the Sforza's being afterward
extinct, it was necessary they should do. This is the condition of the affairs
of Italy, which I term past: Let us now come to her present condition; and
comparing it with the past, let us Judge which of the two conditions be to be
chosen, whether that, when the Visconti, the Sforza's, and the French who
counterpoised the King of Aragon in the Kingdom of Naples, or this, wherein the
Spaniards being masters of both these St^tes, are with the moderation of
Empire, a counterpoise unto themselves. I verily believe there is none that
will prefer those times before these, neither in respect of the peace and
happiness which we and the other Princes of Italy enjoy, nor of the security
and quiet wherein we at the present do possess our States. By means whereof if
Italy do not begin to recover the Empire of the world, yet does she flourish in
all those Arts and riches which can result from a continued secure peace. Let
us now give for granted, that the Spaniards are naturally ambitious, coveting
what belongs to others; let us allege Monaco, Finale, and four other poor
Villages, by the masters whereof they were for the most part brought in; put
what esteem you please upon the Citations of Fuentes, and of the disturbances
occasioned by four Pirates which molest our Gulf; and let us compare these, or
other more trivial businesses, and this desire which the Spaniards seem to have
of Government, to the like as well of Native Princes, as Foreigners, who have
born sway in Italy: Let us oppose the Actions of those, to the remonstrances of
these; the Citations of these, to the wars made by those with Italian Princes,
and with our Commonwealth; and certainly he must be very stupid who will not
wonder at the comparison: But unless I be deceived, I see no probable ground,
nor any conclusive reason of this their so immense ambition, and covetousness
of dispossessing other men, when I consider the conveniences of great
Acquisitions which their Kings have forborne to make, and how civil and liberal
they have been to the Princes of Italy; this may be witnessed by the States of
Florence, and of Sienna, won by their Arms, and yielded to the Medici; by
Corcica taken from the French, and restored to the Commonwealth of Genua; by
the free gift of the County of Asti to the Duke of Savoy, and by the recovery
of almost all Piedmont to the same Duke; by the restitution of Modena to the
Estensi, and of Piacenza to the Farnesi; by the free foregoing of the State of
Millain to Francisco Sforza; by the adjudging of Montferrat to the Gonzagi,
almost 100 years after the Paleologi were extinct, and now freed from the hands
of the Duke of Savoy, and so faithfully restored to the Duke of Mantua: If we
be not satisfied with these cle^r and evident Examples, I cannot see what
mis-guiding error it is which does incumber us, and makes us argue them to be
so covetous of thirsting after what belongs to others. I forbear mentioning
that all our Princes have for so many years been undisturbed by this their so
great power; nay, how upon all occasions they have been succored by them; and
we, if truth may prevail, and if the remembrance of benefits received make not
the Benefactor odious, as we have no just occasion to complain of their
neighborhood, so may we not justly forget the benefits received from the Crown,
both when Ferdinando the Catholic sent Consalv^ the great to assist us when
assaulted by the Turks; and when Philip the second concurred in the sacred
League, chiefly in our defense against the Ottoman Empire, wherein he was at
double expense, in a great preparation of Ships, and Galleys, and in an
infinite number of fighting men: Wherefore, as I am not informed by what is
past, that the happiness of Italy consists in being governed wholly by her
natural Princes; so since we manifestly perceive that the times, nor our minds,
are not framed for the introducing of that which we account at present the most
happy condition; it will be great wisdom, not out of a desire of novelty, to
break the thread of things which have been hitherto happily spun: For what
remains, that the Spaniards would secure their own Sta^es by building new
Forts, that they endeavor to disturb our Vessels; though we may think it
unkindly done, yet we have no just reason to take it ill at their hands; since
they therein do nothing but what other Princes do, and what we our selves have
thought fit to do in Friuli, and elsewhere: Nor has the Duke of Savoy reason
to complain of those Commands (as he calls them) which are laid upon him by the
Spaniards, whilst it tends to the freeing of Italy from being continually
troubled with her forces, and her neighbors from suspicion of novelty;
otherwise I see not why the King should not be suffered to secure his own
Dominions, except we will suffer the Duke to keep other men's possessions in
continual expense and anxiety, and inhibit others, after having tried all fair
ways to free themselves from it by force; as is allowed of by natural and civil
reason, even amongst private men. Let us remember, I beseech you, how much we
were troubled at the unexpected assault of Montferrat; how much all Italy was
molested thereat; how much we our selves did endeavor the comfort of the
assaulted State, and the acquitting it from so sore and sudden troubles, both
by assisting the Duke of Mantua, and by having recourse to the King of Spain:
And let us argue from hence, if the asoresaid alleged may not suffice, what
just reason, what fair color we have to oppose the intention of the Spanish
forces, procured, as I may say, by our selves, for the peace and safety of
present affairs: What jealousies would there be had of our word and constancy,
if we should endeavor to oppose the King in a war wherein he has interessed
himself at our desires; and against a Prince, who being so nearly related to
him both in blood and concernments, ought to be convinced, though he had those
sinister intentions against us and other Princes, as are supposed to the
contrary: You all know what great offers we did refuse made to us by the King
of France if we would join with him against the Spanish Empire, when not many
years ago, having a great Army on foot, and being confederate with manypowerful
Princes, he prepared to make war against that Empire: We refused Cremona,
Giaradada, and all the Coast of the Kingdom of Naples, which lies upon our Sea,
because we desired rather to be esteemed peaceful preservers of our own
affairs, then unquiet disturbers of other men's; because we thought it not safe
to change the certainty of our present condition for specious future hopes,
though great ones, nor to go out of a happy calm, and enter into a troublesome
tempestuous sea of novelties. And shall the Duke of Savoy make us do that which
the King of France, a King of such power and authority, environed with so great
Forces, and adherences, could not persuade us to? if we shall upon so slight
terms become the Dukes followers in his unquietness; i^ we shall adhere to his
will, partake of his quarrels, and undertake under pretense of the honor and
liberty of Italy, to revenge his private quarrels with the Spanish Court,
having been so jealous but a little before of his confederacy therewith; if we
shall suffer our selves for any conceits of his, to be inveloped in a War
against a powerful King and Nation, whose Forces I know not how those who think
them so formidable in time of peace, should think them so unconsiderable in
times of War, as that to free themselves from jealousies which they fancy unto
themselves in time of peace, they dare irritate them: since we have no reason
at the present to be jealous of the Spaniards neighborhood, and since we may
probably fear it may prove prejudicial, if provoked; me thinks, we should
conclude it were not good to innovate, or alter the peaceful condition of the
present times; and that we should lay aside those conceits of Italies liberty,
which are so fair in appe^rance, but in realty very uncertain and dangerous;
and which, as cates which are most esteemed, are not meats to cure a sick
person, but poison to kill him; so peradventure may they extinguish those vital
spirits of liberty which we now enjoy. And this, in my opinion, is the likelier
to fall out, for that they cannot be put in execution without much difficulty,
by reason of the many contests they will meet withal in the bringing about, by
reason of the present condition of times, and through the disagreeing of our
Princes, who as formerly, so now, not being able to suffer that one should
exceed another, would be the first to recall those foreign Nations in, which
they now exclaim so much against. Nor has the Duke of Savoy, who seems now so
zealous for the common liberty, and to abhor so much the Spanish Empire, been
always of that opinion. So as it will be hard for us to secure our selves, but
that when he shall be satisfied in his pretentions to Montferrat, he may
afterward, to the prejudice of the common liberty, re enter into the former
privacy, and good intelligence with the King: For these Reasons, most excellent
Senators, I conclude, that minding the safe Counsels of Peace, we may not in
wrap our selves in a dangerous War, and in the troubles which may result from a
contrary resolution.

These reasons did not please such, who detesting the Spanish greatness were
much troubled to hear it so asserted; and yet though the Senate were not
desirous that the Duke should be suppressed, lest the Spanish Grandezza might
be thereby more increased, which being already swollen too high, they rather
desired to see abased; yet the reputation of the Spanish Forces prevailing with
them, and preferring their own safety and quiet before that of others, they
considered not as then the contrary reasons, and pitched upon this last
opinion; so as looking to be advised by more certain events, and not thinking
the affairs as yet sufficiently in order, nor ripe enough for them to declare
themselves, they held it not good to display their Sails to that wind which
began to breathe from Piedmont: True it is, that for the Dukes better
satisfaction, they sent Rainero Zeno into Piedmont with title of Ambassador
Extraordinary, in lieu of the ordinary Ambassador, who when the business
should be reconciled, was to be sent back; to the end that carrying on the
business with more authority, the Dukes business might not seem to be totally
abandoned by the Commonwealth: And there wanted not those who argued by the
success, that they did not only foment the Duke by private advice and promises,
but assisted him underhand with supplies. The Duke obtained not a much
differing resolution from the Court of France, where he expected better things
from the neighboring dangers, from the vivacity of that Nation, and from the
Kings minority; for the Queen being assured by the King of Spain, that he would
forbear all hostility in Italy, whenever the Duke would consent to what was
demanded, she was therewith satisfied, and endeavored to make the Duke yield
to the Kings pleasure, in regard of the interest of her Nephew the Duke of
Mantua, in whose behalf this new War was begun: Not listening therefore to any
of the Dukes desires or complaints, she under severe penalties prohibited all
her Subjects to take pay of him; and yet she also, for the honor of her
Kingdom, and to give satisfaction to the Princes and Chief Lords of her Count,
sen Charles a' Anghienes Marquess of Rambolliette to Piedmont, Ambassador, to
exhort the Duke to peace, with express commission, that if he should forbear to
lay down Arms, fearing that he might be oppressed afterward by the Spanish
Forces, he should give him all such assurances as he himself could desire, and
offer him the protection of that Crown, and the Forces of the whole Kingdom:
Such was the public resolution of that Court which was then governed by the
Queen, who was much inclined to preserve friendship with the Crown of Spain,
for the Interest of her own authority and greatness, and for the quiet and
safety also of her Sons affairs, which would be less subject to troubles and
perturbation, by keeping peace, and good correspondency with his neighbors.
That Court continued in the same mind for some years; though the King being
come to the age of 14, and, according to the orders of the Kingdom, out of
gardianship, took upon him the administration of affairs, and consequently the
Queens regency ceased. For depending wholly upon his Mothers authority, and
advice, the change of Government was for a while insensible, the name of
Governor being only altered. The new Kings first action was to ratify the
Marriages contracted with Spain; and seeming to be desirous to keep fair
correspondency therewith, the Duke of Savoy had small hopes of and good from
France. And though he seemed abandoned of all help from thence, the Marshall de
Dignieres, Governor of Dolphenye, sent good store of men continually unto him
underhand. it not being known whether the Queen did wink thereat, or no; who
hearing that many did murmr that the Duke in so urgent a necessity and danger
should be abandoned, to the great diminution of the Kings authority, and of the
Kingdoms interest, did underhand give way that the Kings resolution should be
countervened; And therefore besides those that were sent by de Dignieres, many
others falling down from the Alps, a good number of that Nation were in a short
time found to be in Piedmont. By which the Duke being comforted, a^ also by the
promises of other Princes; and being encouraged by the good beginning of the
War (as it is usually seen that enterprises which at first appear fearful, grow
by degrees less dreadful) he began to confide more in himself; and looking for
greater successes, he was content to be entreated to do that which he bad much
reason to desire. So as the words nor persuasions of the French Ambassador
prevailed but a little with him; nor yet those of Monsieur Giulio Savelli, who
was likewise sent extraordinary Ambassador upon the same occasion to Piedmont
by the Pope. For the Duke persisting in not composing the affairs of Mantua,
without having some part of Montferrat given him, and denying to lay down arms,
unless the Governor should do so likewise; he refused also to refer the
differences to be decided by the Emperor, being jealous of him; but he
consented to refer it to the King of France, and to the King of England, to
which he knew neither the King of Spain, nor Duke of Mantua would agree. It
seemed therefore very hard to reconcile them; and the less, for that the Duke
of Savoy growing bold by the Spanish Armies going out of Piedmont, and by their
lasie entertaining themselves about the building of the new Fort, not caring
much to pursue the War: he thought he was the more secured from any new
assaults. Wherefore sending daily Troops of horse out of Vercelles, which
foording over the very River of the Sesia in sight of the enemies Army, which
the Governor in the Dukes absence durst not pass through with a numerous and
gallant Army, they dared to insult over the Soldiers which were busied about
the Fort, without either fear or respect, though but by a snatch and away. And
the Governor being wholly intent about building the Fort, did not only not
care to suppress their insolence, but would not follow the advice of many of
the Commanders, who thinking it bootless and dishonorable to busy the whole
Army about building a Fort, which stood in the Kings own ground, advised to
send part thereof in the interim to prejudice Piedmont, where the Duke being
employed about the guarding and defending of Vercelles, it was probable they
might make some good progress. But the Dukes affairs, which seemed to be secure
from any hostile act, or at least were not troubled with any, ran unexpectedly
great hazard at home. For the French and Swissers which were under the Dukes
pay, mutinying upon a small occasion, put the City of Vercelles, in defense
whereof they were then employed, in great danger, and confusion: nor was the
danger of a greater sedition small, nor the Dukes labor less in appeasing it;
but being at last quieted, the French, as who were suspected of novelty and
alteration, were distributed into several quarters about the City. The Dukes
resistance being this mean while known in Spain, and what had happened in Italy,
contrary to that Courts expectation, the King and Council were not a little
incensed, they thought the Kings honor and authority to be highly offended;
therefore minding resentment more then the appeasing of rumors, they thought
it necessary to alter their first orders, and to take a more severe course in
making the Duke acknowledge the Kings Grandezza, which by his entering into the
State of Millain in hostile manner, he seemed to value but a little. They
therefore commanded the Governor and their other Officers in Italy, that they
should proceed no longer against the Duke with such respect as formerly, but
with all bitterness and severity. To which end they gave out orders, and made
extraordinary provisions.

The Ambassador Vives was returned from the Camp to Genoa, who having sent some
scouts to Nizza di Provensa, and to Villa Franca, brought back word, that the
Castle of Nice, though otherwise very strong, had only a Garrison of 150
Soldiers in it, and but little Ammunition; That the City was safe on the one
side from being injured by the Castle; That the Citizens were but ill satisfied
with the Prince; That the Passes in Piedmont, which were situated on steep
Cliffs, might be unexpectedly taken by a few Soldiers, and be by them
defended; which being taken, that the Castle and City could not be relieved,
and therefore might be easily mastered by any who should go thither with
convenient Forces: They also said, that the Castle of Villa Franca, a spacious
and safe harbor, was but weakly walled, guarded only by 50 Soldiers, and
subject to be played upon on several sides, that howsoever, Cape San Sespiro, a
place commodious to land in, and very near Villa Franca, might easily be
surprised and fortified, as not being provided either of Guards or
Fortifications; he therefore proposed either of these two enterprises, as
feasible, to the King; the rather, for that he being Master of the Sea, had the
whole River of Genoa, together with the Haven of Monaco, for his friends; so as
if either of these two enterprises should be taken in hand, at the same time
that the Land-Army should enter Piedmont, it might be probably hoped that
landing between six and eight thousand men in those parts, they might easily be
effected; or if they should meet therein with any greater difficulties, it
would howsoever be very advantageous to make the attempt, by reason of the
great diversion it would be to the affairs of Piedmont, The Court was pleased
with this proposal, and it was presently ordered to be put in hand; so as
necessary provision and materials were furnished from Genua, by the said Vives:
and the people which were come from Naples, and those which were shortly
expected from Sicily, were deputed for that service: but because contrary winds
caused much delay, the Duke had notice of the Enemies design, and fortified
Cape San Sespiro, reinforced the Garrison of Nice, and of his other Maritime
Towns; therefore the Governor, either that he might not irritate the French,
when they should see the places confining upon Prevence assaulted, and to which
they have ancient pretenses, or finding the difficulties, and that they were
prevented by the Duke, forewent these their first intentions, and fell to
besiege Oneglia, a Town belonging to the Duke, 40 miles distant from Nice,
toward Genua; wherefore Prince Philibertus being gone for Spain, though the
Galleys which were expected with men from Spain; were not yet come, yet Don
Alvaro Bassano, Marquess of Sancta Croce, Captain of the Neopolitan Galleys,
went thither with his Galleys, and with those that keep usually in the Haven at
Genua, commanded by Don Andrea Doria; in them there were six Ne^politan
Companies, under Vespatiano Macedonico, and eight Spanish, under Pietro
Sermiento, Camp-master. Oneglia is a Town di 500 fuochi, upon the sea shore,
having on the east side craggy hills; on the west it is watered as it were with
a little river, beyond which stand some hills, which entering into the sea make
the Premontory, commonly called Cape St. Lazero, her jurisdiction toward the
sea lies near the mountain and the river; it extends much further on the land
side, having the command of three very fruitful (...) peopled by 60 Villages:
besides which there are other two, Maro, and Perla; which belong likewise unto
the Duke. The place it self, never having seen the face of an Enemy, is not any
ways fortified, unless with a Castle built after the ancient manner, and by a
Bulwark toward the sea, which serves rather to keep out Pirates, then to
fortify the Town.

But the Dukes Commanders and Soldiers being entered thereinto, they made
diverse Fortifications there; they drew a trench along the river on the West
side, and a bank of sand along the shore; for it was defended on the north side
by a Country of friends, and on the east by craggy hills. Count Lodevico della
Moretta, Marquess di Dogliano, commanded there in chief; who had with him many
Captains, and Soldiers, as well of the neighboring Valleys, as sent by
directions and order from Piedmont. Sancta Croce landed his men on the 19 of
November, by permission from the Commonwealth, beyond Cape St. Lazero: and
though his leave to land was upon condition that he should not make any they in
her Territories; yet making no account thereof, St. Crece quartered himself on
this side the river, and planting his battery there he begun to command the
Campagnia, and to remove all impedments. The next night he sent some of his men
beyond the river, who after a stour dispute having gained the further bank,
made themselves masters of many ways which led unto the walls: and at the same
time bringing two pieces of Artillery upon the Piazza of St. Moro, to begin the
battery from thence, they beat back above 500 Soldiers from the Trenches and
Rampires which they had made thereabouts, with loss of only eight assailants,
and some that were wounded. But being there infested by others, who were
fortified in some other houses which stood a little higher, and by certain
Mortar-pieces, which were placed on the Dukes Palace, he turned his Artillery
thither-ward, beat down the houses, and boldly assaulting them, he repulst the
defendants who were 300 in number, and pursued them to the Covent of St
Augustini, whither they retreated in great disorder. The Covent was immediately
environed with Trenches, which was very opportunely seated for defense of the
Town, and was played upon all that night, 400 of the Garrison, who were there,
defending themselves very valiantly. This mean while the Galleys lay not idle,
but landing men came upon Oneglia, cleared the Campagnia with their Artillery,
and beat down the tops of the houses, though that they that were within
indeavored to keep them off with the Artillery of the Castle, and of the
Bastion, which was on the sea side. And landing a great Cannon between the
river and Cape St. Lazere, they therewithal slew many upon the Trenches. Those
who were within defended themselves manfully, but their Ammunition grew low, as
was conceived by their so seldom shooting; and a Falluca loaded with Muniton
which was sent from Villa Franca was intercepted by the Galleys, so as they
grew daily more and more to despair of succor. For Count Guido, who fell down
from Piedmont to this purpose with 200 Horse, and 500 Foot, being necessarily
to pass through the Territories of Genua, was denied passage. It was therefore
thought the Town would be soon surrendered; and those within had already
obtained Truce for three hours, by means of a Capuchine Friar, seeming as if
they would yield up the Town, but with intention that they might fortify
themselves the better; for the Rampires being finished a little before the time
of Truce expired, they let fly a piece of Artillery into the Camp, and gave a
furious volley of Musket shot from the Monastery. On the other side, those
without reinforced their batteries on many parts, but did no great good
thereby, the defendants making valiant resistance, and killing many of the
assailants. This mean while the six Galleys came from Sicely, and brought with
them eight Colors of Spanish Foot, of the usual Garrison of that Island,
commanded by Don Diego Piementello. Which whilst they were landed beyond Cape
St. Lazero, the remainder of the former Foot who were quartered on this side,
in the Commonwealths Territories, were sent over the water into the parts about
Oneglia, and by means of a Capuchine Fria, a Truce for three days was again
endeavored, upon condition that if in the interim they should not be relieved,
the Town should be surrendered; but this was not yielded to by Sancta Croce.
Whereupon many of the Towns men fearing to be sacked, or to be put to some
miserable ruin, went over into the State of Genua; and 200 of the Country
people who were set to guard a certain Ditch near the Gate, forsook it, and
fled away by night. Wherefore the Spaniards advancing even to the Church St
Martino, without any withstanding, made themselves masters of all the parts
that were about Oneglia on the land side; and had they not been hindered by
great rain, and by the river which swells very high in those parts, they would
certainly have ended their work then. But the waters being fallen, those within
drew two pieces of Cannon just over against the Gate of the Town, and by means
of the Capuchine who had past several times before between them and the enemy,
they desired, and obtained leave, to march out with their Colors flying, Drums
beating, with their Arms and Baggage, and with a safe conduct. Whereupon the
Marquess Degliano publicly complaining that the place was lost by the
accommodation, and Munition which was afforded by the Commonwealth to the Kings
Commanders, and by giving way to the intercepting of the succor which was sent
by the Duke, went out the fifth day after the landing of the first men, and
with him went out twelve Colors, besides many Townsmen, and others of the
neighboring Villages, who swearing loyalty to the Spanish Commanders, tarried
in the Country. But Count Guido, who was kept, as has been said, from
relieving Oneglia, went into the Marquesate of Zuccherello, an Imperial
Feudatory which lying between the Dukes Territories, and those of the
Commonwealth, serves as a Gate whereby to enter Piedmont. And carrying Count
Odo Rovero along with him, withdrew all that jurisdiction, except Castello
Veccohio, which was the Marquess his place of residence, and who was then
absent, into his power. Where though there was neither Ammunition, Artillery,
nor Soldiers; yet the enemy not being able to bring their Artillery thither
without much labor; and 500 of the Subjects of the Commonwealth being at that
instant come into Castle Vecchio, to whom the Emperor had committed the
protection of the Marquesate, some resistance was made for some days: yea with
the death of some of the oppugners: but afterward their Ammunition and succor
failing them, they yielded the Castle upon Articles. But all things were not
quiet in the Valley of Oneglia, by reason of the Castle of Maro; whither the
Dukes Captains, at their marching out of Oneglia, sent 300 Foot under Cavalier
Broglia, who having fortified it, and furnished it well with Munition, it was
thought it would be hard to take, for it was seated between craggy Rocks and
cliffs; and from hence he infested the Towns in the Valley of Oneglia with
often salleys, and forced them to pay great contributions; for after having
sworn fealty to the King, he esteemed them Enemies, and Rebels to the Duke.
After the taking of Oneglia, Sancta Croce was gone to Naples, and returned from
thence; and had brought with him in his Galleys 3000 Neapolitanes, under the
Camp-master Thomaso Carassiol^, and many other provisions for the enterprise of
Villa Franca, which the Spanish Commanders were still bent upon. But the
Governor had always been against it, and by a Secretary which he had lately
dispatched away into Spain, had propounded many difficulties to the Kings
Counsel, whereby he had not a precise order to desist from it. It was therefore
resolved that they should go to the taking in of Maro, to the which 3000 Foot,
part Neapolitans and part Spaniards, with three pieces of Cannon, and 2000
other Foot of the Valley of Oneglia, were sent, commanded by Iovan Ieronimo
Doria, a very valiant Commander. Doria began the battery immediately; and
having quickly beaten down part of the Wall, he ordered an assault to be given
the second night, not only where the wall was broken down, but also on two
other sides, to the end that he might divide the defendants. And that all this
might be done at one and the same time, the firing of a Cannon was the sign of
falling on. But some of the assailants having mist their way, and others been
too slow in coming to the place appointed, only the Spaniards, who were to
assault the Town where the Wall was beaten down, fell on, entered the Town, and
maintained fight a long while, till such time as great stones being thrown down
upon them, and beams from the tops of the highest houses, and out of windows,
they were forced to retreat, with loss of two of their men, and 35 who had
their heads broke; amongst which Emanuel di Luna, their Captain. The battery
continued afterward two days, on two several parts; when Doria finding
businesses reduced to that pass of coming to an assault again, he gave order
for it, as before, on three several parts; which being valiantly performed in
all the parts, and the defendants playing their parts valiantly, Broglia, who
had taken some rest by reason of the pains he had taken the preceding night,
came from the Castle to assist his men; but as he was either retiring into the
Castle, or as he was carrying succor to another place where he heard a new
tumult, he was run through with a Pike by a Spaniard, by whose death the
defendants being dismayed, they retreared all into the Castle, which they
surrendered not long after, upon permission to march out with their Arms and
Baggage.

Whilst the Kings Forces were thus busied in the Maritime parts, the building
of the Fort Sandoval went on; and the Nuntio Savelli, and the French
Ambassador, labored, though in vain, to compose Affairs. The difficulty lay
on the Governors behalf, who, according to the Kings Orders, would have the
Duke to lay down Arms; which the Duke denied to do, fearing, as he alleged,
the Spanish Forces, if he should do so. But the Nuntio, and the Ambassador,
finding that fear to be in effect vain, and that the Dukes backwardness did not
depend thereon, but rather upon a desire of having some part of Montferrat
allotted him by agreement, without which they saw him resolute not to lay down
Arms, they framed some Capitulations, wherein giving him some satisfaction in
that behalf, they obliged him to disarm upon the Governors bare word, in the
name of the King of France, and upon the promise of the said Governor, that he
also would soon after disband all his men. The Duke was not hereat displeased;
but foregoing his former obdurancy, out of hopes of soon obtaining part of
Montferrat, he did not insist so much as he had done upon the form of
disarming, and was persuaded to accept of the proposal. Yet were it either that
the Articles were cunningly contrived, that the Duke giving free consent to the
Article of disarming, wherein the difficulty lay, his fair pretense of
providing for his own safety might be taken way; or that the Governor thought
the Articles repugnant to three points of the Kings Decree, the Governor
refused to accept of them, so as the business was not perfected; the rather,
for that the Governor boasting that he would chastise the Duke for his having
entered the Kings Dominions in a hostile manner, said he could not consent to
any agreement, unless the Duke should humble himself to the King, and ask his
pardon, for having offended him, by entering his Territories in hostile manner;
and therefore although the midst of November was over before the Fort was
finished, and the weather consequently grown very sharp; and though the Army,
which was much lessened by mortality, and by the running away of many, ought to
have been brought into winter Quarters, yet the Governor, being thereunto
solicited by many of his Captains, and much pressed by many of the Officers of
the Court, who by their Letters desired very much to see the Dukes contumacy
severely punished by some signal action, resolved to go to before Asti; for he
despaired of getting Vercelles, the Duke being there in person with the
greatest part of his men. This proposal had been several times pressed, even
from the very first beginning of the war, by Rodorigo Oroseo, Marquess of
Mortara, and Governor of Allessandria; who being a Soldier, and desirous to
signalize himself, promised the Governor that he would easily take it, if he
would give him 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse; but the Governor not giving way
thereunto, he grew more fervent therein, when he saw the Duke busied in
building the Fort, hoping that he might get it the more easily, for that the
Duke keeping at Vercelles by reason of the neighborhood of his Enemies, could
not divert him, nor send any considerable Forces to relieve it. Now the times
being altered, and what was more to be considered, the form and design of the
enterprise being varied, the Governor would of himself attempt it with all his
Forces; and therefore leaving a sufficient Garrison in Sandoval, and having
sent away the Artillery before by the Tannaro, he attempted to come before it
with 1200 Horse, 3000 Dutch Foot, and 4000 Foot more of several Nations: But
the Duke as soon as he saw Vercelles free from the Enemies neighborhood,
leaving his youngest Son Prince Thomaso there, with a reasonable Garrison, went
with the rest of his men to the defense of Asti, passing over the Poe by a
Bridge, which he quickly threw over between Crescentino and Verrua; and whilst
the Nuntio and the Ambassador entertained the Governor with diverse promises,
that they would bring the Duke to disarm, thereby making him lose much time;
the Duke minded the more the fortifying of the walls, and of other fitting
places, for the defense of that City. The Governors heat was somewhet cooled
by the Dukes coming to Asti, and much more by the French, which he knew fell
down into Piedmont; wherefore he ordered Iovan Bravo, who had already taken up
his Quarters at Quarto, a Village nere the City, to retreat back into Annone;
and the season growing then to be very sharp and cold, he was much confused,
and found no less difficulty in this Enterprise than in that of Vercelles: He
saw himself so far advanced as he could not with honor retreat; to winter his
Army about the City was very incommodious and dangerous; to return once more
b^ck to the State of Millain did too much repugne the protestations and threats
which he had given out; he could not therefore do it without much blame, and
loss of Honor, and without being subject to many severe reprehensions from the
Court; therefore calling a Counsel of War, he asked his Field-Officers advice
concerning the manner, and possibility of quartering that Winter in the Dukes
Country. Several were the opinions; many were against, many for quartering
there: the former alleged the bitterness of the season, the weakness, and far
distance between the places wherein they were to distribute their Army, the
Dukes being present there; who being in a great City, and capable of receiving
all his men, might sally out and suppress, one by one, all the places wherein
their men should be quartered, before, being so far from one another, they
could join time enough in the common defense. They therefore concluded, it was
better to amend the first resolution, of coming before Asti, then by
persevering in the error be subject to the danger and mischief which might
result thereupon. The others pleaded, and chiefly Morara, the chief promoter of
the enterprise, the conveniences of the Quarters by reason of the vicinity of
the State of Millain, and of Montferrat, from whence provisions might be
conveniently brought; and also the safety thereof, in the Towns of that Country
capable to quarter the whole Army, which being fortified by Trenches would be
able to withstand sudden assaults, till such time as succor might be brought
from the neighboring places. They mentioned many good effects which might
result therefrom; first, the preservation of the honor of the Kings Forces,
which otherwise would be totally lost; that the State of Millain would be that
Winter eased from the charge of quartering; and on the contrary, the enemies
Country troubled therewith: which would be thereby kept from assaulting the
Kings Towns, as they formerly had done, and publicly threatened to do again;
that it was probably to be hoped that time might afford occasions of making
themselves masters of the City that very Winter; if the Duke not being able,
(as he was not likely to be) to keep his men long together without moneys, they
should chance to mutiny, or any other unthought of accident should fall out.
And as for the bitterness of the season, they said it was not now to be taken
into consideration, the Army being already in the enemies Country; and since it
differed not much from that when they went from the Novarese.

In this ambiguity of opinions the Governor sent some Commanders to discover
the Country beyong the Tanaro; and then going with part of his men by a Bridge,
which he threw over at Roccad' Arazzo, he ordered Mortara to possess himself
with Bravo's Brigado of a Town called Zam, up the River overagainst the City,
which being easily taken, he went against 1000 men which he saw passing in
boats over the Tanaro. But they being quickly repassed, and joined with the
rest of the Dukes men, they began to skirmish with Muskets on both side the
banks, not without the prejudice and death of some of both the parties, amongst
which two Spanish Captains, who were shot with a Cannonbullet from the opposite
bank, where the Duke himself appeared in a red Coat, encouraging his
Soldiers, giving fire to the Artille^y with his own hands. The Commanders
being returned made their relations according to their several opinions.
Mortara said the Army might be commodiously quartered there; but Don Francisco
Padiglia, General of the Artillery, Don Sanchio Salina, and Barnabo Barbo,
Commissary-general, who were sent to the same purpose by the Governor, were of
a contrary opinion. And the Governor being sorry that he had come thither,
desired nothing more then a fair occasion to retreat, which he was offered by
the Nuntio, and French Ambassador by proposal of new Capitulations,
conformable enough to the Kings decree, and already accepted of, and subscribed
by the Duke: But the Governor persisting still that there was no way left to
execute the Kings decree, unless the Duke did first ask the King pardon for the
injury he had done after the decree, all were scandalized at so proud a
pretention; and the French Ambassador told him freely, that it was not an
action fit for a free Prince, to ask pardon; nor was it ever demanded from the
said Duke, when, not many years before, a pacification was made between him and
the King of France, though unprovoked, he had not only assaulted the Kings
Territories, but taken some of them; and that the Capitulation was conformable
to the King of Spains mind, and such as the Governor ought not to refuse. At
this very time the Ambassador Vives, being sent for by the Governor, was
returned to the Camp, who before he came from Genoa was present at a
consultation had between Sancta Croce, Don Piedro di Sieva, Captain of the
Sicilian Band, Don Carlo Doria, and the Camp-masters Don Diego Pimontello, and
Don Piedro Sarmiento; The result whereof was, that it was absolutely necessary
for maintaining the dignity of the Crown, and the authority of his Majesty's
Arms, to quarter that Winter in Piedmont; wherewith he acquainted the
Governor, who was already more inclined to depart, then to tarry; he persuaded
him likewise by many Reasons to tarry there, at least till such time as having
made some notable resentment, which might tend to the punishment of the Duke,
Peace might be concluded upon honorable terms. And because the Duke seemed to
be much perplexed, lest (as he professed) by the exclusion of Peace, some new
breach might ensue between the two Crowns, Vives endeavored to free him from
any such suspicion, showing him, that by new orders had from the Court, by
which, without listening to any treaty of peace, he was absolutely commanded to
keep the War on foot; the Governor had good occasion to excuse himself to the
Ambassadors, and to delay the accepting of the Capitulations which were
proposed, till new orders might come from the King; and that the mean while by
continuing the War orderly and boldly, some honorable action might be luckily
light upon, which might make way for the King to enter into a treaty of peace
with honor and reputation. And he added, that otherwise the Duke must needs
pass unpunished for the injuries done unto the King, if the Governor should
either immediately accept of the Articles of p^ace, or coming out of Piedmont
without doing any thing, might suffer those same Princes to apply themselves to
the King for accepting of the same Capitulations. For in such a case, the King
not being able to refuse them, because they contain the three points propounded
by his Majesty, he should be constrained to agree with the Duke, without taking
that revenge, or making that resentment, which he intended to do. Moreover, he
said it would be very dangerous that the Duke, seeing him and his Army
retreated, might again assault the State of Millain, and infest it with often
inroads.

These and many other Reasons urged, by Vives, could not work upon the
Governor, who was desirous every day more then other to return to Millain.
Wherefore the business being propounded in Counsel, after a long discussion,
two things were at last resolved upon; the one, not to accept the Capitulations
of peace; the other, that they would go out of Piedmont. For the first, they
alleged the precise orders from the King; for the second, the common custom,
of bringing their Camps to their Winter quarters in October, and in May into
the field. And because the Governor had told the Nuntio, and the Ambassador,
that it was necessary to send those Capitulations first into Spain, they
desired a Truce in the interim for forty days: which it was again disputed
whether or no it stood with the reputation of the retreat, to give way
thereunto. And it was concluded in the negative, because it was contrary to the
Kings orders; therefore the Governor sent the Capitulations into Spain, and
having tacitly afforded a longer Truce then they had expressly refused to do,
he returned with his Army into the State of Millain, after having staid only
six days in the Dukes Dominions. So this second entrance of the Spanish Army
into Piedmont, which was publicly protested to be made to chastise the Duke,
had no better success, nor won no greater reputation then did the first. Nay,
at the same time that the Governor stood consulting before Asti, Prince
Thomaso went by night out of Vercelles with a body of Foot and Horse, and on
the sudden assaulted Candia, a Town belonging to the King; and beating down the
Gate with a Petard, he put it to fire and sword: and having staid there all
night, he returned safe the next morning to Vercelles, receiving no offense
from the Garrisou of Sandoval, which was not far from thence. An action, which
though the Duke protested to proceed without any order from him, and before his
son had notice of the Capitulation subscribed by him, yet it was commonly
thought that to revenge himself for this second assault, and to free his State
once more by diversion, he had commanded his son to do it. The Governor being
returned, he made the Duke be by public Proclamation declared to have
forfeited the Dom nion of the City and Country of Asti, and of the like of
Santia, by his hostile acts committed against the State of Millain; pretending
that those Towns held in Fee of the said State, and the Bills thereof were
published at the beat of Drum, and fastened in some parts of that Country
confining upon the State of Millain. Against which Proclamation the Duke made
another Edict be published, wherein denying absolutely that he held those Towns
in Fee from the Chamber of Millain, and that therefore they could not be
proceeded against by way of confiseation, he contradicted the Proclamation,
terming it foolish and ridiculous, and commanded his Subjects to keep their
wonted loyalty and obedience to him. He afterward possessed himself of some
other Imperial Fee-towns in the Langhe; and amongst those some that held of the
Chamber of Millain; the Governor not taking any notice the^eof, unless it were
that fearing the Duke might draw nearer the sea, he sent Don Lewis di Cordia,
Don Piedro Sarmiento, Don Ieronymo Pimontello and Thomaso Caracciolo to quarter
in those parts with their Brigadoes; and some Companies of Iovan Piedro
Zerbelloves Brigade; and afterward being advised thereunto by Sancta Croce,
and Don Carlo Poria, who were come into Allessandria, he orde^ed Don Piedro
Sarmiento, to (...) himself of Montbaldne, Dente, Roccaverano, and Cortemiglia;
by which places the Spaniards became masters of all that Country, which lying
between the River of Genoa, and the lower Montferrat, is called Le Langhe.
Montbaldone and Dente came in immediately to Sarmieneo, who going with his
Artillery to Roccaverano, it is not known for what cause; and therefore not
without wonder to all men, he had new orders to supersede; wherefore retiring
back, the Duke sent 100 Foot to re enforce the Garrison of Cortemiglia, he
afterward took Bozalasco, Gorzegno, Manoxino, and other Towns thereabouts;
this was the success of the Wars of Piedmont, in the year 1614: at the end
whereof the Governor went to Millain, to take order for greater provisions for
War the next year; and two Millions of Ducates being come to the Haven of
Genoa, part whereof was for the Army in Flanders, part for that in Lombardy,
the Gabels upon Merchandise, and other things, was increased to above a third
part in Millain; The sum whereof being turned into annual revenue, and a good
part thereof sold to particular persons, brought great store of moneys into the
Exchequer, which were afterward assigned for the War, which was noised would
be great the next year.

Levies of men were ordered to be made in Germany, Swisserland, in the Kingdom
of Naples, and in Lombardy; and not herewith all content, the King desired the
Genoeses, the great Duke of Tuscany, the Duke of Urbin, Duke of Parma, and the
Commonwealth of Lucca, to send such men to the State of Millain, as either for
their own concernments, or by the condition of obligation they were bound to
do; and he did this not so much out of necessity, as for the honor of the
undertaking, and to show how much the Princes of Italy did adhere to the Kings
party, yea even against an Italian Prince. The Princes of Italy were not well
pleased to see him proceed with such a bulk of War against the Duke; for though
the defense and protection of Montferrat, and the preservation of public
peace, had at first rendered the title and cause of the Spanish Forces less
odious; yet since the end was now altered, and that revenge was endeavored,
which made them apprehend worser things, they began in respect of the common
interest, to abhor the proceeding; and yet Urbin, Parma, and Lucca, preferring
the Kings Authority before any other respect, yielded easily to the Kings
request. The great Duke made some difficulty, alleging that being obliged to
send 4000 Foot and 400 Horse, for the State of Sienna, which he held in Fee
from the Crown of Spain, to defend the State of Millain; he was not now bound
to do it, when as the State making an offensive and not a defensive War, his
obligation and tenure thereof was enlarged, the example being of great
consequence, and of greater prejudice: but reply being made, that that which
assaulteth must of necessity also be defended, his excuse was not accepted of;
chiefly since (as it was said) he who held so great a State in Fee from the
King ought not to stand so precisely upon the words of his obligation. It was
therefore agreed, that 2000 Foot should effectually be sent, which should serve
to defend the State, and not to offend the Duke, and some supplies of money
were sent; the Genueses case was otherwise, who not being requi^ed to
administer relief out of any obligation, but only by way of fiendship and
correspondency, and for the great Interest which they had in the Crown of
Spain, excused themselves upon the necessity they had to guard their Confines
toward Piedmont, and to keep the Sea and River open for the passage of the
people which came to the State of Millain; which Reasons gave satisfaction.

The Duke was not this mean while idle; for being much encouraged by the past
successes, and having, after he saw the Governor once more gone out of
Piedmont, quartered his men in several parts of the State, he was wholly bent
upon desending himself, and not upon agreement. He solicited the promised
assistance of the Transalpine Princes, and guessing at what was to come, by
what was past, he grew so confident, that as he was wont to say, his own person
was sufficient for half the Spanish preparations: Yet the fear of the future
war grew daily greater, and was confirmed by the knowledge, that though the
King had declared it did not become a free Prince to ask pardon of another
Prince upon the making of peace; and that therefore he never expected any such
thing from the Duke; yet with an intention of resenting what the Duke had done
in his Dominions, he had openly refused to accept of the last Capitulation
subscribed by the Duke: But this fear was much more increased by the retaining
a Post, who coming from Spain was taken Prisoner as he past in a little Barque
from Antibo to Finale, and was sent to Turin with the Kings and Councels
Letters? the which being opened and Printed, the Duke caused to be divulged
throughout Italy, together with other Writings, wherein he justified his own
actions, tending (as he said) only to the defense of his own State, which is so
natural for all men to do, and to the preservation of peace: To obtain the
which, he added, he had not refused any submission which became a free Prince:
And because the Kings Lettess, and those of his Counsel, contained bitter
complaints of what had happened, and sharp reprehensions of the Governors
actions; and breathing forth nothing but fire and threats, charged him with
having troubled him with grievous war: The Duke, taking his rise from their
apprehensions, filled the Papers with grievous Revilings of the Spanish Nation,
blaming the Spaniards without any respect, That under the fair pretense of
peace, they aimed only at the usurpation of his State; and that therefore the
King, refusing the just Capitulations subscribed by him the Duke, did incite
all the Princes of Italy against him, drawing forth all the usual Garrisons of
the Kingdom of Naples and Scicily, pardoning the most heinous offenders, as if
he did proceed with all his Forces and Authority, against an enemy to
Christendom: Nor did the following actions delay the confirmation of the fear
of the future war; for hardly was the tacit Truce occasioned by the sharpness
of the season, ceased, when Arms were taken up with greater fervor about the
end of March, 1615.

Cordona's Spaniards, who were quartered in the Langhe, were the first that
moved; who through intelligence held with those of Roccavrano, who were weary
of the French Garrison, entered the Town by night through a hole made in the
walls, and slew some of the French, the rest whereof retired into the Castle,
and made themselves Masters of the Town, and the next day of the Castle, which
could not he relieved, the Passes and Avenues thereunto being anticipately
possessed: The Duke being awakened, as one out of a deep sleep, by the loss of
Roccavrano, who had been quiet enough in Turin, began to doubt Cortemiglia,
whither he presently sent some Regiments of Piedmontesans, and 800 Switzers;
and coming from thence to Cherasco, he furnished all his men in those parts
with Ammunition and Artillery: But the Spaniards perceiving by Letters which
were intercepted that Count Guido went to the recovery of Roccavrano, and that
to that end the Count was come with some men to Castine; Mortara, Governor of
Alessandria, being sent to for succor by Cordova, who was anxious of the
mustering of men made by the Duke not far from his own and his companions
quarters, sent him 1000 Foot, advising him to assemble together all the
Soldiers which were quartered in those parts, lest being assunder they might
be the more easily oppressed by the Duke: And giving notice of every the least
particular to the Governor, and having after much pressing obtained means,
money, and munition from him, whereby to come into the field, he went from
Alessandria with 600 Soldiers, five Troops of Horse, and two fieldpieces; and
having given order to Ieronymo Pimontello, and to Ieronymo Gamboloita, to go
with a thousand Soldiers which yet remained with them from Tortona to Castine,
he himself directed his course also thitherward: Here he thought to muster a
body of 5000 Foot, and 600 Horse, all commanded men, and most of them
Spaniards; and confided so much in their valor, as persuading that the Dukes
men would not be able to make head against him, he promised himself secure
victory at the first encounter: Bistagno, a Town of above a hundred and more
Families, belonging to Montferrat, lies between Cassine and Cortemiglia; and
being upon the rode-way which comes from the Sea, it is of no small moment for
the safety of the usual passage of people, who coming from the Ligustick Sea,
pass into the State of Millain: Hither came Mortara, lest the place might be
prepossessed by the Duke; and with him came Pimontello and Gamboloita, with the
men of Tortora; and not long after Cordova, who had left his Brigade in Spain;
and by order from the Governor, Don Sanchio Salina likewise, and Caracciolo,
to assist and advise Mortara; whose too great fervor made the Governor
apprehend some inconvenience. Gamboloita was sent with his men, and some few
Horse, to defend Monastero, a place two miles beyond Bistagno, for the
safeguard of Cordova's men, who were to come from Spigno to Bistagno; but the
Duke thought he had assuredly caught Mortara, and the other Captains, in a
noose, when he saw them come thither with so few men: Wherefore placing the
hope of so happy success in speed, he came out of Cherasco, and throwing a
Bridge suddenly over the Tenaro, he past over to Neviglie, and came that way to
Castino, and so to Cortemiglia; where leaving the Switzers, and a great
Garrison under the Commendatore della Motta, he parted on the 16th of April,
being holy Thursday, toward Bistagno, with 1200 Horse, and about 7000 Foot;
and thinking to get thither early in the morning, and to have taken the enemy
at unawares, he marched apace all that night; but being held play by the
Garrison of Vezema, as he past over the Bridge at Bormia, which is near the
Castle; and having lost some time the n^xt morning in sacking and burning
Cassinasco, a little Village which h^d the boldness to resist him, he marred his
design; for Mortara, having notice of the Kings coming, whilst he was at
Dinner, sent Cordova presently away toward his Brigade, he sent to his men who
were quartered in the neighboring parts, to come to Bistagno, and getting
immediately on horseback with Salina and Caracciolo, and followed with a Troop
of Horse with Musketeers en Crupe, he went toward the Hill which leads to
Cassinisco, to encounter the enemy; but having advanced courageously, and
placed some of his Musketeers to defend the Passes, he returned back
immediately to take order for the defense of Bistagno; where his men stood in
battle array, ready to receive the enemy; but being astonished at the great
number of men which they saw come down the Hill with the Duke, they suddenly
retired to within the walls of the Town; and having flanked the Gate with
earth, they put themselves orderly in a defensive posture; and Skirmished all
that day and the next night, seeking to keep the enemy aloof off, lest coming
near they might throw down the wall with Spades and Pick axes: The mean time
Salino, Pimontello, Caracciolo, and chiefly Mortara's self, though he was then
troubled with the Gout, sometimes on horseback, sometimes carried in a Chair,
went comforting, (providing for what was needful) and encouraging the
Soldiers; in whose assistance the Towns-folk, yea, even the women, labored
with much affection and zeal, though the Duke had sent Letters before his
arrival to the Consuls and Officers of that Communalty; wherein he professed
his only aim was to secure his own State, and to drive the Spaniards from
thence, promising safety both of life and lively-hoods; but failing in his
hopes of taking Bistagno by surprisal, he be took himself to force, and because
he wanted great Guns, which were left behind by reason of the speed of their
march, he began to block up the Avenues, so to hinder relief. He first repulsed
Gamboloita, who marching with his men from Monastero would have gotten into
Bistagno; and not long after the same Gamboloita joining with those who came
with Cordua from Spigno to relieve Mortara, they were both of them set upon by
the Dukes men, led on by Cavalier Boglia, and Monsieur di Polimia, as they
descended the Mountain beyond Bormia; and after a Skirmish of three hours, they
were forced to retreat toward the top of the Mountain, and to desist from the
enterprise, having won more praise for their daring, then for Military
discipline, and left about 200 fighting men behind them.

The news of the danger Bistagno was in being divulged round about, and
afterward throughout all Italy, turned the eyes and minds of all men upon the
Duke; not only for the danger those Commanders, who were the chiefest of all
the Spanish Army, were in of being made prisoners, and the destruction of the
men that were there, but because upon the taking of that little Town the
scattering of all those other men who were quartered in the Langhe, did depend;
who being Ve^eran Soldiers, and most of them Spaniards, were thought to be the
sinews of that Militia, and the foundation of the Empire of that Nation in
Italy: Moreover the Duke by his taking of Bistagne, would have been master of
all the Langhe, and would not only have been a great hinderance to the succors
which were expected from beyond Sea; but by assaulting Finale, or the River of
Genoa, he would have freed his own State for that year from the war wherewith
it was threatened, and would have forced the Governor to have made either his
own Country, or that of the friends and Confederates of the Crown, the Seat of
war: He was therefore admired and exalted, even to the Stars, for his Courage,
Counsel, and Conduct; for that when he seemed to be placed in an abyss of
ruin, having such great forces ordained against him, and being so sorely
threatened, he rose up more courageously, and with greater vigor; and had
reduced the affairs of so potent an enemy into so difficult and dangerous a
condition, and particularly those of Mortara; who presuming more then any other
Spanish Commander whatsoever, has several times vaunted, and particularly in a
Letter which he writ at his parting from Alessandria to Don Carlo Doria, at
Genoa; that he was gone to take the Duke Prisoner: But fortune, which does
usually disturb well-weighed designs, looked not with a favorable aspect upon
this the Dukes enterprise; for the greater Guns tarrying behind by reason of
the Dukes speedy march toward Bistagno, and his being hindered by the
cragginess of the ways, and the deepness thereof, he lost his design; so as not
being able to do any thing of moment with only two small pieces, especially by
reason of the sacks full of earth and straw which the Defendants hung out upon
ropes, Mortara had leisure to hold him play till succor came; which the Duke
fearing, and yet being resolved to do his utmost, he came to the wall with
Spade and Pick-Ax, to throw it down; and attempted in the dark of night to make
a furious assault; he at the same time made the Pyoneers approach, and put for
the ultimate trial of his and the enemies fortune; but the Defendants being
encouraged, by seeing how little effect the Dukes Artillery did, resisted
stoutly here also; For having notice of the Dukes intention, they were very
vigilant in making defense; and did so clear the darkness with Faggots and
Grenades, which they threw into the Ditch, as they might see to hit those that
approached the walls; and so rendered this the Dukes endeavor vain, as they
had done the rest.

This mean while the Governor of Millain hearing at Pavia what danger Mortara
was in, though there was no good intelligence held between them, because
Mortara was wont to detract from his actions, and as if he understood the
mystery of the Militia better then the Governor, pretended to teach him how to
fight; and because his much importunity had made the Governor give way to this
his going out; yet howsoever, preferring the public good, and the Kings
Service, before any private enmity, he resolved speedily to relieve him and the
other Commanders who were in the like danger: He therefore marched with between
four and five thousand Foot, and some Troops of Horse which he had near at
hand; and having sent strict Orders to all Cap^ains and Camp-masters to follow
him with their men, he marched with incredible speed toward Bistagno; and
being come within three miles of it on the second day in Easter-week, he lay
all that night in Terzo: The Duke the next morning after, which was the fourth
day after his arrival, hearing of the coming of so strong a succor, began to
dis-lodge, and leaving 2500 Foot, and the Horse on the Plain, he sent the rest
of his men with the Artillery toward the Hill. The Horse and Foot which were
left on the plain followed afterward by the same way; leaving much Ammunition
in their Quarters, Arms and many sick Soldiers, who were unfit to march,
besides 1000 which were slain in the assaults and actions. He departed
unmolested, for Mortara being more afraid then was needful would not suffer his
men to go out; and the Governor did not follow him; but coming into Bistagno
almost at the same instant that the Duke removed away, and having heard Mass,
advised with his Counsel what was to be done upon the present occasion: some of
the Captains alleged the disturbance by rain, the narrowness of the ways, and
the difficult passes, which were fit for Ambuscadoes; and wherein they not
being able to make use of all their men, the enemy might with a few men resist
a much greater number; others alleged the weariness of their own Soldiers,
and some hours being past before the Consultation; wherefore they thought the
Enemy was so far advanced, as it was impossible to overtake them, it was
resolved, the Governor himself being of the same opinion, that they should not
follow the flying Enemy; a resolution whereby the glory due unto him for so
speedy and seasonable a succor; whereupon the welfare of so many well
deserving Commanders did depend, was turned to as much shame and dishonor; for
he was not only much blamed for letting slip so rare an occasion of victory,
but was worse spoke of, the manner and circumstances of the present action
being considered: some spoke against the way he took by Acqui, being the
further about, and worse then that of Nice; which was both the n^erer, and
would also have been a hindrance to the Duke in his retreat; others added, that
to make the Dukes retreat the more easy, he had forbidden Don Alphonso d'
Avalos to advance, who was Governor of Montferrat: and who marching from
Cassalle with 3000 Montferrian Foot and 300 Horse, had sent some of his men to
the Castle Palafea, which being a place upon the way was very opportune to have
detained the Duke, and hindered his retreat; so as when the Spaniards should
have been come upon him, and he consequently taken in the midst, he must of
necessity have been defeated; Others argued some secret Intelligence held
between them, by the Governors lying all night in Terzo, so near the Enemy,
when the besieged were in so great danger; Nor were there those wanting, who
said they had seen Messengers pass and repass between the two Camps, and
thereby, as also by other counter-signs argued that the Dukes retreat was
secured to him. Howsoever, it is most certain the Duke must have received a
great blow, had he been quickly pursued, without so much counsel, and such
affected delays; for his men were in very bad condition, by reason of their
sufferings, and the hunger they had undergone before Bistagno; and fearing to
be assaulted, threw away their Arms, and fled in disorder; and on the contrary,
the Duke had that very morning within three miles space, 14000 Foot, and 1500
Horse (those of the Langhe being comprehended) men, who in respect of the
Enemy, were fresh, and who had rested most part of that night; For Cordova,
Gamboloita, and other Commanders appeared immediately from the Langhe, with all
the people of those parts; as also Iovan Bravo, Carlo Spinelli, and Iovan
Pietro Serbelloni, appeared that very morning from the State of Millain, with
their Brigades, to boot with those of the Country. Bistagno being freed, the
Governor without looking further after the Duke, who was gotten but
ill-favour'dly with his men into Canelli, tarried diverse days in Allessandria,
waiting for Men, Ammunition, and Artillery, which he had sent for from several
parts of the State of Millain, for the enterprise of Asti, which he gave out he
would take in hand.

The Duke, when he had brought his men into Canelli, sent them by degrees into
Asti, whether he also sent victuals and Ammunition, for the defense of that
City, against which he saw the Governor bent all his Forces; who parting from
Allessandria about the fifth of May, tarried six days in Felizzano; and going
from thence to Annone, the last Town upon the Confines of Millain, he went with
his Army toward Asti: He had with him between 16 and 18000 Italian Foot, 4000
Spaniards, about 2000 Horse, the Gens d' Arms being therein comprehended; to
boot with 6000 other Foot, and 500 Horse, which he had left under Cavagliero
Melzi in Sandoval, not so much to guard that Fort, as to keep Vercelles in
jealousy; so as the Duke being forced to keep it well Garrisoned, was the less
able to defend Asti: He had also 7000 other Foot, which he shortly expected
from Tuscanye, Urbine, and Lucca, by Sea; and those of Parma were already come
unto the Camp. At his going from Annone toward Asti he divided his Foot into
four equal Squadrons, which being led on by four Troops of Dragoons, the
Cavalry divided into two Squadrons winged the left side toward the Tannaro,
the more inward whereof was led on by Don Alfonso Pimontello, General thereof;
and the outward by his Lieutenant Don Sanchio Salina; after these came the Gens
d' Arms, conducted by their General the Marquess of Este; the Baggage came
after the Squadrons, and the Artillery, part whereof was also placed on the
left hand of the Squadrons.

The City of Asti stands in a plain, at the foot of some hills, upon the top
whereof stands the Castle, joined to the City, of an ancient shape, as are also
the rest of the Walls of the City, which therefore have not those Flanks nor
Rampires which are used in modern Fortifications. On the South side the Tannaro
runs, two Musket shot distant from the walls; the little hills which run in a
large compass toward the North, bending from thence toward the East,
terminate in Annone, from whence, like a half Amphitheaer, they encompass all
that plain, between the Rivolea Versa, and the hills of Tannato, for some four
miles space, and somewhat further, between Annone and Asti.

But the Duke not at all affrighted at the approach of so great an Army, would,
though weaker in Forces, face them; and hating to keep enclosed within walls
would march into the field against them. He had with him about some 15000 Foot,
and 1500 Horse, most of them Foreigners, and chiefly French, who were come
thither, notwithstanding their Kings severe Edicts to the contrary; for the
Princes of that Kingdom being desirous of new perturbations and ruptures
between the two Kings, and it may be, that their King might be the Arbitrator
of Peace and War in Italy, sent many men thither, thinking, that look how many
more of their Nation should be in the Dukes service, both Peace and War should
the more depend upon their Kings Being come near Versa, and having taken up his
Quarters upon the inward bank of the River, where was no commodious foording,
save in two places, he sent Monsieur de Roason, with 200 Lorrain Horse, beyond
the River, that he might get into some houses belonging to an Inn called Corce
Bianca; the first bickering fell out here, between these men, and Alphonso
Balesteros, Comissary General of the Kings Horse, who was sent before with 400
Dragoons to discover the enemy: This Skirmish, by the concourse of people on
both sides, grew almost to a Battle; the Duke having sent his Van to relieve
his men, and the Governor some Troops of Curassiers, with the Burgonian
Forces, led on by the Baton Batteville, who was also followed by Alfonso
Pimontello, with his Horse Troop; so as the fray increasing, both sides fought
valiantly; in which fight it happened, that the Lorrainers who were on the Dukes
side, being clothed and weaponed like to the Kings Burgonians, did so mingle
with the Burgonians, as passing unknown through the midst of them, they advanced
even to within sight of the Spanish Camp. The Governor advancing toward them
bare headed, thinking they were his men who fled, began, much to his danger, to
reprehend them, and to bid them return and fight valiantly; but they for fear
of death in case they should be known, seeming as if they would return to the
Skirmish, retreated dexterously to their own men, leaving their Captain
Prisoner, together with Cavalier San Rainero, and some others. There died in
this Skirmish an Ensign-Bearer of the Dukes, with some others of both sides;
Balesteros was sorely wounded, and Baron Batteville slightly, who, together
with his Burgonians, behaved themselves gallantly both here, and during this
whole Campagnia, and were of great aid to the Enterprise: Don Alfonso
Pimentello's Horse fell over and over with him, not without great danger of
death.

The Skirmish being over, (for the Dukes men retreated to beyond the River,)
the Governor advanced even to Versa, and took up his Quarters there in the
face of the Dukes Army; but he sent Iovan Bravo, with his Brigade, and some
pieces of Artillery, to Quarter upon the little Hills, for his own more safety,
and for the prejudice of the Enemy: But the Duke having munited all the bank of
Versa on his side with a long Trench, which reached from the little Hills to
the Tannaro, sent also 2000 Foot to possess themselves of the Hill which was
opposite to that where Bravo was Quartered; and being mightily well sheltered
on all sides, and fortified, nor being to be assaulted there without apparent
danger to the Assailants, they began to skirmish from the Hills, and from the
opposite Trenches, with Muskets and Bumbards; but more out of force and fury
than out of any well taken advice, or any great effect. This Skirmish continued
two or three days without any advantage on either side; so as the Spaniards
thinking it a shame that the Duke with so unequal Forces durst confront them,
and keep himself equal to their Army so long, they resolved to advance by the
Hillocks, intending to fight him both on the back and flanks, in his own
Quarters, and to beat up his Quarters: The Enterprise was committed to the
Prince of Ascoli, who whilst he foreslowed the execution thereof, meeting with
some impediments, he afforded the Duke, (who had notice of all proceedings)
leisure to possess himself of other stations, fitter to hinder, or at least to
make the Enemies progress more difficult in that part: And because it was
necessary for the Prince to go by way of anticipation to the oppugning of
Castiglione, a little Castle, situated upon a little Hill, which being of some
consequence was furnished with a reasonable Garrison, the Duke, for the better
security thereof, chose out about a thousand of his best Musketeers, and sent
them under the command of Captain Odone Rovero of Asti, and Monsieur d' Arlo, a
French man, men of great courage and experience, to possess themselves of, and
to fortify a certain Hill which stood between the Castle and Bravo's Quarters;
but the Prince going with 4000 Foot, two Troops of Light Horse, and some
Artillery, to take in the Hill, after a long dispute, wherein Arlo, Rovero, and
many of the Dukes chiefest Soldiers were slain, got it at last by stout
fighting, for all that the Duke sent a great relief unto them by Count Guido;
from whence turning immediately to the expugning of Castiglione, whether the
Soldiers who escaped from the defense of the Hill fled, he likewise easily
took it; for the Governor, to the end that he by division might the more
easily obtain the Hill, having at the same time sent Don Alonso Pimontello to
fall upon the Trenches toward the Tannaro, which were defended by Prince
Thomaso; the Duke, thinking that he had sufficiently provided for the defense
of the Hillocks, by those that he had sent thither under Rovero and Arlo, went
with the body of his Army to assist his Son; so as not being able time enough
to relieve Castiglione, the Garrison of that Castle astonished at Prince
Ascoli's great valor, and through the fearful relations' which were made by
the Soldiers who were fled thither, basely surrendered it, when the battery was
scarcely begun: 500 Soldiers marched out, who were graciously sent by the
Prince to the Duke, not without the murmurs of the Spanish Army, who by this
acquisition remained absolute Masters of the Colline.

The Duke not being able to keep any longer upon the banks of the River, those
stations being lost, quitted his Quarters, and retired quietly, unmolested, to
the City; for the Governor, keeping the Army back, contrary to the opinion of
many of the Captains, expressly forbad Pimentello to advance, who already moved
with the Cavalry to fall upon his Rere, being satisfied with taking the Hills,
and with having made the Duke forsake his Trenches, he past with his Army
beyond Versa, where he tarryed three days to fortify la Croce Bianca, and some
other places thereabouts. This mean while those of Tuscany, Urbane, and Lucca
came to the Camp, and the Tuscans were sent to Sandoval, that, according to
agreement with the great Duke, they might be employed only in defense of the
State of Millain, and the rest tarryed in the Camp. With the addition of these,
and of other Soldiers who came to the Camp, the Army was increased to the
number of 30000 Foot, and 3200 Horse, 400 whereof were sent to St. Damiano, a
Town in Montferrat, which stands on the back of Asti, to keep back the victuals
and munition which came from Piedmont. The Captains of the Army consulted how
they should assault the Duke, and expugne the City; and it was resolved to
attempt it by the Hills near unto it, as from a higher and more convenient
place, whereby they promised themselves the shorter and more easy success; for
that, contrary to the opinion of all men, they were neither garrisoned by the
Duke, nor fortified by Trenches, though the slow Proceedings of the Enemies
Army had afforded him sufficient convenience to do it, and the present occasion
did necessarily require it: Therefore the Governor, leaving Zerbellone with
his Brigade to guard the Fortifications made about Versa, marched with his Army
in three distinct battaglions toward the Hills; Don Piedro Sarmiento led on
the first, which was the Van, composed of four brigades of Foot, two Spanish,
two Neapolitans; whereof the one was that commanded by Sarmiento, the other by
Don Ieronimo Pimontello; the one under Thomaso Carecciolo, and the other under
Carlo Spinelli: After this went the second battaglion, led on by Giovan Bravo,
wherein was his own Brigade, and the other two of Cordova and Gambaloita, with
some Troops of Horse, according as the situation would permit: Between the
one, and the other of these were some Artillery brought, and some carriages of
Ammunition; in the reere the two Brigades of Ieronimo Rho, and of Cavalier
Peccio followed, with those of Urbane, Parma, and Lucca; the first commanded by
Count Horatio Carpegna, the second by Don Francesco Farnese, and the last by
Francisco Cenami: The Horse sheltered, as formerly, the left wing of the Foot;
the baggage came last, and a numerous Train of Artillery, with the wonted
Guard. In this order did the Army march early in the morning in a thick mist
which would neither suffer them to discern the Hills, nor the Sentinels which
were placed there to discover them. The Duke having notice at last by his
Scouts of the Enemies March, and finding that they went toward the Hills, he,
though too late, was aware of the importancy of that station; wherefore issuing
immediately with all his men out of the City, he went to pre-possess himself
thereof; which by reason of their nearness having easily done, since he had not
more s^asonably fortified them, he endeavored at least to arm them, and
furnish them so with Soldiers, as the Enemy should not be Masters of them
without much prejudice and effusion of blood. He therefore, having a mind to
give battle, placed six or seven thousand French on the least Hill, and on that
which was farthest off; and talking to them on foot, he encouraged them to
fight, proposing unto them the advantage of the situation, the valor of their
Nation, their hatred to the Spaniards, the glory and great rewards of Victory;
and they being come for the most part, rather to pillage then to fight, it is
said, that pointing with his hand unto the Enemies Troops, he should say to
them, give you me those Ranks disordered, and I will give you the State of
Millain, and all Italy in prey to your valor and worth: For all the Arms, all
the Forces that the Spaniards can put together, being assembled in this Camp,
with what other people, with what other Armies can they oppose you? with what
Arms, with what Commanders can they bereave you of the reward and fruit of
Victory? Then seeming as if he were called away elsewhere, he excused himself
for not tarrying longer with them: But seeming as if he did totally confide in
their worth, he told them that his presence was more requisite elsewhere; then
going from them, he disposed 5000 Swissers on the Hill called Certosa, where he
also placed five pieces of Artillery, with which scouring the Plain, he also
light upon the Enemies Squadrons, and made way for the Horse, partly on the
side of the Foot, partly in the Valley between the two Hills. The Governor was
advanced, verily believing that the Duke would not stir out of the City; and
seeing him, beyond all expectation, encamped upon the Hills, and prepared for
fight, he gave order for giving battle, being thereunto much egged on by the
entreaties of his men, and by the fervency of the whole Camp, who desired
nothing else. This order being published, Sarmiento's battaglion, which was the
Van, marched toward the Hills, and through the Soldiers fervor; a little
more speedily then they ought to have done: And as he passed along having
discovered some French quartered underneath the skirts of the Hills, some
Neapolitanes were sent to drive them from thence. Here the fight begun; for
Onofrio Muti, a Roman Gentleman and Commiss^ry General of the Dukes Horse, came
in to the relief of the French with a great Squadron of Horse, which, as if
they had abandoned the Dukes party, past over to amongst the Enemy, crying Viva
la Spagna, Viva la Spagna; whereby they did so deceive the Neapolitanes, as
coming close up to them, without receiving any harm, and being by them friendly
received, they immediately drew forth their Swords, and wounded some, slew
other some, till such time as being relieved by Gambaloita, who seeing what was
done from the second Squadron, advanced with his men, and forced the Enemies
Horse to retreat: And at the same time the Neapolitanes, and the rest of the
first Squadron, clambe up by those straight paths against the thund^r of Cannon
and hail of Musket Shot, and fighting as they came up the Hill, they at last
got to the Plain, where being backed by two pieces of Artillery, which were
conveniently placed, they pressed so home upon the French, as beginning first
to wave, and afterward shamefully to turn their backs, they fled into Asti:
The Duke, though in vain, sent Monsieur Limogione Lieutenant to Prince Thomaso
to assist them, that he might set upon and oppose the Enemy with his Horse; and
he himself turning to the Swissers on the other Hill, on whom all his hopes
lay, began to encourage them to make that station good; showing them, That the
first Hill was lost, not through the valor or number of the Enemy, but by the
cowardice of the French; that they might make amends for the shame, and repair
the loss: Wherefore they had an excellent occasion to show how much the
Swissers did exceed the French in valor, and to boast that it was the Swissers
that had preserved his reputation and the state of the House of Savoy: He
therefore wished them to make head, and face the Enemy, not only by keeping
them from that station, but by beating them also from the other which the
French had so basely abandoned: That he himself would hazard his life amongst
them, to whose valor and worth he had trusted his honor, State, and
reputation; that he was therefore ready to keep with them, and run the same
fortune, and fighting valiantly with a pike in his hand, either dye there, or
bear away a plenary and glorious victory from the Enemy: That therefore they
should fight as valiantly for the defense of that station, as they would do for
the very walls of Turin; and let the world know that the Swissers had not lost
the ancient gallantry of their Forefathers, whereby they had won so many, and
so famous Victories, with so much glory, wherein he did not in vain confide,
nor yet so many other Princes, preferring the Swissers worth, in the defense of
things of greatest importance, before that of all other Nations.

But all these words were spoke in vain; for Giovan Bravo, who followed
Sarmiento, having this mean while wheeled about with the second Squadron on the
side of the first Hill, and got upon the second, and together with him
Gamboloita, and Don Alphonso Pimontello, Limogione could do not only not do any
thing of moment; but the Swissers seeing themselves set on, on so many sides,
turned their backs more basely then the French had done, without or fighting,
or showing their face to the adversary; and though the Duke and Prince Thomas^
endeavored to make head with some Squadrons of Horse, and to detain the
Swissers; which not being able to do, they themselves withstood the coming on
of the Enemy, as much as might be; yet his men running faster and faster away,
and the Enemy coming faster and faster on, they were forced to yield, and to
leave five piece of Cannon in the Enemies hands; two of which being thrown into
a ditch toward the City, were by night recovered by the same Swissers.

This was that which happened on the Hills of Asti, on the 21th of May, wherein
though Sarmiento's Squadron fought more then any of the others, and
particularly Spinello's and Caracciolo's Neapolitans, to whom therefore the
praise of the Victory was little less then wholly due; yet because their too
great fervor and fury wherewith they charged the Enemy was a hindrance to
their companions, and to the Kings other Squadrons, who proceeded in a more
orderly, and Mili^ary manner, so as they could not come time enough to the
fight; therefore these coming up after the French were routed, their action was
not so advantageous as it would have been, if they had made a joint assault;
for then doub^lesly the Dukes men would have been totally beaten. The number of
the slain (as is usual) is diversely related; yet was it less then was to have
been expected from such a conflict; and no wonder, since they minded flying
more then fighting. The Neapolitans received some loss, being deceived by the
Dukes Horse, who were they only that may be said to have laid about them, and
to have made some resistance, whereas the Kings Horse did little or nothing;
nor were there many taken prisoners; of the Spaniards the only man of account
that was taken, was Don Francesca di Silva, brother to the Duke of Pastran^,
who going out a picchering alone, out of his ranks, and entering with too much
youthful spirit amongst the Enemy, was wounded, and died not many days after a
prisoner in Turin. Those of quality who fell on the Dukes side, were Monsieur
di Crepagna, Sergeant Major General, and six other Captains; on the Kings side,
six Captains and some other Underofficers: Great was the reputation which the
Kings Forces won by these successes, who were brought very low by the former;
and very much the suppression of the Dukes party, whose affairs were hereby
thought to be reduced to so low an ebb, as the news of the loss of the Battle
b^ing brought to Turin, and the Dukes writings, and things of greatest
consequence being sent thither, men betook themselves to such courses, as in
times of greatest extremity is usual; they carried the Jewels and best of the
Courthoushold-stuff into the Castle; and as if the Enemy had been before the
Walls, the people fell to fortify them, to furnish them with Sentinels, and
Corpse de guarde; and the women clothed in sackcloth, went bare foot in
procession to the Churches, and sacred places of the City; and yet little was
the advantage that was got by the Victory: For contrary to the common custom of
War, the Kings affairs did from thence begin to decline in power, and
reputation; and on the contrary, those of the Duke grew daily better and more
glorious; for the conquering Army, which ought to have run with fervor to the
ruin of the City, which was full of men affrighted, and confused through
excessive fear, and which was not likely to have held out long before so
victorious an Army, as was generally confessed by all men, did not only forbe^r
doing so, but kept idle upon the Hills that they had won, and as if they had
been infatuated with stupidity, busying themselves only in making Trenches, and
in fortifying their Quarters, to defend themselves from the Enemy which they
had beaten; who after some days were passed began the Battery, but so cold, so
leasurely, so uncertain a one, that the Bullets of the Artillery either did not
hit at all, or with very little damage, though the Walls which they played upon,
were exceeding weak with age.

Wherefore the Duke, who was also entered the Town in fear and astonishment, and
saw things in so desperate a condition, by reason of his own Soldiers
confusion, prepared rather to abandon, then to defend it, taking courage at the
so slow proceeding of the Enemy, began to hope he might be able to defend it;
the which that he might do with the more honor and show of valor, he lodged
his men between the Walls and the Trenches, over against those of the Enemy;
and he did not only play upon the Enemies Camp from the Castle, and from the
Bulwarks, and Platforms built without in convenient places; but sallying often
out of the Trenches with store of Musketeers, even to the Enemies Banks and
Works, he molested them continually both by day and night; and particularly on
that part, where, as being most exposed to assaults, Giovan Bravo, and Lodovico
Gamboloita stood to make defense, who consequently underwent the burden of all
that enterprise. The City was plentiful in Victuals and Ammunition, which were
daily brought to the Duke, notwithstanding the 400 Horse which were sent to St.
Damiano; and the neerness of the same City afforded him convenience not only to
quarter his men commodiously, and under covert, but also to refresh them; for
dividing his Soldiers between the Guards of the Walls and the Trenches, and
some succeeding other some in labor, and in rest, they recreated themselves,
and getting more strength by their rest and recreation, they fell with more
vigor to their labor again, and made the longer resistance: and though they
were not over-well paid, yet did they serve in that War with much affection and
industry, and were encouraged not so much by the Dukes presence and authority,
as by his civil comportment, which won upon the Soldiers, whom he accompanied
in all their labors and dangers; To this was added, that he being naturally
liberal to the Soldiers, they knew he failed them not in their pay through
avarice, but impossibility: so as every one esteeming the cause his own, they
labored in the enterprise as for their own honor, incited by their hatred to
the Spaniards, and by their desire of cancelling the fault which they had
committed in the Battle; and they fought the more fervently, for that they saw
the Enemies Army grow the less courageous; Which not being only molested by
continual labor (as has been said) but afflicted with infinite wants and
inconveniences, and exposed to a thousand hardships in the Campagnia, wasted
and consumed miserably away, as ice beaten on by the Sun; for abounding in
Victuals, and in all other refreshments, which was brought them from the States
of Millain and Montferrat, they grew unruly and ill-governed, from whence
infinite disorders did result: they were quartered upon those barren Hills, and
without water, the scarcity whereof was very great, which they wanted not only
for their refreshment, and to keep them clean, but even to drink: for having
none but what was brought on the backs of beasts from the Tanaro, and Versa,
there was not sufficient for the Men and Horses to drink: especially the
neighboring Cisterns of Certosa being immediately dried up by reason of the
great concourse of people; and a little rivulet which ran near their Quarters,
through the small care they had of keeping cleansed from the immundities of the
Army, became so foul and loathsome, as it was of no service: So as the
Soldiers were not only scorched up through heat, but fell sick through
sluttishness. Moreover, there being no habitations there, (...) save in the
Covent of the Certosa, the Soldiers for the most part lay without Tents or
Shrouds, naked upon the earth; so as they were burnt by day, by the Sunbeams
which were at that time very hot, and by night distempred by the blasting
Evening-dew, and cold Air. In many places you might have seen the Soldiers
sitting on the ground under the shadow of a bough, fixed in the earth, thinking
it a great refreshment to shelter their heads a little from the scorching heat
of the Sun: they took little care in burying the dead; so as the air grew
noisome through the stink of dead bodies, sickness, and other pollutions. The
Soldiers not being able therefore to bear with so much labor in War, and
inconveniences of body, fell many of them daily sick, who not being fitted with
opportune remedy, and the contagion still increasing, the Camp within a few
days became rather like an Hospital of sickmen, then Military Quarters: It
behoved therefore to send for the Germans who were in the Garrison at Sandoval,
to supply the scarcity of people in the Camp, wherein there were not enough
able to supply the Guards, and other usual Military Duties; the rather for that
the Governor having made a Trench to be dug toward the west, by which way
Victuals and Ammunion were brought into the City from Piedmont; the Duke being
aware of it, caused another Trench to be made over against it, wherewith he
sheltered the way, and on the head thereof made a Fort be built, from whence
the opposite Trench being furiously played upon by the Artillery, the quarters
about la Certosa were exposed to assaults: it being therefore necessary, for
remedy, to build another Fort opposite to it, Thomaso Caracciola was deputed to
have the custody the^eof, with his Brigade of Neapolitans; and these not being
sufficient, for many of them diminished, the Dutch who were come but a little
before from Sandoval, were sent thither. The Governor continuing thus, many
days, to oppose the Enemies Army which lay before the City, and seeming neither
willing, nor resolute to assault it; the Soldiers being oppressed with so much
labor and inconvenience could not be kept from murmuring, not complaining so
much of the effect, as of the manner of the Governors suffering them, who were
willing to fight the Enemy, to be so basely consumed by sufferings; and that
undergoing a thousand deaths hourly, and running manifest ruin and
destruction, he would not suffer them to dye honorably by assaulting the City
and the Dukes Quarters; nor so much as send the Horse which lay there idle, to
divert the enemy from making defense, or to pillage and overrun Piedmont, and
to keep back the provisions which were daily brought into Asti: Every one
therefore spoke ill of him, detracting from his Honor and Reputation, saying,
as they were wont, that he held private intelligence with the Duke, and had no
good intentions to the Kings Affairs: Now that the true ground of these
Detractions, as also of what was alleged in his defense, (for it was variously
argued) may be known, it will be necessary, that leaving the Spanish Army in
their difficulties and troubles, wherein it continued till the end of the war,
and till the peace was concluded; that looking a little backwards, we make some
particular inquiry.

The Governor being naturally inclined to proceed with maturity and safety in
all his actions, and therefore professing that he managed the war not with any
military violence, but with Spanish slowness and caution seemed in all his
resolutions to have for his chief end, not to hazard the present condition of
affairs; and that therefore, as a dangerous Rock to the Kings affairs, he
abhorred nothing more then to make either the Italians or French jealous that
the King would make himself master of Asti, and of Piedmont; lest such (...)
might move too brisk humors, and might perturb the very foundation of the
peace of Italy, which was far from the intention of the King or his Council to
do: These his ends and thoughts, which he from the beginning, for the
justification of the business did not conceal, made him af^erwards so
circumspect and reserved, as well in the prosecution of the war, as in all his
other actions, as the Duke growing bold thereupon, and fearing the reputation
of his forces the less, did with more courage continue the war; and the
Ambassadors who managed the p^ace made use thereof as of a bridle, or spur, to
bring him to what they would. The Prince of Ascoli seemed, though with more
settled thoughts, to be of the same opinion; to whom the Duke did much adhere,
as to both of them did some of the Commanders, who being gratified by the
Governors failed not to side with him in all Consul^ations depending; though
Mortara declared against them, but in vain; who according to his custom being
averse to the Gove^nours proceedings, and not at all ab^sh'd at what had
happened at Bistagno, was for the setting aside of all such respects, as
pernicious to the final end of the affairs, and for the making war manfully: To
him did the most of the Captains in their hearts incline, and openly the whole
Army; who were scandalized at the Governors so great circumspection; the
Governor and the Prince were much nourished in this disposition by the
Negotiation of peace, which was hotly trea^ed of in Spain, France, and Italy;
For the King of France having sent Monsieur de Silleri with a stately Embassy
to carry his Presents to his new Spouse, and beginning to grow jealous of the
Governors so great preparations against Piedmont, had given him Commission to
treat efficaciously with the King of Spain, touching the manner of composing
the Dukes Affairs; from which composition, after the said Dukes hostile
actions, the King and Court of Spain seemed to be much averse; That King and
Court were loath to yield to the King of France his desires, thinking them too
much mis-becoming Kingly dignity, nor suiting with such threats and
preparations: They were yet more troubled for the examples sake; thinking that
to agree with the Duke, without some preceding just resentment, and due revenge
for the hostility, and little respect shown, would be too great a detriment to
the Authority and Reputation of the Crown. The Dukes necessity in defending
himself pleaded for the other side; which being permitted for a free Prince to
do, did not only mitigate the name of the offense, but the offense it self; As
also the continual desire of preserving Italy in peace, which contrary to all
expectation was now disturbed by the effusion of so much Christian blood, to
the so great prejudice of the people, and not without danger of France her
being interessed therein: The respect of Kindred likewise between the King and
Duke; so as the King being resolved that the resentment should not only be
finally forborne, but all satisfaction for the pre^ended interest, by reason of
the intercession of his Son in law, his conjunction of blood, and the peace and
quiet of Christendom; it was agreed that the Duke being always understood to
observe the said three Points which were proposed from the beginning of the
war, he should be freed from the molestations of war: But to the end that all
things should be proceeded in with the dignity and reputation of the King; and
that the Duke should not be minded to be pertinacious, as he seemed to be, and
to refuse the offer; it was agreed upon, That the King of France should by his
Ambassador intimate war to the Duke, if he should refuse to accept of the
aforesaid three things; and that on the contrary, if the Duke should accept
thereof, and that this acceptance should be brought in writing by the French
Ambassador to the Governor, it might be as an express Command from the King,
that forbearing all hostility in Piedmont, the Army should immediately retreat:
That things being thus composed, without the meddling of any of the Kings
Officers, or their Articling any thing with the Duke, it should be interpreted
in Spain as a form of composition suiting with the Kings greatness and Majesty;
the Dukes bare and ready acceptance serving for a full amends and satisfaction
for what was past: That the Governor was made acquainted with this Agreement
by the Ambassador Rambollietto, when he was in Felizano; and that fearing the
danger that might ensue unto the Duke by so gallant an Army, he should exhort
him to desist, to the end that the peace which was almost concluded, might meet
with no disturbance: He gave him, together with this advice, a Letter from Don
Inego de Cardevas, Ambassador for the King at Paris, wherein he gave him
notice, That the King of France had given order to Ramboglietto to denounce war
in his name to the Duke, if he should not accept of these three Points: And it
not being to be believed that the Duke would gainsay the pleasure of these two
Kings; who, as if they were both one, proceeded with joint Counsels; therefore
the Governor, since the occasion of fighting did not deserve that for it the
Kings Affairs should be longer disturbed, did prefer safe peace before long and
dangerous war; and thought itsuffic^ent to show war unto the Duke, rather then
to make war upon him; and that it would suffice to come to some honorable
action with him, rather to make an honorable peace, then to damnifie him: In
token whereof he moved but slowly from Felizzano to Annone, and did likewise
proceed but slowly for six days about Versa; as al^ in beating up the Dukes
Quarters, in consulting of the whole ca^riage of war, and of the manner of
expugning Asti; hoping, peradventure, that the apprehension of the neighboring
Army, the Ambassadors intercedings, and the fear of having war intimated to
him in the King of France his name, might prepare him for conditions of peace;
so all things might be with much honor appeased, without any danger or hazard
to the Kings Affairs; That this might, peradventure, also be the cause that
when he had got the Victory, he was contented with the Dukes retreat, and
proceeded no further: And that thinking that he being superior in forces, and
victorious, he might willingly listen to the urgent and efficacious
protestations of the French Ambassador, who acquainted him that the King did
not intend he should proceed with loose Reins to oppress the Duke, assuring him
also that the Duke being overcome in battle could not but accept of the
conditions of Peace; as the Ambassador, mingling hopes and promises day by day
with his protestations, assured him it would succeed.

This is that which is pleaded in the discharge and defense of the Governor,
besides many other Orders given, which are unknown, which were secretly sent to
the Governor from the Duke of Lerma, according to which it behoved him to
govern himself; for it was then tacitly murmured amongst many, which increased
afterward in fame and opinion, and was constantly and universally believed;
That the Duke of Lerma, to whose severity the reason of these Commotions was
chiefly attributed, seeing how much contrary to his expectation, and contrary
to the Kings affairs, they increased; and fearing lest the disturbance of
peace, and the Dukes alienation, might at long running ruin his own inte^ests,
did straightly charge the Governor, that setting side all other respects, he
should wholly mind composition and reconciliation with the Duke, and that he
was precisely commanded to sl^cken the carrying on of the war: But these things
were neither then nor afterward so certainly manifest, as that they were able
to quench the pregnant suspicions which were formerly had of him: Therefore the
contrary opinion of those did generally prevail; who a^guing either out of
self-emulation; or out of a sinister impression of his actions, said; That none
of the Kings Orders could be so precise or limited, especially the far distance
being considered, but that they were to be varied according to the variation of
affairs; nor that the Governors hands ought to be so bound up, as that he
might not make use of his forces according as time and occasion should require:
Nor that any Negotiation of peace should with any reason so much impede the
heat of war, as that the progress of the latter should be lost or slackened, in
respect of not disturbing the uncertain conclusion of the former; They made no
account of the apprehension of future evils, as being vain and not consonant to
these times; for the Governor having a well-experienced Army on foot,
commanded by the best Commanders of these times, and provided with all things
fitting for war; which received greater force and reputation by the assistance
of diverse I^alian Princes; things were so well asscertained, as he might be
confident of not only ma^ntaining Italy in her wonted fidelity and inclination
to the King, but to keep foreigners from moving, and to suppress such as had
moved: And howsoever, what sinister action, said they, could ever happen, which
would not be less then the prejudice which would result from the disbanding of
that Army, which being kept on foot, was able to repair all inconveniences;
and which being disbanded did inf^llibly draw after it all those mischiefs,
nay, greater then those which were so much feared; therefore, said they, it
behoved the Commander in chief to know the condition of his own forces, to make
use of them to his best advantage, by streightning and assaulting the enemy,
and by keeping him so molested, as that he might desire, covet, nay, account it
a great favor, to obtain a secure peace; which assuredly is always most
advantageous to those who are most against it: That all Commanders and Generals
had always governed themselves so, and that by so doing they had reaped great
advantage, honorable conditions, and much reputation to their Princes affairs;
but that to keep idle within Works, to sit quietly under Pavillions, and to
expect that the enemy should be inclined to peace; to suffer themselves to be
wheeled about by words, to feed themselves with vain promises of interessed
Sta^e-Ministers, and to show small inclination to war, and a great desire of
peace; was nothing else but to increase the adversaries confidence, to make him
the prouder and more bold, to alienate him from Articles of peace, to make him
backward and harder to consent to that which he finds to be so much endeavored
by his Adversary.

These and the like things were spoken of throughout Italy, in the very Camp.
at all assemblies of men, who not knowing the final ends of Princes and
Commanders, and of the Reasons which make them operate, or which keeps them
from doing so; and less knowing what would have happened if they had done
according to their intentions and discourses, do often arrogate unto themselves
to the prejudice of other men's reputations, the censuring of humane actions,
even as if the heart of him that governs, or future events, were apparent to
the^r eye; And confining the duty of a Writer to the bare narration of what
passes, will not permit of his judgment in the truest and most equitable
ratiocination, to him who shall be pleased and satisfied with his pains: it is
most certain that the Governor, in the general opinion of men, made himself
suspected of having at the first, instead of extinguishing, disloyally
nourished that fire, the suppression whereof if he had more endeavored, he
would have shut up the mouth of detraction, and have be^ter justified his
loyalty to his King, and together with his own reputation wherein he suffered
very much, have preserved the Kings honor, which beginning from the first to
bow did afterward decline without any stop, as the future success will show.

But that we may return to where we left; whilst the Army wasted, as has been
said, the endeavors of peace were not given over by the Agents of Princes: the
French Ambassador did Negotiate it, together with Pier Francesco Costa, Bishop
of Savoy, and Nutio resident with the Duke, who succeeded Savelli, he having
for some particular indispositions of his own, obtained leave to return to
Rome: and together with them the same Zeno for the Commonwealth of Venice; with
whom (but apart from the Nuntio) St Dudly Carleton did intervene, who was come
from Venice, were he had been Ambassador in ordinary, and was come a little
before into Piedmont with the title of Ambassador extraordinary from the King
of England: which King, adhering privately to the Dukes affairs, at the same
time that he Negotiated the peace as a friend to both, had taken order for the
disbursing of a hundred thousand Ducates to the Duke, at Lions, and also,
seeming as if it were done by the Peers of the Kingdom, but in effect by his
own command, sent him some Ships, as it was said, fraughted with Foot. Count
John of Nassau was also daily expected to come with men by land from Holland;
and it was heard that succors came from Germany, to assist the said Duke,
which were sent him from the Protestant Princes of that Nation, who did not a
little foment the Wars of Piedmont; Nor did the Venetians foment them less then
they, though secretly; who from the beginning being anxious at the proceedings
of the Spanish Army, and fearing that the Duke might be oppressed, began to
assist him underhand with moneys, and advice: and afterward see^g his affairs
proceed prosperously, they being desirous to abate the Spanish grandezza, were
not wanting in sustaining him, and shoaring him up, to the end that he might
resist him who thought to suppress him. So all these Princes being thought
privately to blow this fire, it was imagined that their Ambassadors, who
Negotiated the business; did not proceed therein with sincerity, unless it were
the Popes Nuntio; for both their manner of treating, and form of conclusion,
was sufficiently different from that reallity which in appearance they did
profess: and contrary to the great confidence, and good correspondency between
the Kings of Spain and France: the French Ambassador having the ^ppointment
made at Madrid in one hand, and in the other the intimation of War, being
consequently able to compel the Duke by the latter, and to force the Governor
by the other: so as he was the chief Arbitrator of all that Negotiation, the
rather for that the French Soldiers and Captains, who fought on the Dukes
behalf, depending upon his command, he might at his pleasure make them forego
their Arms, and bereave the Duke of the greatest part of his Forces; and though
by orders from his King he was to be careful of the reputation of the Spanish
Crown, and to give satisfaction thereunto; and as a good servant to so great a
King ought not to suffer the peace to be concluded otherwise, for the example
which it would be to all greater Kings; and being trusted by the Barons of
France, was chosen by the Queen to be employed for this end at the Court of
Spain; yet the Authority and common desire of the Princes of that Kingdom;
wherein they differed from the King in point of keeping friendship with the
Crown of Spain, prevailing more with him: as also peradventure the French
humor, naturally averse to the name of Spaniard, he made less account of the
Kings command: which was the chief cause of all the inconveniences which befell
the Spanish Army. For doubtlesly things would have gone otherwise, if he had
punctually observed his Kings directions immediately after the Victory upon the
Hills: but whilst under pretense of not exasperating the Duke, he proceeded
sometimes too favorably with him, and sometimes approving of his jealousies,
he feared that by intimating War unto him Piedmont might be made a prey to the
Victorious Army, much to the Kings prejudice; and that therefore he temporiseth
with the Duke, wherein he is fautor'd by the English and Venetian Ambassadors:
the Duke knowing what was done, fenced himself on one side with subterfuge^,
and delays, and on the other side assaulted the Enemies Trenches, and faced
him: and on the contrary, the Spanish Army (as has been said) mouldred away;
and the weaker they grew in Forces and Men, the Duke had the less mind to come
to an agreement; and consequently standing harder upon the advantage of
Articles, propounded delays, and greater difficulties; and hoping to get the
better at the last, had a greater desire to fight; and venting his conceived
hatred against the Spaniards, aspired at glory, by the total Victory of so
invincible an Army; and the Ambassadors, who would spin the thread of the
Negotiation, a^ they were resolved to do, held the Governors in hand with
efficacious promises of peace; the conclusion whereof being from day to day
deferred, and they the mean while delighting to see the miseries of the Spanish
Army, they delaied so long, as finding it at last reduced to so great weakness,
as that it was not able to fall upon any enterprise, they began to treat of new
conditions; which together with the three particulars of Madrid, contained many
other things of satisfaction to the Duke. Thus was the Capitulations of peace
made, upon the beneath written terms and agreement.

That the Duke should disarm effectually within one month; and retaining only
four Companies of Swissers for the safety of his States, together with as many
of his Subjects as he would, should cashe^r all the rest of his men, that he
should not offend the Duke of Mantua's Dominions, and that his pretentions
should be discus'd in the Emperors Courts of Justice. On the contrary, the
French Ambassador promised that the Rebels of Montferrat should be pardoned,
and be fully restored to their Goods, Honors and Offices: that he should be
protected by France, in case he should be molested by the Spaniard, contrary to
what was agreed upon; to which purpose, express command was given in the Kings
name to Marshall Diguere, Governor of Dolpheny, and to the other Governors of
Provinces confining upon the Dukes Territories, that immediately, without
expecting any orders from the King, they should succor the Duke, in case the
Conventions should not be agreed upon: that the Swissers and Walloons should be
restored to free Commerce in the State of Millain: that the places taken by
either side should be restored: that all the French should be generally
pardoned, who had served in the present War, contrary to the Kings command:
that the King of Spain should not demand pass^ge for six months space of the
Duke, for any men: That the Duke should have three months allowed him, to give
notice to his friends, that they were to abstain from any hostility against the
King; during which time the Duke repairing any damage which should be done,
nothing of Hostility which should happen should prejudice the peace; and
herewith the removal of the Spanish Army was agreed, upon in form following.

That the French Ambassador should desire the Duke to draw a thousand Foot out
of Asti; at whose marching out he would write to the Governor, and cause him
to quit his quarters and to retreat to Croce Bianca, and to Quarto: Which being
done, the same Ambassador was to entreat the Duke to remove the rest of the
Soldiers out of the City: and the French Ambassador promised, that on the
same day that that should be done, the Spanish Army should march out of
Piedmont; and that then the Duke should immediately dis^rm, but with this
promise from the Ambassador, that after such effectual laying down of Arms,
the Governor should so dispose of the Kings Army, as neither the Duke, nor any
other Prince of Italy, should thereby have any cause of jealousy; and that the
King of France should ratify the agreement within twenty days. All these
Articles and Conventions were reciprocal between the Duke and the French
Ambassador, who bound himself in his Kings name; which King took upon himself
the whole business, and obliged himself to see whatsoever on his side, or by
the Spanish Agents, abundantly executed; For what remained, there was no
mention of any submission to be made by the Duke; only in the preamble, amongst
the Reasons which moved him to peace, he alleged the desire he had to witness
to the world the obsequence, and particular devotion which he had always
professed to bear unto the King. These Articles were subscr^bed by the
Ambassadors of France, England and Venice, expressly ob^iging their Princes to
defend the Duke, if all that was promised were not made good to him, as long as
he should observe what he ^ad promised.

When these Capitulations were engrossed or drawn up; The Duke, who he ring
that the Germane and Holland succors were at hand, thought that he should now
get absolute victory over the enemy, who we^e reduced to great extremity, and
were not able to keep longer in their quarters by reason of the excessive
heats, refused to under-writ the Articles: But the French Ambassador, forced by
express command from the King, did at last let him know that ^e came to
intimate war unto ^im; and the Duke shunning his sight, he made the Kings
Order, and the necessity of putting it in exe^ution, known to Prince Victorio,
and commanded the French Sould^ers and Commanders, under pain of grievous
punishment, in the Kings name, that they should immediately forego the Dukes
service and return to France, whither he would follow them the next day; which
certainly he would have done, if the Nuntio had not opportunely interposed his
Authority; who going several times between him and the Duke, and earnestly
entreating them not to let the almost concluded peace be disturbed, obtained
that the Ambassador should tarry and give leave to the Duke to bethink himself
better, and to reflect upon the danger and necessity of his affairs, which
would grow to a bad condition, if the French, who were the chief sinews of his
Army, should mutiny as they seemed to be already inclined to do; or foregoing
his pay, should be enforced suddenly, and in so ill a crisis of time, to
abandon him; Wherefore ^aging at the Ambassador, he not without much
indignation, was at last brought to subscribe the Articles of peace; but upon
condition that the Instrument should be kept in the Nuntio's hands, to be by
him assigned over to the Ambassador when he should receive another from him,
wherein the Governor of Millan should sufficiently bind himself in his Kings
name, to observe what the French Ambassadors had promised on the Kings behalf:
the Duke being desirous that it should be rather covenanted with him on the
King of Spains behalf, for that he knew he for his reputation sake abhorred to
do it: He was also satisfied herein, though contrary to the capitulations of
Madrid, and to the intentions of the two Kings, yielded unto by the Ambassador
of France, and by the other Ambassadors, who were desirous that Peace might be
concluded the most that might be to his advantage and honor; and therefore the
Ambassador of France having written to the Governor, (who was now reduced to
a state rather of giving then of receiving conditions of peace) and having
obtained sufficient assurance from him under his hand, the business was at last
totally agreed. Whilst these things were a concluding, or were rather held to
be totally concluded; the Duke not being yet satisfied with venting, nor with
resenting himself, went out of the City by night with a great number of his
valiantest Soldiers and Capta^ns, and assaulted the enemies Trenches: He hoped
to find them unprovided, by reason of their great sufferings, and negligent out
of their hopes of the near conclusion of peace, which made him desire to make
great slaughter, and notably to resent his conceived injuries; but he failed in
his design; for the Governor having notice thereof, reinforced the Trenches
with Garrisons, and gave the chief care thereof to Gamboloita and Bravo; who
managed the business so well, as they forced the Duke to retreat, with the like
prejudice which he had plotted against the Enemies. The Duke lost in that
affault by night above 200 of his best and valiantest Soldiers, besides many
Commanders, and persons of note; and had the Governor (as some of his men
thought) sent a good body of men out of the Trenches, who might have fallen
upon the Assailants on the Flank, not any of the Dukes men might have escaped
scot-free; and the Duke himself, who was affirmed by many to be there pre^ent,
would have run ^anger of his person; Wherefore the Governor was for this
action also much blamed, ill spoken of, and detested by the whole Camp. The
next morning, which was June the 23d, and the 34 day after the Bat^l, upon the
Hills, peace was proclaimed, and was the very self-same day put in execution,
for as much as was then requisite; wherein the Governor was fain to pass by
two things also: which though small in themselves, yet of no small
consideration in point of honor: the one, that the Dukes Soldiers, who went
to throw down the abandoned Trenches, should kill 200 of the Enemies Soldiers
who were found sick there, the Spanish Army being in a manner present, who were
not all of them gone from their quarters; the other, that the Governor
deferring his removal for that day, in respect of the scarcity of Carriages, as
also of the multitude of sick persons, and of many other impediments, the
French Ambassador not admitting of any excuse, nor giving way to any one hours
delay, forced him to dislodge immediately, protesting, and that resolutely,
that otherwise he would make the Soldiers return who were gone out of the
City, and that revoking the command to the contrary, he would permit the French
to tarry and continue in the Dukes service. Thus merely through their fault who
governed the Kings Forces, not only the enterprise of Asti, but those others
that proceeded had but bad success; and not conformable to the greatness of
preparation, to the threats and imagined resentments, Thus the Governor rather
enforced, then willingly, and rather as conquered, then conqueror, went out of
Piedmont, sufficiently diminished both in Forces and Reputation, who was entered
thereinto but forty days before with a flourishing and gallant Army, and
glorious and triumphant for the Victory he had obtained.

The End of the third Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK IV.
The Contents.
THe King being but badly satisfied with the peace of Asti, makes Don Pietro di
Toledo Governor of Millain; Between whom and the Duke new differences arise
touching the execution of the Articles of peace. The Venetians by reason of the
Slavonians, who molest their Navigation in the Gulf, make war in Friuli against
the Archduke, and in Istria against the Emperor; and possessing themselves of
many Towns in Friuli, come before Gradisca; from whence they depart not many
days after by reason of Treaties of Agreement which were introduced. The Duke
of Savoy, complaining still of the not observance of peace, fears to be again
assaulted by the Governor, and therefore prepares for war again: He joins
underhand with the Venetians, and calls Digueres, Marshal of France, into
Piedmont; but is quickly and unexpectedly assaulted in Savoy by the Duke de
Nemours, who is fomented with moneys and promises from the Governor of
Millain. The King of France, to provide against the commencing uproars in
Lombardy, sends Monsieur di Bettuve thither; and the Pope Monsignore Lodovisio,
Archbishop of Bologna. Preparations for a new war are renewed in the State of
Millain, and in Piedmont, which is again begun between the Duke and the
Governor, who draws near the Confines of Piedmont with an Army.

FOrces were more appeased by the Articles of Asti then men's minds; and none
having met with such satisfaction as was by them expected, they were not
generally held a sufficient tie for the uniting of wills, nor a secure
foundation for the performing what was agreed upon: As for the Duke, though he
might have been contented to have made his party good against the Kings so
formidable Army, and to have defended himself beyond expectation, made his
agreement upon equal (...), and that the peace was for his sake subscribed by
so great Po^entates; yet he thou^ht it too ^ard for him to be at last i^forced
to receive those Laws, which to keep from being imposed (...) him, he had
exposed himself to so much danger and trouble: It further troubled him, that
his men being by these Articles reduced to a set number, he was left like a
body without Arms, and as it were, like a Lion without Teeth o^ ^aws, to be
laughed at by the Spaniards, with whom ^e was sure ^e could never have any
secure peace, nor sincere intelligence, as long as they should remember his
past offenses: So as the past Commotions not having produced effects wholly
answerable to his high hopes; the vivacity of his Genius, and pride of his
undaunted Spirit being considered, it was more probable that his having escaped
unprejudiced out of so great a tempest would incite him to novel^ies, and not
keep him from putting himself again into new dangers. On the other side; though
the King by this peace had o^tained the ch^ef intent of the war, yet the Duke
not being so humbled as at the beginning of the war they firmly believed he
should be, the Court of Spain thought the King was not lightly wounded in his
honor, and more then untouched in that veneration and respect which the I
alians had wont to bear him. The Spaniards were therefore generally much
unsatisfied, that the fruit of so many threats, and of so great preparations,
should end in a peace so little advantageous for the King, and purchased by the
Governor with so little reputation, and wi h reciprocal promises and
obligations, and wherein there were not terms befitting the Majesty of that
Crown, nor suiting with the Authority and Grandezza thereof: They were yet more
troubled that the French, who were formerly labored to be kept from having any
thing to do with the affairs of Italy, should upon this occasion prove to have
not only maintained an Italian Prince who had made insurrection against the
Kings Authority, but had taken upon them to be the mediators of peace,
exercising that arbitriment in the managing and concluding thereof, which the
Spanish Nation pretended did in Italy belong only to their King: They were
likewise vexed to consider that one sole protestation, one bare intimation of
the French Ambassador, whose King had no footing in Italy, should be of more
consideration to make the Duke accept of conditions of peace, then the
authority and forces of their King, bent with such fervency against Piedmont;
and as they did inwardly, but ill resent the Dukes total alienation, so could
they hardly well digest that such a separation should be confirmed by a tacit
League, contract d before their eyes between the Duke and the Princes who had
subscribed the Peace; amongst the which, that the Venetians did not
particularly keep from obliging themselves against the King, was a thing which
had not yet been practiced by any Prince of Italy, where the Spaniards had so
deeply fixed their roots: So as thinking that the King suffered too much
thereby in his Dignity and Reputa^ion, they were very much unsatisfied both
with the war so unsuccesfully begun, and with the Peace concluded against their
Dignity and Pre^entions: And throwing all the fault publicly upon the
Governor, and privately upon the Duke of Lerma; the name of the Governor as
the executor of such scandal, and of the Duke of Lerma as the Author thereof,
was detested both in Spain and Italy; Nor was it thought by any one that the
King would ever ratify the Articles of that Peace: All which considerations,
though they were of power enough with the King and his Council, and made them
very much doubt what to do; chi^fly since they were done by a State-Minister
contrary to Orders given him, and beyond the appointment made in his Court with
the French Ambassador; yet, whether it were that the Duke of Lerma's authority
prevailed, that he desired no uproars, or the being much pressed by the Pope,
and by the King of France, or peradventure through the consideration of that
Council, that all the a^oresaid respects were not to be compared to the good of
peace, and to the safety of the States of Italy, from whence the Authority and
Dignity of the Crown take mo^e force and vigor, then from the events of war:
It was a^ last resolved, that setting aside all other considerations, peace
should be accepted of as it was concluded: Wherefore the King delayed not
sending the Ratification thereof to the King of France, who ^ad likewise
ratified within the prefixed time by a particula^ Decree; but being not a
little offended with the Governor, (the Duke of Lerma not being able to sway
against the general sense of the Court, nor keep himself from the punishment
which was ready to fall upon him and the Governor) Don Piedro di Toledo was
chosen to succeed him in his place; and he was sent for into Spain; and in
demonstration of greater dissatisfaction Don Piedro to go with all possible
speed for Italy.

Don Piedro had always, and upon all occasions, been very free in resolving
upon public affairs, and very zealous for the public good, and not depending
upon any ones authority, showed very singular (...) in what belonged to the
public Dignity: Wherefore he had won a general opinion, that neither any
respect of the Duke of Lerma, nor any private Interests, which (setting aside
those of the King) had much furthered the Dukes affairs, should be able to
remove him from this resolution: He was therefore thought both by the King and
Council to be one who would suit well with the present condition of affairs,
and such a one who might easily reduce the affairs of the Crown in Italy to
their former condition and reputation: But things being brought to that pass,
as they could not be repaired either without great maturity of counsel, or
without extraordinary valor in War, this choice proved not a convenient remedy
for the malady; for when Inoiosa, in conformity to the agreed upon Articles,
laid down Arms, and afterward offered himself to be the first who should
restore what was gotten in the preceding War, it was not agreed upon in express
words, that the King was to lay down Arms, but it was only said, that the
Governor should so dispose of the Kings Armies, as neither for state, nor
time, the Duke, or any other Prince should have reason to be jealous thereof;
nor, though the Duke had commanded upon pain of great punishments all foreign
Soldiers to depart his Dominions, did they really depart; for many French,
under the name of Savo^ards, and many Walloons, under the name of Swissers, by
reason of the conformity in their apparel and speech, kept concealedly there,
whereof it was held the Duke was not ^acitely ignorant: Many also (if all were
true which was pretended against the Duke) were sent by him into some parts of
Piedmont, far from the Commerce of Foreigners, and unfrequented by them; so as
the diligence of those that were sent by Inoiosa into Piedmont to certify the
effectual performance of the Treaty of peace proved but vain: And many of the
French Commanders kept publicly in Turin, some by reason of sickness, some for
their own affairs, and others under color of being the Dukes particular
servants. And yet Inoiosa being desirous that the peace made by him might be
perfected, and to le^ve it as little as he could in the power of his
successor, when he heard what relation his Spies brought back, he without any
more ado dismissed his Swissers, and the Regiments of the Italian Princes, and
reforming the Spanish Companies and Lombards, which were much diminished, he
cashiered likewise many Captains and Officers, and ^educed his men to a much
lesser number; and not to come short of the Duke in his forwardness of
restoring such places as were taken, he gave order to the Governor of Oneglia
that he should be ready upon the first notice given to quit the Town; who
therefore began to send away some Artillery and Ammunition. But the face of
affairs altered at the coming of his Successor, whereof as soon as Inoiosa had
notice, he went from Millain, and not tarrying to see his successor, he went
with two Galleys into Spain, richer in moneys which he had gotten in his
Government, and by the War, then in any glory he had gotten in the last
actions: whereof to excuse himself he gave out that he carried with him
particular orders which he had received from Spain, (meaning those of the Duke
of Lerma) and the opinions of many of the Council of War in Millain, according
to which he professed he had governed himself upon all occurrences. When he
came to Spain, he was by order from the King confined in Alcala; where his
cause being tried by Justice, and the Judges who were deputed by the King to
examine his actions not agreeing in their sentence, he at last, after some
months space, was admitted to see the King, and was acquitted of all
imputations. It was thought by many, that the Duke of Lerma's favor stood him
in much stead, who besmeared himself sufficiently in procuring his liberty, for
the doubt conceived, lest by his depression, who was a creature of his, his own
reputation might be concerned; especially for that he doubted lest many of his
rivals might use all their endeavors to have him condemned, rather out of a
desire to lessen his the Dukes authority and grandezza, then to see the guilty
person punished for his misdemeanors: but though his Grandezza, till now
untouched, did also in these affairs surpass his corrivals; yet envy increasing
upon these occasions, and the gate to murmr being opened, he began from this
time to decline, and fell afterward totally. The first thing the new Governor
did, was to revoke the Reforma^ion made by his predecessor in the Spanish, and
Lombarde Companie^; under no other color, but for that the less worthy
Captains and Officers were detained, and the more deserving and experienced
were casheired; for what remained, though he in words professed the observance of
the treaty of peace, yet there appeared many signs which showed he was
otherwise minded; for being naturally zealous of the Kings dignity, he, even
with injurious words detested the actions of his predecessor; of whom having
received ill impressions, he in his actions and countenance appeared every day
to be more and more offended, and broke often out into spiteful speeches
against the Duke, even to the telling him he would in a short time reduce him
to nothing: and that he was very certain that the Kings affairs, especially for
what concerned him the Duke, should be otherwise handled under his Government
then they had been. It was also observed that as he sailed above the City of
Nice, when he passed from Antibo to Finale, he showed no friendly intention,
not resaluting that Fort with shot according to custom: being moreover visited
by the said Duke by way of Embassy, as Ital^an Princes are wont to visit new
Governors, he did not answer with equal civility, till delay had made it
unseasonable; and being offered by the Duke to have all places restored, as
soon as he should have laid down Arms; he answered that the Duke ought first to
do all that he was obliged by agreement to do, before he should pretend to the
observancy of any thing agreed upon. He moreover rejected Claudio Marini, who
in the King of France his name desired him to disarm; telling him, that he was
no legitimate person for that King: so as the Duke and all Italy were not a
little doubtful of his intentions; which for what he afterward manifested, was
not to break the peace at first, nor yet to keep his Army idle; for he was by
the King forbid to do eitheir of these; but, were it either for the greater
preservation of Dignity in disarming he would seem to do it of his own good
will, and not as being bound so to do, or at the request of any other, or that
he had really any such injunction from Spain, or that he was moved thereunto
for the honor of his King, or out of private glory, he delayed the execution
of the agreement; not without hope, as appeared afterward, so to better the
Kings conditions. It was notwithstanding believed that he had a mind to bring
the Duke to lay aside the Articles of Asti, and to humble himself of his own
accord unto the King, into whose hands if he would totally put himself he
should be rece^ved into like favor as formerly, and treated with more
advantageous satisfaction; wherein if he should have prevailed, he should, much
to his glory, have abolished those abominable conditions; and also have wrought
the Duke^ so much desired humiliation, and his re-uniting to the Crown; a thing
as much desired for the quiet and safe^y of Italy, after the breach, as it was
little valued before; and that which D^n Piedro seemed most of all to desire;
if the Duke should agr^e upon any other terms, or by any other means, then by
the Articles of Asti, the the French men's plots, and those of the other enviers
of the Spanish greatness, would be cancelled; and the King of France his
arbitrament, which the French boasted they had introduced in the affai^s of
Italy, and excluded that of Spain, would ^ave proved vain: being probably moved
thereunto, out of these ends, he began to propound many difficulties touching
the Dukes demands, more relating to the Kings dignity, then to the peace of
present affairs: pre^ending that it was not expressed in the now Capitulations
of peace that the King should disarm; that the Swissers were dismissed, and the
Auxiliary Forces of the Italian Princes; and that the remainder we^e so much
lessened by running away, and by death, as there were scarcely enough left for
the Garrisons of the State of Millain, which was not limited by the Capitula
ions. And finally, that the Duke had not fully disarmed, who was to observe ^ll
the other Articles anticipately: but the commotions begun at the same time in
other parts of Italy, between the Emperor, and the Archduke of Grats, in one
part, and by the Venetians in another, afforded him more reason of justifying
his designs; For the Kings Agent, holding for certain that the Commonwealth had
made War upon those Princes, out of a desire to bereave the house of Austria of
many Towns which it possesses in Friuli, and of the Havens of Istria and
Dalmatia, they thought themselves bound to maintain them, not only for that the
Arckduke was brother to their Queen, and of the Kings family, but for that by
their possession of those Havens they did for ever shut up the entrance from
any German succors, which upon occasion might be sent into the Kingdom of
Naples. Wherefore, because whilst there was War in Italy, it neither became the
dign^ty, nor the safety of the Kings affairs, that they his Ministers should be
unarmed, idly expecting the event of those differences wherein the King was so
much concerned: the Governor adding this no less just (as he termed it) then
necessary reason to the rest, and therewithal refusing the Dukes demands,
alleged that such accidents had happened as forced him to keep more strongly
armed; nor that there could be any pretense made, but that the King might
lawfully re-arm upon new occasions, though he had been bound by those
Capitulations to disarm.

By the in^erposition of these dissiculties, together with his rigorous and
threa^ing proceedings with the Duke, he hoped that by making the Duke despair
of reaping his pretended fruit by those Capitulations, whereby he might boast
that he had once been able to make the King lay down Arms, he might easily make
him bethink himself of new resolutions: This the Governors hope was likewise
confirmed by the occ^sions and present conjuncture of times, which seemed to
make very much for him. At this very nick of time was the consignation of the
Ro^al married Couple made by the two Kings, with a glorious and splendid
attendance upon the Confines of their adjoining Kingdoms; and therefore their
Union being established by such pledges, he thought that the King of France,
and the Queen Regen^, by whom, and according to whose pleasure, the Kingdom was
then Governed, that they might gratify the King and Court of Spain, toward
whom the Queen seemed to be very well inclined, would no longer stand so much
upon the alteration or observation of the Treaty of Asti; especially since ^e
knew it had happened partly by siniste^ in^entions, partly by the negligence of
the State-Ministers in Italy, beyond the chief appointment made in Spain with
that King, by the Commendator Sillery, and beyond their intentions who
pretended nothing from the King of Spain, but the Dukes safety; but still
joined with the same Kings Dignity, whose Authority they had not the l^ast
drift to diminish; nay, if they had been otherwise minded, it would not have
been easy to have made good the Dukes Affairs, since France was then in
greater combustions than ever, and fuller of new broyls, and intestine
discords, raised by the Prince of Conde, the nearest Prince of the Blood, next
to the la^e King Henry's line, and by many other Princes and Barons of the
Kingdom; who being much unsatisfied with the Kings Match, and with the so
strong union between those two Crowns, since they saw they could no longer
hinder it, made head under pretense of reforming the Government, with great
Forces, and attendance of the Nobles, against the King, as he returned with his
Wife and Mother to Paris; so as the necessity which their Majesty's had of
keeping united to the Crown of Spain, that they might thereby the better fence
themselves against the Civil Insurrections of the Kingdom, being added to
their own good will, made them the less able to mind the Affairs of Piedmont.
Moreover the Duke of Savoy, being but badly satisfied with the King and Queen
of France, by reason of their denial to assist him upon the late occasion, and
by their intimating War unto him, just then when by the diminution of the
Spanish Army before Asti ^e thought himself sure of Victory: Conde, and the
other Princes that were tacitly united, thought him a fitting means to
disturb, together with them, that union of the two Crowns which was contrary
to his ends, which he had already endeavored, and had disbursed moneys largely
to such as having a hand in the business might trouble those Marriages; so as
being still able to do so, their Majesty's had little reason to look upon his
Affairs with a favorable eye: The Governor therefore thinking he might lay a
good groundwork for his designs, in ordering that King, and the Affairs of
that Court, ^e doubted not but that his Reasons for not disarming, effectually
represented in that Court by Don Hectore Pignatello, Duke di Montelione,
Ambassador for the Catholic King at Paris, and a great Confident of Don
Pietro's, by reason of the near alliance that was between t^em, might be
accepted of as lawful; and consequently the opposition of that Crown being
taken away, he was sure that the Duke, being destitute of such a leaning stock,
and his Forces being consequently lessened, might be put upon great
necessities, and that submitting himself to the Kings pleasure, he would agree
to any thing, without talking any longer of Asti, or of the Capitulations made
there. The Duke then understanding at last, that the Governor desired one
might be sent unto him, with whom he might treat touching the Common
occurrences, gave order to Count John Battista Soleri, who upon other occasions
was destined Ambassador to Venice, that pssiang by Millain he should hear what
should be said unto him about that business; and he sent the Senator Lodovico
Zoello along with the said Count, to the end that the Count passing on to
Venice, Zoello might bring him the Compendium of the business: These being gone
to Millain, the Governor propounded Propositions to them, not only very
satisfactory for the Duke, but made also many promises of advancing the Duke
and his Sons to great pre^erment, if, passing by the nicity of the
Capitulations, he would humble himself to the King; and on the contrary,
strange doub^s ad difficulties touching the execution and interpre^ation of the
said Capitulations, if the Duke should tenaciously stick thereunto; they were
therefore desired to exhort the Duke to write unto the King in conformity to
what he had proposed; but the Duke being frustrated of any Spanish hopes would
not give way to the Governors allurements, esteeming them so many baits to
make him fall unworthily from that Glory which through so much trouble and
danger he had achieved; to the end that throwing himself dishonourably into
the Kings Arms, and indiscreetly estranging himself from the friendship and
protection of those Princes who had subscribed the Peace, he might the more
easily be brought into his former condition by the Kings Ministers of State,
with little hope that the same Princes should resent his injuries another time,
if upon this occasion he should so slightly have foregone their favor and
Authority: Resolving therefore to undergo whatsoever misfortune, rather than to
do what he would not consent unto whilst he had the Enemies Army upon his
hands, he absolutely denied to forego the Capitulations, or to make any
submission; but pretending that the King was bound by the Articles to disarm,
he said it was the Ambassadors intentions who made them that he should do so,
though, for his Majesty's greater honor it was expressed with more
circumspection; and notwithstanding, being desirous that he might not thereby
receive any prejudice in compassing his chief end, which was, that that Army
might be disarmed, he was content to write a Letter, wherein not saying any
thing which was not worthy of himself, as a free and independent Prince, and
without parting from the Capitulations at Asti, he with great respect excused
himself for what had happened; and laying the fault upon the late Governor, he
added, that by this means he hoped he should keep himself in his Majesty's
former favor, desiring him to preserve him therein in the same degree which he
and his children out of so many relations pretend unto: This he sent to the
Governor by Zoello, with a flying Seal, with order that he should deliver it
him when he should engage himself by express word, that he would dismiss
himself within a certain prefixed time: But this Letter was neither received by
the Governor, nor sent into Spain; for it did not please him, who desired it
might have been written more humbly, and so as that it might have prejudicated
the Capitulations; or else thinking that the Duke by that Letter might get a
promise of effectual disarming, he did not think the prize equivalent to the
demand, nor the bargain answer^ble to the condition of the present times;
therefore showing the Duke the necessity he had to keep his men in Arms, by
reason of the war in Friuli, and offering to restore the places that were
taken, and giving him his word in the Kings Name that he would not offend him,
he kept from disarming: He added also, that the Duke of Mantua would not listen
to the pardoning of Rebels; and, as if the King of France had done more than he
had power to do, in promising that without his consent, he seemed to be
prejudiced in the rights of his Principality; so as having sent the Marquess
Don John Gonzaga into Spain, he obtained that that point might be left to his
free will, that King professing, that he though himself not bound by the
Articles of that Peace to pardon (...); and that he would not, nor could not
justly keep the Duke o^ Mantua from (...) Jurisdiction in that State which he
had obliged himself to protect: And therefore the Duke of Mantua, being therein
encouraged by the new Governor, to whom he was near allied; and being moreover
desirous that the Duke of Savoy might reap no good by this peace, he did not
only constantly deny the pardoning of Rebels, which he wa^ much pressed to do
by the King of France, but selling the remainder of Count Guido's goods, and
confiscating those of the rest who he pretended to be Rebels, he also put some
of his Subjects to death, for having served the contrary party in that War.

But the Duke of Savoy, who could not be satisfied neither by the Kings word,
nor by the restitution of places taken, which the Governor offered him,
without the effectual difarming of the Kings Army; seeing that no good was yet
got by the peace of Asti, but some vain promises, by which he had suffered
himself to be persuaded to lay down Arms, and to consent to other of the Kings
demands; having now lost all hopes of obtaining his intent of the Governor, as
if he had run the danger of being again assaulted by the Spanish Army, and
being enforced to send some Soldiers and Ammunition to the Confines of
Piedmont, that he might thereby move the Princes who were bound to observe the
Capitulations; to which betaking himself, he did not a little exclaim against
the not observance of what was agreed upon under their Authority, and replying
to the Governors oppositions and difficulties, he complained that all this
proceeded only from his not submitting himself unworthily to the King, and by
renouncing the Articles covenanted, from not ^erding himself from their union,
and from his not undervaluing their Authority and Dignity, who were the
Arbitrators and Moderators thereof; and putting all men in mind, but
particularly the French, how prejudicial it would be to their King, and to the
honor of France, that the Regal Name and Authority should be cancelled from
the Conventions of peace, he endeavored by all means to make them to get them
to be maintained and made good, promising that for his part he would refuse no
pains, would not forbear for any expense, would not be afraid for any loss or
danger, but would adventure his own person, his sons, and his State, and
whatsoever he held dear in this world; that the glory of that King and Nation,
in having preserved his State unto him, and in the Kings having interposed
himself as an Arbitratour in compounding the affairs of Italy, should not be
turned into as much shame and dishonor, ^hy not being able to maintain them;
but though he could promise himself but little from the King of England, by
reason of the far distance of his Country, or of the King of France, for the
aforesaid reasons, yet had he a new occasion to hope well in the favor of the
Venetians, who, being entered (as has been said) into a new War with the House
of Austria, were necessitated for their own Interests to assist him, so to
secure themselves from the Spanish Forces, whilst they were entertained by him
the Duke, and diverted from their Dominions confining upon the State of
Millain. And since this War began just at that time, and had much connection
with that of Piedmont, and because it happened in Italy, it is proper to our
present History, and it will be necessary, that taking it from its original, it
be described by us equally with that of Piedmont, and distinctly related.

The Venetian for some hundreds of years since pretend to the Sovereignty of
the Adriatic Sea, now called the Gulf of Venice, and have long maintained it
more by the authority of a powerful Fleet, then by any ground of ancient
concession or just title; by virtue whereof inhibiting many neighboring people
the freedom of Navigation, they do not suffer them to transport their
Merchandise freely through that Sea into foreign parts, nor that any such be
brought from foreign parts to their Havens and Shore: And as it makes much for
the advantage and grandezza of that Commonwealth, that the Inhabitants of the
Gulf, and Foreigners who sail through it do not only put in at Venice, and pay
a great tribute to the Commonwealth, and that the said Inhabitants provide
themselves with things necessary from that City; so on the contrary, it
redounds to the prejudice of the same people, not to be able to make use of
their own Sea without paying Taxes, nor carry that wherein their Country
abounds through it to other parts, nor furnish themselves with necessaries from
elsewhere; for the Venetians are wont to send forth some Galleys to guard that
Gulf, and do not only seize on such Vessels as sail for other parts, contrary
to their Inhibition, but confiscate the Merchandise, and strangely molest the
Masters and Passengers. The neighboring people and Princes did always gainsay
these pretensions, complaining that the use of the Sea, which by the Law of
Nations was free to all men, was interdicted them by this Commonwealth; and how
that she used more respect to those that were more powerful: But those of
Trieste did always repugne, and those of ancient Liburnia were more
contumacious then they, who are now called Sclavonians, who, as being members
of the Kingdom of Hungary, are under the Archduke of Austria, and they have
always questioned it, and debated it with the Venetians, not without the tacit
knowledge of their Princes, who being busied in more weighty Wars with the
Turks, and not-being able either by forces, or by endeavors to alter the
Commonwealth, thought it at last to be their only remedy for that sore, to
bring into those parts some of the people of Croatia, who were commonly called
afterward Uscocchi, Croates or Cravates, a fierce and courageous people, and
who valued not life; who being there as a thorn in the eyes of the
Commonwealth, might to the best of their power make good the liberty of
Navigation upon those Seas to the Archdukes Subjects. To these, instead of
stipend, Pyracy was at first permitted, but only against the Turks, as common
Enemies, and F^es to their Prince; abusing which permission against the
Venetians Vessels, or being willing to treat them alike (for the Venetians
persecuted them) they afforded the Commonwealth reason of complaint; which not
prevailing, they resented the injury so far, as they resolved to extermine that
whole Nation; professing that so to do, was not only necessary for freeing the
Gulf from Pirates, but also, as they alleged, to provide that the Turk being
irritated by the Uscocchi's or Croa^es's injuries might not send powerful
Fleets into the Gulf, not only to the danger of their Dominions, but to those
of other Princes which they possess upon those Seas: Thus making their own
cause common to all, the Commonwealth began of her self alone to provide
against it; and endeavoring more to remove the effect, then the cause of the
malady, they went against them, and began to prosecute them as Pirates and
public Robbers; who being already much increased in number (for many driven
thither by the barrenness of their Country, and allured by the profit of
pillage, and many banished vagabond Italians, and particularly such as were
Subjects to the Venetians, flock thither as to lawful prey of great gain) and
growing much more powerful by their numbers, and more cruel by reason of the
losses they had suffered by being persecuted by the Commonwealth, they were
very cruel in their Piracy throughout that whole Sea, and in all the
neighboring Havens and Islands; and coming sometimes even to within a few
miles of Venice her self, they took Vessels even almost in her sight; insomuch
as they grew so terrible to Navigators, and so dreadful through their cruelty,
as the Commonwealth, without the Archdukes trouble or expense, began to make
trial of those sufferings which she had formerly endeavored to make the
neighboring people undergo; and as they could hardly suppress their insultings
with the Venetian greater Vessels, the yareness and multitude of Boats
wherewith they scoured up and down in several parts being considered; as also
the vicinity of their friends Country, whither they fled when chased by the
Venetian Vessels, and the condition of the Sclavonian seas and shores, which
being full of Rocks and narrow Channels made by the many little Islands and
Flats, are scarcely navigable for greater Vessels; so did the agreements and
stipulations often made between the Commonwealth and the Archduke stand them
but in little stead; for though the one promised to keep in the Cravates; and
the other to leave the sea open and free, neither party being willing to
prejudice the main of their pretentions; they inserted some clause or other in
the close of each convention, whereby leaving the controverted point touching
the liberty of the Gulf undecided; neither the difference between those Princes
was composed, nor yet were the promises made, and agreed upon between them
kept; the point of freedom of Navigation put off to another time, and the
permission of free Commerce at sea, as it had been formerly had, being
incompatible: which incompatibility occasioned the one the mean while to
pretend unto, and the other to prohibit the freebooting of the Uscocchi or
Cravates: they being long accustomed to pillage, and urged by poverty, and
necessity to live from hand to mouth, which they were not able to do but by
rapine, the Covenants agreed upon must needs be broken, and the Gulf must
necessarily remain subject to the former molestations. The Commonwealth finding
no more ready nor opportune remedy, began to pretend, that to extirpate the
evil, as they said, by the roots, that whole Nation should be removed from the
Maritime parts. But this meeting with many difficulties, at last in the year
1612. an agreement was come unto, almost of the same contents, and with the
same clause of reservation as before, between the Emperor Mathias, to whom the
places inhabited by the Croats belonged, and the Archduke Ferdinando, to whom
the Emperor his Cosin-german gave the Government thereof, he being the next
neighbor Prince to that Country, on the one part, and the Commonwealth on the
other; which that it did not long continue, ^s it ought to have done, the
Venetians according to their custom, upon the Uscocchi or Cravates
ravenousness, and upon the Archdukes dissimulation, and that of their Officers,
who were well enough pleased to see the Commonwealth continually molested on
that side. But they complain more particularly that a Galley of theirs being
taken by the Uscocchi or Croates, after that agreement, whilst it lay in one of
the Havens of Sclavonia, it was carried to Segna, a Town belonging to the
Emperor, and that the Galley-slaves being there set at liberty all the rest
were slain, and barbarous cruelty was used upon the de^d Corpse of Veniero the
Master of the Galley; the Archduke not resenting so abominable an excess
committed not against private men or Vessels; but against the public Barques
and Officers. The Austriant, on the other side, laying fault upon the
prohibition of Navigation continually pretended to by the Venetians, and stiffly
maintained contrary to the Capitulations, gave their Reasons for the fact which
they had committed, and which they did not deny: affirming that some
differences being known between people that were under the Turks, and under
the Venetians upon the Confines of Dalmatia, the Commonwealth did resolve not
to meddle therein openly, but thought it better to make use of the Uscocchi or
Cravates, naturally enemies to the Turks; and that privately furnishing them
with moneys, they egged them on underhand against the Turks, not so much within
land, as upon the sea shore.

But when not only the complaint of this fact came to the Court at
Constantinople, but also the Commonwealths underhand dealing therein; the
Commonwealth could find no better means to free her self thereof, then by
coming to some sudden severe demonstration; and that therefore some of the
Croats Barques being gone by the Commissary of Dalmatia's express license to
sack Popono and T^bigna, Towns belonging to the Turks, as they returned home
with their prey, they were unexpectedly fallen upon by some of the Venetian
Soldiery in the Island of Liesina where they had touched in their passage,
after they had eaten friendly with them in company, that leaving there great
part of their prey, and 200 of their men slam in the scuffle, the rest escaped
away by flight, and returned home, who did so move the kindred and friends of
those that were slain, and generally the whole Nation, as hasting to their
Barques, they went to resent the injury: and that lighting by chance upon that
Gally, they took her, and there vented the^r rage; and that yet there were
Commissaries sent to Segna, to see justice done; but that understanding the
truth of the fact, and no body appearing on the Commonwealths behalf to make
complaint, they proceeded no further: but howsoever the matter went, the breach
was occasioned upon this occasion; For the Commonwealth being more mindful of
revenge then of complaining, as if all their Articles and Law had been
violated, they began presently to forbid Commerce by Navigation to all the
Archdukes Subjects; and placing many armed Boats in the Gulf of Trieste, and
in other convenient place^, they did so handle those people as they could not
only not Traffic, but neither Fish, nor carry the fruit of their possessions
home in their domestic Barques: and moreover, Antonio Chi^rano, Captain of the
Gulf, entered into Laurona, and Lorenzo Veniero General of Dalmatia into N^w,
Towns inhabited by the Uscocchi, where they miserably ruined them, sinking many
Barques loaded with Victuals in the former, and recovering the Artillery of the
Venetian Galley which was lately taken, in the other: at the same time, by way
of Intelligence they assaulted the Fort of Carlobago; but meeting with greater
resistance, they were repulsed with the loss of 200 Soldiers, and their
Captain: the People and Officers on both sides being hereby more incensed, they
began interchangably to disturb each others Confines, rather by tacit
permission, then by express order from their Princes, who shunned coming to an
open breach; making inroads, firing Houses, and destroying the Countries; and
some toward the Law began to publish defamatory Edicts, and to lash one
another reciprocally: and afterward the fury increasing, the Venetians entered
into Istria with 1500 foot, and some Horse; and having in vain attempted the
Castle of St Servolo, they sacked and burnt the Towns of Cernotis and
Cervicale. And the Commissary of Istria sacked Berbenito, Berce, St Theodorico,
and once mo^e Cernotis and Cervicale, with 1500 Foot and some Horse, not
meeting with any resistance. And not long after they assaulted the Confines of
Trieste with 4000 Foot and 200 Horse, with a Gally and many Barques, they
destroyed the Salt Pits, put the neighboring Country to fire and sword;
intending to do more mischief, had it not been for Volfango Frangepane, Count
of Terzacco, General of Croatia, who coming by order from the Archduke with the
Militia of those Confines, to defend the Country, and with the Cavalry of
Carlistot, which came in unto him, assaulted the (...); against whom there came
also out 400 Triestians commanded by Benedetto Pettazzo, and by Daniel Francol,
so as there happened a fierce skirmish, wherein the Venetians were routed, and
put to flight, with the death of above 600 of them, and of their General Mario
Gallo da Ossimo: and the Commissary, and rest who were in the scuffle, had much
ado to save themselves, by getting into the Galley, under the shelter of the
Artillery which was shot from thence. After which Victory, the Vice-general,
suffering some of the Soldiers, and of the Uscocchi, to overrun Istria, where
they did much mischief, he himself with some of his men entered the Territory of
Montfalcone, and destroyed all things by fire and rapine: but the Commonwealth,
whom the successes of Piedmont had peradventure made apprehend the Spanish
Forces less, in respect whereof they had for born to come to an open breach
with the Archdukes, and had therefore still formerly been contented to suffer
and to temporize, resolved now to do so no longer, but to show their resentment
by open war. A resolution which though as it was publicly said, the gravest
and wisest Senators were far from; who foreseeing the consequences, would not
have willingly seen the Commonwealth imbroil her self in that war; yet the heat
of the younger sort prevailing, which was fomented by one more ancient Senator,
who to win favor from the meaner Citizens adhered to the more general Vote;
the greater opinion overcame the better, as it sometimes happens amongst
multitudes; and though the Towns and places, from whence the Uscocchi came to
pillage, belonged (as has been said) to the Emperor, and above a hundred
miles from Friuli, yet because they were governed by the Archduke Ferdinando,
and that the said Ferdinando was bound for the behavior of the Uscocchi, the
Venetians complained that he winked at their Piracy, or atleast did not inhibit
them, nor punish them for it; and would not only assault, and make war upon
that Country from whence their prejudice came, but also upon that part of
Friuli which belonged unto the Archduke: thinking that the only way to provide
a salve for this sore, was to molest the patrimonial Territories of that
Prince. They therefore ordered Pompeo Giustiniano to go into Friull with six
companies of paid Foot, which were destined for Candia; and he carried thither
also many other Soldiers, most of them of the meaner sort of those parts; and
making the rendezvous at Palma and Udine, he commanded them to go against the
Archdukes Country: Francisco Erizzo governed Palma, and the Militia of that
Province, but Giustiniano was to govern the war. Having assembled together
about 1200 Horse, and some seven or eight thousand Foot, he at unawares entered
Friuli, and possessing himself at the very first of many of the open Towns, he
also took and fortified Medea, Meriano, Chiopris, Romanso, Cormonso, and
Vilesso, the chiefest Towns belonging to the Archduke, and distributed his men
therein: At the same time the Territory of Monfalcone took up Arms, and the
Commonwealths Soldiers took Sagra, one of the Archdukes Castles on the other
side of the River, over against Gradisca, and munited it, to defend the Country
from the troubles it might receive from Gradisca. The War being thus begun
against the Archduke, and footing being got in the Archdukes Country, the
Captains in the Camp, and the Senators in Venice, began to aspire unto greater
things. The two chief Towns, and of most consideration, were Goritia and
Gradisea; the former, which is as it were the Metropolis of the Archdukes
Country on this side of the Mountains, is situated beyond LIsonzo, at the foot
of the Alps, which was by the Ancients called Giulie, very strongly situated,
and defended by a Castle hard to become at: The other lies lower toward Palma
and Udine, upon the right hand of the Lisonzo; which washing the walls thereof
on the East side, serves it for a Rampire, and it is secured on the other three
sides by large and deep ditches; The passage over the River made against the
expugning of the former, as also the danger that the Soldiery being too far
entered into the enemies Country they might be molested, and peradventure much
prejudiced, if Gradisca should remain behind them on their backs in the enemies
hands; and the expugning of the other was withstood by her Fort, and by her
being easily relieved by the succor which might easily be conv^yed to her
every day by the neighboring River from Goritia, espec^ally the Archdukes men
being encamped, as they were, on the left shore. Between these two lay the
third less difficult en^erprise of Lucino, a great Town on this side of
Lisonzo, in the midst between Goritia and Gradisca, near the Stone Bridge
which leads to Goritia; neither so strong, nor so easily to be succored as
Gradisca, as lying somewhat farther from the River, and not so far within the
Archdukes Country, as Goritia. Commissary Erizzo resolved therefore to attempt
it, and sent Giustiniano thither with some men, who took it, and sacked it,
meeting with no resistance, and quit it the same day, as not thinking it a safe
place to ^arry in; but nothing was so great a hinderance to the Venetians, nor
did so much detain their resolutions, as the want of experience, discipline and
valor, in their men; the greater part whereof being unorderly, who being by
force taken by the Magistrates from their houses and employments, kept the
Campagnia unwillingly, and did unwillingly serve in those exercises whereunto
they were not bred up nor accustomed, nor led unto by their genius: So as their
Captains not being able to rely upon them, they were not only kept from
attempting new enterprises, but from bringing them into the field, or employing
them in any Action.

The whole Archdukes Country being therefore by reason of these Commotions up
in arms, and Adamo, Baron of Trautmistorfe, being sent from Germany into
Friuly, who was General of Croatia, and Captain of the Emperors Guard, and who
though but young, yet of tried valor, was made the chief in this war by the
Archduke, with Title of Captain General: He had also brought along with him
between two and three thousand Veteran Soldiers, long trained up in the wars
in Hungary; and Garisonizing such places as were fittest to hinder the enemies
progress, he oftentimes scoured the Campagnia, assaulting to some purpose the
Venetians Stations, and men, who not being able to stand before the Dutch, were
sometimes shrewdly beaten: Therefore the Commonwealths Commanders were forced
to keep themselves within their Works till they were furnished with better
Soldiers; True it is, that Daniel Francol, coming out of Gradisca with some
few Horse, was taken in an Ambush that was laid for him, and with some 30 of
his men was slain by some Troops of the Albanesses; and Ferdinando Scotto, who
had the custody of the County of Monfalcone routed some of the Archdukes forces
who were come to plunder and infest that Country, and made them retreat into
Goritia: But the Commonwealth, which entered into this war with more servour
then preparation, began to meet with many great difficulties; for having in all
former times made use of paid-men in their Militia, as being more useful and
less suspicious to that Government, they had made less esteem of their natural
subjects; and according to the condition of those ages, when the Militia of
Italy served any Prince under famous Commanders, she, as being richer, and
abounding more in moneys then any other Prince, had better convenience of
furnishing her self with the valiantest Sould^ers, and most experienced
Commanders; by whose means and valor she made notable achievements, and
signal progress on Terra ferma; augmenting her State, and bringing it to that
Grandezza which now she injoys: But now the condition of times being changed,
the Italian Militia being reduced under the command of their natural Princes,
and Foreigners depending in a great part upon the King of Spain and House of
Austria, the Commonwealth found her self to be at the same time deprived of
her natural forces, and totally unfurnished of Foreigners: Wherefore
endeavoring to get Soldiers and Commanders, she found not so much difficulty
in getting them from amongst Italian Princes, from the Switzers and Grisons, as
to get passage for those that came to serve her out of France and the
Low Countries; the former not being willing to disfurnish themselves of their
best Soldiers in so turbulent times; and the others being loath to deprive
themselves of the Commerce of the State of Millain, so necessary for their
maintenance; and none of them being greatly desirous to offend the House of
Austria, upon which they in diverse respects have antien^ dependence; and no^ to
incense the King of Spain, who they knew would favor the House of Austria: Nor
could she hope for any assistance from ^omama, or (...) Ancona, from whence the
Venetians had wont to be furnished with so many Foot and Commander^ as did
supply their ordinary Garrisons, as well in their Forts in the Levant, and in
Dalmatia, a^ on T^ra forma; for the Pope professing to be outwardly a Neu^er in
all these Occurrences, but being in effect very much unsatisfied with the
Venetian^, by reason of the great disgusts between him and them in the
beginning of his Popedom, he was more fevere then any other Prince, in
prohibiting his subjects to assist them: Wherefore the Duke of ^arma, were it
either in respect of the Popes Orders, of whom he held in ^ee, or out of the
near interests and intelligence which he held with the Crown of Spain, being
offend^d with his Son Don Ottavi^, whom he loved dearly, though he was
illegitimate, condemned him to perpetual imprisonment for his forwardness to
serve the Venetians. The Duke of Modena showed little less anger against his
second Son Luigi, whom he banished for going to serve the Venetians against the
Dominions which were under the (...) Empire whereof he was a Feudatory: And the
Duke of Urbi^, who had formerly received great pay from the Commonwealth for
being their Captain General upon occasion of war, as his Ancestors had been;
having of late years found some difference in geting his stipend, the
Commonwealth growing weaty of that continual charge, now that they believed
well in the peace of Italy; had some years before sided with the Crown of
Spain, from whence he received better and readier day; so as they could not
build upon him in their present ^ed.

In this great difficulty; and streights of men and money, the Commonwealth was
forced to call in her Feudatoris, and all other her subjects who were in
service under any other Princes, and to pardon all their Banditti, though for
whatsoever he^nous offense; but that which seemed more uneasy, and of greater
importance, these Provisions being very scarce, and far short of the present
occasions, they placed the Tra^ed-Bands of their Country in their Garrisons in
Terra forma toward the S^ate of Millain; and drew out the best Soldiers from
thence, to make use of them in the Camp; to the no little wonder of all that
knew, that that Commonwealth which was formerly wont to be careful in Arming
their Confine upon the State of Millain whenever they ^ard the least news of
Arms in that State; and to recruit those very Garrisons with Foreigners, and
to provide so well for that part of their (...), as (...) it had been
undoubtedly to be assaulted; should now ((...) ^ey knew there was an Army on
foot in the State of Millain, and that (...) Spa^ards threatened ^o interest
themselves in that war on the Arc^dukes behalf) unfurnish that Frontier of
their best Soldiers, and should trust the defense of those places of such
importance; in the hands of their Country Mil^a or Trained-Bands, which were
unexperienced in war. Next (all this not being sufficient to serve their needs)
they betook themselves to Albania, Morea, and to Braccio di Maino, seeking to
get from thence, at great rates, as many men as possibly they could: And for
their last refuge, these not sufficing, they were at a very great charge in
taking a Regiment of 4000 Hollanders into pay, who were to be brought by
shipping to Venice; which provisions being courageously ordered, and executed
with no less expense, and even to the end of that war constantly, and by
general consent increased; though they witnessed the unanimity of their minds,
and the readiness of that Government to uphold the public dignity and
enterprises resolved upon by public Authority; yet so great a scarcity of
Soldiers did not only prejudice the conceived reputation of the Venetian
power, being so necessitated at the beginning of the war to borrow money of
Foreigners; and not finding much that way, to engage her self to her own
Citizens, in little more then one year, for above a Million of moneys, did not
a little lessen the opinion which was commonly held of their public Treasure,
which was held to be the richest of all Italian Princes; though to preserve
their credit they gave out that they would rather spare the public moneys,
even at the greatest need, and at the present take up at interest from private
men, then by wasting it when they might make use of other men's moneys, be
forced afterward to depend upon the will of others; which though it was not
then believed, was afterward proved to be true by the event; For the
Commonwealth having had many occasions of vast expenses in this war, yet she,
contrary to the opinion of all men, found means to supply all the necessities
which came upon her, with the public moneys; wherein she was never found to
withdraw from not only what was necessary, but from what was useful or fitting
for any whatsoever difficulties, or want of ready moneys; and it was affirmed
by those who were well experienced in their affairs, that the Commonwealth
upon this occasion spent above 14 Millions of Ducats: True it is, that their
Taxes and Impositions were very great throughout the whole State, which grew
thereby much indebted; and that all that not sufficing the whirepool of war,
they ran her in debt afterward for more then eight Millions.

These were the preparations for the war of Friuli; but not being able
otherwise to provide against the danger of the Spanish forces upon the confines
of Millain, they did it by making a (...) League with the Duke of Savoy; who
standing more in need of money then of men; to boot with many provisions which
they furnished them withal, they lent him great sums of money; to the end that
persisting still in his pretention of not laying down Arms, he might enforce
the Governor to disarm; or that if he would not disarm, they might keep him so
employed, as he should not be well able to assault the^r Confines: They also
caused moneys to be paid to the Marquess of Castiglione in France, to bring him
in to assist the Duke in Piedmont with 4000 Foot, and 4^0 Horse; though because
the execution of the Treaty at Asti was not totally off the hooks, it was
noised abroad that Castiglions French men were raised to assist the Venetians,
not the Duke of Savoy: And though these provisions, by reason of delay, could
not ease the present need of the Camp; for it was said that powerful aids were
preparing in Germany by the Germane Princes, to assist the Archduke; yet the
Commonwealths Army being somewhat increased, the Senate, that it might not lie
idle, but that it might attempt somewhat worthy of the Forces and honor of
Venice, ordered it to go and expugne Gradisca. This place was governed by Count
Richard Strasoldo, and by him fortified; and though Captain John Peirino, a
Walloon, was entered thereinto with 300 Curassiers and Dragoons; as soon as the
enemy drew near it, General Trautmistorft entered by the River with about 1200
Musketeers; and having encouraged the Soldiers and Citizens with promises of
daily succor, he left Peirino there, in whose valor he did much confide; and
went out himself with the Curassiers that he had brought with him, to make use
of them in the Campagnia, and to employ them where it was necessary elsewhere.

The Commonwealths Commanders went to the taking in of Gradisca, more out of
obedience to the Senate, then that they thought themselves able to take it with
so weak forces; and having first possessed themselves of a Castle near Fara,
they afterward drew near Gradisca, and began to draw a Line; but finding the
earth to be sandy, so as it was impossible for them to entrench themselves, or
to make Rampie^s; and wanting both men and other provisions, they quitted the
enterprise, Pietro Barbarico, consenting thereunto, who succeeded Erizzo, with
Title of Commissary; but being returned to Cormonzo, they were forced to
reassume the business by express Command from the Sen^te; who were desirous by
all means to have that place taken: And therefore bringing much earth thither
in Carts, they sat down before it; and having raised some Banks they planted
the Battery on four sides with 24 p^eces Cannon, and endeavored by their
approaches to get into the Ditch; a Raveline was built in defense of the Gate
which looked toward the Camp; this the besiegers thought necessary to take
before they should come to the assault; wherefore they endeavored to make a
Mine underneath it: To effect the which they sent many Pyoneers thither, who
whilst they endeavored to perfect the work with their Spaces and Pick-axes,
(for they met with Quarries of stone) the defendants were not idle, but shot
continually into the Camp, whereby they did much mischief; ran to and fro, and
made diligent reparations wheresoever it was necessary; and seeing the enemy
draw ^ear with their Trenches, they resolved to fall upon them by night within
their own works: Issuing therefore out a little before day, and finding the
Soldiers lie disorderly asleep in the Ditches, and without any military
discipline, they assaulted them, put them into great disorder, and returned to
Gradisca loaded with prey, having lost but six of their men: The Venetians Army
was more indamaged by the bad success of a Scalado, and by an ^ssault given to
the Raveline after the^ ^ad given fi^e to the Mine; For there being but few in
the Camp who durst go first on upon the enterprise, and mount the Rampires
first, those e^ that did so, who were for the most part Corsicks, though they
be^aved themselves egregiously, yet they lost their lives; not so much by any
stout resistance which they met with, as by their companions shameful flight;
who being terrified at the very first Volley of the enemies Musket, some of
them ran away, and returned into the Camp, some threw themselves upon the
ground; nor was it possible for the Soldiers to make them rally for any
threats, or blows which they could give them; and such was the consternation of
their mind, as many chose rather to dye basely by the hands of their own
Sergeants and Captains, whilst they endeavored to make them advance, then to
hazard the uncertain danger of an honorable death; nay it was said that many
of them dyed out of mere fear: It was impossible to renew the assault; for none
of the Soldiers durst advance; and the first ranks or files were so shunned, as
whereas in other places upon occasion of bickerings or assaults, they are much
endeavored by the valiantest Soldiers, and not obtained without much favor,
none could be hired to do so here. This mean while the great Duke of Tuscany,
and the Duke of Mantua, out of their alliance to the Archduke, and of the trust
which the Commonwealth imposed in them, had begun some Treaty of Peace, not
without the Emperors consent; who being desirous to see these differences
composed in a friendly manner, was not displeased with the interposing of these
Princes: But the Governor of Millain having received express Orders from Spain
to assist the Archduke, sent Don Sanchio di Luna, Keeper of the Citadel of
Millain, with many Soldiers and Artillery to the Confines of Bergamo and
Crema; wherefore the Commonwealth fearing what might ensue thereupon, admitted
the Governor into the Treaty of Peace, who having to this purpose sent Don
Andrea Manriques to Venice, demanded in the Kings Name that they should desist
from oppugning Gradisca; and they finding daily more difficulty in the
Enterprise, by reason of the continual succor which could not be kept from
thence, willingly honested the occasion of the necessity they saw they were in,
of either desisting with little honor, or of continuing the Enterprise with
little hopes, and less advantage, by the present color of complying with the
Kings desires: So the Army rise from before Gradisca on the 26th day after they
had sat down before it, and retreated to their former Quarters of Cormors,
Meriana, and Medea.

The endeavors of agreement were afterward reassumed, and diverse proposals
made, not only in Venice by the Popes Nuntio and the Agents of other Ministers,
but also in the Emperors Court between Cardinal Clesell, Cesars chief Agent,
and Giorgio Iustiniano the Venetian Ambassador, but all to no purpose; for all
agreeing in the principal point of providing for the business of the Uscocchi,
they disagreed in the manner how. The Archduke, who thought himself unjustly
assaulted by the Venetians, would not listen to any thing before he was first
put into possession of all that had been taken from him: The Commonwealth on
the contrary would not give way to any restitution till the Uscocchi were
driven out of the Gulf, wherein they insisted upon more then they had done at
first, demanding not only the expulsion of their Chieftains alone, as they had
done at the beginning of the War, but (that they might dig up the mischief by
the roots, as they termed it) the total extirpating of that Nation, and of the
other banished men who were joined with them; and they persisted so much
thereupon, as they did not only refuse the resigning of the Towns which they
had taken, as was proposed by the Pope, together with a suspension of Arms till
such time as the business of the Croates should be agreed upon to their
satisfaction; but neither would they accept of the Governor of Millain's word,
given them in the Kings name, and the security offered them by the Pope, that
they should be satisfied in that point, as soon as what had been taken should
be restored; and the provision therein was such, as not only the Chieftains,
but those that were expelled the Commonwealth should be driven out. The
Venetians alleged for their obdurancy herein, that the Commonwealth had been
several times fed with such words and promises to no purpose; which being but
badly performed afterward, they seemed to have just occasion to persist stiffly
in keeping what they had got, as a pledge or pawn at least of the total
extirpation of the Pirates, by them pretended unto: which demands the Austrians
thought very unreasonable, who argued by this their so great tenacity that they
aimed more at being masters of what belonged to others, then at the purging
their Gulf of Pirates. The war continued therefore in Friuli, with greater
forces, and preparations, but with but small progress made by the Venetians:
much succor came to the Archduke from Germany, part at his own charges, part
at the Emperors; and several valiant and well experienced Commanders were sent
him from other Princes: as Count d' Ampierre, the Commandatore Coloredo, the
Baron of Lelile, and Colonel Standardi, amongst others there came 4000 Foot and
500 Horse, all select men raised at the King of Spains cost, and sent into
Friuli under the command of Don Baldasser Marradas, Don Inigo di G^evara, Count
d' Egnate, and Ambassador for that King in the Emperors Court, a very
accura^e Lord, and vigilant in public affairs; and to whom the King committed
all the charge and provision of succor which he contributed to the Archdukes
service. General Trautmistorft not thinking it now any longer time only to make
excursions, but to keep the Field and face the Enemy, past over Lisonso with
his Army, took up his quarters under Luciniso, intending to fall upon the
Venetians quarters; whose valor he so little valued, as he cared not to
fortify himself: The Venetian Commanders had notice of the weakness of his
Works, and of the Enemies negligence in fortifying themselves: and thinking it
a fit occasion to prevent being offended, they resolved to assault them
unexpectedly by night. The Venetians Camp was no less reinforced then the
Archdukes, with Soldiers raised in Terra ferma, Sclavonia, Albania and Greece:
and having altered their Officers, they had made a new form of Government: in
stead of Barbarico, three Commissaries were sent to the Camp from Venice:
Antonio Pri^i, Procurator of St Mark, I^van Battista Foscarini and Francisco
Erizzo; the first had the title of Commissary-general, the other of plain
Commissari^s. These were the only three that voted, and all things were
resolved upon by the Votes of two: the Council of War being therefore first
called, and consulted with, wherein was Don L^igi d^ Esta, General of the great
Cavalry, Francisco Martin^go de Conti di Malpaga, General of the Light Horse,
Ferrante de Rossi, General of the Arti^ery, Pompeo Iustiniano Camp maste, and
Camillo Trivisano Commissary of the Albanesse Horse, called Stradi^tta: these
assisted the three Commissaries with their advice, and gave their opinions, but
had no Votes: the execution of what was resolved upon belonged to Iustiniano,
as Camp-master, which he ordered under the Commissary-General, guided the
Directions, and directed the intended Enterprises.

The enemy being then to be assaulted within his Quarters, according to the
resolution already taken, Iustiniano disposed of the Army into several
Squadrons; the first assault fell to Trivigiano's share with his Albanesse, and
to Horatio Baglioni with his Brigade and some Corsicans; the former on the
west side where the Hills ended; and the others on the south side toward the
Campagnia. Trivigiano took some works far from the enemies Quarters, killed the
defendants, and past no further; but Baglione at the same time, which was
daybreak, forcing the first Port of the Rampires, and having seized on the
Court, found a stiff dispute at the second; for the Austrians, awakened at the
noise, ran in to the defense; and had not some Corsicks come to relieve him, he
had undoubtedly been slain, as many of his men were: A great onset was also
made on the other side; which though it appeared to be prosperous at first, yet
the assailants were forced to give back; the same befalling them as did those
that made the assault at the Raveline before Gradisca, who fought more
valiantly, and received more harm from their friends who were upon their backs,
then from the^r enemies who were before them; for the former being timorous and
fearful, stood crouching, and many of them lay grovelling on the ground, who
firing their Muskets low slew the best of their own men. The Venetian being
returned without having done any good effect to Mariano, had no be^ter success
in the assault which they resolved afterward to give to the Fort Stella, built
by the Austrians on the other side the River in form of a Cavalier, against
those of Sagra and Fogliano, held by the Venetians; for Pietro di Vasques, a
Spaniard who was Captain there, fore-knowing the enemies resolution, put his
men quietly in a defensive posture, and repulss'd them, with the death of above
a hundred of the assailants: The loss which the enemy received was increased by
a great mortality in the Venetian Camp, which beginning with their horses, came
afterward to their men; for the stench of the dead horses being intolerable,
the air grew so infected as it begot dangerous diseases; whereby the Camp was
reduced to so small a number, a^ if they had been then assaulted by the enemy,
it would assuredly have been totally defeated: A danger whereat the Common
wealths Commanders were much troubled, the courage and gallantry of the enemy
especially being considered, and the little esteem which the Austrians made of
their men: But they were afterward somewhat inhea^ed by the taking of two
places situated on two several ways which lead from Germany; and therefore of
great consequence, Ponteba and Chiavaretto. Ponteba is cut through in the midst
by the River Fella, which falls into the Tagliamento; the ne^her part the^eof
belongs to the Venetians, and is called Ponteba Venetiana; the other part to
the Dutch, and is called Austriaca: The Soldiers which guard Austriaca passing
over the River had taken Ponteba Venetiana; which when the Camp heard, 2000
Foo^ of the Country were pre^ently dipatch'd away thither, under Commissary
Fosclarini, Francisco Martinengo, led on by Count Nicolo Gualdo of Vicenza,
Governor of Udine, by Captain Antonio Manzano, and by Captain Daniele
Antonini, of the same City, who when they had past the River drove the Dutch
out of Austriaca; and did not only recover the booty which they had taken, but
moreover, took much Merchandise which they found in Austriaca; and entering
further in, burnt Malborgeto and Trivese, two neighboring Towns: nor had the
other Commissary Erizzo less fortunate success, who advancing toward
Chiavaretto, together with Trivigiano and his Stradiotti, and a good strength
of Foot led on by Iovanni M^rtinengo, took it, to the no little praise of
Trivigiano, to whom almost the whole honor thereof is due, he being the first
that came thither, and the first that did manfully assault it. The taking of
Chiavaretto was succeeded by the like of Luciniso, the Austrians having
abandoned it, who going to recover Chiavaretto, repast over the Lisonzo: which
when the Venetians knew, they marched immediately thither; and possessing
themselves easily of the Town, which was but weakly guarded, they in a short
time made themselves masters of the Castle, situated upon the top of a Hill:
where after three days stout resistance, the defendants were forced to yield
for want of water. The like did those of a certain Fort called la Trinita,
built by the Austrians, a little higher: to these happy successes was added the
taking of Fara, a small Castle between Luciniso and Gradisca, which being
played upon by the Cannon, yielded upon Articles; and Baglione, a valiant
Colonel, was sorely wounded before it. Thus did the affairs of the Venetians
alter in Friuli: but they were not idle the mean while in Istria and Dalmatia;
for Marcho Loredano, Commissary in those parts, and Benedetto da Leze,
Commissary of Horse, as they scoured the Country, met with several incounters,
wherein having the better, they took many prisoners, and slew many: and some
Galleys going to Antignana, after having played upon it long, they took it upon
Articles; and a^erwards scouring along the Coast of Pessino, they put it to
fire and sword; and Iovanni Iacomo Zane, Commissary of Dalmatia, went to before
Segna; but for want of provision durst not attempt it; but turning to
Mosconizza, after having played upon it two days, took it: Berses upon the bank
of the River, and the Fort of Sirissa, over against the Island Pago, through
the Garrisons discord, fell also into the Venetians hands.

But not long after the Austrians being become masters of the field in those
parts, by the multitude of men that came in to assist them, they ran all over
with much terror, burning and ruinating all the Country, and the Venetians
Subjects: the affairs of which States began sore to go less in reputation, all
men's eyes being bent upon Lombardy, where the war grew hotter between the
Governor of Millain and the Duke. The Duke (as has been said) was entered into
private consederacy with the Venetians: in whose name publicly, but privately
for the service of the Duke of Savoy, a Regiment of 4000 Foot was raised in
France by the Marquess of Castiglione, besides many others who flocked in
threves into Piedmont: The Duke had also made his complaints in that Court, of
the difficulties interposed by the Governor in the performance of the Treaty:
and though the Reasons wherewith he strove to imprint in that Nation, the
necessity which they had for the Kings honor to make the Articles be observed,
prevailed but little with the King and Queen, who were not to be removed from
their friendship with Spain; yet having made great impression in the Prince of
Conde, and in the other Colleagues, they afforded them more occasion
efficaciously to demand the Reformation which they pretended unto, of the
Kingdom: openly complaining that the Queen Mother by reason of her secret
intelligence held with the Court of Spain; and the chief Officers and
State-Ministers of the Kingdom, for the great advantage they got in that Court,
and that they might not withstand the Queens authority, did wink at, and did
not value the Kingdoms sa^ety, nor the honor of the King, who by reason of his
years, was incapable of knowing how much the sustaining of Piedmont concerned
the safety of that Court. Wherefore these having sent Monsieur d' Orfe to
Piedmont, to the end that his assisting the Duke in the name of the
Confederates, he might encourage him, and give him reputation; they also made
open demonstration in France that they would savor the Dukes affairs by all
the means they might. But in effect their whole ends tended to bring about
their own interests, whereunto the union of the two Crowns being contrary, they
found no better means to break it then by pressing the affairs of Piedmont; and
that the King of Spain being busied in Italy might be less able to assist their
King; and yet the King and Queen, were it either to take away this occasion of
complaint from the Princes, or that they had a real value for the observance of
the Treaty, the execution whereof they never had forborne to endeavor, though
in a moderate manner, as becomes Princes really united, they always found the
Court of Spain very ready to allow of the Dukes disarming, as legitimate, and
forward to order the Governor, that disbanding his Army he might readily, and
without difficulty or delay observe the residue of the Treaty: not so much for
that the peace of Italy was there desired, as for that the Duke of Lerma, who
was interested in Inoioso's defense, and thinking that according to the custom
of Courts, he was bound to make good his actions, would that all exceptions
being laid aside, the peace of Asti should by all means be executed, and made
good. But were it either that those orders were not over precise, or were
peradventure so expressed, as that they left a power in the Governor to do
therein according to the condition of the present times and occurrences: or
that the Duke thought he could not execute them, in consideration of the new
accidents, and preparations for war, as well on the Dukes behalf, as on the
Venetians: or else, as some would have it, that he had so involved himself in
the thought thereof, or had engaged himself so deeply, that the Duke should by
his means be brought to humble himself to the King, and that the Capitulations
of Asti should be cancelled, as that he thought he could not in honor do less,
he did not much care to see them performed; many were of opinion that as the
aforesaid orders proceeded not from the Kings nor his Councils mind, but from
the Duke of Lerma's mere will, whose excessive authority, grown odious to the
Grandees of Spain, began to decline (as has been said) a^er the success of
Piedmont, so were they not punctually observed, nor much valued by Don Pietro;
for he thinking that the Grandezza and Majesty of the Crown lay now upon his
Shoulders, which he thought had not been very carefully sustained by the Duke
of Lerma, out of private respects; was not well pleased that Lerma preferring
his own affairs before those of others, unless it were In^iosa's, whom he
detested should abandon the public cause: which he professing himself to be
very zealous of, was ready to repair; wherefore not openly gainsaying the Kings
commands, but execusing himself upon the Venetians new occasions, upon the
Dukes new commotions, and upon the strange pretentions of the French, he did as
it were by force draw the Court to incline to his opinion. Hereunto was added,
that he not being able to per swade himself but that the past disorders had
been occasioned through his predecessors fault, and tacit Collusion, he took
it for granted, that when the Duke should see himself assaulted by a powerful
Army, commanded by himself, who proceeded really, and would assault Piedmont
with all the true rules, and rigor of war, should out of excessive fear,
yield, and humble himself unto the King: he therefore being big with vast
conceits, promised by Letters written to the Court, that he would bring him
under, without almost once unsheathing his sword, and without breaking the
peace of Italy, by his demonstrations only, and by his preparations: and that
undoubtedly he would repair the public dignity, and that he would easily
reduce affairs into their former condition. Which hopes being greedily
conceived, and believed that he should be able to make that Court slacken their
former orders, and permit more freedom to him in conducting the public
affairs, according to his own mind, and according as times and occasions should
serve: but howsoever affairs went there (for the more intimate occasions of
this new commotion appeared too observe and too repugnant within themselves,
and peradventure were no less unknown to the Officers through whose hands they
past, then to the people who only minded the effects) it is certain, that the
Duke either took, or the Governor gave him occasion of re-assuming those Arms:
which being naturally given to war, he had unwillingly laid down; from the
wresting of the meaning of the Capitulations of Asti, from the dispute about
their execution, and from the rigorous p^etentions about the point of honor
between the Duke and the Governor. Wherefore the Governor seeing him busy in
preparing for a new war, and being himself no less desirous to set it on fire,
t^en the Duke thinking undoubtedly to bring him lower, and to subdue his
Forces, he began to prepare an Army not inferior to that of the preceding
year: he took order for men in Germany, in Burgony, in Swisserland, and in the
Kingdom of Naples; he disburst moneys to fill up the Brigades of Lombardy, and
to raise new Foot in the State of Millain: so rather as it were out of sport,
and out of a fained show, then out of any deliberate will, war was again begun
by him who was able to have quenched the fire thereof: which afterward
breaking forth in earnest, and contrary to his opinion who caused it, was the
occasion of much prejudice, and ruin to the people of Lombardy. And as the
first war was not improperly termed the Duke of Lerma's war, so this upon
better grounds was called Don Pietro di Tolledo's war. The troubles of France
were at this time reduced to such terms, as the King being near the Princes
Forces with a powerful Army, the business had like to have been decided by a
Battle. But the King and Queen choosing rather, even upon disadvantagious
terms, to forbear shedding of civil blood, and to secure affairs, then to get
the Victory by the ruin and destruction of the Kingdom, and by the common
danger, were not against According many things by way of Negotiation, even
contrary to their wills and authority: Whereof two were the ^iefest; the first,
that the principal State-ministers should be removed from their Offices; in
whose places others of the confiding Princes should be put; the other, that the
King should swear to make the Treaty of Asti be observed. Wherefore the King
understanding what orders the King of Spain had given to the Governor,
commanded Lodovico Mangia^te, who was his Ageat in Turin, to go to Millain, and
solicit the execution of that Treaty. Who being come to Millain, and having
spoken with the Governor, desiring him in the Kings name that he would become
more pliable, and prosecute the begun execution of that Capitulation with all
sincerity, received this answer; that the Kings Army was much lessened by the
dismission of the Swissers, and of those of Tuscany, Urbane, Parma and Lucca,
and by the death and running away of the Lombardy Regiments: that the King was
not obliged to disarme by the Articles of Asti, and less upon new occasions to
reassume Arms; that notwithstanding he the Governor had, for the entire
observancy of the Capitulations, offered the Duke reciprocal restitution of
what had been taken; which the Duke had refused: and that not relying upon the
words of two so good, and so great Kings, who offered to secure him from the
Forces of the State of Millain; he contrary to the said Capitulations, had
detained most of his men in Piedmont, and therefore given new reason of
jealousies: and that notwithstanding, he the Governor offered again the
proposal of restitution, and promised not to offend him, if the Duke would
resolve to observe the Capitulations entirely: and that if he should refuse to
do this, he the Agent might witness this to the King, to the end that he might
be fully satisfied of the new preparations made by the Duke, and of what he
should hereafter do; and that he might plainly see, that he the Governor would
proceed with such authority and reputation as became his King, without
obviating the peace. The Governor gave this answer in writing to the Agent,
and made the same be given to the King by the Duke of Montelion in Paris, who
writ him word back, that the King had approved thereof. But the Prince of
Conde, and the other confederates seemed to understand it otherwise, whose
authority by this new and advantageous agreement was then very great, and got
ground upon the King, who by reason of his tender years was not yet constant in
his Counsels and Resolutio^s. They therefore agreed to send an Ambassador into
Italy, and made choice of Philippo di Bettune, a nimble-witted Gentleman, and
well experienced in the affairs of Italy, where he had been Ambassador many
years with the Pope from the King: his Commission was to find out the
Governor, and press him to the perfect performance of the Treaty. This mean
while all things inclined daily to a manifest breach in Lombardy; for new seeds
of troubles being already sown, the Duke armed strongly, and so did the
Governor; the Duke threa^ned to reassume the war in Montferrat by reason of
the Duke of Mantua's backwardness to pardon the Rebels: the Governor would
quarter his men in that State, not only to defend it from the Duke, but also
that he might be the readie^ to offend Piedmont; and to the end, that the Duke
of Savoy fearing to be assaulted nearer hand, and as it were at his own doors,
might lay aside his thought of assaulting others. But the Duke of Mantua
refusing to receive foreign Soldiers into Montferrat, the Princes of Italy
stormed thereat, and chiefly the Duke of Savoy, who from a ^ore assailant,
being become a jealous Protector of that State, did not only exclaim against
it, for his own interest, but, to raise suspicions of the Governor, and of the
Spanish Court, and to make them be ill thought of by the Italians; and renewing
the ancient jealousies, he gave out, that under color of defending and
protecting Montferrat, the Governor did fully intend to usurp it; and the
Queen Mother exclaiming much against it in the Court of Spain, the King of
Spain commanded absolutely that it should be forborne. At this time the Duke of
Savoy increased in reputation, it being given out that the French Ambassador
came in favor to him, who, as it was said, was sent from the Prince of Conde,
and from the consederates, who managed the affairs of that Court as they
listed, and seemed to adhere sufficiently to his cause; not was the tacit
League between him the Duke, and the Commonwealth of Venice, of less
consideration; which being formerly kept secret, grew now to be manifest. The
King of England, and many other Protestant Princes of Cermany, who seemed to
^avour him, confirmed him in his belief, that being upheld by so many, and so
potent Princes, he might withstand the violence which was thr^atned him; and
this opinion was increased in many men by the coming of Ambassadors at this
time to Turin from the King of England, and from some German Princes: but (that
which did out do all other appearings and seemings) Marshal de Deguieres's
coming into Piedmont made all men wonder, he having been long held to be one of
the best Commanders in France, and one who took the Dukes affairs very much to
heart, and more an enemy to Spain then any other Frenchman: this man, though
he came in a peaceful posture, and unarmed, as it were to be a superintendent
over the French Embassadour's Negotiations, and privately to inform himself
whether things were in that dangerous condition as the Duke related them to be:
yet the good correspondency which was held between him and the Duke, and his
continual assisting him; his being nominated in the Capitulations of Asti, to
see all things performed; and much more the great desire which he and the other
Frenchmen seemed to have of maintaining and backing the Duke upon this
occasion, so to lessen the Authority of the Spaniard in Italy; made it appear
manifestly, that if the Governor should persist resolute in not disarming he
would call the French Soldiery into Piedmont, who were said to be ready at his
beck upon the Confines of Italy, and prepared for Piedmont. His coming
therefore did not only much countenance the Duke, but all the Ambassadors
future Negotiation: and the Duke being very vigilant, and ready witted, and
accustomed to consort the disposition of his genius with outward
demonstrations, made much use of this present occasion in b^asting of his own
Forces, and of the assistance which was promised him, and which he hoped for:
wherefore receiving the Marshal with excessive, and unusual honor, and with
singular magnificence, and keeping close at very private Counsel with him, ^e
seemed to repose much confidence in him, not pretermitting any term of honor
and liberality to make to himself propitious, particularly such, who being
intimate with the Marshal might further most his ends and his desires: but
these so many demonstrations did more prejudice then further the conclusion of
the agreement; for the Spanish Ministers of State being very much troubled at
the King of France and King of England's interposing themselves in the affairs
of Italy, did very much dislike, nor could they tolerate the Capitulation
agreed upon in France, wherein the King swore unto the Prince of Conde, and the
other confederates, that he would cause the Articles of Asti to be performed;
and the Ambassadors and Marshals coming to see them executed, and the new
preparations which were said to be made in France; for Italy being hereunto
added, they thought that the French did arrogate that authority to them in
Italy by rigor and threats, which the occasion and conjuncture of times, and
much easiness of the preceding Governor of Millain had procured unto their
King; and that the Venetians and other Princes, did by declaring themselves to
adhere unto the Duke, pretend to have an eye unto their Crowns authority: so as
if the power and dignity thereof were therein too much concerned, they thought
themselves the more bound to resist what so great a union of wills did
threaten, for that the danger was greater, that if they should give way, it
might be esteemed they did it out of fear of the French Forces. A respect which
if it penetrated deep into any one, it must needs make a deeper impression in
the Governor; as in him who being come into Italy, wholly inflamed with
exalted thoughts, who had put himself in a posture of restoring his Kings
authority to its former condition, would have been too much failing to himself,
and to the opinion which he had generally won, if he had gone less in any
thing, then what he had at first so openly professed; and it would have been
basely done by him, it seeing his affairs grow worse and worse, he had not
endeavored by all possible means to sustain them: and if he had not been the
more sollicitous in providing for war, by how much his enemies bravadoes were
the greater. Therefore to boot with the moneys which he had already disburst
for raising of men; that it might be seen he durst she^ his face, and to make
them jealous who did almost already openly threa^en him, he sent some Forces to
the Venetians Confines, and to the Confines of Piedmont; and as if he would
assault the Sta^e of Venice (for the effects of their League with the Duke
appea^ed daily more and more) he gave order for a Bridge to be made over the
Adda. Whereat though the Commonwealth were much troubled, yet having a great
scarcity of men at that time, the Senators not being able to do more were
forced to commit the defense of that part of the State to the people of the
Country.

Whilst the Governor was thus busied in making preparations every where, the
Ambassador, after having staid some days at Turin, came to Millain; the
substance of whose Embassy was, That the King had, by reason of the accidents
which hindered the laying down of Arms, used many endeavors to the Duke, and
given him his word to secure him from the extraordinary Militia of the State of
Millain; but that the Duke not being therewithal satisfied, the King, out of
his great desire to public peace, and by the obligation which was upon him by
the Articles of Asti^, did desire him that he would prosecute the disarming
which was begun by his Predecessors; to the end that the restitutions of the
Towns might be come to; and the execution of other things appointed by the
peace: To this proposal, which was given in in writing, the Governor replied
in a long discourse given also in in writing; wherein by a methodical Narration
of all things that had occurred from the beginning of the war of Montferrat, to
the peace made at Asti; he inferred, That the King had done all things for the
protection and security of that State, to which he was much solicited by the
Queen of France; That the King was not bound by the Treaty of peace to dismiss,
no not so much as one man; and that the Duke had only at the beginning given
satisfaction in this point, but that he had afterward openly countervened it
by the many novelties attempted against Montferrat, by his new Levies of men,
and by his League lately concluded with the Venetians against the House of
Austria: So as the King was in all acceptations free from the Articles of
peace; That the Duke refused the security offered him by the words of two so
great Kings, not out of any doubt or distrust, but in favor to the Venetians;
and that therefore the King of France was no longer bound by the Capitulations
to favor the Dukes hidden ends: He concluded with offering readily to observe
the rest of the Articles, if the Duke would observe them punctually on his
behalf; and with passing his word again in the Kings name, not to wrong him;
But as for laying down Arms, he confessed freely it was impossble to do it by
reason of the Venetians new Commotions; And finally, he entered his
Protestation, That if the Duke should refuse this, and should withdraw from
reciprocal restitution; the King should remain free from any whatsoever
obligation, since he had abundantly satisfied him by the abovesaid offer.

This was the substance of the Answer given to the French Ambassador, who at
his going from Millain was earnestly desired, That as a good servant to his
King, who was by affinity so nearly joined to the Crown of Spain, he would use
the best means he could to appease the Duke; and disposing him to make good the
Treaty, keep him from favoring the Venetians, whose ends were only to usurp
the Archdukes States, who was a just Prince; and this the rather, for that the
Duke might be sure he would thereby irritate the King of Spain, toward whom he
had reason to proceed with all manner of respect; and that therefore taking the
word of both the Kings, he should not provoke the anger of the whole House of
Austria against him, wherewith he the Duke was so much interessed both by
alliance, and in so many other respects: The Ambassador promised he would do
so; and having therewith obtained a Suspension of Arms for the whole month of
August, which was then began, he went to Turin; where he was present at a Diet
in Moncallieri, between the Duke, the Marshal, and the Venetian Ambassador,
who was admitted thereinto under pre^ence of making him acquainted with every
thing; but in effect, because that Commonwealth which is naturally of her self
sparing in spending, having till now been more liberal in words and promises,
then in deeds, the Duke and the rest of that Cabal, thought it now a very
fitting time to make use of her troubles and danger to make hercontribute a
great sum of money which they pretended to from her; and therefore the
Governors Answer and offers being heard, the Duke began to listen to the
proposals, seeming to be thereunto inclined rather for want of moneys, whereof
he and his State were much exhausted, then out of any desire or inclination to
abandon the common Cause: The French Ambassador, under color of being a
peacemaker, assisted him in his drift; and the Marshal more then he; who being
to be the head of the French succor, was to share deeply in the Venetians
money; and therefore concluding that it was impossible for Piedmont to sustain
so great a war as was threatened her, otherwise then by the Sword of France, and
Purse of Venice; he minded the Duke that he could build but little upon the
former if he should fail of the other; But the Commonwealth, which saw affairs
were so far proceeded in, as it was impossible to come to any atonement;
especially the fiery nature of both parties being considered; little valued the
threats which were made under the color of necessity; and knowing whether
these counsels, and this sudden inclination to peace tended, did not at all
fear being left alone to bear the burden of the war; and so much the less, for
that the Duke was already envelloped in many difficulties, and was already by
his demonstrations so far engaged in war, as it was impossible, at least very
hard, for him to draw back his hand: Wherefore she seemed as cunningly to be
inclined to a composure of affairs, which she was as much desired to do as the
Duke was by the Archduke, and by the other Princes; and it was in her power to
obtain it upon very honorable terms: wherefore the Duke, hoping that the
Negotiation about peace would be a perfect antidote against the Venetians
Tenacity, gave order that the Treaty should be had in Rome with the Pope; who
for this and for other affairs sent Alessandro Lodovisio, Archbishop of
Bollognia, into Lombardy, under the Title of Nuntio in extraordinary, that by
his Authority he might stop the Governors forces; who growing every day hotter
against the Duke, was gone from Millain to Pavia, to hasten on the war the
more; which whilst he threatens openly on this side to Piedmont, yet he plotted
it privately on that side where it might be worse for the Duke, as least
suspected by him. The Duke of Nemours; a French Prince, of the Duke of Savoy's
blood, and the nearest to the Ducal Line next after the children of this
present Duke; upon whom, that Line sailing, the States of Savoy and Piedmont
were to divolve, was for some years past not well satisfied with the Duke, upon
occasion of some private Picque; wherefore he had not succored him at all upon
occasion of the last troubles of Piedmont; but seeing new Commotions now about
to arise from the Capitulations of Asti, he laid aside all past enmity and
rancor, and offered to serve him in that war freely of his own accord with 4000
Foot, and 500 Horse: The Duke accepted the offer, and moneys were disburst unto
him in point of pay; and he was expected with his men in Piedmont according to
his promise: But his ancient hatred and desire of revenge prevailing over his
new Reconcilia^ion; or his ambition and desire of Reign over his conjunction in
blood and his obligations, he closed with the Governor of Millain, who gave
him both men and moneys; promising to assault Savoy with the same men wherewith
he was to have fallen into Piedmont; which when taken, he offered to
acknowledge it as held in perpetual Fee from the Crown of Spain. The Governor
listened to this offer, that he might weaken the Dukes Forces by diversion; and
therefore sending money to Nemours, (...) ordered Monsieur di Disse to pass into
Savoy in assistance of this enterprise with 6000 Foot, and 400 Horse, which
were raised by his directions in Burgony: And Nemours promised moreover that
divert Princes and great Lords of France, who were his friends and adherents,
would likewise come thither upon this occasion: Nor was it to be doubted but
that the Duke being thus assaulted would have been mightily troubled; he not
having forces sufficient for two sore war^ made upon him at one and the same
time; in Savoy by Nemours, and in Piedmont by the Governor: But a Letter
written from the Governor into Spain freed him from this so near and so
important danger; wherein the complotting of this business was entirely
contained, which were it by chance, or by the craft of some of the Governors
servants, came to the Dukes hands, and afforded him opportunity to prevent what
was plotted against him: Wherefore sending Prince Victorio away in all haste to
those parts; he also gave order to Monsieur di Lanz, Governor of Savoy, to
secure himself as speedily as might be of Nissi and Remigli, places which lying
upon the Frontier of Savoy toward Burgony, served as a gate to let in, or to
keep out, the Governors men who were to enter by those parts under Diffe. This
Order being readily executed by Lanz rendered Nemours his business vain; for
he, seeming as if he were coming with his men into Piedmont, but indeed turning
upon those Towns, was repulss'd by the Dukes men: wherefore forced to retire
more inward toward Chiaromonte and Cleramonte, his men out of mere necessity
of livelihood and maintenance, fell to sack the neighboring Villages: whilst
Nemours kept idle in those parts, expecting that the forces of Burgony should
have come and have joined with him; but it was in vain to expect that; for
Nissi and Remigli holding for the Duke, and the Governors of Lions, Dolpheny,
and the Duchy of Burgony, discovering themselves forthwith to be for the Duke;
and soon after all the Princes of France, moved thereunto out of consideration
of the great prejudice which might thereby ensue unto the Kingdom, if the
Spanish Forces entering into Savoy should more inviron the Confines of France,
Disse could not get to join with Nemours: And Albertus, Archduke of Austria,
who, as Lord of Flaunders, and of the Low Countries, governed the County of
Burgony; though he made use, for the most part, of the King of Spains Armies
and Militia, and of the Spanish Officers, in the Government of those Provinces,
yet would he not by any means be brought to assist or consent unto that
Enterprise, were it either that he was unwilling to disturb the Peace between
his men and the States of France, or for that that enterp^e not being either
commanded or approved of by the King, but only framed by the State Officers in
Italy, he did more value the near interest of blood which he and the Infanta
Arch-dutchess his wife, and Daughter to the King, (whose Dowry those States
were) ^ad with the Duke of Savoy, and with his children, born of a Sister of
his Wives, than he did the Governor of Millain's designs; nay, giving severe
Orders to his Officers in Burgony, that they should not countenance Nemours in
any sort, nor receive his men, he was abandoned by all at the fairest of his
play: So the violence of that storm began suddenly to pass over, which, whilst
it hovered in the Air, did much alter the Dukes Affairs, which continued
troubled for many months; but for all this he did not give over the defense of
Piedmont, where having Garrisonned the Towns of Asti and Vercelles, and made
Count Guido Governor of the forme^, and the Marquess of Clausio, who had
escaped some few months before from the Castle of Millain, where he was kept
close prisoner, Governor of the other; he caused a Bridge to be made over the
Poe, between Verr^a and Crescentino, to the end that the Counties of Asti and
Vercelles being thereby joined, they might more easily relieve one another in
case they should be assaulted; and having sent the remainder of the pay to
Castiglione, and the other Commanders who raised men for him, he staid
expecting him: The Governor did the like in Pavia, but with more fervency;
where breathing forth nothing but fire and sword, and being impatient of any
the least delay, he hasted provisions, that he might go into the field; and
giving out that he would be all August with his Army upon the Confines of
Piedmont, ^he made his Artillery be Imbarqued upon the Poe, took Order for many
Pioneers and Bridges, and disburst moneys in Montferrat and Millain for the
raising of new Regiments; and laying all the Civil Government of the State upon
Don Sanchio di Lu^a, Keeper of the Ci^adel of Millain, he was wholly intent in
providing for War, promising mavelous things unto himself from so great
prep^rations; and the Nuntio being come to Pavia about the midst of August, he
gave him Audience bo^ted and spurred, in which posture he used then to go
through the City, that it might be seen he was in a readiness to march; and the
Nuntio desiring a short suspension of Arms, he would not grant it, saying, That
he was come too late: But all things were not so ready for going to the field
as the Governor could have desired; for neither were the Swissers come from
their own homes, nor were the Dutch come into the State of Millain; and many
draught-horses for the Artillery, and many Arms which were expected from
Germany for the use of the Army, were not yet come: Execution therefore not
answering resolution, and businesses not proceeding on so fast as was expected;
nay, new difficulties arising every day, the Governor began to slacken that
vigor of mind wherewith till now he had with some violence been transported;
and beginning to know the difference between saying and doing, he found also
that the bad success of the last War was not wholly through his Predecessors
fault: His courage was also cooled by the bad success of the business of Savoy,
which was the chief groundwork of his designs; wherein, to boot with having
spent above 300000 Ducats, he had also consumed the Marquess of Disse his whole
Regiment of Burgonians, which had caused no less diversion to him than to the
Duke: He was not a little scandalized neither, that the enterprise should be
thought to have miscarried through the wickedness of his men, corrupted by the
Dukes moneys; for his chief Secretary was imprisoned as guilty of having made
the Letter written unto the King come unto the Duke of Savoy's hands; and
though nothing could be proved against him, he was rigidly tormented: He was
likewise detained by continual remembrances from the Court, that he should
rather break off, than embrace any new occasions of new ruptures; finding those
Ministers of State more inclined to preserve that Authority and Greatness which
they received privately, and the Crown publicly, from the tranquillity of
peace, then to advance it by perturbation of affairs: chiefly when he called to
mind that the Duke being desperate, and extraordinarily exasperated, not caring
into wha^ danger he ran, seemed to desire nothing but tumults, and alteration
of affairs, which was contrary to the Crowns interest in Italy. Of which
opinion some of the State-ministers of the State of Millain seemed also to be;
those chiefly who out of a particular friendship to the Marquess Inoiosa, and
for good turns received from him, thought it suited more with his reputation,
that either the peace made by him should be perfected, or else the new war
prove unfortunate. And as, for the aforesaid respect, moneys were not provided
in Spain, so some State-ministers of the State of Millain, not going along with
the Governor in his opinions and ends, but opposing as much as they might such
provisions, and resolutions as were to be made, caused diffidence in him in his
Counsels, and impediments in the execution of what was resolved upon: wherefore
he who was almost surrounded with Competitors, consulting in things of
weightiest importance only with Vives, who was then his Confident, communicated
nothing to the rest save slight and ordinary affairs; whereat they thinking
themselves injured did the more willingly thwart his Counsels and Resolutions.

The Ambassador Bettune returned about the end of August from Turin, who
professing that he had used all his best endeavors to make the Duke bear all
due respect to the King, and to the house of Austria, brought with him in the
Kings name a middle way for composure of the present differences. Which was,
that the Treaty of Asti should be made good, with the reciprocal restitution of
all places taken away; that it might be lawful for them both to keep armed,
with reciprocal word of not offending each other till such time as it should be
fully accorded within a certain prefixed time, in which interim the whole Treaty
might be fully performed; and that the Governor should abstain from injuring
the Venetians, whilst the King should endeavor the composure of those
differences by his Ambassadors, sent to the Emperor, to the Archduke, and to
the Venetians.

These Proposals were debated in full Council; where it fell into
consideration, (...) if (the Duke and the Venetians being agreed) the Kings
Forces should go against one of them, and the other should assault the State of
Millain, whether the war might be dive^ted from the assaulted Dominions; and
that the Governor not having a sufficient Army for two offensive wars; whether
it were better to accept of the Proposal only so far as regarded the affairs of
Piedmont, and turn with the Army against the Venetians, so to divert them from
the war of Friuli; or whether, if the said Proposals should not be allowed of,
they should assault Piedmont: it was said for the first part, that the war
against the Venetians was the chief cause of retaining, and afterward of
increasing the present Army, that it might seem sufficient for the Kings honor
to seem to lay down Arms, as the Duke had done, instead of effectually doing
so; and the King of France having by the Dukes word, secured those of Spain,
that Montferrat should not be assaulted, whether the King (especially when the
Duke should have past his word again, not to innovate any thing to the
prejudice of the State of Millain) might dissemble and keep still in Arms, so
to keep from making war upon him, which would not be so easily decided, because
he was daily succored by men from France: that therefore it was more
expedient, to secure affairs with the Duke, to assault the Venetians Towns, to
bereave them of all defense, and so to assist the Archduke by diversion. But
they were much troubled left the Duke, when he should see the Kings Forces go
against the Venetians, might think himself free, and might assault the State of
Millain, according to the Articles of Confede^acy; and this the rather, for
that the Marshal being at the same time gone for France, with speech that he
was to return suddenly armed, the Duke was gone to Creseentino, where having
built a Bridge (a^ has been said) over the Poe, he did not only prepare for
defense, but drawing near the Confines of Millain did fortify at la Motta:
where having also thrown a Bridge over the Sefia, a River which divides his
State from that of Millain, he gave evident signs that he would be the first
who would pass over with his Army, which begun already to be numerous. To
remove these doubts, the Ambassador was demanded, whether his word past, of
not offending, would serve, if the Kings Forces should march to the prejudice
of the Venetians; and he answering, that he had had no speech thereof with the
Duke, the other opinion prevailed, that war should be made upon Piedmont,
though Don Giovan Vives, who was got into great power with the Governor, and
was commonly thought either the Author, or great Fautorer of the renewed war,
seeing the Court of Spain averse from war, and for the aforesaid Reasons, the
Governor weary, or grown cooler therein; or peradventure to keep the fault
from being imputed to him, if any inconvenience should happen by the war, which
the Duke was advised against, giving his opinion openly in writing, exhorted
the Governor to accept of the Ambassadors offer for what concerned peace with
the Duke, and that setting in the Frontiers of Piedmont 7000 Swissers, and
10000 other Soldiers, did exhort him to assault the Venetians State with the
remainder of his Army, which was 13000 Foot and 2000 Horse, molesting it, till
such time as they should restore to the Archduke what they had taken from him
in that war.

But this advise being neither accepted by the Duke, nor allowed of by the
rest, nor yet the Ambassadors new Proposals, this answer was given the
Ambassador: That his Propositions were not answer able to the Capitulations at
Asti, nor if they were, was there any Reason to yield thereunto, the many
things which the Duke had to object against them being understood: that the
King of France, who was interessed in these affairs, only for what concerned
him in that Capitulation, was not allowed to make any new Proposals: that in
respect of the new alliance, and good correspondenc^ which was contracted
b^tween him and the King of Spain, he should rather oppose the^ int^rpose
himself in the so many commotions made by the Duke, to the house of Austria*
and to the Kings Dominions, tending to the prejudice of the public peace: and
this so much the rather, as that the same Proposals would not be a fitting
remedy for the present evils; for by keeping in Arms the people were
excessively prejudiced, Princes were p^t to infini^ expense, and n^w unlooked
for Tumults were endangered, from whenc^ blo^dy Wars might afterward (...):
that it was superfluous to restore that anticipately, which differences not
being afterward agreed, was necessary to be retaken. And in fine, the
Governor complained that the Ambassador, after having a months space allowed
him to treat of atonement, should propound n^ terms, and new delays, when he
should have brought the Dukes ultimate resolu^ons touching ^is accepting or not
accepting of the (...) which was offered him: though afterward laying the
fault upon the Duke, he added, that this was one of that Princes usual pieces
of cunning, that he might the bett^r prepare himself for the defense, and that
letting the season for the Field pass over, the Kings Forces might become
unuseful to offend. This answer was followed with extraordinary orders, and
diligence in putting the resolution which was put on in execution; for the
Ambassador not ceasing to give them hopes, and almost assurances that the Duke
should promise not to move, no not though they went against the Venetians, he
did not obtain his chief end, which was to keep them from providing for war;
for the Governor sent Orders to (...) that were already upon the Venetian
Confines, and to the rest of the Soldiery that was in the State, that they
should speedily march into the Novarese, whither he said he would send the
Artillery and Ammunition the next day. But whilst he labored both in body and
mind about making these preparations, he fell into an Ague; whereof before he
was wholly free, he made himself be carried upon a Bed, on the third of
September, to Candia, where he told the Nuntio, and the Ambassador, both which
he had dismissed, he would wait the Dukes final resolution: he staid some days
there, paying out moneys to the Soldiery which came unto him from several
parts: and making a Bridge over at la Villata, he intended to pass over there
with his Army, into Montferrat, and from thence to where the Duke should be, or
whither he should like best. He had here in a short time a flourishing Army,
not only in respect of the number and valor of the Soldiers and Commanders,
but for Artillery, Ammu^tion, and all things else necessary: there were therein
20000 Foot, made up of several Nations; to wit, 4000 Spaniards, divided into
five Regiments and led on by the Camp-masters, Don Iovanni, Don Lewis, and Don
^onsallo di Cordua, Don Ioronymo Pimontello, and Don John Brav^: 9000 Lombards,
in five Regiments, the one consisting wholly of Muske^eers, led on by Prior
Sforza, the others, by Lodovico Gambaloita, Ieronymo Rho, Giovanni Pietro
Serbollone, and Giovan Battista Pecchio; all of them likewise Camp-masters:
3000 Neapolitans, led on by the Camp-masters Carlo-Spinelli, Carlo di Sanguine,
and Thomaso Carracciola: 13000 Dutch in two Regiments, the one Trentinians, led
on by Count Guadentio Madruzzi; the other Hollanders under, Luigi Solz: to boot
with 6000 Swissers, who as being Confederates with the Duke, were to tar^y in
the State of Millain: the Horse, wherein the Gens Arms were comprehended, came
to 3000 under their General Don Alphonso Pimontello; they were for the most
part new men, and untrain'd; and therefore though superior in number, yet much
inferior in worth to those of the Duke, who keeping still at la Motta, with no
contemptible forces, had with him, as fame gave out (wherewith he used to keep
up the reputation of his own forces;) 25000 Foot and 2500 ch^ice Horse; but in
effect, between 1500 and 2000 Horse, which were held to be the flower and
sinews of his Army: between 8 and 9 thousand French; as many Savoiards,
Swissers, Walloons, Piedmonteses and Provencials. And though the differences of
Savoy were not yet composed, and that he knew he was to be faced with a more
implacable Enemy; yet egged on by the fiercenss of his spirit; and fed with
hopes that neither the French, nor Venetians would suffer him to perish; and
perhaps arguing the Governors future actions from his former, did not wholly
distrust, but that after the first onset the war would not continue in the same
fervor as it seemed to begin, he seemed little to fear the Enemies threats: so
as instead of sending back the Ambassador with the acceptance of the
conditions of peace, he made his Horse go to Langosco, a Town within the State
of Millain, and sent Soldiers to take Villa Franca, and to burn Murano, and
other places in Montferrat, upon pretense that provision, passage and quarter
was there given to the Enemy; and sending some Shallops down the Sesia, loaded
with Powder, and artificial fire, so ordered as that it should play when it
came to the Bridge made by the Governor, and break it; whilst he being not far
off intended, when the Bridge should be broken, to fall with his Horse upon the
Garrison, which were upon the head of that Bridge toward Montferrat, and cut
them in pieces: but the Shallops being kept back, the design failed: so as the
Dukes Horse appearing on the River bank, there happened a small skirmish betwe^n
them and the Kings men, wherein but little harm was done* Thus the second War
of Piedmont began from the drawing near of two Armies: which was not occasioned
through any differences, or Statepretentions, not for any fresh injuries done
or received, nor by any new commands to the Duke that he should lay down Arms;
but if the truth were known; it proceeded on the Dukes side, from his ancient
rancour, and from his desire thereby contracted, of venting himself in any
whatsoever manner, in abating the Spanish Grandezza; and on the Governors
behalf; from the bad success of the late War, from the Capitulations concluded
with small satisfaction before Asti, and from a desire to abolish them, and
therewithal* the prejudice of the la^e actions; and to establish the Kings
affairs in Italy in their former condition and honor. But if we shall mark the
outside of things, this war had no other title, unless it were, that the Duke
pretending the Governor should dismiss his Army, he not doing it, did contrary
to the same Capitulation reassume Arms, and joining in League with the
Venetians would not abandon his Confederates (by whom he was so little assisted
in the former war of Piedmont, and by whom he was so apparently wronged in that
of Montferrat) nor disarm upon the security of both the Kings words, nor yet
promise not to molest the Kings Dominions.

These wars, and the ends and motives of these Princes, was variously
discoursed of: some praised the Duke for his faith, valor and free spirit; and
cried him up even to the Stars, as if he had been a new Marcellus, who had
taught that the Spaniards power, which was held unconquerable, might be
resisted: he was therefore esteemed a seasonable defender of the Venetian
Commonwealth, and the generous Protector of the Liberty of Italy; and the
Governor of Millain was detested, as one that studied novelties, and was no
way zealous of the public peace: others who attributed the Dukes resolution to
an over contentious mind, to an immoderate hatred conceived against the
Spaniards, and to a too excessive desire of suppressing the authority of that
Crown, imputed unto him an unquiet spirit, and that he was a greater friend to
turmoils, then to quiet: because, to the prejudice of peace, and of the
security of Italy, he had let in foreigners into the bowels thereof, to the
peoples so great loss, to the so great effusion of blood, and to the so
apparent danger not only of himself, but to the contaminating of that little of
sound or wholesome which was yet left in Italy. But they wondered not at the
Duke, by reason of his warlike humor: the wisdom of the Venetian Senate was
the more common subject of men's discourse; why they who were so professed friends
to peace; (a thing so good for their Commonwealth, by means whereof they had so
long continued to be thought rich and powerful, and for which the safety and
grandezza of Italy seemed to be upheld by them;) why they (I say) should suffer
themselves to be engaged in war with the Archduke, for unnecessary and trivial
things: in which war, to boot that they might be sure the German Princes and
King of Spain would interest themselves, they should, to the prejudice of their
reputation, make known the utmost bounds of their Forces; which proving short
of what they were generally thought to be, and not being such as that they were
able at one and the same time to contest against the Archdukes and King of
Spains Forces, they should be enforced to run the same fortune with the Duke of
Savoy, and in a business of such weight and concernment depend upon his award
and inclination, who if he should continue to disagree with the King might
secure their affairs, and by agreeing might make them run great danger; many
could therefore have desired that they had either been more circumspect in
their resentment, or that after their first resentment they had used their
wonted moderation in their Counsels; whereby their ends, hatreds and desires
being tempered, they might have given way to the fair conditions which were
presently offered them; if for no other end, at least not to justify the
complaints which were made against the Commonwealth, as if she had moved in
this, not to free the Gulf of Free-booters, but out of a desire of possessing
her self of the Archdukes Dominions; and much more, to obviate the trouble and
dangers which might result to her, to the Duke, and to all Italy by such
commotions and troubles.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK V.
The Contents.
THe Duke unexpectedly assaults the Spanish Army which was entered his State;
and being beaten retreats to Assigliano; From whence finding that the enemy
went to possess themselves of Creseentino, he departs, and speedily preventing
them, defends it. The Spanish Army take Santya, and San Germano: The Duke
endeavoring to keep back their Victuals was forced to come to a Battle, where
he was again worsted. The Popes Nuntio and the French. Ambassador hold the
Governors forces in hand by introducing new Treaties of Peace; In the interim
the Marquess of Mortara entering le Langhe takes many of the Dukes Castles; and
Don Sanchio di Luna takes Gattinara: Winter coming on, the Governor fired
Santya; and leaving a Garrison in St. Germano sends the rest of his Army into
their Quarters, and retires into the State of Millain. The Duke, the Prince his
Son being come to him from Savoy, and the Marshal Diguieres from France, with
new men, takes the Principality of Messerano, and makes himself master of San
Damiano, Alba, and Monreggio, Towns in Montferrat: Wherefore Mortara firing
Canelli, abandons the Langhe. The Marshal being sent for back by the King,
returns with his men to France. The Venetians whilst they are busying
themselves to little purpose in Friuli, are molested at Sea by the Spanish
Fleet, sent by the Viceroy of Naples into the Gulf; which not being able to
draw the Venetian Fleet to fight, take three Galleys richly fraught.

THe Governor being come to the Confines of Piedmont, rather out of a grounded
opinion of compounding affairs, then with any resolution to fight: And seeing
that the French Ambassador did not return back to him, and signs in the Duke
absolute contrary to his expectation, began to fail in the chief foundation of
his designs, and consequently to apprehend the difficulties to be greater and
of more importance now (...) ^e was ne^r at hand, then they could appear to be
when he was (...) off: He ^aw that enemy appear against him whom he thought
would assuredly have been quelled at the first brandishing of his Sword; and
that not being at all astonished at Nemours his wheeling about, nor at the
approach of such an Army, he appeared with well adjusted forces; and that
rather like a^ Assailant then on^ assaulted he would run any fortune rather
then to abandon his Confederates, or part the least from his first resolutions:
he was troubled to see so many French appea^ already on his behalf; those who
were wrought upon by the Venetian gold, by the desire of prey and of novelties,
and those also who were driven on by Conde's authority, almost the sole
Arbitrator of France, were likely to come thither: So as being troubled that
the present war should be the beginning o^ another with that Nation which was
naturally a Rival to the ^ame of Spain, he feared he might hazard not only the
safety of the States, but even the honor of that Crown for which he had been
so hot in taking up Arms: He was confounded at the disagreement in opinion of
his men; he suspected those who desiring him to be more cautious and
circumspect, proposed dangers and difficulties: He thought those rash, who
encouraging him unto the war, promised him assured victory; and having neither
art nor experience in the administration of war joined to his natural judgment,
he was altogether perplexed and irresolute in betaking himself to what was best
for him to do, and in choosing the best of many proposals made by his
Commanders: The so great number of those of various Nations who fought under
his Banners added to his anxiety; especially the Dutch, more numerous and
fierce then the rest, and consequently the harder to be governed according to
the military Government: That in proportion, the number of the Spaniards being
but few, upon whom the safety of the Empire leaning, it tottered; the
dissatisfaction of those of Millain, who to boot with their former grievances,
were already weary of the present war, and attenuated by the former: And being
environed on all sides by Foreigners, his thoughts were perplexed, not only
with the uncertainty of Battle, with the dissolving of his Army, and with the
casualties of war; but with the uncertain Loyalty of his Officers, the
mutinying of Soldiers, the rebellion of subjects, the peoples inclinations,
the favor of the Princes of Italy depending upon the success of things, the
hatred of those of the Nation to the dominion of Foreigners; and finally,
whatsoever may happen to the prejudice of security in great commotions by the
variety of fortune. Diving deep into such considerations, and considering truly
how much the placing the quiet and safety of affairs upon the uncertainty of a
Die was a business which fell very short of all that greatness which the Duke
pre^ended unto; he began by practice to know how wise and salutiferous their
counsels had always been who had thought the peace of Italy to be the surest
foundation of the Spanish Empire: He therefore began to call to mind the
Instructions and Orders which he had continually had from the Court; which as
being contrary to his then fervor, he valued but a little; and as if it had
been in his power yet to put on new resolves, he weighed the condition of
affairs now when it was time to fight, as he had formerly examined them when it
was time to make peace, with fiery thoughts bent upon war: So as having paid
the Soldiers, and made up his Musters; wavering, and not knowing what to do,
to the great admiration of all men, and to the great dislike of the
field-Officers and Army; he was like Caesar upon the Banks of Rubicon, not being
able to resolve of removing from his Quarters for fear of worser commotions;
yet at last his Soldiers persuasions prevailed, and particularly Vives his
Reasons, upon whose Authority he much relied; so as he resolved to pass over
the Sesia, and to go against the Duke: And Ferdinando Mesia Gomes,
Sergeant-Major of the Army, was a great occasion thereof; who seeing the
Governor so perplexed and unresolved, said roundly unto him, I will uphold, it
though I were as sure to dye for it as those who go to Preach the Catholic
faith in England, if this Army do not this day pass the River, the honor of
the Spanish Nation will be here lost with perpetual infamy; They therefore past
over into Montferrat by the Bridge at la Villata, on the 14th of September,
1616. that they might from thence enter Piedmont the more commodiously, but
otherwise resolved then before; for whereas before La Mortara was to have
entered by the way of Asti with 6000 Foot, and 500 Horse; and with the Foot
Militia, and Alessandrian and Tortonesse Horse; and Don Alphonso d' Avolos,
Governor of Montferrat, with 3000 Foot, and 300 Montferrat Horse jointly with
him; and Don Pedro with the rest of the Army by the way of Vercelli, presuming
that the Duke, constrained to divide his Forces, would be the weaker, and
unable to stand against him in the field; now, his mind being altered, he went
with all his joint forces against the enemy: And therefore being past over the
Bridge he intended to quarter his Army between la Motta and Villa Nova, to the
end, that at the same time when the Van, where^n were the best Soldiers and
most experienced Commanders in the Army should assault the Duke, who was
entrenched at la Motta; the Rear should possess themselves of Villa Nova, and
drive out the French Horse which were Quartered there; But the Duke prevented
this design; for lying in Ambush in a field of very high corn that was on the
left hand of the way as you go from Villa Nova to la Motta, he assaulted some
forerunners and Musketeers of the Van, as they past over a little wooden
Bridge which crosses the way; which happening unexpectedly and on the sudden,
caused some confusion in the Spanish Army; wherefore many of the Commanders
advanced with part of their men; amongst which were Gamboloita, Bravo, Prior
Sforza, and the Prince of Ascoli, who showed much valor upon this occasion: By
the coming in of these the Skirmish increased, and held equal on both sides for
the space of four hours; for besides that the Cavalry was come in to assist the
Duke from Villa Nova, the situation proved likewise advantageous for him; the
Spaniards not being able by reason of the narrowness thereof, to make use of
all their Force.

But at last the Assailants being much prejudiced by four pieces of Artillery
placed upon a little rise, they were forced to give back, leaving four Troops
of Horse and two Bands of Musketeers on their backs to make good the retreat,
which was notwithstanding not done without some disorder. There fell in this
first conflict between four and five hundred of the Dukes Foot, about sixty
Horse, besides many that we^e wounded; of the Kings side about fifty, and as
many wounded; amongst which Almarante delle Canarie, Son to the Prince of
Ascoli, and Lodovico Gambaloita, who having received a slight wound in the
head with a Musket, before it was well cured died of other disorders, to the
general grief and damage, being held by the Kings Commanders to be of an
approved valor, and good at Counsel. Many thought that if the Duke had
suffered the Van to pass, and had given upon the Battle in the midst, which was
weaker and more impeded, he had occasioned more loss and disorder; and on the
other side, that if the Governor had sent a Squadron beyond the Rivulet which
was on the right hand, and assaulted the Duke on the Flank, he had not only
hindered his retreat, but totally d^feated him. But humane wisdom does not
always foresee what is best; and in actions of War confusion, danger, and too
much forwardness, blind the Understanding, and disturb Reason. The Governor
lay all that night with the Army in the place where the Battle was given, and
the Duke in the Trenches of la Motta, which he abandoned the next day, and
causing Villa nova to be burnt, and the Country thereabouts, as well his own as
that of Montferrat, he retreated with his Horse, which was come from Villa
nova, into Assigliano, nearer Vercelles, in great haste, for fear of being
assaulted, to his disadvantage, in the Fields of Carenzana; but his fear was
vain; for the Governor growing more wary by the last unexpected assault, and
fearing lest he might be drawn into those dangers into which the Duke did not
much care to precipitate himself, thought it became him to be the more
circumspect, by how much he found his Adversary to be the more adventurous; so
forbearing to pursue him, and possessing himself of la Motta, and Carenzana,
and, after some Cannon shot, of Stroppiana, he tarried there some days, being
detained by the rain; and on the contrary, the Duke being encouraged by the
Governors circumspection, sent his Horse into a plain, between a certain wood
and Stroppiana, to the end that insulting there he might encourage his men, who
were not a little dismayed; and giving manifest signs of undauntedness and
valor, might redeem the loss of repu^ation in the last Skirmish and (...): Nor
did his resolution prove unlucky; for though when it was given out in the
Spanish Army, that the Duke came on with the gross of his Army, the Battaglions
were set in order, and the Horse were ready to sally out upon him, yet the
whole matter being quickly known, the Prince of Ascoli with Spanish caution
ordered, that every one should return to their own Quarters; and some Bands of
Muske^eers were recalled, who were placed upon a bank at Mortara, from whence
they might commodiously defend their own Horse, and offend those of the Enemy;
so as the Duke not meeting with any opposition, marched up even to underneath
the Enemies Rampires. The Kings Commanders finding afterwa^ds how hard it was
to f^ll upon the Duke in his Quarters at Assigliano, by reason of the new
Fortifications which were made there, and by reason of the waters, and
consequently how difficult it would be to get Vercelles, as they had resolved,
without beating up those his quarters, went toward St. Germano and
Crescentino, to the end that by taking the first, they might keep back the
Dukes Victuals and Succor; and by taking the other, they might remove all
impediments which might keep the Army from drawing near Turin by the way of
Montferrat.

Crescentino stands upon the left bank of Poe, in the midst of the upper
Montferrat, over against Verrua, a Town which though seated upon the opposite
bank belongs notwithstanding to the Duke; so as the River which comes from the
Territories of Turin, and enters immediately into Montferrat, running all along
the length thereof, would be Navigable from the State of Millain to that City,
were not the Navigation hindered by its being enclosed between Verrua and
Crescentino, as between two hedges; so as Victual nor Ammunition could not be
brought to the Spanish Army, if it were to enter into Piedmont by Montferrat,
unless they should be first masters of one of these two places; They making
much for the convenience and inconveniency of the Armies advancing, the
Governor resolved to make himself master of them: he therefore marched from
Stroppiana, going a little above Costanza, but in so little good order, as
certainly if the Duke had known it, and would have hazzarded, he might
undoubtedly have cut the Rear in pieces, which marched at a good distance from
the Body of the Army: but the great advantage in Forces which makes Commanders
sometimes careless, suffers their errors sometimes also to go unpunished: they
might easily have gone in one days march from Costanza to Crescentino; and the
Governor might doubtlesly have gotten into it, and made himself master
thereof, it being but weakly garrisoned, if he had marched directly on. The
Duke knew the danger, and apprehending it, thought it necessary to be
prevented: but the resolution was far more easily taken, then executed: for he
who will go from Assigliano and Ruisecco (whither the Duke coasting along the
Spanish Army was come) will get into Crescentino, must either pass by the
Enemies Army, or else must go far about, and as it were by a bow, on the upper
side. The Governor then who marched in a direct line, must either come before
Crescentino before the Duke, or incountering him in his march, must fight him
upon great advantage: the rains moreover were at this time very great; and many
gullets of water which crossed the way by which the Duke was necessarily to
march, being swollen by the rain, were almost not to be past over, especially
by the Foot; but necessity made that possible which seemed impossible; and
Fortune, which is often a friend to courageous resolutions, did miraculously
favor the Dukes aff^irs in this so difficult a case; for having sent his
Baggage and other encumbrances to Vercelli, whither he feigned to retreat, he
suddenly went at the first watch of the night from Ruisecco, and being covered
by the darkness, and by the rain which poured down, he marched till day with
incredible speed; and having past over all the gullets of water, being therein
assisted by his Horse, he got at last a little after day break to Crescentino,
weary and ill accommodated, and much lessened in his numbers, by the
tediousness of the march: but not being at all hindered by the Governor; who
instead of going straight on by the way of Desana, went (being advised so to do
by the Prince o^ Ascoli) by Trin^, much the longer way, only that he might have
better quarters for his Army that night. So as not going by a line, as he ought
to have done, but marching in a semicircle, contrary to where the Duke went,
he lost not only the opportunity of getting into Crescentino, but of a signal
Victory: when the Van went early the next morning from Trino, it might see the
Dukes Rear two miles before entering into Crescentino; and having no order to
fight, did not ass^ult it. This action of the Dukes was really very gallant and
singular; whether you consider the boldness of the resolution, or the diligence
of the execution, or the happy success thereof; but chi^fly, if you consider
the importancy of the enterprise, or the great alteration of aff^irs which
would have happened if Crescentino had been lost. The Governor having lost this
design went toward Livorno and Bianza, two Towns of the Canavese, not above
two miles distant one from another: in which march some of the Cavalier della
Manta's Horse me^ting with some of the Governors men, they took Don Francisco,
son to the Ambassador Vives, prisoner, whose Horse, as he advanced somewhat
before the rest, fell, and he himself was sorely wounded in the neck; and some
carriage of the chief Commanders fell also into the Dukes hands. The Duke
suspected that the Governor would go from Bianza and Livorno, to Chivasso a
great Town in Piedmont, upon the back of Crescentino; wherefore he caused a
great Trench to be m^de upon the outermost bank of Dora, near to Saluggio, and
placed 1000 of the Country Musketeers to defend it; and fearing also lest the
Towns of Montferrat might prejudice his affairs by giving receptacle to the
Enemies A^my, he took R^dazzano and Verolengo before their eyes, Towns of
Montferrat near the Poe, together with almost all the Canavese; and gave order
to the Cardinal, his son, to go from Turin, and take Vulpiano, a place not far
from that City; and those of Lauriano and of St Sebastian killing his Keeper of
the Castle, he put them both to fire and sword: thinking that if those people
were not made an example, the others would not forbear to do the like upon any
slight occasion. Thus miserable Montferrat being exposed to the Dukes
injuries, was in the midst of the Enemies and of the Protectors Forces,
affor^ing quarter to the latter out of good will, and to the former out of
fear: nor durst the people thereof for fear of severe punishment, which was
duly executed upon them, move or anger the Duke, who by rigor had made the way
as open to him there, as through his own S^ate: the rains continued still, and
the season was very bad for the F^eld; so as the Governor could not only not
attempt any of the enterprises suspected by the Duke, but being by the
rigidness of the weather to lie idle some days in Livorno and Bianza, began to
want Victuals. He resolved therefore to go to St. Germano, and from thence to
Inurea, weak Towns, but capacious, and of fruitful Territories; conceiving that
the Duke would either go, or not go, from Crescentino; if he should go, he
would be in manifest danger of being routed, his men being much lessened* and
so the Governor proving victorious, might have free way to advance without any
opposition, and attempt whatsoever enterprise; if he should not go out, he
might easily take those two Towns; which when he should have done, the whole
Country on this side the Dora even to Vercelli would be at his disposal; where
he might not only quarter his Army commodiously all the succeeding Winter; but
the City of Vercelli, as being cut off from Piedmont, and excluded from any
succor, would without any danger or effusion of blood fall that Winter into
his hands. The design would have been more easily effected, then discoursed, if
continuing the same begun execution he he had persevered in the same mind; or
if the Governor making use of the occasion, and of the good success of Victory
which he got afterward, had prosecuted it with the like vigor; for the Army
being gone from Livorno and Bianzo, and in his passage taken Santia, a Town
that is now open, and of no moment, but formerly famous for having resisted the
Spanish Army, when it was fortified: and leaving 4000 Dutch there in Garrison,
rather to free himself from the fear of their numerousness, then out of any
need of keeping it garrisoned, the Governor went with his Camp to St. Germano;
where the Garrison having withstood the battery a while, yielded on the third
day: and the Duke having burnt Bianza, for that having dared to resist him, one
of his best Commanders was slain before it, he went to Vinarie, a place which
stands on the way as you go from Trino to St. Germano, from whence he hindered
the Enemy from Victuals, without abandoning Crescentino, or bereaving himself
of that refuge, and hoping that his men would be constant in defending St.
Germano; he hoped to make the Governor rise from before it for famine;
wherefore to encourage the defendants, and let them know that he was come, he
tarried there and fired his Cannon, but all in vain; for at the same time that
he came to the Vinarie, St Germano surrendered; where at the Duke was so
gr^eved, as he put the Governor thereof to death, because he had yielded the
Town to the Enemy, having promised to hold it out much longer. And yet the
Governor keeping three days in St. Germano had such sca^city of Victuals, as
even his chief Commanders were fain to feed upon dead horse flesh; for the Duke
keeping his station kept the Enemy from Provision; and the Governor who
detested fighting resolved not to move from thence. But at last, enforced by
famine, or for shame to see himself as it were besieged, he left Antonio
Mastrillo, Caracciolo's Serjeant-major, in St. Germano with 500 Foot, and
marched toward the Duke: Castelmerlino stands between Crescentino and le
Vinarie, a very little toward which the Army marched, out of a double end;
that they might without disturbance receive Victuals there from Trino, and to
keep the Duke from Victuals, who being excluded Crescentino, by the loss of
that place, would be brought into the same streights whereinto he had a little
before brought the Enemy: and therefore moved by his disadvantage he marched to
give battle: to avoid the which, when the Duke saw the Enemy coming, he marched
toward the Abbey of Lucidio, thinking to get beforehand into Crescentino: but
he could not march so fast but that the Spanish Van fell upon his Rear;
notwithstanding which skirmish the Duke marched on, till being overtaken by the
night he was forced to lodge that night in the said Abbey; and the Governor in
some small Cottages not far off, where the Soldiers being famished for want of
Victuals at St. Germano, suffered also very much by cold that night. The next
day the Duke not being able to march so early as he intended, by reason of some
hindrances, and not having with him above ten or twelve thousand Foot, and
about 1200 Horse, he pursued his way in this manner: the Artillery and
Ammunition was placed in the Van, the Baggage in the middle; on the left hand,
where there was more field-room, the Horse; on the right hand, where it was
more woody, the French Foot Regiments; led on by Chricchy and Orfe; the Rear,
led on by Count Guido, was mixed of Italians, Piedmontans, and Savoiards, and it
had in it the best Soldiers, and most experienced Commanders of the whole
Army; and the Country through which they marched being full of bushes, Count
Guido placed Musketeers in some of them, to the end that they might keep the
Enemy from hindering them in their march; if these Musk^teers should be
assaulted, they were to retreat to other bushes which were on their backs; and
thus to continue the fight that they might hold the Enemy play as long as
possibly they might. When the Governor knew what way the Duke marched, he
resolved to pursue him; and sending part of his Cavalry before with 1800 Foot
en Croupe to assault him on the Rear, he himself followed after with the rest
of the Army: those who marched before had much ado to drive the defendants out
of the bushes; yet overcoming them at the last, they got up to the Rear; for
the Dukes Van being come to some narrow p^ssages, kept the rest of the Army
from advancing, so as he could not get to Crescentino without disturbance, as
he hoped to have done. The Rear being assaulted made their part good against
the Enemy; and defending themselves honorably for a while, did not only resist
them with advantage, but repulst them: the Battaglions of the Spanish Army were
this me^n while advanced, led on by Gironymo Pimontello, and Gironymo Rho, who
though they saw that their men who were beaten back by the Dukes Rear could
hardly keep the field, yet having no precise order, and the Governor being two
miles behind, they proceeded to fight bu^ slowly: when Don Alphonso Pimontello,
the Ambassador Vives, and Cavalier Melzi coming in, and not being able to
endure that their men should be beaten for want of help, they encouraged the
Captains of the Battaglions to fall on, without expecting any other orders,
assuring them that the Governor would approve thereon: by whose words and
authority being inheartned, the Battaglions charged furiously, and routed the
Dukes Rear, who not able to withstand so fierce a shock, gave back; and at the
same time Count Sults, not expecting any orders, assaulted the French Regiments
with his Dutch furiously on the Flank; whose fear the Duke foreseeing, he was
come himself unto them, earnestly exhorting them to stand fast, to keep their
ranks, and encouraging them to fight: but words prevailed not where valor was
wanting: Cricchi's Regiment made some resistance; but Castiglions Regiment
which was led on by Orfe, not daring to look the Enemy in the face, much less
to stand the fierce and close assault of the Dutch, threw away their Arms
shamefully before they came to blows, and ran: and if instead of pursuing them
the Dutch had fallen on upon the main body of the Battle, the Dukes Army had
not been only discomfited that day, but wholly routed.

This success had the Battle of Lucedio, which lasted for the space of five
hours; wherein there fell not above 100 of the Kings men, and about as many
were wounded: Of the Dukes party there was above 400 slain, and above 1000
sorely hurt; amongst which 15 Captains, and one French Colonel: The Governors
men took eleven Foot Colors, and three Horse Ensigns; and many of those who
fled were miserably slain by the Country people of Montferrat: So as though
there were not many that died by the Sword in the Conflict, there were but few
that kept with their Colors, or who retreated with the Duke into Crescentino;
whither the Duke being gotten, he was very diligent in assembling them together
who were dispersed abroad, and had abandoned him: Nor did his ill fortune cease
here; for the Marquess of Mortara entering the Langhe with 2000 Dutch, with
Cavalier Pecchios's Brigade, and with the Alessandrian and Tortonesse Horse and
Foot, took Canelli, Cortemiglia, Calosso, and other neighboring places; there
being none to withstand him in the field, nor to defend those places: And not
long after Don Sanchio di Luna took Gattinara, and other neighboring places,
with the men of Millain, and blocked up the passage to Vercelli on that side;
which City, being environed by the Territories of Montferrat and Millain, and
being straightened by the Garrisons of the new Fort of Sandovalle, Trino, St.
Germano, and Gattinara, was as it were besieged. A Gally was also parted from
Genoa toward Monaco, with moneys for Monsieur di Boglio, a Lord of many Castles
between the Confines of Nice and Provence, who having always formerly adhered
to the Dukes of Savoy, began upon some new distastes to waver in his former
friendship; and having at present entertained new intelligence with the
Governor, promised to infest the Dukes Territories on that side; who, the
affairs of Savoy not being yet composed, had his Dominions molested on five
sides, himself being absolutely routed in the field, and having lost most of
his men: And that these so sad accidents might be accompanied with very sad
circumstances; the Prince of Conde, who was the only prop and stay of the Dukes
affairs, was some few days before, by order fromthe King, accused to be guilty
of high Treason, and imprisoned in Paris; so as the Government of that Court
being altered, wherein the Duke did confide; and the Princes of the Kingdom,
who were his friends, being alienated from the King, they raised men to provide
for their own affairs; and filling France with civil wars they could not only
not succor the Duke in this his so great distress; but many of them who were
come from France desired leave to be gone, being drawn either by their own
interests, or for that they hoped for better entertainment there. The common
opinion was, That the Duke being thus prosecuted by Fortune would not be able
to bear it, and less able to withst^nd so great a violence; and that therefore
being dejected in mind, and out of hope of ever making head again, he would lay
down Arms, and endeavor some kind of peace: And yet, though over-laid, not
overcome with such an accumulation of evils, and so great adversity; he, with a
courageous mind, was not daunted nor dismayed amidst so many misfortunes: For
relying upon the Forts of Vercelli, Asti, and Nice, the chief Keys of h^s
Dukedom, he little valued what Mortara, Luna, or Boglio could do against his
lesser Holds, which being lost by war would be recove^ed by peace: So as he
began forthwith to make new Rampires and Bulwarks about Crescentino; But on the
other side, holding it necessary to allay that fortune by industry, and by
cunning to lull those Forces asleep which he could not possibly then withstand,
he procured Monsieur Lodovisio, (who of an Archbishop was then made Cardinal,
and continued in the same Nuntiature) and the French Ambassador, should go to
the Governor and treat of peace: He sent along with these some discreet
Gentlemen and Officers, as followers of the Ambassador, to the end that they
might pry into the enemies ways, and into the Commanders intentions; And also
that making the Rout to seem greater by their speeches, they might cunningly
make it be believed that the war was at an end; and that the Duke not being
able to resist any longer was reduced to such a condition, as he could no
longer refuse any conditions of peace; which he knew the Governor would
embrace more willingly then war: But there needed not so much cunning; for Don
Pietro di Toledo, who was already weary of war, and heard nothing but the noise
of Drums and Trumpets, and was therefore desirous of repose, wanted not those
who either for that they thought it made for the Kings service, or (as it was
afterward laid to their charge at Court) out of secret intelligence held with
the Duke, advised the Governor to use his victory moderately, telling him,
That the French were overcome, and the Duke so weakened, as he could no longer
hold up his head; so as he must be forced to consent to any whatsoever
conditions: That therefore he ought to proceed very warily in hazzarding the
affairs of the Crown in Italy; if by unseasonable prosecuting the war he should
once more draw the French over, and make a change in the minds of the Princes
of Italy; who though they might be content to see the Duke receive a blow, yet
not being able to see him totally ruined, it was to be believed they would
easily resent it: That as the Dukes suppression increased, the envy, hatred,
and jealousies of other Princes would increase; That therefore it was a wise
advice, To be content with an indifferent Victory, and not to lose what was
already gotten, out of a desire of getting more: That he had been sufficiently
victorious in so short a time, sufficiently triumphant; and that now there
remained no more for him to do, then answerably to the Kings mind, to secure
peace upon such conditions as might be tolerable to the Duke. The Prince of
Ascoli was the chief, nay, only Author of this; a fatal Counselor, that the
Duke being reduced to great extremities might have opportunity to raise himself
up again. This Prince being till then much suspected by the Governor, for the
power and straight intelligence he had formerly had with Inoiosa, by these his
flattering speeches got into great power with the Governor; and his counsel
was afterward the more credited by the Cardin^ls and Ambassadors coming to
the Camp, and by the speec^es spread abroad in the Army by the Dukes Spies:
Wherefore the Governor being tickled to hear himself styled Triumphant and
Conqueror, would no longer listen to Vives his counsel, nor that of others,
who weighing the state of affairs better, and the Dukes condition, thought it
necessary to pursue the victory, and not to afford the Enemy time to breathe:
they told him that a good war was the best way to come by a good peace; but all
this was to no purpose. The Cardinal and the Ambassador came to Don Piedro at
Tricerro, and desired him that he would let them know his intention touching
the composing of the present affairs. Don Piedro, in a haughty manner, like a
Conqueror, answered, that they were to discover what the Duke was minded to do,
and then to acquaint him with it: they therefore returned to Crescentino, and
from thence to Chivasso, whither the Duke having found the Governors
inclination to an agreement was come: under pretense of well considering the
state of affairs, he spun out the Treaty at length, to the end that he might
the mean while find where that storm would fall, and that he might have the
longer time to discover the proceedings of such Princes as were his friends, in
whom the remainder of his hopes lay; for about this time Monsieur de Verdon was
come to him from France, being sent by the King and Queen of France, to
acquaint him with the Prince of Conde's imprisonment; and perhaps to keep him
their friend, in this so great commotion of the Kingdom, and to promise the
favor and assistance of the Crown of France. In Savoy things were in a way to
composition; for Nemours being abandoned by all assistance, and shut up with
his men by Prince Victorio in barren Rocks, where they had not whereof to live,
and being also restrained by France and Burgony, was forced to yield-to the
composition which Monsieur le Grand, Governor of Burgony, did then interpose
himself on the Kings behalf, wherein he was accompanied by Monsieur di Lazai,
Privy Counselor to the King: and those commotions being appeased, the Prince
was infallibly expected with many Soldiers. Marshal Deguieres was also
expected with a great attendance both of Foot and Horse, who was very
diligently preparing for his journey; and Boglio being become a Client of the
Crown of France, which ^ad newly taken him into its protection, had refused
moneys from Spain, or to hold intelligence with the Spaniards: Mortara who was
entered the Langhe with much fervor, having placed almost all his Soldiers in
Garrisons in the places which he had taken; and not being able to keep the
Militia of the Country any longer together, was grown cooler; so as betaking
himself to pillage the fields, and neighboring Towns, he minded more enriching
himself, then making war; and the Venetians, whose affairs declined in Friuli,
fearing that when the Duke should be quite overthrown, their turns would be
next, began to be more open-handed, and to disburse moneys more freely for the
recruting of his Army; and did moreover oblige themselves to pay unto him a
certain sum of money during the war, which as they say, was 8000 crowns a
month. The Duke being hereby encouraged began to reassume his former State,
and to stand with the Governor, not only upon what was necessary, but even
upon punctillios of honor; wherefore after having kept the Cardinal and the
Ambassador some days with him, and not being willing neither that any
overtures should proceed from him, suffered them to return to the Governor,
who was then in Trino, to whom, not by way of any order from the Duke, but as
it were of themselves, they told him in substance, though in good and handsome
terms; That if he would go with his Army out of Piedmont, they thought by what
they might learn by the speech they had had with the Duke, that being desirous
of peace he would cashier all the French, save such as were his own domestics;
always provided, that both the Kings would pass their words to him, that he
should be kept undempnified both in life and State; that he would be the first
that should restore what had been taken, if he might be secured that the like
should be immediately done to him, and that the Governor would dismiss all the
Dutch, Swissers, and some Troops of Horse: And in the last place, in their
Princes name, they demanded his paroll for the Venetians security, whilst the
King by his Ambassadors should treat of composing differences with the
Archduke. Conditions, which, to say the truth, were sufficiently advantageous
for the Articles of Asti, and such, as had the Duke been victorious, he could
not well have demanded better; yet the Governor answered moderately enough:
That the King did not alter his mind by success, who did not aspire after the
Dukes Dominions, but only by War to secure peace in Italy; and therefore
offering to restore immediately what had been taken, when the Duke should have
done the like, he demanded that the two Dukes should set down their differences
in writing, and refer the decision thereof to the Emperor, passing their words
reciprocally not to offend one another: That the Duke should disarm totally; in
point whereof he offered to stand to what they should say in the names of the
Pope and of the King of France. This being observed, he promised to free the
Dukes State, and to retreat with his Army into the State of Millain: He denied
that the King was bound by the Articles of Asti to lay down Arms, and therefore
denying absolutely to enter into the like obligation, he added, that when Italy
should be in peace, the King, who aid abound in his own natural Militia, would
need no Foreigners. He consented to pass his paroll for the Dukes indemnity,
but not for the Venetians, in whose affairs, as not being comprehended within
the Articles of Asti, he said, the King of France was not to intermeddle; and
that therefore this was no place to treat thereof, nor had he any Commission to
do so. It was hard in effect for the Duke, whilst the Enemy was armed in his
own Dominions, to lay down those Arms which he had with such resentment
reassumed, as not able to endure that the Governor should keep armed in the
State of Millain: And on the other side, it might seem strange, that the
Governor who was entered Piedmont with intention to make the Duke lay down
Arms, should suffer himself to be treated as if he had been overcome, by
leaving the Duke in Arms, and going cut of Piedmont just when he was possessed
of Victory: And therefore both of them standing pertinaciously not to consent
to what was proposed by each other, it was thought to be impossible to perfect
the business; it was requisite therefore to cut this knot in two with the
Sword, which seemed to be so hard to untye by Negotiation. But the Governor,
who abounded then in Forces, wanted will; and the Duke who wanted Forces was
very willing; and the Cardinal and Ambassador keeping the Treaty on Foot, and
giving continual hopes that they would return with more moderate proposals,
suffered not the Negotiation to be broken off.

The Duke this mean while fearing the Enemies Forces every day less then other,
and his hopes of approaching aid increasing, and being sufficiently assured of
the Governors no great inclination to fight, and of the desire he had to
return to Millain; and being encouraged by the many disorders which he knew was
in the Enemies Army, would not go a jot less from his first demands; but
sharpening his wits about the interpretation of the Articles of Asti, he
pretended that the Venetians were therein comprehended, at least under that
head, where it was provided that the Kings Forces should not cause jealousy in
the Italian Princes; he therefore demanded that the King should be bound to
secure them. This mean while two months past on without any action, though the
weather, which had been very bad till the battle of Lucedio, turned to be
extraordinarily fair, and therefore very fit for the field; in which time had
not the Negotiation of peace, or the Governors backwardness, fomented by the
advice of others, slackened and almost taken the edge from off the Kings
Forces, they would certainly have made important progress, and the Duke might
peradventure have consented to such conditions as he could not be brought unto
by the Cardinal nor Ambassador: In which time the Spanish Army being no less
wearied in mind through idleness, then in body by labor and hardship, did
diminish very much, many of them daily dying, many running away; for the
Country round about was desolate, and not able to feed them, and the horse
were fain to go daily ten miles for forage, and after so many mile returning
were very much weakened: The Heads of the Army disagreed in opinion, and were
not only unsatisfied one with another, but all of them were much displeased
with the Governor, whose authority grew to be as little valued by the
Commanders as by the common Soldiers; so as all Military Discipline being
given over, all obedience lost, and all respect, all was full of disorder and
confusion: To this was added the want of moneys; for the Army having been at
vast expense, none came from Spain where the War was abomina^ed; nor were those
of the Sta^e of Millain, who were already exhausted, able to furnish sufficient
for the daily present need; and Don Piedro himself expected nothing more then
that the season, contrary to the natural course of Winter, should alter, and
becoming less cold, might afford him a fair pretense to retreat. On the other
side, the Dukes affairs increased in reputation; he received plenty of money
from the Venetians, and abounded in men; for Prince Victorio having at last
composed the affairs of Savoy had brought about 5000 Foot into Piedmont, and
600 Horse; some whereof were his own, some belonging to Nemours; and Marshal
Deguieres was either already come thither, or being come out of Dolpheny, was
ready to come; and all the whole people of Piedmont (a singular example of the
Subjects duty to their natural Prince) flocking diligently thither, were most
ready to succor him; so as the Duke raised like another Auteus from his mother
Earth, was grown more vigorous then at first; and being superior to the
Governor in Horse, was Master of the Field. At last Don Piedro, who was better
pleased with peace, though upon bad conditions, then to continue in the danger,
trouble, and expense of War, seeing the Dukes obdurancy, and thinking he should
have done enough, if in the conclusion of the Peace he should have excluded the
power of France, had at last, though too la^e and in vain, recourse to the
Cardinal; to whom he professed he was ready to compose businesses with the Duke
by his means, in any whatsoever manner, yea even with passing his word for the
Venetians security; and therefore desired him that he would return to the Duke,
and bring back with him the final conclusion of Peace: A thing which being
afterward known did not a little incense the King, and the whole Court of
France. Wherefore the Ambassador, by particular order from the King, demanded
that the Governor should send an Ambassador in extraordinary to Paris; where
the Kings aim was, that the whole business of Peace might be carried on by his
own proper interest. But the Duke, under pretense that he would not alter a
tittle of the Articles of Asti without the consent of the Princes who did
intervene therein, excused himself; and so the Treaty of Peace broke totally
off, to the small liking of the Cardinal and Ambassador, who seeming little
pleased with the Governor, gave over the Treaty, and returned, the one to
Turin, and the other to the Charter House at Pavia: And the cold coming on, and
the earth wholly covered with snow, the Governor resolved to return to the
State of Millain, having notwithstanding fortified St. Germano, and left
Thomaso Caracciola there with his Brigade, and distributed part of the Army
into Trino, Pontestura, and other Towns of Montferrat, not without the Duke of
Mantua's consent, who being then come to Casalle could not refuse it: He
moreover gave order to the Dutch at Santia, that they should abandon that Town,
and burn it, to the end that the Enemy might not possess himself of it. He
returned afterward about the beginning of Winter with the rest of his Army
into the State of Millain, and with his Horse, which did not amount to 700,
worthy to be commended rather for his good inclination to keep up the honor
and grandezza of his King, than for any happy success, which he himself marred
by his so many irresolutions; it being most certain, that not being able to
behave himself as victorious, he afterward allowed the Duke field-room enough
to treat with him as Conqueror: Being retreated he quartered the rest of his
Army in the Towns of Lomellina, and he himself went to Vicenza, near the Poe,
where re-assuming his warlike mind, when it was now no longer time to do it, he
thought the Spring was too long a coming on, which he much desired, that he
might once more (as he publicly professed) re-assault Piedmont more
vigorously, and with greater resolution: But he forbore not this mean while to
streighten Vercelli, hoping that by the falling thereof into his hands this
Winter, it might open the way unto him the next Spring to greater and more
important Enterprises which he had designed. The Prince of Messerano was Master
of a small State beyond the Sesia, between Vercelli and Gattinara, even almost
in the Duke of Savoys mouth, and as the neighborhood of greater Princes is
always, if not troublesome, at least suspected by those who are lesser; the
Prince of Messerano out of both these respects was not well satisfied with the
Duke: Being therefore to free himself from the Dukes continual molestations,
and to keep from worse, he treated with the Governor to put himself into the
King of Spains protection, and upon certain conditions to receive a Spanish
Garrison; which conditions, together with the desired protection, being easily
granted him, by reason of the great opportunity which was thereby had of
approaching nearer, and of streightening Vercelli more; therefore the agreement
being made, the Prince was presently required to receive in the Garrison: But
he proceeding cautiously, would not admit of them till such time as the King of
Spain had allowed the conditions; and whilst expedition from Spain was
foreslowed, the Duke got a hint of the business; so thinking prevention to be
the only remedy against so eminent a danger, he sent Prince Victorio in the
Christmas holy days with 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, to secure himself of the
Principality. The Town of Messerano yielded presently to the Prince Victorio;
for the Princess of the place, her husband being absent, fearing lest the Town
might be burnt, and she and her seven children slain, surrendered the Town upon
certain conditions. He went then to Gattinara, and having played upon it with
his Artillery in vain, he was forced to quit the Enterprise, either out of
sickness which besell himself, or for that he heard the Governor was gone from
Valenza to Romagnano intending to relieve it. Being returned to Messerano, and
forced to tarry there a while by reason of his sickness, he sent a French
Captain with a great many both Horse and Foot to attempt Creppacuore, a place
of the same Principality; whither the Princess was fled, and had received in a
Spanish Garrison of 1000 Foot under the Sergeant Francisco Bernardine Vertua;
from whence the French being after a slight assault beaten back, they
retreated to certain Cottages not far off; where whilst they thought themselves
secure, they were unexpectedly surprised by Don Alphonso Pimontello; who
falling upon them courageously with some Foot and Horse in those Cottages,
routed them, and slew 200 of them, and took 200 more prisoners, together with
their Captain: The Prince being recovered resolved to make the same attempt of
Creppacruore with a greater force and with more men sent unto him by his
Father; the taking whereof (it being environed with steep Clif^s and high
Rocks) proved very difficult by reason of the inconvenience of bringing Cannon
thither; and yet he went with 8000 Foot, and 400 Horse, and taking the places
round about it, and particularly such from whence it might be relieved, he
began to skirmish with them that were within from a Hill, which being very near
and very high, commanded the Town; and the Cannon coming the next day he began
the Battery; and having made a sufficient breach he fell to an assault, which
he did with such violence, as those within abandoned the Town without making
much resistance, and retreated to the Castle; which being presently played upon
by four pieces of Cannon came to composition: But some differences arising
touching the performance of Articles, the Battery was again begun more
furiously then before and from a more fitting place; Prince Victorio being not
a little incensed, who thought himself mocked by the Captains cavelling; the
Battery continuing some days still more bitterly, the defendants not trusting
to their forces, yielded up the Castle on condition the Princess and her
childrens lives should be saved, and that the Garrison should be permitted to
march out only with their Arms, but without bullet, powder or match; which
whilst all was faithfully performed, two Barrels of powder fell unfortunately
on fire, and burnt many of those that had surrendered, and many who for fear
threw themselves over the wall, could not escape their fate; the rest who
escaped the misfortune, went to the State of Millain, being convoyed by four
Troops of Horse, according to the Articles of surrender; where Verrua being
condemned to dye, suffered for having defended the Town no better.

The Governor knowing by experience that his men might long make good the
Town, had sent Don Sanchio di Luna with succor to Creppacuore, who finding the
passes well fortified, and not being able to come to Creppacuore, the surrender
whereof he heard not of, without worsting them, he began to entrench himself
within Musket shot of Prince Victorio's Fortifications; and whilst he was
discovering the Sconces there happened a slight Skirmish, which afterward
increased by the coming in of men of both parties, wherein, whilst Don Sanchio
fought valiantly, advancing with a Pike in his hand, he was shot with two
Musket bullets, and fell down dead immediately; and Carlo di Sanguine,
Camp-Master to a Brigado of Neapolitans, was taken Prisoner, together with a
Nephew of his, one Captain being sla^n, and another taken prisoner, the Kings
men retreated to within the Rampires, and afterward hearing the Town was
surrendered, retreated to the rest of his men: But the Marshal Deguieres being
at last come to Piedmont, with about 8000, (what Foot, what Horse,) amongst
which were many of the Gens d' Arms des Ordonnances of the Kingdom, who carried
the Kings own Ensigns; the Duke increasing in power and reputation, since it
appeared that the King of France adhered unto him with displayed Banners, was
not idle; being become superior in Horse, he overran the Country, and,
without meeting with any opposition, was Master of the Field; hearing of the
taking of Messarano and Creppacuore, he being desirous to do somewhat
remarkable, fell into the lower Montferrat, where there was no opposition save
what was made by Mortara in the Langhe, who had hardly men enough to Garrison
the places he had taken: The Duke therefore commanded Count Guido to go with
all his men from Asti to San Damiano, where he, and the two Princes, Victorio
and Thomaso, and the Marshal Deguieres met, with a great train of Horse, Foot,
and Artillery; and having presently possessed themselves of the hills, and
placed 24 Bombards in several convenient places, they began a furious battery
on four sides of the Town, wherein there were no Soldiers, save such as were
of the common people of Montferrat, under Captain Andrea Prand^, who was slain
by the fall of a house which was beaten down: The Soldiers being left without
a Commander, whilst they ran with more courage than order to defend the place
which was assaulted, left the rest of the Town unprovided of defense; which
disorder the Captains of the French Horse perceiving, they commanded their men
to light immediately off horse back, and to mount the walls where they were
left unguarded, wherein succeeding, with little labor and less loss they took
the Town, which they afterward miserably plundered, and used cruelty upon the
Defendents, who, a little before the Enemy entered, had either agreed, or were
ready to agree upon surrender of the Town on Articles to Count Guido, who
assaulted the Town on the other side. San Damiano being taken, the Duke gave
order that the Walls should be slighted, to the end that if they should come
to restitution, the State should be bereft of that Fort, which was as a thorn
in his eyes.

The Governors of Montferrat and Allessandrio were this mean while come to
Alba with 8000 Foot and 700 Horse, intending to relieve San Damiano; but
hearing that it was surrendered, and apprehending that the Duke might fall upon
Alba next (which being weakly walled, and but badly furnished with Ammunition
and Victuals, they thought it was not tenable, and therefore went from it;) and
leaving Ieronymo Rho there with his Brigade, and 500 Montferrians, those of
Alessandria returned home, and the others to Cassalle: and not long after they
were gone, Ieronymo Rho, by order from the Duke of Millain, who was loath to
hazard the Kings Forces and honor in the defense of that Town, went with his
men to Felizzano, having dismantled the Castle of Neviglie in his passage, to
the end the Enemy might not take it: in whose place 400 Dutch of Soltz his
Regiment were sent thither, and 500 Foot from Casalle, much too small a
Garrison for the circuit of the Walls. The Duke seeing it abandoned had his eye
presently upon it, thinking to take it; and making himself first master of many
places in that Country, drew near it: Count Alerame St. Georgio, Governor of
Alba, was very diligent in repairing the Walls of that City, where they were
weakest, and in most danger, and in making all necessary provisions for
defense; and finding afterward, that the Duke being gone with some Forces from
Barbaresco, to discover the situation of that City, and the new Works which he
had made; he sent some Soldiers to possess themselves of a certain high pass,
which stood upon the way whereby the Duke was to go; which they did, and as
soon as they saw the Dukes men come to discover, they skirmished stoutly with
them; and the skirmish lasted a long while, with variety of fortune and
prejudice on both sides; after which the Duke returned to Barbaresco, and sent
Count Guido to take in Alba, with the French Foot, and Cavagliere Guirini with
those of Piedmont, each of them having with them eight pieces of Artillery, and
800 Horse, who coming before the Town, raised Batteries on two sides, and began
to play upon the Walls: those who were within were not wanting in making
defense, they diligently repaired the Walls wheresoever they were beaten down;
and made out many bold sallies, not without some advantage; and assaulted the
Enemies Works: but at last, their Powder being wasted, many of their best
Soldiers being slain in skirmishing, and in defending the Walls, they began
also to want Victuals; and seeing no hopes of succor (for Don Pietro being
inferior to the Duke in Horse would not only not expose his men to the danger
or being lost, but had long before sent for them back that did defend it) they
were forced to surrender, leaving the City upon honorable conditions in Count
Guido's hands, who received it in the Dukes name, the twelfth day after the
Siege: at the same time Mortara, not thinking himself able to resist the Dukes
Forces; hav^ng first barbarously burnt Canelli, abandoned all the other Castles
which he had t^en in the Langhe, where he had committed infinite extortions.

The Governor thinking it too unworthy a thing to suffer the Duke to overrun
the Country thus victoriously, and that he should so plainly abandon it, and
should suffer the chief Towns of Montferrat to be taken, and plundered, which
State he had so often professed to protect, and for the occasion whereof he had
been so much troubled, and had chiefly begun the war; he endeavored to provide
against it by some means or other: he assembled all the men he could in
Alessandria, which amounting to about 14000 fighting men, he sent them to
Feliz-Zano; and the Duke fearing Asti entered thereinto with his men: but
finding that the Governor had soon distributed his men in Alessandrino and
Tortonese, he with his Soldiers, and with the French Horse, suddenly assaulted
Montiglio, a great Town in Montferrat; and having made way enough for an
assault with his Artillery, the Townsmen finding themselves not able to resist
him, and fearing the Town might be plundered, they surrendered it upon Articles.
But the French having heard a certain whisper at their entering into the Town
(as the Dukes Captains pleaded in their excuse) the Town, contrary to Articles,
was miserably plundered, and put to the sword. Thus Montferrat was exposed to
troubles occasioned by her friends, who without defending her laid her waste;
and was likewise exposed to be injured by the Enemy, who without any compassion
ruined her: in which vicissi^ude of affairs, it was no little wonder to
consider that the French who fought not many years before in the behalf of
Mantua, against the Duke of Savoy, should now under the King of France his
Colors, and with the Gens d'ordonnance of that Kingdom, joined to those of
Savoy, t^ke the Duke of Mantua's Territories, who was a Friend and Cosen to
their King, without any preceding injury done; and on the contrary, that the
Spaniards formerly so much suspected to bear ill will to the same Duke of
Mantua, had not only made his State be readily restored unto him; but to the
end that he might the more securely enjoy it, had with so much expense put the
world into a hurly-burly, and against a Prince so nearly allied to their King.
Thus does fortune often alter the State of affairs, and humane interests and
affections often more then she: but as for the King of France, though he, and
all that Nation which had professed to maintain the Duke of Mantua against the
Duke of Savoy, yea even against the King of Spain, when by the sinister means
of his Sta^e-ministers, who joined with the Duke of Savoy, they were ill
satisfied with the Duke of Mantua, because he would not give way to the Kings
demands, in pardoning the Rebels; and because valuing their friendship and
authority less he had so wholly betaken himself to the protection of the Crown
of Spain: yet the Kingdom being for the most part governed according to the
will and pleasure of the Queen Mother, near allied to the Duke of Mantua, and
who held intelligence with the Court of Spain; and consequently was more
inclined to favor him, then careful of the other Dukes affairs, or of the
observing the Treaty: the King therefore, who by reason of his years, depended
wholly upon her will, did not only patiently bear with the Duke of Mantua's
stubbornness, and that he should accommoda^e himself according to the condition
of times, and his own affairs; but to favor him, and not to oppose his Father
in Laws intentions at the same time in Italy, had expressly forbidden the
Marshal to go into Italy; and being gone, recalled him upon severe Edicts: and
finding him afterward contumacious, and hearing the Spanish Agents, and those
of Mantua make grievous complaints, he sent to put him out of the Government of
Dolpheny: and as for the Marshal, though he pleaded for his so great
disobedience, his being bound by the Articles of Asti ^o assist Piedmont
without any orders to that purpose; also his zeal to the Kings honor, which he
said the Governor endeavored to prejudice, by altering the Treaty of Peace;
yet the common opinion was, that the Dukes fair speeches, and extraordinary
favors, he being naturally apt to win the love of all men, the Venetian Gold,
Military Courage which was yet very powerful with him, and the desire of
abating the spanish honor in Italy, were of power to work upon him; and
therefore being come he stuck no^ to favor the Duke, yea though against
Montferrat; either for that not knowing whither to turn himself better, his
coming might not be thought to have been altogether vain; or for the aforesaid
respects, to show some resentment against the Duke of Mantua: so as he made
himself be felt, and kept the Spanish Forces short and low whilst he was in
Italy: yet Thomaso Caracciola, Captain of the Garrison of St. Germano, did at
this time somewhat sustain the reputation of the Spanish Forces; for the Duke
being desirous to get that place, sent the Princes Victorio and Thomaso
thither, who resolving not to fall upon that place, because they saw it was
provided with a good Garrison, and with an excellent Commander, and well
fortified with Trenches, took up their quarters in the^ neighboring ruins of
Santia, whereby keeping back succor and provisions, and by disturbing the way,
they endeavored: to besiege the Town, as it were, at a large distance,
expecting some fit occasion to effect their desires: but this enterprise turned
much to the Dukes prejudice; for Caracciola being well prepared for de^ence,
made many sailies out of the Town, and did so molest the Enemy, as by little
and little he brought most of them to their end: moreover, he straightened
Vercelles yet more, by taking sometimes the Victuals which were sent thither.
True it is, that Clausio did sometimes cry quittance with him; for he being
ready upon warning, and having learnt that a Convoy of Victuals and Ammunition
went with a Guard of 150 Foot, and 50 Horse commanded by Gerardo Gambacorta,
Captain of Caracciola's B^igade, from Tricerto to St. Germano; he sent 1000
Foot and 400 Horse from Vercelli under Colonel Meziers, who lighting upon them
in the midway at Montei, fought them, and Clausio's Horse chased those of the
Convoy: though Gambacorta disposing of the Carriages in manner of Trenches,
resisted for two hours space: yet being overpowered by number, most of his men
were cut in pieces, Gambacorta's self sorely wounded, and taken prisoner, and
the Convoy remained absolutely in Clausio's hands.

Thus the war in Piedmont varied, from the beginning of September, till the
beginning of the next Spring, in the year 1617. before which time the Marshal
fearing to lose his Government of Dolpheny, and apprehending much more the
anger of the Court, returned to France, and freed the Governor from the fear
of the Forces of that Nation, which was so main a help to the Dukes affairs;
which though they suffered not a little by the King of France his precise and
punctual command; yet new, and unexpected accidents happened soon in Paris, which
made the Duke hope for greater favor. The King of France was much molested by
troubles and sedition raised in his Kingdom by Princes, who being distasted at
Conde's imprisonment, and displeased with the Authority and Government of the
Queen Mothe^, went from the Court; where^ore upon his own inclination (for
increasing in years, he now began to the condition of the State, and of his own
affairs) or instigated, as it was more commonly ^eld, by Monsieur de Luines who
was native of Avignone, and a great favorite of his, caused Concino the
Florentine, Marquess d' Anchre, to be suddenly slain, he who being got into
great authority by the Queens extreme favors, made her become so odious to all
the Princes, and afterward he removed the Queen from him; and sending her to
Bloys, had recalled all the Princes and Officers of the Kingdom, who being
herewith very well s^tisfied went speedily to Court, and were very ready to
obey him: the Mother being removed from her Son, she being much inclined to the
Spaniards, and the Princes who were friends to the Duke being taken to the
Court instead of her, the Duke had much reason to hope for better things, both
from the King, and from the Forces of the Kingdom; wherefore he began to care
the less for the Governor, who having gotten new men, and disposed of them in
several places, threatened to enter Piedmont the next Spring. But the Venetians
were not idle this mean while in Friuli: when the Austrian Army had abandoned
Luciniso, and was gone from thence to Lizonso; they were masters of the Field,
from Luciniso downward, and had taken all the Archdukes ^owns, save Gradisca:
which being the harder to be taken by reason of the new Fortifications, the
Venetian Army gave over the thought of taking it by force, and betook
themselves to the Country which lies above Luciniso, to the end that succeeding
therein, they might draw near Goritia: and because the Enemies Army might be an
impediment to this, which lay beyond the River, over against Luciniso, and sent
Forces often to scour the Country on this side, and to carry away much prey;
as did likewise the Garrison of Gradisca; they therefore did all they could to
prevent this mischief by building Forts, and making Trenches on their side the
bank; they then applied themselves to St. Martino in Crusca, a strong Town
amongst the Mounta^ns, somewhat distant from Lisonzo: to which purpose Pompeo
Iustiniano went to Vipulciano which stands upon the road to St. Martino, and
took it: but afterward, better considering how hard it would be to take St.
Martino, which might be as well succored from Goritia, as Gradisca, by the old
Stone Bridge which was not far off, changing the^r minds, and deferring it till
another time, they resolved to make themselves first masters of the Bridge,
that they might not only cut off relief from St. Martino, but open the way
thereby to Goritia, as Alviano formerly had done. The Bridge was defended by a
great Tower, at the head thereof, bu^lt after the ancient manner, and flanked
with new Fortifications: which the Venetians being desirous, as it was
necessary, to take, they resolved to build a Fort on some elevated place on
this side the River, from whence they might play upon the Tower, and the
Bridge: and Iustiniano being gone with some other Captains into those parts, to
discover the rises thereabouts, carried with him a good strength of men;
between whom and the Archdukes men, who were come to defend the Bridge, a
skirmish began on both sides of the banks; which though it were to little
purpose, yet the Venetians were prejudiced thereby, who left their Camp-master
Iustiniano there, being shot through the reins with a Musket-bullet, and was
carried to Luciniso where within a few hours he died. Count Martinengo
succeeded in his place, but not being able to discharge it by reason of his
great age, Don John de Medici, Bastard Son to Cosmo the first, great Duke of
Tuscany, was chosen with the Title of Governor General; he was an old
Commander, and had discharged places of chiefest employment in the wars of
Flanders and Hungary, wherefore his Authority was great.

The Venetians forbore not, though Iustiniano was dead, to prosecute the
build^ng of the Fort, as they had intended; wherefore they sent Martinengo with
some forces to get footing in a little Hill which Iustiniano had made choice of
to build the Fort upon; which the enemy being aware of they sent Captain Fur, a
French man, to prepossess it; between whom and Martinengo there happened a
fierce Skirmish; to the which fresh succor coming in from the other side, the
Venetians were forced to give back, and to leave the Hill in the Austrians
possession; who presently built a Fort upon it, which from the multitude of
Chessnut Trees that were there they called the Fort of the wood, or of
Chessnuts: And the Venetians built another Fort on a higher Hill, from whence,
with two Cannons and a Culvering they broke down the B^idge; wherefore the
Austrians, that they might not lose the conve^ency of the River, threw another
Bridge over a little higher upon an Angle of the River, which was sheltered
from the Venetians Fort. The sickness began now to rage again in the Venetian
Camp, whereof Martinengo (...) desperately sick, and the new Governor Medici
not being yet come to the Camp, the war grew worse with the Vene^ans; and the
Austrians assuming courage from Iustiniano's death, Martinengo's sickness, and
Medici's absence, foorded over the River (...) then before, and came even to
underneath Mariano, prejudicing the Venetians very much: Count d' Ampier went
out of Gradisca with two Troops of Horse, and fell by night upon Garuggio, a
Town within two miles of Palma, where he utterly routed a company of Curassiers
who were quartered there: And Don Baldassar Marradas, in emulation of him, went
out also by night out of the same Town and assaulted the quarters of Chiopris,
and did much prejudice them; and not many days after the Garrison of Gradisca,
led on by Strasoldo Governor of the Town, came by night to Ceruiggiano, a
River not far from Palma, took and fired some neighboring Towns, and
especially the chiefest, which takes its name from the River, and is called
Ceruiggiano; which if it had been fortified by the Austrians, as it was by them
abandoned, Palma would have been excluded from maritime commerce with V^nice:
Wherefore the Venetians, finding the danger, fell immediately to fortify it,
and put therein a gallant Garrison. At last General Medici came to the Camp,
who presently fell to order such things as he found out of order: And
afterward being very desirous to do some thing which might be worthy of his
name, and of the expectation which was had of him, was much vexed to find that
things were not prepared for his designs. He found out daily more and more the
corruption of Military discipline, which was fomented by the avarice of some of
the Venet an Captains and Gentlemen, Officers of the Commonwealth, who being
more intent to enrich themselves then to fight, gave too much license to the
Soldiers, contrary to military rules: He was yet more distasted, for that
being by the Commonwealths Letters Patents to be superior over all except the
Commissary General, he found at first the execution thereof in the Camp
difficult: Amidst which difficulties the enemy sent Monsieur de la Foglia, a
French Captain, with a Troop of Horse beyond the River against some Light Horse
which guarded a ce^tain Trench upon the Bank of Lisonzo; and both sides being
succored, the Skirmish grew almost to be a Battle; wherein Trautmistorft
passing over the River, and Trivigiano coming with many men from Luciniso, the
business was manfully disputed; but the Venet ans Light Horse not being able to
resist the solid order of the Dutch Horse, whilst they would have retreated did
so confound themselves with their Curassiers which were on their backs, the one
and the other of them were charged and chased quite through their own Foot which
were come in to their succor; who were therefore wholly disordered by their
own Horse, and slain by those of the enemy. In this scuffle many Corsicks were
slain, and Se^geant Major Raffa^le, Son to the dead Iustiniano, was taken
prisoner; and Giovan Dominico da Ornano, a very valiant Corsick Commander: Nor
was this the worst; for the Venetians who retreated, not thinking themselves
safe in the Trenches of Luciniso, were minded to get into the Castle which was
above, had not some Commanders stoutly withstood them, who keeping their own
men several ways from running, and particularly by shutting the Gates upon
them, hindered their flight, encouraged them, and making them stand, preserved
those Quarters and Luciniso, which otherwise had been abandoned, and left in
the power of the enemy; who fearing the Artillery of Luciniso, repast back over
the River, and went to their wonted quarters, having lost but few of their men,
though their General and Matradas were slightly wounded; and Foglia, who
advanced too ^ar, slain: Though Trivigiano showed great courage upon this
occasion, yet did he deserve to be reprehended by the Commissary and by Medici,
for having engaged himself and so many others in that action of his own will,
and without their knowledge. The sickness still increased in the Camp, which
made the Soldiers still run faster away, and especially those of the Country;
and the best Soldiery were yet more consumed by Skirmishes: Wherefore the
scarcity of men (...), the Commissary and Medici endeavored, by all the means
they could, to persuade the Switzers and Grisons that were in the Camp to fight
against the Archduke; which they, being prohibited to do by the League which
they have with the House of Austria, had not as yet done; having only served as
Garrisons to defend such Towns as were possessed by the Commonwealth: which
having at last obtained, it increased their numbers for a while, they being
1500 in number; but it made their scarcity of men greater soon after; for the
Grisons Country being for this respect prohibited more strictly from having any
commerce with the State of Millain; the chief Rulers amongst the Grisons, that
they might have that Decree revoked, recalled all those of their Nation home
who were in service for the Commonwealth; and forbad passage through their
State to all Foreigners who went to serve the Venetians: By this increase
Medici hoped to surprise St. Martino in Crusca, especially knowing how few
there were there in Garrison: He therefore departed about midnight in very good
order from Vipulciano, where he had mustered those who he intended for that
enterprise, and got before day near the Castle; but a certain whisper arising
amongst his men, and a small light being discovered in the Castle, the
Soldiers fell into so horrible dread and confusion as they immediately ran
away shamefully without being pursued; which Medici, lighting off horseback,
seeking to obv^ate even by exposal of his own person, he was thrice thrown
down, and almost trod under foo^: At this time Antonio Lando came to the Camp,
who succeeded Priuli in the place of Commissary-general; who seeing that the
whole success of the war consisted in taking Goritia, and that this was not to
be done without passing over Lizonso; he first built some Forts, and made some
Trenches about Gradisca, to hinder excursions, and then bethought himself how
he might pass over the River: And both he and Medici holding it impossible to
pass over between Goritia and Gradisca, by reason of the enemies opposition;
they learned that there was a certain Bridge over the Channel of Ronzina which
was but weakly guarded; and though it were very hard to get thither, they being
to pass through the enemies Country, and yet harder to fall down by the Ronzina
into Goritia; yet thinking they should have done much if they should pass the
River, they would put it to a trial: Which that they might the better effect,
they resolved to assault the enemy in six other places, to the end that being
assaulted in so many other places at once, they might not be able to keep them
from passing over the Bridge at Ronzina; which design though it were very well
laid, and for the most part well executed, yet had they not good success
therein, except at St Floriano, which was taken by Count Nicholo Gualdo by a
Petard; and which being upon their backs, and not far from the Fort of the
wood, whereat the Commonwealths Commanders aimed, it was presently fortified
and furnished with a strong Garrison. Lando and Medici being beaten from this
enterprise, and despairing to be able to work their end, which was to pass over
the River, they hoped to effect it by another un-thought of way: The passage
over the River was not interdicted underneath Gradisca; for the Territories of
Monfalcone lying on this side the Bank, the Venetians were masters of it as
well by ancient right as having newly won it by the Sword; but the passage
though it was easy in this part, was to little purpose; for he who will p^ss
from the County of Monfalcone to Goritia must pass over the Mountains anciently
called Giapedi, and now del Carso, which beginning from Lisonzo more below
Luciniso, and running in a continual Line even to the Sea, do wholly divide
these two Counties: Mountains which are horridly rough and craggy, and not
esteemed passable by an Army; at the bottom whereof, toward Goritia, runs the
Vipao, a River which falls into the Lisonzo, over against the River Fara; which
though it be lesser then Lisonzo, yet though del Carso should be past over,
they must meet with the same difficulties, and be opposed by the enemy who were
encamped not far from thence; so as these difficulties being thought not to be
overcome, it was always held desperate to attempt Goritia by this way; But it
being found by some conjectures at this time, that the Mountains were not so
rough and craggy as they were imagined, Marquess Oration d^l Monte was sent to
make the discovery; who having made all necessary diligence brought word back
that there were some places by which they might bring their Artillery, and
avoid the other difficulties. The Commissary and Medici being overjyo'd at so
good news, out of hopes of good success, resolved by all means to pass over the
River beneath Gradisca; and passing from thence over the Carso to go to the
besieging of ^oritia: But necessary preparations for the effecting it were not
answerable to their hopes and desires; the scarcity of Soldiers still
increased, partly by death, partly by running away; and particularly those of
the Country, who were never in the Camp but upon the pay-days; many of the
Grisons, hearing the command of their Superiors, were already gone, and many
were cashiered for having been too insolent, and having caused sedition in the
Camp: The Hollanders delaied their coming still, and a Regiment of 4000 French
which the Duke du Main should have brought to Friuli at the Commonwealths
cost, were kept back either by reason of the new troubles in France, or by the
Grisons Decrees: To this was added, that being to go beyond the River to
attempt an uncertain enterprise, (which the newer it was, was the more
difficult and dangerous) they could not abandon the Country on this side the
River which had cost them so much pains to get, and so much money to fortify:
So as to divide those few that were in the Camp, was to hazard the loss of
what was certain, to go, with much danger to themselves, to get what was
uncertain: The hopes of new supplies were but few, by reason of the times,
which brought the Commonwealth into great streights; for the Duke of Savoys
Rout at the Abbey of Lucedio happened but a little before, which made them not
only disburse good store of money to recruit him, but also to provide
experienced Soldiers and Commanders upon their Confines toward the State of
Millain, lest they might be probably assaulted on that fide: So as the Venetian
Army was fain to delay the enterprise of Carso, and to expect the coming of the
Hollanders, which was thought could not be long: This new enterprise met also
with much difficulty by the coming of new supplies from Germany into Friuli,
whereby the Austrian Camp was increased; and there was a speech of others that
would shortly come: The Commonwealths troubles were also infinitely multiplied
by the new-taken resolution of Pietro di Girona, Duke of Ossuna, and Viceroy of
Naples; who, either seconding the Kings intention had declared himself to side
with the Archduke; or out of his particular hatred to the Venetians, had rigged
up Galleys and Gallioons in the Haven at Naples, giving out that he would send
them into the Adr^atick Sea, not only to assist the Archduke by diversion, but
to hinder the Commonwealth in the possession which they pretend unto of the
said Sea, and to trouble their Maritine Traffic: And though the same courage
of mind appeared to be amongst those Conscript Fathers amidst so many troubles
and adversities, wherewith persisting in their first generous resolution of
maintaining the public honor and of freeing the Gulf from Pirates, they
prepared to resist this new tempest; and therefore forbear not to provide
abundantly for all necessaries in all requisite parts; yet naturally
considering the little good they were likely to get by the war, and the
prejudice which might thereby result both to the Commonwealth, and to private
men; and moreover foreseeing the emiment dangers threatened to their
Commonwealth by the State of Millain, and by the Kingdom of Naples; they grew
somewhat less obdurate, and desired that the formerly broken Treaty of
agreement might be reassumed: But it was no less hard for them to find the
means how, then to compass their end with satisfaction; for all the Princes
being weary with the last Negotiations, by reason of the Commonwealths
backwardness to restore what had been taken, not any of them cared to
intermeddle therein: And they could get nothing from the Pope (who they thought
would not be inwardly displeased here^t) but words and generallities; nor could
they confide much in the King of France, by reason of the vast troubles of that
Kingdom: They therefore thought it the less evil to have recourse to the Court
of Spain, which they had formerly so much suspected; and which by the
Declaration made by the King in the behalf of the Archduke, and by the men who
were paid by him in this war against the Venetians, was little less then their
declared enemy; But by reason of many things formerly done by the
Commonwealth, which were ill taken by the King and Court of Spain, and which
made them desireous to lessen the Commonwealths good opinion of her self; they
oftentimes refused the pressures made by Pietro Gritti, Resident in that Court
for the Commonwealth, who desired in the Commonwealths name that some
composition might be come unto; But the King and Duke of Lerma having been
always against having war in Italy, and more particularly now out of many
respects; the Duke, embracing the present occasion, began to close with the
proposals made by Gritti in the Commonwealths behalf, and very affectionately
desired the effecting of them: But the Duke of Oss^na forbore not for all this
to pursue his enterprise; for he abominated the Venetians more then any other
Spaniard did; and had therefore put seven Gallioons in good order for fight,
and furnished them with all warlike Ammunition; which (to begin the war which
he intended against the Venetians) he sent into the Gulf, under the Command of
Francisco Riviera, native of Granada; who from a private condition had by his
own worth, and by the Viceroys favor, raised himself to no small greatness.
The Commonwealth forthwith armed out two Galliasses, and seven Gallioons, and
gave the charge thereof to Lorenzo Veniero; and to these they added 18 lesser
Galleys, which they were wont to keep to guard the Gulf and the Seas of the
Levant: They set Iusto Antonio Belegno, Commissary over the Gulf, to be chief
over all these; who whilst he was on his way toward Ragusa, where he
understood the Neapolitan Galleys were; Riviera advanced with five of his
Vessels within sight of the Isl^nd Liesena; and drawing near the City began to
play upon the Fort with some of his Cannon, and upon some Houses which were not
far from it: and not seeing any one appear he retreated upon the coming on of
night toward Calamotta and Sabioncella, Towns of Ragusa; where joining with the
other Vessels, he took a Ship which went from Ragusa to Venice: He staid some
days thereabouts; and hearing that Bellegno was coming on with very
advantageous forces, he steered unpursued toward Puglia, and came safe from
thence to Brindisi: It was the common opinion of all men, that Bellegno might
have fought him if he had pleased; and that upon slight pretenses, tarrying
sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, he had delayed time, and
permitted him to return; It is not known, notwithstanding, whether he did this
of himself, or by his limited instructions; for though the Commonwealth seemed
to be very much displeased with his proceedings, and therefore removing him
from that charge, placed Veniero, Captain of the Galleoons, in his room; who in
Consultations had appeared to be more forward and courageous; yet because they
gave him other employments and dignities not long after; it was thought that
this resentment was one of the Venetians wonted pieces of cunning; who laying
the weakness of their Commissions to the fault of their Officers, do at the
same time, without hazzarding their own forces, cover the public diffidence,
and maintain the reputation of their Militia; nor do their Officers hold
themselves thereby insured, who being contented with the tacit applause of the
wisest Citizens, and with the tacit praise which is given them for having
discreetly carried on the public fortune, do so love their Country, as they
care not for having the fault laid upon them which otherwise would redound to
the public bad success; being sure that when the wonder is over they shall be
largely rewarded with other honors and dignities.

The Crabates growing bold upon the nearness of the Neapol^an Galleoons, and by
the free commerce which was allowed them in the Kingdom of Naples, flock from
home in great numbers; and scouring the Gulf with much terror, took much
pillage, and took many Vessels even upon the City shoars; and afterward
carrying their prey into Puglia and L'Abruzzi, sold them safely; and whither
they safely fled when chased by the Venetian Vessels; In so much as the greater
Traffic of Galleoons, and the lesser commerce was in a short space brought to
a bad condition in Venice. Veniero being afterward gone with two Galleasses
and seven Galleoons to Brindisi, he endeavored to draw out Riviera, who lay
there with his Galleys, to Battle; who not having rowing Vessels, and the wind
being contrary to his coming out, did not refuse Veniero's Challenge, but put
it off till a fitter time: whereupon Veniero w^nt to Corf^, and afterward
getting into the Gulf entered the Channel of Corsola, and from thence to
Liesina; and being content with this generous offer, appeared no more upon
those shoars: The Fleets afterward increased; for the Viceroy providing new
Galleoons, both in Naples and in Sicily; and assembling the Kings Galleys
together, p^epared others at his own cost, that he might send them altogether
to prejudice the Venetians; and growing daily more angry and more incensed, he
threatened to assault the very Town of Venice with his whole Fleet; and adding
all possible demonstrations to his speeches, he gave out that he would go
himself in person to Brindisi, the more to encourage and hasten such
preparations: Wherefore the Commonwealth growing fearful, armed more
Galleoons, and put more Galleys and Galleasses to Sea; and ordered also that
all the Galleys which sail upon those Seas, and upon the Levant Seas, should
join in opposing the Spanish Fleet: But the Commonwealth which abounded in
Ships, in Galleasses, and in all other warlike preparations, was in a great
want both of men for their Oars and for fighting; for those people, and those
parts who were formerly trained up in the Militia, and therefore good at Sea
affairs, from whence the Venetian greatness had its rise and increase; being
now accustomed to Domestic employments, and not having seen an enemy for many
years, were grown imbased by idleness: nor were they better provided of
Commanders; for the Gentry being given to such Arts as peace produces, had not
of late years valued the Militia, except what was Maritime.

The Commonwealth being therefore upon these terms, and fearing the Viceroy's
threats and preparations, whose Fleet they knew did much exceed theirs both in
stout Soldiers and experienced Commanders, had much ado to provide for
necessary defense, whe^ein they were to coin much money, and to be at excessive
expense: Wherefore falling immediately to raise moneys by many Taxes and
Impositions, and also assembling all the Tradesmen of the City, who were picked
out by lot according to public Orders, a certain number of them were commanded
to serve either for themselves or for others in the Fleet. Thus having
furnished a good many Rowers out of the dregs of the people, and Clowns of the
neighboring Villages, they furnished the Fleet also with many Troops of the
Land-Militia, who being found to be unfit for Land-Service, little good could
be expected from them in Sea affairs: And because the Senate were afraid of
Veniero the Governor of the Fleet's animosity, they left him his first charge
over the Galleoons, but made Iovan Iacomo Zane, a grave and discreet person,
chief of all the maritime affairs, with title of Commissary, but with authority
of Captain General; who putting to Sea many days after with those Vessels which
were in a readiness at Venice, went to Liesina, where the general rendezvous
was for all those Vessels which were to serve in that Fleet; to the end that
from thence, as from the Center of the Gulf, he might discover what ways the
Enemy steered, and oppose them and their designs; part whereof appea^ed upon
that very Island before he got thither: This part of the Viceroys Fleet was led
on by Don Pietro di Leva under the Viceroys Ensigns, consisting of 12 Galleoons
and 23 Galleys; and being come near the Haven, he sent two of them to challenge
the Venetian Fleet to fight, which lay there under the command of the same
Bellegno, to whom the Senates Orders and Commissions were not yet come: And
though he came not short of the Enemy in vessels, the Galleasses especially
being considered, yet durst not Bellegno come out of the Haven and encounter
them; but fortifying himself there, and placing the G^lleasses in the mouth of
the Haven, which being shut up by a great Rock is very narrow, he suffered them
to be shot at by the Spanish Vessels, which assaulted them even almost
underneath the Fort; and after-many shot on both sides, the Spanish Commanders
seeing their danger, if they should proceed on any further, and dispute the
business upon so many (...), and that they could by no means draw the Enemy out
into the open Sea, they retreated without any harm safe to Brindisi; where a
new supply of Ships and excellently well-armed Galleys being come, new and more
urgent Commissions came also from the Viceroy; who being angry that they had
not fought, sent express Orders for the setting up of the Standards Royal, and
that they should re-enter the Gulf, and that assaulting and fighting the
Enemies Fleet in any whatsoever manner, they should proceed on against the very
City of Venice: which when it was known did much trouble the whole City; those
Fathers therefore, according to their accustomed wisdom, being desirous to
provide for dangers afar off, as if they were at hand; not confiding in their
own Fleet, nor in their preparations by Sea, not in the impenetrable situation
of those Washes; but as if those natural defenses were weak obstacles for the
doubtful condition of the Commonwealth, they used all such diligence, as
greater they could not have used if the En^my had been at hand: they fortified
their out shores with Banks and Trenches, built Bulwarks upon the mouths of the
Washes; and all this appearing to come short of the danger, they put Weapons
into the peoples hands, made Corpse de guarde in every Par^sh, and raised Troops
of Soldiers in every one of them, placing two Citizens over each of them, one
of the Gentry, another of the Commonalty; and that these provisions against
foreign disorders might occasion no disorder at home, a Magistracy of three of
the gravest and most eminent Gentlemen was chosen, to keep them all within
their duties; whom they endued with all supreme power, and trusted them with
the care of providing that the Commonwealth in the midst of all these
Ruptures might be preserved from receiving any damage; and not satisfied with
so many provisions within the City and without, they f^rbare not to have
recourse to the Turks for aid: for having bribed (as it was said) the chief
Officers of that Court, and the most favored Sultana's of the Seraglio, they
obtained a command from the Grand Signeior, directed to the General of the Sea,
that he should go into the Gulf, and be serviceable to the Commonwealths
General upon all occasion^: though detained afterward by the odium that would
have been conceived against them for that action, or by the danger of bringing
the Fleet of so formidable an Empire into the Gulf, they made it come to
Navarino, and made use of it only to the end that the V^ceroy, ^earing the
Kingdom of Naples, might recall the Fleet from offending others to defend
himself.

This mean while Don Pietro di Leva, being recruited with more Forces, went
with the Standard Royal from Brindisi, carrying with him 33 Galleys and 19
Galleoons, well armed with old Soldiers, and moreover took along with him from
the Coast of Puglia about 4000 fighting men; he drew near Liesina with a
resolution to fight, if he should find the Enemies Fleet there: he found all
joined together under Zane, the new Commissary, who coming out of the Haven, a^
the appearing of the Enemy with all his Vessels, which were 40 Gallyes, 40
Long-boats, six Galleasses and 15 Galleoons, all which, especially the
Galle^sses and Galleoons were very well munited with Artillery; especially the
Galleoon Balbi otherwise called St. Marco; a Vessel vastly great, which for the
multitude of Guns which she carried was fit, as those who were skilful in that
Profession said, to stand the assault of a whole Fleet. The Venetian Gallyes
were very well provided of Rowers, yet but badly furnished with fighting-men;
for of 22000 persons which were in the Fleet, there were hardly 3000 who were
fit to manage Arms; being come within sight one of the other, and the Kings
Fleet having given sign of Battle by shooting of a Cannon, and having loosened
the Cables wherewith the Galleoons were fastened to the Gallyes, the wind,
which till then had been good for them, changed immediately; and turning
exceeding ^air for the Venetian Fleet began to blow with a strong gale against
the Spaniards; and the Galleoons being fallen off from the Gallyes, sailing
some here, some there, were immediately dispersed; whereupon the Spanish
Commanders, and all the Soldiery, though by the same wind they might have
tacked about, and have escaped so great a danger, yet courage prevailing over
fear, they still kept their Fore-Castle toward the Venetian Fleet: yet being
astonished at this their enemies so great advantage, they were much troubled,
and almost brought to despair of safety: fearing to be suffocated with the
smoke of their own, and of the Enemies Cannon; and to be drowned and stifled,
without being able to fight, at the very first shock: but the nearer they came
the more they saw themselves free from that danger; for Zane after a while
withdrew into the Haven, and lost the opportunity of an assured and full
Victory; to Veniero's great vexation, who being fallen a l^ttle off with his
Galleoons, that he might with a better wind fall upon the Enemy, expected that
Zane should advance, or give the sign of Battle; to which purpose he had sent a
Longboat to him: but seeing him withdraw into the Haven he followed the
General, and put into the same Haven with his Galleoons, leaving a great
Tartana behind him, which fell into the Enemies hands. The Spanish Fleet being
driven by the wind went upwards toward Zara, and staid that night not far from
Liesina: the next day being forced by the wind to coast a long beyond Dalmatia,
it light by chance upon ten Gallyes, and two great Venetian Barques; whereof
two, which are called Maone, and the two Barques were fraught with very rich
Merchandise: the Spaniards presently pursued them, for at first sight of the
Enemy they fled; seven of the yarest of them, by the advantage of night,
recovered Zara from whence they were come; the two which were loaded with
Merchandise, and the Barques, and another Vessel fell into Leva's power, but no
men in them, for they had all escaped to land, but the Vessels were loaded with
Merchandise, and Moneys, to the worth of above a Million of Ducates. Captain
Antonio Chiurano was greatly to blame in this, who not valuing the Enemy, and
trusting more then became him to do in the Commonwealths Fleet, was not only
negligent, as if he had sailed in secure peace, but thinking himself derided by
a Fisherman, who told him how near the Enemy was, caused him to be put in
prison; and not long after some Barques were taken, loaded with M^rchandize,
and Victuals for the Army, which being retreated to Liesina, and not daring to
stir from thence suffered the Enemy to rove ^reely over all those Seas.

It was commonly said that Commissary Zane, when Consultation was held by the
Captains and Officers, whether or no they should make use of the present
occasion, and taking the advantage of the wind, fall upon the Enemy; that after
he had by his Authority and Reasons contradicted their opinion, he at last drew
an express command out of his bosom from the Senate, whereby he was absolutely
forbidden to give Battle, no not upon any whatsoever advantage; and truly the
Commonwealth having so powerful an Enemy so near at hand, who publicly
threatened to assault the City; and the loss being beyond comparison greater
which they should have received, if they had been beaten, then any advantage
that could have redounded to them by Victory; and that being able of her self
to maintain the Empire of the Sea against that Enemy, who they knew could not
trouble them long; it suited well with their wisdom, to prefer wholesome and
sa^e resolutions before such as they were not certain should prove glorious;
and that it became them not to hazard that Fleet upon the uncertainty of
Battle, which being the only defense of that City, ready to be assaulted, and
which being the greatest strength that they could then put together, was
thought the only foundation of the Venetian Honor and Empire: which could not
probably waver so long as that Navy was safe; so if that should be lost, would
infallibly draw after it great mischief, and little less then the utmost danger
of the Commonwealths safety: and the danger appeared so much the more probable,
for that, doubtless, as if they should fight at a distance, the Venetian Fleet
by the advantage of the^r Guns would have much vexed that of Spain; so if they
should come to close fight, the Venetians being badly provided of defendants,
would have been easily worsted by the Spaniards: the want of Order and Military
Discipline in the Venetian Fleet was also to be confidered; for never a one of
the Masters knew what their place was, nor what upon such an occasion he was to
do; there was no distinction of Wings, nor Squadrons; but the whole Fleet was
one great body, misshapen and confused; and therefore unable to move, and more
troublesome to its self, then formidable to the Enemy: but it was no less
considerable, that when contrary to the afore^aid probable Reasons of the
Venetians being worsted, they should have had the upper hand, the victory must
needs have been got by much loss, and effusion of blood: in which case, if the
Turkish Fleet should have come, and have found the Venetian Fleet weakened, and
the Spanish beaten, might it not have come up even unto Venice; and without any
contestation, or opposition, have done what the Spaniards threatened? it was
therefore in this respect thought that it became not the Commonwealth, to
expose her safety to the certain danger wherewith she was t^reatned, upon
whatsoever event, especially since not only the Venetian Commonwealth, but
whole Christendom would have b^n much endangered by this conflict; for of the
two Fleets, which being both joined together make but a proportionable Bulwark
of Christendom, against the Maritime Forces of the Ottoman Empire, when one of
them should have been discomfited, and the other weakened; Christendom would
not have had Forces sufficient to withstand the Ottomans Fleet, if it should
have come against it: and therefore many strengthening their Reason, and fixing
their Thoughts higher, attributed that sudden and unexpected change of wind to
a great miracle, and acknowledged it to proceed from Gods Divine goodness; yet
they proceeded in Venice (according to their usual custom) against Commissary
Zane, as they had done against Bellegno, sending for him back to Venice, taking
his place from him, and proceeding hotly by Process against him; and yet after
some months he was acquitted by a great number of Vote^ in a full Council of
the Pregati. But the success of the Fleet, and the loss of the Mahouns, caused
great commotions in Venice; the rather for that false news being brought some
few days before, of the conflicts, and of the vistory gotten by the Venetian
Fleet, great Feasts and Triumphs were made by the Nobility, who believing that
report could not contain themselves in rejoicing, and congratulations; and the
Common People following the example of the Nobiliry fell into excesses, even
such as were scandalous: they ran tumultuously in great numbers to the Spanish
Ambassadors Palace; and mingling opprobrious speeches with their shouts and
outcries, they had almost fallen to injurious actions: and elsewhere they hung
up the Portraicture of the Viceroy by the feet, and after many scornful and
abusive speeches, set it on fire: but the truth being afterward known, the
Commonwealth was much afflicted, both in private, for the loss of the Mahouns,
of so great value; and for the continual damage suffered by the Croates; and
was much astonished and confused in the Public, for the loss of their ancient
Reputation, and for fear lest the Spanish Fleet, according to the Viceroys
threats and commands, might draw near their Washes, and assault their City.
They knew not what courses to take, which might suffice to remove the imminent
danger; but finding them all to be short, and unproportionable, they complained
of the King of Spain; who being chosen by them to be a pacifier of the
differences between them and the Archduke, instead of making peace, had proved
so bitter an Enemy; suffering them to be under hand so injuriously dealt with
by his Minister, without any respect had to the friendship which was publicly
professed between them; and yet the King, who did not desire that the Treaty of
Peace which was by him reassumed should be disturbed; preferring kindness
before revenge (for they had injured him, by assisting the Duke of Savoy) and
peace before whatsoever victory; as soon as he had given way to the
Commonwealths desire, of interposing himself in the present differences;
commanded the Viceroy (being much pressed so to do by the Commonwealth) to send
for the Fleet back from the Gulf; and that his command might be the better
observed, he sent Orders to Don Pietro di Lieva, to ret^eat immediately with
his Fleet without injuring the Commonwealth into the Tuscan Sea; and as good
luck would have it for the Commonwealth, the Kings Orders came to Don Pietro
when he was not far from the Venetian Washes, and when the Venetians, as
finding themselves in greatest danger, did exclaim most against the King;
wherefore Don Pietro (having had some inkling of the Turkish Fleet) that he
might not be enclosed between two Fleets retreated; and leaving the Galleoons
at Brindisi came, according to the Kings command, into the Tuscan Sea; not
without much grief to the Viceroy, who not having yet vented his anger would,
contrary to the Kings command, continue the War which was begun.

Thus was Venice, when she least thought of it, freed from the very near danger
of being assaulted; but she fared no better in the Wars of Friuli; for the
Captains of the Army, that they might not lie idle whilst the Hollanders
delayed their coming, attempted the Castle of Cestnuts, and a Town which was a
great one, and near it, upon the banks of Lisonzo; hoping that when they should
have taken those two places they might easily take the Tower upon the stone
Bridge, and pass from thence to the expugning of Goritia; which when they
should have got, the Enemies Army would neither have been able to have kept the
Field, nor to defend Gradisca, nor to hold the rest of the Archdukes Country;
so as whole Friuli falling into the Commonwealths hands, the Alps had been the
bound^ure of the Dutch Empire; a thing which peradventure she concealedly aimed
at: General Medici parting therefore from Luciniso with many Soldiers sent
part of them to take in the Fort, and coming with the rest to Piuma, he easily
took it; and leaving people with sufficient provisions, and Orders to defend
it, he returned to Luciniso: The others being gotten near the Fort began to
streighten it on two sides, hoping verily to take it; for there being only
eighty Foot in it, badly provided either with Victuals or wherewithal to fight,
they by signs gave notice of their necessity to those of their side, wherein
they could hardly be provided by the Austrians; for besides that the Venetians
were numerous, and in Piuma, and about the Fort, and were able to increase
their numbers, by reason of the neighborhood of those who were in Luciniso,
and in St Florini, Lisonz^ being swollen by continual rains, had broke the Bridge
which the Austrians had built upon long-boats, and had carried the long boats
along with it; and the rain continuing, it was impossible to pass over Lisonzo;
it was therefore hard and dangerous to relieve that Fort, but more hard and
dangerous to abandon it: yet at the last, the Austrian Commanders, of two evils
choosing the less, resolved to adventure a few men, for the safety and
preservation of all: they therefore planted two Batteries on their shore side
against Piuma, to keep the Enemy from fortifying, and chose out 800 of the best
Horse and Foot; who being commanded by the Baron Hermisteine, and by Captain
Henrico Paradiso Navarro, and Captain Ferdinand^ Caratti, might pass over the
Rive^ in a certain place, where they were sheltered from the sight of the
Enemy, and from being offended by them; and to this purpose having no
Long-boats, they took from the standing Pools and Rivers that were near at hand
certain little Shallops made out of the whole timber which the Country People
call Zocchi, whereinto the Soldiers got; and holding by a long-rope which was
thrown over the River, did by a few at a time get over to the other shore. The
business being u^dauntedly begun by Captain Caratti succeeded no less happily;
except that the rope being broke by the swiftness of the Rive^, two Zocchi,
with the Soldiers that were in them, were drowned: at which disaster their
companions being not at all dismayed, tied certain bundles together; and
throwing them over the River, did by resting on them get without any prejudice
to the other side: 200 of them went to relieve the Fort, and the rest to
recover Piuma; the former, though assisted by the besieged, who sallied out of
the Fort, could not advance; but the others, when they came near Piuma, infused
such terror into the Venetians, as abandoning the Town without making any
resistance, they betook themselves to their heels, and fled without stopping,
till they came to Luciniso: whose example was immediately followed by those who
were about the Fort, who seeing Piuma abandoned, forsook their Trenches also,
and unpursued ran shamefully away: and though at first the Commanders, and
afterward Medici, who was come then from Luciniso, got them to return to their
first stations, yet afterward better considering the confusion, the Soldiers
dismaiedness, and the undauntedness of the Enemy (who despising death, and
presenting themselves fiercely before them after they had waded the River,
which they had so courageously past over, only to relieve the Fort, and who
therefore were likely not to refuse any danger, so they might relieve it) they
chose to shun the encounter, and to forgothe enterprise, with some loss of
reputation, lest they might be driven away with loss and shame: the Sould^ers
retreated therefore in good order to Luciniso, and the Fort was freed by the
Austrians singular valor: at last, the Hollanders appeared, 4300 in number, in
two Regiments; led on by Count John Ernestus of Nassaw, Nephew to Count
Maurice: 300 whereof were at her own charge sent by the Princess of Orange,
under the same Count, and 1000 brought at his own expense by Colonel Georgio
Sergi Wassenofen, who was nobly rewarded by the Venetians for so generous an
action: these Soldiers were very well armed and clad, commanded by many
Gentlemen of very good quality, and were therefore of great help to the
Venetian Camp. Wassenofen, who was the first that came to Venice, was sent by
Land to Friuli, and the Count coming soon after went by Sea to Montfalcone, and
from thence to the Camp: as soon as Commissary Lando and General Medici saw the
Hollanders, they immediately betook themselves to pass over the Carso: leaving
the care of the Camp, and of all things on this side, to Commissary Nicolo
Contareno, who succeeded Forscarini, with sufficient Forces to Guard the
Country, and with excellent Orders to be put in execution in due time. They
caused a Bridge to be privately cast over Cassoian^, four miles below Gradisca,
by which Lando, Medici, and Erizzo past over into the Country of Montfalcone,
with 5000 Foot, and about 800 Horse, which being joined to Nassaw's Hollanders,
and to other Soldiers who were mustered there, were divided into four
Squadrons, according to the ways by which they were to march: Commissary Lando,
though he desired, and was resolved to be present at this passage, was
notwithstanding persuaded by Medici and the rest, who to shun adventuring the
public dignity in his person, forced him to tarry in Montfalcone, where he
might be more serviceable in taking order, and in making provisions for the
Enterprise: Erizzo was to be ready with a flying Squadron, to come in and
assist where any need, or sudden accident should require: Cosimo di Marchesi
del Monte, he who first discovered Carso, went by the first way, nearest the
Sea, and furthest from Lisonzo, with 800 Foot; and being come to Dobredo, he
presently took it, and for more security, began to fortify it: Oration Balioni
went by the next way with 1500 Foot, four small pieces, good store of Pioneers,
and Ammunition for War, Count Ferdinando Scotto going before him with some
Horse-Troops to scour the Country, and to make discovery: he took St. Michele,
which afterward when Baglione came thither was diligently fortified: By the
third way went Count Nassaw with the Hollanders, waited on by some Troops of
Horse, and some pieces of Artillery, who coming to the Town called St. Martino
in Carso, took it; then going to the Fort which is called delle Done, at the
third shot, he took it upon Articles; not long after he did the like to the
Fort Imperial, a little lower, and nearer Lisonzo, which commands the River,
and was therefore of great concern, in keeping succors from Gradisca. Only
Giovan Martinengo, who led on the fourth Squadron, and to whose share it fell
to bring on the Artillery, and to advance by the way which lay nearest the
River, met with a rub; for being to take the Fort Stella, which was upon the
way over against Gradisca and being come so near it; as he began to make
Trenches for Battery, two companies of Swissers and Grisons, being afraid
without any occasion, began to Mutiny; which Mutiny passing into those of other
Nations, they began all to wheel about, and to run, Martinengo not being by any
means able to stay them; and Commissary Erizzo coming in, he had much ado to
persuade them to turn back, and carry off the Artillery which they had
abandoned, and which, had they made the least delay, had fallen into the hands
of those of the Fort. Martinengo retreated to Sagra, and sending the Artillery
from thence to St. Michele, he fortified himself at St. Nichola Medici, not
being bound to keep any one place, discharged the Office of a General, and ran
sometimes to one place, sometimes to another, encouraging, providing for, and
ordering all things which appertained to the March: the same night, to the end
that the Austrians being assaulted in several places might have the less
convenience to oppose the passage of Carso; some of the Commonwealths Galleys
drew near Dulcigno, a great Town belonging to the Archduke in the Gulf of
Triesti, and playing upon it with their Artillery did it much harm: and on the
other side of Lisonzo, Trivigiano coming from Luciniso, according to Medici his
Orders, at midnight with a great many Horse, came to Lisonzo; and s^eming as
if he would pass over it, kept the Enemy busy that was lodged on the other
side; and a little lower, near Fora, Francisco and Carlo Strasoldi, who had the
same Orders, being come to the River side, and not seeing any appear against
them, but finding by counter-signs that the Venetians had luckily overcome the
Mountain, they boldly entered the River, which was somewhat more swollen then
usual; and coming to sh^ar on the other side, they were presently followed by
many Horse, and particularly by two choice Troops, the one led on by Udine, the
other by Cividal, the former belonging to Commissary Contereno's self, and the
other to Giovan Bassadone, Lieutenant General of Friuli, both of them ancient
Senators; who notwithstanding having foorded over the River, possessed
themselves of the furthermost

(...) bank and ways, making themselves masters of them and of the enemies
Rampires: The Austrians were sufficiently astonished at this strange and
unexpected passage, as well over the Mountains as over the River; and
forgetting their former Generosity grew into great confusion; and doubtlesly,
if the Venetian Commanders had proceeded on with the same fervor, they would
freely without any opposition have gotten to the Walls of Goritia, being only
three miles distant from the bottom of Carso; whereof, by reason of the great
terror they were in, they might without much ado have made themselves masters.

Horatio Baglione was aware of this so rare occasion; who with many reasons and
reitterated persuasions exhorted Medici not to let it slip; but Medici being
very cautious and circumspect would not be advised by him: And whilst he fore
slowed the business upon the descent of Carso, to discover the Country, and to
pry into the enemies proceedings; whilst busying himself in making of Trenches
and Fortifications for the safety of his Quarters, he played the part rather of
a Cunctator then of a Dictator, he let slip the occasion; for the Austrians
arguing by this the enemies delay that they had but little mind to advance,
reassumed their ^ormer courage, and resolved to stand upon their defense; which
resolution was ^omented by Count d' Ampier^, who was at this time come from
Germany; and who by his ^atural vivacity, by his Authority, and by the assured
succor which he told them was ready in Germany, and assured them would be very
quickly in Italy, encouraged the Captains to resist, and manfully to oppose the
enemy. Between the Carso and Vipao, a River which (as has been said) runs at
the bottom of the Mountain toward Goritia, is a Palace in form of a Castle,
with a Wood walled about, (called il Pallagio, e Barco di Rubbia) situated just
where Vipao falls into Lifonzo, and is therefore flanked on two sides by the
same Rivers. Baglione, seeing it abandoned, would have made himself master of
it, for the doing so made much for the main business; but being forbidden by
Medici, Colonel Standato entered it with 1000 Foot, and not long after Maradas
with more men; and they fell forthwith to fortify it, and to surround it with
platforms: Here ended the success of that passage; for the Austrians having
fortified il Pallagio, flanked il Barco with Ravelines, and munited the Banks
of Vipao with new Works; the Venetians found another Gradisca to besiege, and
another Lisonzo to overcome, on the other side of Carso; about which they
entertained themselves to little purpose till the Peace was concluded. Many
Batteries, many Attempts, many Skirmishes, were made by both parties, with
variety of Fortune; which since they made nothing for the main of the war, will
be superfluous to relate, and p^radventure irksome to read: The end of the
business was, that the Venetians could never drive the Austrians thence, who
had always the better, not only in defending il Barco and the River, but also
in relieving Gradisca, which the Venetians could not, by any means they could
use, obviate. General Trautmistorft dyed in the defense of il Barco, being
shot, whilst too courageously, and contrary to the opinion of his own men, he
stood upon a Raveline which ^e himself had given order for; He was a Gentleman
well born, of great courage, not d^unted with any danger, very vigilant in all
things belonging to war; but of a Genius more given to Skirmishes and petty
actions, then to the main enterprises; and therefore deserved rather to be
esteemed a good Soldier then an excellent Commander; for being always provided
of excellent Soldiers, and having to do with a weak and undisciplined Army,
and which was moreover continually macera^ed with sickness, he could never
totally overthrow them; So though he was always assailant, and had always more
the better in private actions, yet he seemed to be always more for defense then
offense: And the Venetians, who were continually losers, seemed in general to
be victors; having always carried the war into the enemies Country, without
losing any thing they had gotten, and always advancing somewhat toward new
Acquisitions: Many laid the fault of this, not upon the Comm^nder, but upon the
scarcity of his men, and of necessary provisions for war; others imputed it to
his being too prodigal of his own life, and spacing of his Soldiers lives;
others laid it to the secret orders of the Emperors chief Officers, corrupted
by the Venetian Gold: But howsoever, he being well esteemed of for his great
valor both by the Emperor and Archduke, his death did very much trouble t^em.

On the Venetians side Baglione was slain, whilst he with 500 Foot opposed a
great squadron of horse upon the Carso, as they were carrying relief to Fort
Stella, that so they might put it into Gradisca; with him there dyed Virginio
Orsino di Lamentana, and 500 Foot, who were almost all of them put to the Sword
by the Austrians: There also dyed, but upon other occasions, Danielle Antonini,
and Mark Antonio Mazzano, (both of them of Udine) Count Leonardo Gualdo,
Francisco Maria Albertaccio, all of them being prime Commanders in the Venetian
Army; to (...) with many others of lesser note, Count Nassaw dyed t^ere also,
but of sickness; and his Brother Count Ernestus succeeded him: It is thought
that in this war, what by the Sword, (...) by sickness, there dyed of the
Venetians above 30000; and not full (...) 4000 Austrians. Trautmistorf^ was
succeeded in his charge by Iovan Prainero, a gallant Commander, bred up in the
Hungarian wars, who was lucky in the defense of il Barco, and in the relief of
Gradisca; and Pietro Barbarigo, Procurator of St Mark, succeeded Commissary
Lando, he who at the beginning of the war exercised the same place, though
under the bare title of Commissary; and Lorenzo Iustiniano succeeded Commissary
Erizzo.

The Venetians were much prejudiced in their proceedings by the continual
(...), which fell contrary to the season of the year; for the Venet^ans ^ad
passed over Carso in the beginning of June. T^ese rains caused much sickness
amongst the Soldiers; and Lisonzo being extraordinarily swollen broke the
Venetians Bridge at Cassoiano; wherefore those of the Commonwealth could not
conveniently communica^e (...), the Bridge being broken; nor could those of
Carso be victualled by those of Friuli: They were likewise much prejudiced by
the mutinying of the Hol^anders, who were displeased with their Captains for
k^eping back a good part of their pay, which had been readily di^burst by the
Venetians; but certainly the fallings out between Medici and Nassaw did most
harm, who strove for superiority, and who should command, and who obey; Medici,
by his Patents from the Commonwealth, being to command over all save the
Commissary-general; and Nassaw being by his Letters Patents not to obey any
save the Commissary-general; and the Commissaries not being able to compose the
difference, jealousies, grudges, and dis^astes grew amongst them, whereby the
cause of the Commonwealth was much prejudiced; the Commonwealth not being only
not well satisfied with Medici his service, but his loyalty and truth being
suspected; if not publicly by the Senate, at least by the Nobles, who
beginning to distrust him, did publicly, and generally de^act from his
reputation; as if by private intelligence held with the Archduke, whose Sister
was Wife to the Great Duke of Tuscany, Nephew to Medici, he had not only let
slip the opportunity of going to Goritia, by proceeding so slowly upon Carso;
but as if having neglected the Commonwealths service in several things, he had
suffered the Enemy to bring succor to Gradisca when it was in greatest
necessity. The Governors of the Commonwealth do often fall upon such Rocks,
especially when affairs go not well with them; and it is clear enough, that if
the War ^ad lasted, that he being weary of the Venetians ^ealousies would
either have left their service, or they for their own greater satisfaction
would have tried-first the others fortune; and this was whispered to be
privately treated on by the Senate, but that they did not proceed therein, by
reason they saw the War was near at an end, and by reason of Medici his
condition and alliance. Marco Antonio Canale was also given for a successor to
Trivigiano, though Trivigiano had always showed himself indefatigable in
labor, ready for danger, and would have won much glory in that War, had he not
through the immortal malice he bore to the Spaniards, obscured it by a piece of
cruelty committed by him upon a Spanish Knight, who being brought prisoner
before him, while the Prisoner submissively bowed unto him he thrust a Dagger
into his breast, and slew him. The affairs of the Commonwealth proceeded but
slowly in Istria and Dalmatia; nothing of memorable succeeding ther^in, save
that Zimino, a place of some concern, was taken by General Antonio Barbaro, in
which action he lost 200 Soldiers, and some Captains: for the rest, they spun
it out till the conclusion of the peace, which was made not long after with
much advantage to the Venetians, according to the custom of that Commonwealth;
which though she be good at Counsel, comes short of other Princes in matter of
the Militia; and therefore since she is not fortunate in War, makes peace upon
more honorable terms, by Negotiation; but because the Siege and taking of
Vercelles preceded that peace, it will be necessary, that returning to the
affairs of Piedmont, we first relate the progress of that War, in the beginning
of the Summer 1617.

The End of the fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK VI.
The Contents.
THe Governor of Millain goes with his Army to before Vercelles, and besieging
it on all sides, and the Town not being able to be relieved, after a long Siege
he takes it upon Articles. The Capitulations of Peace, as well for what
concerned Piedmont as Friuli, are treated of in the Court of Spain, and are
concluded in the Court of France; as also at Madrid. The Duke of Savoy being
assisted by the French, who came into Piedmont after the surrender of
Vercelles, takes some Towns in Montferra^ and in Allessandria: And at last, in
pursuance of the Capitulations stipulated in the Courts of France and Spain,
the Peace is concluded in Pavia between the Governor of Millain and the French
Ambassador. The Viceroy of Naples sends some Galleoons into the Gulf in
defense of the Ragusiens, who were vexed by the Venetian Fleet; which Galleoons
get the better, in fight, of the Venetians. A Conspiracy is discovered in
Venice, and some rumors are spread abroad upon the Confines of Venice toward
Milla^n, between the Spanish Soldiers and those of the Commonwealth; which
being appeased, a period is put to the War, and Italy is restored to her former
Peace.

THe Governor being recruited with new Forces, and being kindled with new
desires of re entering Piedmont with his Army, aimed to give on the^e where it
might be to most purpose, and most mortal to the Enemy. The^e were of new
arrived in the State of Millain 4 Companies of Light Horse, 16 of Gens d'
Arms, commanded by Camillo Caracciola Prince of Avelino, and 600 Cur^ssiers
under Don Antonio Caraffa Duke of Matalona, in all 1800 Horse, which were sent
him by the Duke of Ossuna; who being no less desirous to maintain the grandezza
and honor of the King against the Venetians, then anxious for the affairs in
Lombardy, had spared neither for cost, trouble, nor diligence, to keep up the
Glory of the Spaniard, and the Kings Authority, in its ancient splendor.
Besides these there were expected 1000 Curassiers and 6000 Walloon Foot from
Flanders, who came quickly: The command of the Horse was given to Iovan
Ieronimo Doria; the Foot were divided into two Brigades, the one was commanded
by Gulielmo Verdugo, the other by Gulielmo di Quen. The Lombard, Neapolitan,
and Dutch Brigades, being recruited with new men, were almost gotten to their
former number; so as those that were there already being computed with those
who were shortly to come, the Army consisted of about 25000 Foot, and of 5500
Horse; a gallant Army, and fit for whatsoever Enterprise. A Council of the
chief Commanders being therefore called, he asked their opinion touching the
whole business, and touching carrying on the War against the Duke: The opinions
were three; the first, that the Towns of Montferrat should be recovered, since
the defense of that State was the principal end of the present War; and for
that when they should be recovered, the Army, in case the Peace should not be
concluded, which was closely negotiated, might easily go to the expugning of
Turin; or if peace should be concluded, it would redound the more to the Kings
honor; for that the possession of what was taken being got by War, the Duke
should not have the honor of restoring them: The second, whereof Mortara was
Author, was, that Asti should again be attempted: The third, that they should
go to the taking in of Verrua and Crescentino, with intention to keep succor
from Vercelles, and to open a commodious way for entrance into Piedmont. The
last not appearing so difficult as the taking of Asti, and more honorable then
to keep so great an Army about the recovery of a few inconsiderable Castles,
was approved of by the greatest part of the Council, and so resolved on. Don
Ieronimo Caraffa, Marquess of Montenegro, a man of great power, long versed in
the Wars of Flanders, was thought to be the Author of this opinion; who being
sent from Spain the Winter before to be assistant to Don Piedro di Toledo in
Council, succeeded the Prince of Ascoli, who was sent for back to Court, and he
commanded the whole Army by title of Camp-master General, though under the name
of the Governor: So as it being noised that they went to Crescentino, the
Soldiers and Captains were wholly bent thereupon; but the Governor who had
resolved otherwise in private with Montenegro, feigning to go from Pontestura,
where the Army then was, to Crescentino, and changing the Garrison of S.
Germano in his passage, faced about, and sat down before Vercelles so
unexpectedly, as four Troops of Horse which were gone out o^ Vercelles to
discover the Enem^es Proceedings, falling upon the body of the Army, were kept
from re-entring into Vercelles, by a flying Squadron which were advanced by
another way; so they returned (...) and dispersed to the Duke; and some other
which could not save themselves by running were some of them sla^, some taken
Prisoners. Marquess Clausio was Governor of this place, which was sufficiently
well victuall'd, yet but ill provided of Soldiers, and worse of warlike
Ammunition; for they had been much wasted in the business of Messerano and
Creppacuore; wherefore the Governor knowing these their wants, thought the
business would be short and easy, if by drawing suddenly and unexpectedly
before it he could keep it from being relieved: To this end having resolved to
place Iovan Ieralimo Doria with the Cavalry which was come from Flanders, which
consisted wholly of choice and Veteran Soldiers, to guard the ways by which
relief might be brought from Piedmont; he had sent to Millain, before he went
from Pontestura, for provision of Arms; and calculating the time so as that
these Horse might come to Millain at the same instant as the Army should
approach Vercelles, he failed in his account, by reason of some delay made by
some Officer of Millain in the delivery out of the Arms: So as the Duke, who at
the first news of the Armies being gone to Vercelles was gone with all his
Forces to the Ruins of Santia; had opportunity of sending 1500 Foot, and some
Companies of Horse, into the Town; who finding the ways open got safe without
any opposition into Vercelles: This succor came very opportunely; for together
with them there entered also many Commanders and Captains; and amongst the rest
Monsieur di Saufrone, the Dukes Engineer, who did singular service in all this
Siege.

This place was begirt on that side which looks toward Piedmont, where the
greatest danger of assault lay, with a Wall which was platformed with a Ditch:
It was impossible it should be infested on that side which lies toward Millain,
there being but a very little space between the Wall and the neighboring River
Sesia, full of Roots and snags of Trees: When the Army was come within sight of
the Town, finding that the Flemish Horse did still delay coming, and fearing
that more succors would be brought in, he thought it requisite to streighten
it the more; He commanded therefore that a long Trench should be begun; which
beginning from Sesia, a good way above Vercelles, and taking a compass toward
Piedmont, might not only encompass the whole Town with a greater circuit, but
might also enclose all that space of ground wherein the Army was quartered, and
should terminate in Sesia, a good way below the City; to the end that the Army
might lie safe within that Trench, and be sheltered from the Dukes assaults,
and might securely attend the siege; a work which by reason of the large
compass, and continual rains, could not be perfected without much delay of
time: The Horse which were in the Camp were most of them quartered beyond the
Sesia, to the end that they might keep succor also from being brought by that
side. The Town being thus be^eagured on all sides, and the Artillery and other
provisions being also come, they began their Trenches, and began their
Batteries against the Walls and Fortifica^ions thereupon erected, on the lower
side of the Trenches; about which there was continual Skirmishing; for those
within being increased in numbers, to boot with their shooting of Cannon and
Musque^s from the Walls, Ravelines, and other fortified places, (...) often out
to ass^ult the enemy, and to skirmish with him; though for the most part some
wha^ to their loss: And those without advancing st^ll with their appr^aches and
assaults, endeavored to get underneath the defenses; but being often beaten
back, sometimes from one, sometimes from another Fortification, suddenly
erected by Sanfrone, they were kept, as it were, at bay, and forced to return
back, and quit the Stations which they had taken: So as the Siege, which
otherwise would not have lasted long, was necessarily prolonged, and would have
been so longer if those within had been better provided of Ammunition, or if
the Duke had been so lucky in succouring the Town with Ammunition, as he had
been with men; yet he was very diligent in endeavoring it; but the Governor
took such good orders after the first relief was conveyed in, as that thereby,
and by a strange accident that happened, he could not effect it: For the Duke
chose out 500 of his best Horse, and amongst them 400 Curassiers, and sent them
toward the besieged Town, with each of them a sack of Powder; to which he
added 12 Load of the same Ammunition: These men thinking to force their passage
on a sudden, and to get safely into Vercelles, failed in their design; for the
Governor had already placed Ieronimo To with 800 Horse, and 2000 Foo^, to
guard that passage, who lighting upon this Convoy, the Dukes 500 Horse found
the encounter harder then they had imagined; and yet they repulsed the first
200 Horse that came against them; but To coming in afterward, and the Baron
Batteville, with many more men, a furious volley of Musket shot was let fly
from the Trenches; and fire taking unfortunately at the same time in the
Ammunition, it blew up with such violence, as the whole Troop we^e miserably
dissipated; many of them blown up into the Air, and many to shun the fire,
threw themselves into the Sesia, where they were either drowned or shot, only
25 got safe into Vercelles; many being shrewdly scorched were taken prisoners,
amongst which Mnr di Limogione, the Prince Thomoso's Lieutenant; 450 Horse were
slain in this disaster; hardly 50 escaped; other sixscore were also ill dealt
withal a little after, in a bickering which happened in the midway which leads
from St. Germano to Santia; for a Troop of Horse being sent from St Germano,
commanded by Captain Pallestra a Millanese, to disturb the Fortifications which
were begun by the Dukes men, they met with another of the Dukes Troops which
came from Santia; and at the first beginning of the Skirmish the Dukes men fled
to underneath the Trenches of Santia; and those few who could recover the
Trenches, being secured by the Musketeers who kept the enemy off, got free
from danger; but the greatest part of them were either slain in the encounter
or in the retreat, or carried Prisoners into St. Germano by Pallestra: the
Siege drawing on in length, the Duke sent 100 Sacks of Powder wrapped up in
beasts Hides, to keep them from firing, with 100 Horse, by the way of
Gattinara; but this, which was the third endeavored succor, had no better
success; for being discovered by the Marquess of Este, who guarded that Pass
with the Gens d' Arms, most of them were slain, and many of them made
Prisoners. The Army was not this mean while idle in besieging the City; against
which they continued the Batteries, and labored very much to beat down the
outward Fortifications; which besides the multiplicity and variety of them,
were so artificially ordered, as when they were gotten with much effusion of
blood, they were either easily recovered, or not hardly abandoned; and
sometimes, there being a Mine underneath them, they were fired, and so the
Works were blown up with those that were on them into the Air; oftentimes when
one Cavalier was taken, another was the same night erected by the enemy, which
rendered the taking of the former the preceding day of no use to the
possessors: Thus the defendants not being wanting to themselves as long as
their Ammunition lasted, they did several ways with much vigilance and industry
annoy the enemies Army, showing themselves in great order, and with much
courage, very ready for all necessary actions, in defense of the Town against
so stout and so fierce an oppugnation; nor in this their defense were the
Heavens less propitious to them, sending down rain in great abundance for the
first forty days, which were not only great impediments to their approaches and
military actions, but did cause the neighboring Rive^s and Torrents to swell
so high, as the Trentinians who were quartered very low, were forced for fear
of the waters which overflowed the Banks, to draw backwards; and many disorders
which happened in the Camp were causes of prolonging the enterprise, which was
of it self so hard and difficult: But at last all difficulties being overcome
by the pertinacity, valor and courage of the assailants, who removing all
impediments were so advanced in their approaches, as they had made way for an
Assault; it was resolved to give one on the twelfth of July, by the whole power
of the Camp; which coming in good order to the enemy* Rampires, and fighting
valiantly; the assailants advanced so far on three sides as they had sometimes
hope to get the victory; but those within being no less valiant, the assault
continued for the space of three hours, the assailants not being able to make
any progress; many whereof were slain, not so much of the ordinary Soldiers,
as of the Captain^ and of the better sort; of which Monsieur de Quen, the
Walloon Camp-master, and Captain Stampa, and Don Alphonso Piemontello,
succeeding Quen in his place, who was General of the Horse, whilst he fought
valiantly with his Sword in his hand, and taught the Walloons by his own
example to advance, was shot by a Musket in the Arm, whereof he dyed within a
few days, to the great grief and sorrow of the whole Camp; he not being only
very valiant, but extraordinarily civil and courteous: Iohanni Bravo was also
sorely hurt by a Barrel of Powder which fell on fire not far from the place
where he was valiantly fighting: Night coming on, though they gave over the
ass^ult, ^ey forbore not working with their Pick-axes and Gabbioons, t^ get
ne^r the Wall, and to remove all impediments which yet remained from without,
that they might come to a second assault, wherein they placed much hope of
victory, and of ending the enterprise gloriously; For those within being
reduced even to the bottom of their Ammuni ion, and therefore making more use
of stones then of Muskets, (...) was impossible for them to resist any longer;
but for all this, did neither they nor the Duke forego their hopes; for 400 of
them (...) out at mi^ day, under four French Captains, to assault the Trenches,
and clog the A^lery, who being discovered were repulsed with much loss by two
Companies of Musketeers; and the Duke, making his utmost attempt to furn^sh
the Town with what it (...) by a greater power t^en forme^ly, came with all his
men within six miles of the Camp; and dividing 3000 men into three Squadrons,
who were commanded by Monsieur d'Orfe, he sent them with a good quantity of
Powder toward the City.

This succor being conveyed privately between Fort Sandoval, and a little
Bulwark near the Sesia, was brought very near the City: but the Enemies Horse
falling upon the Van, it was presently defeated; the middle Squadron throwing
away their Ammunition foorded over the Sesia, and got to underneath: the Walls
of the City, whereof many being pursued even to the Ditch, were many of them
slain: the third Squadron got safe back to the Duke: In this action 120 were
taken prisoners, of which Orfe his Serjeant-Major, Orfe's self having escaped
luckily by flight. On the Governors party, Don Luigi di Leva was slain, and
Don Ottavio Gonzaga, the Baron Batteville and Lodovico Guasco were wounded: the
first was found sorely wounded lying amongst the expiring bodies, and died not
long after; the other two (though sorely wounded also) escaped death: many of
the middle Squadron got into the City, but without their Ammunition; so as the
Town was not at all relieved by this attempt. So as a second assault being
suddenly given on several sides, and which the defendants not being able to
resist, the assailan^s appearing already with their Banne^s upon the Walls, the
assaulted helped themselves by a false rumor, crying give fire unto the Mine:
which being heard and believed by the assailan^s, who had been often times
strangely deluded, they immediatel^ turned their backs, and abandoning what
they had taken, fled away headlong: which they did not without much loss; for
being pursued by the Enemy by Musket Shot, whereof not any mist, and with
stones, by such as wanted powder, they were smitten sorely; and doubtlesly, if
they had given less belief to the Enemies words, or had kept longer upon the
station which they had taken, the business would h^ve been this day dones for
many of the defendants wanting powder, they were forced to use their Pikes and
Swords; and two of the Spa^ish Foot, who had undauntedly advanced, got as far
in as to St. Andrews Church, where one of them fell, and the other being sorely
wounded, escaped death, by Marquess Calusio his generosity, who admiring so
much valor in an Enemy, commanded he should be no more mo^ested. But in fine,
many of the defendants being wounded in those assaults, amongst which Monsieur
di Bles, a French Commander, their Ammunition being all spent, and despai^ing
either to be relieved, or able to resist any longer, they resolved to come to
composi^ion; which the French were occasion why Calusio, and all the Dukes
Captains, except it were Sanfrone, consented unto: for they finding that the
Town could not hold out much longer, thought they had done sufficiently enough
in point of honor, and in obligation to the Duke, in whose service they
thought themselves not bound obstinately to lose their lives, he not being
their natural Prince, nor they fighting for their Country: so Evangelista
Tosti, a Perugian Captain, going out with the Governor and two Companies of
Horse to Parley, he demanded four days Truce; which being positively denied,
the agreement was finally made upon these conditions:

That all the Ravelines, Half-Moons, Stations and Fortifications which were
without the Wall should be delivered up the next day; that the next day after
all the Soldiers should march both out of the City, and Citadel, with Drums
beating, Trumpets sounding, Bullet in mouth, Match lighted, Colors flying,
with all their Baggage, two pieces of Cannon, Mills, Cattle, Victuals, and with
every thing else that belonged unto them: That they should have sufficient
carriages allowed them to carry away their goods, their wounded men, and all
their Implements; besides many other Articles very favorable to those of
Vercelles: upon which conditions Hostages being given on both sides, all things
were performed with great fidelity, and satisfaction; there marched out 4109
Soldiers, part on foot, part on horse back, whereof 600 wounded, who were
carried in Carts, and 300 staid in Vercelles, not being able to be removed;
they marched through the Enemies ranks, being praised by all for their valor.
The Marquess of Calusio and the Engineer Sanfrone were met by Don Piedro, and
the chief of the Army, and honorably received by them, and were accompanied by
them to the Rendezvous of Arms, where they took their leaves; the Governor
having in a grave and civil manner showed Calusio the great mischief of war,
and the good which would redound by peace; and therefore to offer the Duke the
restitution of Vercelles, if he would be quiet upon reasonable conditions;
which that they might the better be concluded, he said he would be ready to
speak by word of mouth with the Duke, in any place of safety.

There died in this Siege, besides those that have been already named,
Serbellone the Camp-master, the Count of Monte Castello, Brother to the
Marquess of Soncino, Don Garzia Gomes General of the Artillery, Ieronymo
Mormillo, a Neapolitan, and Lieutenant to Montenegro. The Governor himself, as
he was visiting the Trenches, was shot in a place where he wore a^certain
relic about his arm, but received no harm: Montenegro received a shot upon a
Button of gold which he had on his Doublet, but was not hurt: the Siege
continued from the 24th of May, till the 26th of July following. The Duke was
not succored by the French, as he hoped, and as it was commonly held he would
^ave been; the Marshal Diguieres, though he had often promised it, nor any
other of that Nation, appeared in Piedmont; whether they were st^aitly
commanded the contrary by the King (whose commands they had formerly but little
valued) or whether corrupted by Spanish Gold, it is not known: it was known,
that for the one or the other respect, there was p^id at this time from the
Court of Spain, to the Duke of Montelion, Emb^ssadour for Spain, at Paris,
200000 Ducates; and also because the peace being hotly Negotiated at this time
(whereof the French were ambitious to be the Arbitrators; who, it may be,
thoug^t the King of Spain would be hardly brought to consent thereunto, whilst
^e had not the better of the War;) they intended to gratify him, by not
opposing him in this enterprise; not so much in respect that the parity of
^greement between the King and Duke would be a dishonorable example to all
great Kings; as for that the King seeming to have ^he better by the aching of
Vercelles, and therefore satisfied in point of (...), ^e might the more
confidently, and with more reputation conclude it by their Kings means; and it
was generally held, that if the Duke had been assisted but a little by the
French, Vercelles had not been so easily taken; for the Duke coming one night
with those few men he had, put the Spanish Camp into much fear and confusion,
left by assaulting some one place he might make his way through the Enemy to
the City: nor was the fear vain, nor danger small; for the besiegers being
imploi'd in defending so many places in the so long circuit of the Trench, and
busied not so much in keeping the besieged in, as in keeping succor out, they
might not peradventure have been able to resist the Duke, if he had furiously
assaulted some one place with all his Forces close joined together; and so much
the rather for that the Camp having suffered much hardship, they had lost not
only many of their common Soldiers, but also many Officers: and half their
Horse were dead for want of Fodder, and many horses were sick, so as they were
reduced to so small a number, as oftentimes, of a whole company, not above six
or eight entered the Guard; and it often happened that the Officers themselves
were fain to serve for Guard, and to stand Sentinel all day long, having none
to supply the place: the continual skirmishing about the Enemies Out Works
consumed also many Foot; and the extreme hot weather, which came soon after,
might easily have made the Enemy remove, had the Town held out a little longer:
so as if any the least succor had come from France, the place might likely
enough have been p^eserved. The Duke therefore being grieved for the (...)
thereof, made the Governor Calusio and Tosti be presently imprisoned; the
first, for having been negligent in making necessary provisions for the defense
of the Town; and the other out of jealousy of some collusion with the
Governor of Millain: but afterward, when his anger was over, and that he
found them faultless, he caused them to be set at liberty, and received them
into former favor.

Vercelles being taken, the Army being weary with hard duty, and much lessened
by the running away, and by the death of many, was distributed into many places
of the State of Millain, and of Montferrat; a good part thereof was sent with
the Neapolitan Horse into the State Cremona, and Lodigiano: not so much for
that the rest of the Country being much wasted and ruined, they might refresh
themselves in that part which had been yet untouched, as to make the Venetians
the more jealous, who were then troubled with the neerness of the Fle^t at Sea,
and with the War of Friuli; and very much fearing their Confines upon the State
of Millain, which were but weakly munited, now that Vercelles was lost; They
having received many brushes in those parts by the Kings Soldiers (as shall be
said in its due place) and would have received grea^er, had not the general
peace, which was then very hotly Negotia^ed in the Court of Spain, been
speedily concluded; for the Emperor and the Archduke having (at the pressures
of the Venetian Ambassador, residing in that Court) sent Christoforo
Chefnelier, Count of Franchenberg, thither, as their Ambassador, with
sufficient Commission to Negotiate, and to conclude peace; and the Duke of
Savoy, who after his acts of hostility against that Crown, ^ad no Ambassador
there, had made the some Venetian Ambassador his Agent there; after many
debates, and discussions, the Articles of Peace were pronounced by the King in
form as follows:

That the Archduke, who was then newly chosen King of Bohemia, should put a
Dutch Garrison into Segna; and that some of the Towns of Istria nearest to
Segna, such as should be chosen by the Emperor, and Archduke, should be
restored to the Archduke, that then two Commissaries should be chosen by the
Emperor, and two by the Commonwealth of Venice, according to whose award all
the adventitious and stipendiated Croates, who were wont to rove about before
the beginning of this present war, should be dismis^, but not those who had
committed Piracy only in the time of war; nor those who lived quietly at home;
that such as were banished by the Commonwealth should be driven out of the
Archdukes Dominions, and that the Pirates Vessels should be burnt: which being
done, that the Commonwealth should restore all the Towns which they had taken,
as well in Friuli, as in Istria, and in other places: that all Fortifications
and hostile acts should cease on both sides, for the space of two months, to
commence from the beginning of the execution of the agreement: in which time
that which should be agreed upon should be performed: which when it should be
done, all Forces, as well by Sea as Land, should be withdrawn, and Traffic
should be restored to the same condition it was before the war began: that
Prisoners on all sides should be set at liberty, and that all those who had
served the Archduke should generally be pardoned: that the Emperor, and
Archduke, should promise for themselves, and for the King of Spain, that the
Crabates or Croates who should be driven out, should not be re admitted again,
and that the said Princes should not suffer the Seas to be infested for the
time to come, according to the Articles of Vienna, in the year 1612. the tenor
whereof was set down word for word in the said Capitulation: that the Venetian
Ambassador should declare, that the Commonwealths pretentions herein were only
for what concerned the expelling of the adventitious and stipendiary Crabates;
and of the Banditi, who rove about the Seas, and commit Piracy; so as for the
future Traffic might be safe, and free from Pirates; but not concerning those
who live quietly with their Wives and Children; and for what concerned the
liberty of Navigation, it was left according to the custom of former times.

These Articles were very honorable and advantageous for the Venetians, who
thereby got the principal point of their pretenses, and of their diffe^ences
with the Archduke, which consisted chiefly not only in freeing the Gulf from
being molested by the Crabates Piracy, but that the performance thereof should
precede the restitution of the places which they had taken, they being for the
greater honor of the Emperor, and the Archduke, first to restore only one
Town in Istria to them: which favor was the more freely granted them in the
Court of Spain, for that the King supposing that he was to determine these
Differences, as being chosen Arbitrator by the Commonwealth of Venic^, and
accep^ed as such by the Emperor and the Archduke having (that he might be the
more modest in his Arbitrament) been more careful in satisfying the
Commonwealth; thinking that by her freely remitting the differences to be
decided by him, she had abundantly satisfied the off^nces done by her to the
Emperor and Archduke: but the Venetian Ambassador denied openly that he had
ever treated that the King should be Arbitra^or, but only Mediator of the
differences; and that he had no Authority to Negotiate otherwise: so as
constan^ly refusing to accept thereof, he said he would send the Articles of
agreement to the Commonwealth, to the end that she if she did like them might
approve thereof: the truth of this business is hard to be known, it having
passed between the Venetian Ambassador and the Duke of Lerma: many believed
that the Ambassador had not thus in^arged himself in words, without Commission
from the Commonwealth, for his so doing; to the end, that the King by intending
to be Arbitrator of the differences, should not only incline to favor the
Commonwealth in his sentence, but should also free the Commonwealth, and the
Gulf, from being troubled by the Duke of Ossuna; it seeming to be improper,
that he should compose differences as Arbitrator; and as an enemy make war upon
those who had freely put the differences, and occasions of the war to his
Arbitrament. On the other side, the Ambassador never having showed any special
command from his Prince, for the absolute remitting it to the King, nor no such
thing being ever demanded of him, it made much for the contrary: but howsoever
it was, the Duke of Lerma being much offended with the Ambassador who
persisted still in the negative, and being much concerned, that so advant^gious
Articles for the house of Austria if they should not be received, and accepted,
as pronounced by the King, as by common Arbitrator) should be taken out of the
Kings power, without precedent submission of the Commonwealth; sent for the
Ambassador to a meeting where all the Ambassadors of other Princes, ^esident
in that Court were, and did bitterly reprove him, main^aining the contrary to
what he affirmed to his face; and the King being also very much offended,
professed he would trouble himself no more with it, but remitted the whole
Negotiation freely over to the Pope; who when ^e received the Kings Letters,
showed them to Abbot Alessandro Scaglia, brother to Marquess Calusio
Ambassador Resident for the Duke at R^me; exhorting him to write unto his
Prince, that the business might be brought to a conclusion. The Duke not
confiding in the Pope, for that he found him much inclined to satisfy Spain,
and for that he had permitted-passage to the Horse which came from Naples to
Lombardy, and for other things which he had done in fav^ur of tha^ Crown, made
the business known to the Ambassadors of his Con^ederate Friends and Princes;
and then sent to Rome to have the pea^e concluded, with express Commission to
his Ambassador, not to consent to any accommodation, except the Articles of
Asti were observed, and unless the Venetians were secured, as had been formerly
endeavored. The Pope finding the Duke had not referred the business to his
free disposal, as the King had done, was scandalized, and would not meddle with
it; so as it remained unperfected: but the same Capitul^tions of Madrid being
presented to the Senate at Venice, by the Popes Nuntio, and by the French
Ambassador, just at that time when that City quaked for apprehension of the
neerness of the Navy at Se^, which having taken the Mahouns, was feared would
draw near their Washes; and when Vercelles was lost, they stood not much in
approving of the same; not as the award of the King, who was aut^orized by t^em
to judge thereof; but as propounded by him, as a friend, and a^ a mediator, in
the common differences; and the Venetians did the more willingly accept of
them, because they se^med not on^y advantageous for them in all things which
they could have desi^ed, save in the restitution of the Mah^uns; but also for
that they seemed like a propitious star, which in so great a fluctuation,
promised to establish peace and t^anquillity in the Commonwealth: they
therefore forthwith dispatched away their commands to Ottaviano Buono, and to
Vincenzo Guzzoni, the^r Ambassadors in ordinary, and in extraordinary, at
Paris, to stipulate and confirm the same Articles with the King: they also
empowered the said Ambassadors to communicate the same to their Ambassador
Gritti in Spain, that he might consent to the same Articles in that Court; the
Commonwealth having chosen to prefer the King of France his Authority before
that of the King of Spain, were it either in respect of the differences which
had past between her and the Ministers of that Crown; or that by giving the
honor to the King of France, and taking it from the King of Spain, they
thought they did not only deny the King of Spain the Arbitrament of the affairs
of Italy, which he pretended unto; but that they did compound the business with
more freedom and reputation, as if they thereby had made known to the world,
that they had never been brought to receive the Laws of peace from the King of
Spain, as that King had pretended; he by his great interests with the Archduke,
by succouring whom, and by his servant the Duke of Ossuna's Hostility, seeming
in effect to be a party, and an enemy: this Commission being come to Paris, the
State-Ministers of that King were no less desirous to have the business
concluded, then were the Venetian Ambassadors, in ambition that their King
might seem to be the Arbitrator of differences in Italy; and the King alleging
for his justification that he knew the King of Spains good will, as also the
danger which might ensue by the breaking out of new and greater differences and
difficulties, if the agreement should be deferred; in the name of all the
parties that were absent, for all which he engaged his word, confirmed and
ratified the same Articles as they had been pronounced by the Catholic King;
the Kings and Dukes Ambassadors consented thereunto, who were not in any sort
acquainted with this peace before it was concluded; though the Duke, who to
divert the war from the Territories of the Commonwealth had drawn it upon
himself, would never, though never so much oppressed, come to any agreement,
unless the Commonwealth were therein comprehended, or secured from the Spanish
Forces. The little respect which was shown to the Catholic King increased the
envy of this action, who being chosen Arbitrator by the Commonwealth, or
according to themselves, Mediator; and having furthered the Capitulations with
so much satisfaction to her, though against so great Princes, and so nearly
allied to him, and who were assaulted by the Commonwealth; she a^erwards, not
content to deny that Arbitrament which she seemed so fre^ly to have granted
him, or at least had signified her intention of granting it, had by applying
her self to the King of France, made him the chief Author and Moderator of that
peace, which she was to acknowledge howsoever, from the moderation and goodness
of the King of Spain.

But the peace seemed to be stipulated no less to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth; for that the restitution of the Mahouns was not therein
comprehended, which since there was no breach between them and the King of
Spain, ought, as was pretended, to be restored, as not taken in fair War. The
Spaniards, on the other side, pretending that the Kings Declara^ion to assist
the Archduke was a permissive hostility, denied restitution; and the King
refusing to decide this point, the Ambassadors were pacified with the Kings
promise that he would make them be restored, and so the Articles of peace went
forward. But the Commonwealth, partly that they might stand upon the advantage
of reputation, partly to shun the hatred and envy which she purchased by that
peace, and also for the King of Spain's and Duke of Savoy's satisfaction,
without whose knowledge the peace was concluded, feigned to be very ill
satisfied therewith, and, according to her accustomed cunning, laid the fault
wholly upon the Ambassadors, as if they had done it of their own heads without
the Commonwealths knowledge: They therefore chose Seignieur Contarini in their
place, and sent for them presently back to Venice, that they might give a
severe account of that Action, pretending that they had exceeded their secret
Orders and particular Instructions: They also complained hereof to all the
Princes that we^e their Friends, protesting that they would not stand to the
Articles agreed upon in France. But whatsoever their secret Commissions were,
first it is to be supposed, such prime Officers of the Commonwealth would not
have transgressed so; and moreover it is most certain, that their public
Orders and Instructions were general, and were sent after that the Senate had a
Copy of the Articles published in the Court of Spain, after they had been
debated in Venice, and after the Mahouns were lost: So as the Commonwealth
could not only not acquit her self by these her exclamations, but did the more
aggravate her fault, and made ^er cause the more odious; as if not content with
the small respect she had shown to the King of Spain, it had been lawful for
her to treat the King of France so likewise; who not having meddled herein, save
only at the Commonwealths request, and that he might do what would be very
acceptable to her, she when she had got her desire and advantage thereby, would
lay the fault upon the King which was her own: But this excess past not
unreseated; for the King stomaching this refusal gave order that the new
Ambassador Contarini should be ce^ain'd in Lions, and not suffered to go from
thence till the peace should be accepted of in Venice, and till the other
Ambassadors should be freed from all imputation, and should be fully restored
to the enjoyment of all their dignities and places in the Commonwealth: And yet
the Venetians persisting in this their pretention, a discourse in writing came
forth not long after from Venice, by which the same Ambassadors said, that
they were forced by the King to stipulate that peace; for (as they alleged in
that manuscript) the King of Spain having referred the sole power of
arbitrament of the differences in Italy to the King of France, the King of
France desired to make use of and to exercise that power; and that having
notice, that the Duke of Savoy and the French passing into Piedmont after the
surrender of Vercelles had committed violence in Alessandria, where they had
taken some of the King of Spains Towns; the King of France began to doubt, that
the King of Spain, when this should be known, should alter his mind, and by
reason of these innovations should revoke the power of arbitrament which he had
already granted: So as out of a desire to end these differences before this
News should come to the Court of Spain, he threatened to abandon the Affairs of
the Commonwealth and of the Duke, in case the peace should not be speedily
concluded; and that he would join with the King of Spain, to the prejudice both
of the Venetians and Duke of Savoy; and that he did so far persist in this, as
he would not permit them time to send an Express to Venice: So as, thinking it
the lesser ev^l, they chose to comply with the Kings desires. Which
Justifications, having neither substance nor solidity in them, did make the
fault more apparent, and did much weaken the Commonwealths plea; for if the
King of Spain had referred the arbitrament of peace to the King of France, why
was not the Spanish Ambassador called to this action? why was not this
expressed in the engrossing of that peace, in the Preface whereof the King of
France used as little forceable arguments as he could to honest the prevention,
that he might justify it to be his own action as much as might be; and what
more fair and honorable Justification could ^e produce for himself then this?
how could the King of Spain transfer the arbitrament of the affairs of
Dalmatia, Friuli, and Istria, to the King of France, since they belonged
directly to the Emperor and to the Archduke? which falling principally in the
terminat^on of that peace, there was no reason why they should not only not be
decided, but even not referred, without the knowledge of those Princes, and
without the intervening of their Ambassadors; and the alleged violences as
little to be believed, if you either consider the Kings Person; (it being too
contrary to the Laws of all Nations, and wherein the Commonwealths
Ambassadors would hardly have met with the same measure at the Divano in
Constantinople:) Or if you mind the rigorous discipline of the Venetian
Commonwealth, which is a severe exacter of observancy of public Orders and
Commissions from their Ambassadors; it not being likely that the Senators of
that Commonwealth should so easily be threa^ened into so great a transgression;
For who could fear that that King, without any fault of the Dukes or
Commonwealths, (who were then absent, and knew not his Princely pleasure; and
which is of more moment, contrary to his own interest,) should so threaten the
Ambassadors only for a little refractoriness; every one being probably to
believe that the King would have highly commended their wisdom and constancy in
refusing to adhere unto him: As for the fear that the King of Spain should
revoke the power of Arbitrament by reason of the new Commotions in Italy, the
vanity of the Paper does therein more appear; since it is most certain, that
the new Rumors and Insultations against the Towns in Alexandria began on the
third, and ended on the ninth of September; and that the peace was concluded in
Paris on the sixth day of the same Month; How could the King of France in so
short a time have notice of that Commotion? How could he so soon resolve what
to do, not to lose the power o^ arbitrament granted him? how could ^e (...)
with the Ambassadors, and afford them time to consult upon, delibera^e, and
stipulate the Peace? add to this the large Authority and Power which the
Commonwealth gives unto her Ambassadors, which they being to confer, as they
did, were they not permitted to make peace? And that if the peace agreed upon
in Spain should not please the Commonwealth, that it should be stipulated in
France. We may therefor probably conclude by that Paper, Writing, or
Discourse, that the Commonwealths Ambassadors were moved to that action
rather out of any other respect then of that which was alleged: But let us
return to our Story; The same Capitulations which were stipulated in France (as
has been said) were twenty days after accepted in Spain, and agreed unto by
the Emperors and Archdukes Ambassadors in the names of their Princes; by the
Duke of Lerma in the King of Spains name, and by the Ambassador Gritti in the
name of the Commonwealth; for the Court and King of Spain finding that the King
of France ^ad meddled in that peace, and that since he had made it he was
engaged to see it observed and put in execution, they did not think good by
distasting that action to add rumor to rumor, nor to make that war flame
higher which they desired by all means to quench: To this may be added, that
the Capitulations being dictated by the King of Spains self, and consequently
approved of by him as just and honorable, he could not now disapprove them.

Thus the Commonwealth kept the Spanish Armies far from her Dominions by
favou^ of the Duke of Savoys Forces, and got also that advantage in the
Agreement by their cunning handling it, which was impossible for them to have
done by their own Forces. The precise observancy of the Articles of Asti were
likewise agreed upon at the Court at Madrid, between the Duke of Lerma, in the
King of Spains name, and Ambassador Gritti, as Proctour for the Duke of Savoy;
together with a promise to release all p^isoners, and to restore all places
taken as well before as after the Treaty; and the disputes between the Duke of
Savoy and Duke of Mantua were also reciprocally suspended, the Duke of Lerma
engaging himself in the Kings Name for the Duke of Mantua; and the same
Venetian Ambassador for the Duke of Savoy; The negotiation of this T^eaty, and
form of composing the troubles of Piedmont, were therefore first particularly
disgusted between the King of Spain and the Marquesses di Sense and de
Gravesin, ex^raordinary and ord^nary Ambassadors in that Court for the King of
France, in manner as follows.

That the King should give order to the Governor of Millain, that when he
should be secu^ed by writing from the King of France, by Ambassador Be^tune,
that the Duke of Savoy had promised and would perform the Articles of Asti in
three Points; In laying down Arms; In passing his word that he would not injure
the Duke of Mantua; And that he would refer his differences to be judged
according to the Civil Law by the Emperor, the Governor should immediately
desist from all Acts of Hostility, as was contained in the Articles of Asti:
But for that affairs were altered since those Articles were made, the manner of
withdrawing forces should be thus performed; That the Duke should withdraw 1000
Foot from Santia, or from any other place where his Army should be; That then
the Governor should retreat as far backwards with his Army as Croce Bianca is
distant from Asti; That then the Duke should retreat with all his men from the
said Station; and the Governor should retreat with all his Army into the State
of (...): Which being done, that the Duke should effectually lay down Arms
within one Months space, as was agreed upon before Asti: That when that Month
should be out, the Duke should restore not only the Towns of Montferrat, but
all places that were held in fee-Farm, either of the Church, Emperor, or any
other particular Landlord; and were taken as well before as since the Pea^e of
Asti; And should set all Prisoners at liberty; which being done, the Governor
should do the like; Who as soon as he should be assured by the King of France
that the Duke had punctually observed all Articles, he should dispose of the
Kings Forces as was contained in the Articles of Asti; and should do whatsoever
else remained for him to do; That he should pass his word to the King of France
not to offend the Duke of Savoy, nor trouble his Dominions for any thing that
had happened; all which Articles, as they were agreed upon in the preseuce, and
at the intervening of Monsieur Antonio Caietano, the Popes Nuntio in that
Court; so it was ordered they should be performed in Italy, in the presence of
Cardinal Lodovisio the Popes Nuntio in Piedmont: And to boot with these things,
to the end that nothing agreed upon in Spain should be added unto or altered,
as had been done in the Peace made at Asti; it was also covenanted, That the
King of France should give order to his Ambassador in Italy; That he should
not press the Governor to promise any thing, either by word of mouth, or in
writing, which was not contained in that Agreement: And on the other side, the
French Ambassador engaging his Kings word to the King of Spain for the Dukes
performance of all things promised: He also promised, That in case the Duke
should dissent from what was agreed upon between them, or should put any
difficulty in accepting or in performing them, his King should join his Forces
with those of the King of Spain against the Duke, and force him to perform what
was agreed upon. A Copy of this Agreement was signed by the King and by the
French Ambassadors, and given to the same Ambassadors to be sent into France;
And it was also Covenanted, That the King should also give another Copy of the
same under his hand to the Duke di Montelion, the Spanish Ambassador in Paris,
to be by him sent into I^ly to the Governor of Millain, that he might be the
more ca^tious and efficatious in performing what was agreed upon.

And whilst Agreements are happily negotiated and concluded in France and
Spain, the same, but not with the same success, was done in Piedmont and in the
State of Millain; For Don Pedro di Tolledo being pu^t up with the getting of
Vercelles, though in the discourses which past between him and the Marquess
Calusio, the Cardinal Nuntio; and the Ambassador of France, who spoke with him
in Vercelles, he seemed very desirous of peace, even so far as he offered to
restore that City; and desired nothing of the Duke but that he would lay down
Arms, and do what was agreed upon at Asti: The Duke, who held himself to be
baffled by him before the beginning of this last war, touching the observance
of the Treaty of Peace, professing to distrust him much; desired that the rise
might be had by the surrender of Vercelles; saying, That till then he would not
disarm, nor observe the rest of the Articles of Asti, lest by Sophistical
interpretations he might again be cavil'd out of the restitution of so
important a place; and so, though much to his disadvantage and greater charge,
embroil Piedmont again. Having therefore refused to speak with the Governor,
he kept still in Arms, being resolved not to lay t^em down till Vercelles were
restored: After the surrender whereof, the Count of Oneria, General of the
Horse in France; the Duke of Rean, Marshal Diguieres, Monsieur di Terms, Count
Candalle, Count Scomberge, with many other Lords, were come to Piedmont with
great store of Horse and Foot: And the Marquess of Baden, with the Prince of
Hannault, were likewise come thither from Germany, accompanied with many
Soldiers: And those of Berne, in recompense of the general renouncing made by
the Duke of certain Towns pretended to by him, and possessed by them upon the
Confines of Savoy; had at their own charge sent him 3000 Foot.

The Duke finding himself to have, with these Recruits and with those that were
come out of Vercelles, about 20000 Foot, and between 3 and 4000 Horse, was once
more become Master of the Field: And on the contrary, the Governor having
consumed many men, first in the besieging, and then in the Garrisoning of
Vercelles, and having quartered the rest of his Army, which was much lessened,
in several places far from the Confines of Piedmont, he was once more exposed
to the Dukes injuries; who after Vercelles was lost, was become more powerful
then he; and who, being desirous to re gain, if not Vercelles, at least his
Reputation for the loss thereof; and to revenge himself for the losses and
affronts which he had received; had now opportunity to do it, not only by the
increase of his own Forces, and by the Governors negligence, but he had also
many about him who incited him thereunto, though he needed no inciters; For the
Commanders who were come from France being desirous of Novelties to allay the
reputation of the Spanish forces, and to make the Duke an amends for the losses
he had suffered by their so long delay; approved of his distrust as just and
reasonable; and said They would never go out of I^aly till they should see the
Duke repossess'd of Vercelles: The Popes Nuntio, and the French Ambassador
going to Allessandria to treat with the Gov^rnour, desired him that he would
either restore Vercelles, or deposite it into the Popes hands, or into those of
the King of France, or into the hands of some other Prince that he might
confide in, whilst the Duke should really disarm, and should observe the whole
remainder of the Treaty of Peace: But the Governors distrust was no less; who
thinking that the Duke had not the first time proceeded si^cerely in point of
disarming, thought he might justly doubt he would much less do it when
Vercelles should be restored: So as he would not depend therein upon the wills
of others; nor thought he that it suited with his own reputation, nor with the
dignity of the Kings Forces, not to reap any good by the so much labor and so
much moneys spent in the taking of that City; and he likewise was loath to
hazard it, lest when the Duke should have regained Vercelles, and being so
well provided of Forces, he might aspire after greater things; but then
considering how strong the Duke was grown by his new Recruits, and that other
Soldiers were marching to side with him on this side the Mountains, he did not
openly refuse to consent to the propounded propositions; but pretending
sometime; to advise with his Council; sometimes that since there was question
touching the alteration of the Articles of Asti, by which disarming was to
precede ^estitution, the Nuntio nor Ambassador had no power from their Princes
to alter them; he was ambiguous in his answers, that he might delay the
conclusion as much as he might; thinking by this ambiguity and irresolution to
make the Duke suspend his intentions, as well as his Forces, which being
collectitious and made up of many Nations, it was probable they would crumble
away, especially since the Duke had not moneys any ways sufficient to pay them:
Whereas, on the contrary, his men being refreshed, and lately increased in
numbers, he hoped to have the better. Wherefore seeing the Duke so strong, he
had already given order for making new Levies of men in several parts, and sent
for a great part of his Army into Alessandria and the parts thereabouts.

But the Duke, and the French more then he, finding by these tergiversations
and windings about but small inclination in the Governor to part with
Vercelles, they did distrust him the more; and therefore being unwilling to be
^ed with vain hopes, or to wait till the Governors Forces being augmented, he
might treat of agreement upon advantage, and as having the upper hand might
prescribe them Laws in the making of peace; being moreover desirous not to
return to France without leaving some memory of their actions in Italy they
instigated and encouraged the Duke, who was desirous of revenge, and to revenge
himself for what he had lost, to assault some Towns in the State of Millain:
Which opinion (as many thought) wrought upon the French Ambassador, upon whose
Authority the Forces of that Nation and their Actions did depend; and this
general opinion was grounded not only upon the eager inclination of so many
Commanders of his Nation, who were continually by him, for leave to assault
some of the King of Spains Towns, but also upon his not being satisfied with
the Proceedings he met with in Alessandria concerning composure of differences.
Count Guido his re-admittance, which was constantly denied by the Duke of
Mantua, was also no little hinderance to the businesses of Italy: The Duke
being therefore resolved to make use of the present occasions, went from Asti
upon the coming on of night with his two Sons, Victorio and Thomaso, upon
pretense that the Governor by his recalling of his men from Alessandria
threatened to assault that Town; and he carried along with him about 10000 Foot
and 2000 Horse; the M^rshalled on the Van, with whom was Monsieur di Terms;
and upon break of day they came to Filizzano, a great Town belonging to the
King, but open and without walls, where about 1500 Trentinians were quartered;
who refusing upon any whatsoever condition to surrender the Town, Prince
Victorio and Prince Thomaso came up with the main body of the Battle, and gave
an assault, wherein it was bravely fought on both sides; the Assailants were
thrice repulsed; but at last those within having no way to defend themselves
but by setting their Carts and Carriages cross the way, they were overcome at
the fourth assault, and all of them put to the Sword, together with many of the
Town of all sexes and ages, some few whereof were taken Prisoners; and the
Town, together with nine Colors of the Trentinians, and two Colors of the
Townsmen, fell into the Dukes power. Refrancore was surrende^ed to Count Guido
by the Garrison, which were 100 Swissers, who, as being Confederates with the
Duke, were sent home unprejudiced: Ribaldone also, and some other Towns beyond
the Tannaro, being terrified at what had befallen Filizzano, surrendered;
whereby Nizza, Acqui, and Bistagno, together with all the Langa, even to the
Sea, being in a manner cut off from Alessandrino, were much endangered, lest
the Duke should possess himself of them, to hinder the passage of those who
were expected to come to the State of Millain from beyond Sea, and particularly
500 Spanish Foot, who were at that very time landed at Savona. But the Duke and
the French, it is not known for what reason, leaving that Enterprise of greater
consequence, advanced to Quattordici, where there were two Companies of
Trentinians, who having leave to march out with a Cane in their hands, yielded
the Town unto the Duke, who marched farther on to take Solleri and Corniento in
the County of Alessandrino, not above six miles distant from the City. The
Governor, who (as has been said) was there, sent Lodovico Guasco, though he
were not yet well cured of his wounds received before Vercelles, with 200 Horse
to discover the Enemy, and, if it were possible, to withstand his violence; as
also to back the Country people who retreated into the City; who coming near
the Enemy had some slight Skirmishes with them; but being assaulted by a body
of Horse he was forced to fly, being charged to even underneath the Walls of
the Town. This put the City into much terror and confusion, seeing the Enemy
advance so courageously; whilst many of Castellazzo, Bosco, and of all the
parts thereabouts, not thinking themselves safe in that City, sent their Wives
and Goods into the Towns of Genoa: And the Alessandrians putting themselves in
arms stood to defend the Walls, hourly looking to be assaulted by the Enemy;
and truly, there not being in that City above 6000 Foot, and some Horse
Companies, there being also but little victuals there^n, nor in the parts
thereabouts; and the honor of the Spanish Force^ lessening through ill
Government, as also the peoples inclination to them, who were weary of so
troublesome a War, the State of Millain was much endangered. All the Forces of
Montferrat were therefore sent for to defend that City, and were quartered
thereabouts: Wherefore Giovan Ieronimo Doria, their Commander, having
immediately given order that they should all meet in Cuccaro, except those who
were to guard the Towns of Montferrat, marched out himself with 2500 Foot, and
400 Horse, and not tarrying for others who were coming to him, resolved to put
himself into Alessandria: But the Duke and the Marshal having notice thereof
endeavored to meet him upon the way, and to fall upon him with all their
Forces, and defeat him. As they were in pursuit of him they understood he was
past on; so leaving their Foot behind them, they advanced with their Horse, and
about evening got up unto him.

Doria was not affrighted when he saw himself assaulted at a distance, nor lost
he either courage or counsel; but fortifying himself upon a plain, near a
little hill, which was fenced on the front by a great ditch, and by some lesser
ditches on the sides, he placed the Foot there, and left the Horse without,
that they might first receive the encounter, which if they could not sustain,
that then they might withdraw themselves into the plain: The Horse resisted
gallantly; but not being able to hold out against so great a number, they
retreated in good order to the Foot, whereinto whilst the Duke and Marshal
endeavored to penetrate, they were so fiercely saluted by volleys of
Musket Shot, which were so opportunely discharged, as though wheeling about on
all sides, they strove to break in upon them, they could never do it; but after
the death of many of the assailants, and the imprisonment of some, amongst
which Monsieur di St Andres de Vius, a Gentleman of Provence, was one, the
night coming on already apace, they retreated; and Doria came the same night to
^u, and from thence, by the way of St Salvadore, to Allessandria, where he was
received by the Governor with much honor and applause. The Governor was
then, by reason of the diversity of his Officers opinions, very much confused,
and unresolved what to do; some would have him go out with those men which he
already had, and with others who were coming, and to encounter the Enemy in the
field; others, that he should keep within the Walls, and defend the City; Doria
was for his keeping in the City, telling him, that the French could not keep
the field long, nor do any thing against any of the chief Towns, for that they
were well munited; and that the Enemy not being able to keep together long for
want of moneys, would quickly moulder away, and being reduced to a smaller
number, would be assaulted upon better advantage, and overcome with less
danger; and because they feared Valenza upon the Poe, it not being very well
Garrisonn'd, Doria took upon him the defense thereof, and entered thereinto with
about a thousand Horse. The Duke despairing to do any good upon the City,
whereinto many men were entered, and did still enter, set fire on Felizzano, and
the places thereabouts, and went against Annone, a strong place, and which was
guarded with about 2000 Foot, but ill provided of powder or ammunition: Those
within came out against him, but were soon made to retreat back into the Town
by Terms: The Cannon being afterward mounted, they came to battery, and from
thence to assault, which being luckily made on three sides, the defendants not
being able to resist long for want of Ammunition, retreated tumultuously into
the Castle; which not being better provided of Ammunition than was the Town,
and much (...) with victuals for so great a multitude; and being little, and
incapable of so many men; whereas with a proportionable Garrison it might have
defended it self, it became undefendible through the multitude of defendants,
and was forced to treat of surrender the sooner, as not having wherewith to
feed so many people; it was therefore agreed, That they should march forth with
their Arms; and that they should be convoyed to the Kings Territories; which
Agreement being afterward too sophistically interpreted by the Duke, they were
sent to the County of Burgony, which was then under the King of Spain, that
they might serve no more in this present War: they then went speedily by the
Bridge which was cast over the Tannaro, to Arazzo, which was immediately
abandoned by the Garrison consisting of 1500 Foot, who seeing the Bridge thrown
over, and the Dukes men march over it, retired into Alessandria; but being
pursued by Terms, and Monsieur della B^rsce, they were assaulted on the Rere,
where were 300 Swissers, who after no long dispute basely yielded, their lives,
but not their Arms, being saved; in which in erim the rest of the Garrison, who
marched on, without ever turning back upon the Enemy, or succouring their
companions, had time to get safe into Alessandria: wherefore the Governor, who
was ill counseled, and whose Forces were but weak, not thinking it safe to
march out into the fields, and to expose his men, whereon the defense of the
State of Millain did wholly and solely depend, to the uncertainty of Battle,
stood looking on whilst his Country was burnt and destroyed, his Garrisons
slain, and his Towns taken by that Enemy, whom (though once superior to him in
Forces) he could not overcome, because he knew not how to use the Victory. But
perhaps the Dukes destiny is to be raised up when he is at the lowest, and to
be oppressed when he is at the greatest height; to the end that never keeping in
the same condition, he should be a singular example to the world both of good
and bad fortune. The Governor complained, and protested under his hand to
Cardinal Lodovisio, that he was assaulted by the Duke, and by the French with
the Forces and Ensigns of the Kingdom under public faith, for that the
affairs of the war were already agreed between the two Kings, which had kept
him from making provision of new men; and by Expresses sent speedily away to
Paris he made the like complaints to the King of France, accusing his
Ministers, that by assaulting the State of Millain with the Arms and Ensigns of
France, they had broken the good understanding, and the Conventions of peace
which were agreed upon between their Majesty's of France and Spain: But on the
other side, seeing so many French and Dutch in Piedmont, and fearing that they
had higher aims, he did the more solicit, that the new levies might be made
which were already appointed: and, as if the safety of the whole State of
Millain had been therein concerned, he writ into Spain for speedy supplies of
money; and demanded the succor from the Princes of Italy, which they were
bound to send for the defense of the State of Milain; and to the Viceroy of
Naples, that he would immediately send him the Soldiers which were in the
Fleet, it being then returned from the Gulf; for it was not thought that the
peace, though concluded, would be observed, by reason of the Dukes new
resentments, wherein it was much doubted, that dissimulation might be used;
though it was known, that the King of France had sent in all haste to the Court
of Spain to excuse himself for what had happened, as being done contrary to his
orders, and beyond all expectation, through the too great fervor and ardency of
his Commanders, who were more inclined to novelty, then that their two
Majesty's should join together in Union: And if the Duke, when he was beaten
and under batches, was so little pliable to Treaty* of peace, how much less
was it likely that he would now con^ent thereunto when he was on the upper
hand* How was it to be believed, that ^e and the other Commanders should
abandon so ra^e an occasion in the present conjuncture of times, and
accompanied with so great good success?

But the errors were already too much multiplied, which were committed either
in undertaking, or in prosecuting the war: the ^aking up of Arms for a mere
punctillio of honor had produced too bitter fruits: the King and Court of
Spain having been interessed in this war, contrary to their own will, by their
Ministers in Italy; minding now more the safety and quiet of Italy, then the
honesting of an advantageous peace, which was that for which the Italian Agents
fought, did detest the continuance thereof beyond measure; and the King of
France, not being able to mind the affairs of Italy, and not being desirous to
lose the honor of having once again made peace in Italy, wished that it might
be made by any whatsoever means; and therefore as the King of Spain accepting
of the King of France his satisfactions had sent very precise Orders into Italy
for the execution of what was agreed upon; so the King of France having upon
the complaints made by the Governor sent a Messenger into Italy to reprehend
the French Lords and Commanders sharply for what they had done, and to wish
them upon pain of grievous punishment to desist, Italy was freed from the
troubles of the late war, and from the fear and dread of that which was to
ensue; which was likely to have been more cruel and bloody then the former. So
as the Duke seeing himself, on the one side, at it were abandoned by the
Venetians, and that the two Kings were desirous he should agree; and on the
other side, that he had brought his affairs to such a pass, as that he might
compound with satisfaction, gave way to what was established in France, and in
Spain; the rather, for that he was fully secured by the King of France, that
Vercelles should be restored, and that his State should be secured and
defended. Thus then the here underwritten Articles were made on the ninth of
October in Paris, whither the Governor was gone, between the said Governor
and the French Ambassador, with the Cardinals assistance, and intervening.

That the Duke should lay down Arms before the present month October should be
ended, according to the peace of Asti: of which disarming the Ambassador
promised the Governor should have notice given him by the King of F^ance: that
he should restore all places appertaining to the Duke of Mantua, to the Church,
to the Empire, and to whatsoever particular person: this being done, that the
Governor, to comply with the King of France his desire, should in the King his
Masters name, restore immediately whatsoever had been taken during the war:
that all prisoners should be set at liberty on both sides as soon as the Duke
should have restored: that this being done, the Governor should dispose of his
Army according to the Articles of Asti: upon these terms a period was put to
the wars of Lombardy and Piedmont: and the Duke at last laid down Arms, rather
for that he had less occasion to use them, then that his desire to use them was
lessened.

Rumors ceased not for all this on the Venetians behalf; they were freed from
fear of the Spanish Fleet, which was gone by the Kings command from the Gulf,
and retreated into the Tyrrhene Sea; they perceived the weakness of the Spanish
Counsels and Forces in Lombardy; that the Dukes Forces by the great recruits
from France and Germany had got the upper hand: they argued by the
dissimulation used in the Court of Spain, and by the insultings suffered in
Alessandria, that the King and that Court were weary of war in Italy; and
desirous to make peace upon any terms. They therefore being confident that they
should meet with the same respect and the like; usage, notwithstanding the
peace already made, will continue the Siege of Gradisca, which they saw was
reduced to so great streights as it could not long hold out: howsoever, were it
either for the reputation of their Forces, or out of a desire of getting that
Town, they could not think of coming empty-handed out of this war, wherein they
had been at so much pains and expense: and doubtlesly, if they had effected
their intention, all things would have been again in great disorder, so loath
would they have been to part with that they had gotten: but their Counsel
proved not at all fortunate; for Archduke Leopold, who had still an eye to the
conduct of that war, upon the Confines of Friuli, and the Spanish Ambassador
Resident in Venice knowing how impossible it was to be relieved, nor having any
other means whereby to provide for the preservation of that place, writ to the
Governor of Millain, letting him know in what danger it was of being lost,
unless, as the last remedy, he would molest the Confines of the Commonwealth on
his side. The Governor therefore made many of the Forces who were quartered
upon those Confines pass into the Counties of Bergomo and Crema, who took from
the Venetians the Castle of Fara; and went afterward to Romano, where though
they were repulsed yet they overran the neighboring Towns, plundering and
carrying away great store of prey, to the very great prejudice of the people in
those parts; for the Venetians were wholly unprovided there; wherefore fearing
some worser thing if that commotion should increase, they sent for the Spanish
Ambassador into the College; this Ambassador was Don Alphonso della Cuena,
Marquess of Belmar, who at the Kings request was afterward made Cardinal: he
having been always very attentive to the success of affairs in Venice had by
his seasonable advice and instructions sent to Naples, Millain and Germany,
been a good help to the carrying on of that war for the advantage of the King
and Archduke, and consequently, had been prejudicial to the Venetians; who
being therefore ill looked upon by them, and hated, as one who pryed too
narrowly into their intentions and actions, had not for many months of late
negotiated with any one neither in private nor in public: being upon this
occasion sent for to the College, after many complaints and alterations made
by the Doge on the one side, for the Fleets having entered the Gulf in an
hostile manner, and for the fresh assaults made by the Soldiers of Millain;
and by the Ambassador on the other side, for the war made upon the house of
Austria, for the continual helps and fomentations administered to the wars of
Piedmont, and for the Siege continued before Gradisca, contrary to the Articles
of peace already agreed upon, and accepted by them; the Venetians thought it
good at last to be content, that if the Ambassador would promise that all
hostile acts should cease in the parts toward Millain, they would suffer so
much Victuals to be daily ca^ried into Gradisca as should serve for their daily
nourishment; and that this agreement should last, till such time as peace were
put in execution: which though it were already done with reciprocal
satisfaction on all sides by Land, yet were not the Venetians free from being
injured and insulted over by Sea; for when the Spanish Fleet was gone from the
Gulf, the Venetians began to fall foul upon the Ragusians, in resentment of
their having given receptacle in their Havens to the Fleet which wronged he
Subjects and Towns which were under the Commonwealth. The Ragusians had
recourse to the Viceroy of Naples, who was commanded to protect them by the
King of Spain, since they live under his protection: their recourse was not in
vain, nor was the Viceroy slow in their revenge; who forbore not to vex that
Commonwealth once more, which he did prosecute with so vehement hatred;
wherefore since he could not have the Galleys in a readiness for this new
attempt, he sent Rivera into the Adriatic Sea with 18 Patacks and Galleoons,
very well versed in what belonged to warlike affairs, who coming on the 15th of
November. above Raggugia, kend the Venetian Fleet a far off, conducted by
Veniero; which coming from forth the Haven of San Croce, within half a mile of
Raggugia, came to assault him. The Venetian Fleet consisted of 19 Galleoons, 6
Galleasses, 32 small Galleys, and 15 large Albanese Vessels, which in all made
up the number of 72 bottoms: a Fleet certainly advantageous for the greatness,
or number of the Vessels, and for the store of Artillery, and much exceeding
that of Rivera, but so bare of men, as the Soldiery came not to 2300, and the
Mariners and Oar-men were not so many as were requisite: the Sea was that day
very calm, and the air very still; so as the Viceroys Galleoons not being able
to move, and the Venetians Fleet coming on leisurely, they came at last, about
Sunset, to within two Cannon-shot of one another: here they stood looking one
upon another, not doing any thing: the Venetian Fleet having put themselves
into the form of a Halfmoon, began to discharge their great Guns, though at a
distance, with intent, if not of offending, at least of scaring the Enemy, and
of keeping him far off: this firing their Guns so far off, and at all
adventures, wrought contrary effects to what the Commander imagined; for the
Spaniard believing this to be a bravado of the Enemy, and that he detested
coming to close fight, grew more confident, and placing his hopes of Victory in
boarding endeavored when the Sun was up to fall on: but the wind proving
scarce, he was forced to temporize till about noon, when the wind beginning to
blow more briskly, he courageously assaulted the Enemies Fleet; and having past
and repast several times amidst them with his Admiral, which was of a large
bulk, excellently well munited, and very yare, and having prejudiced them much
with his great Guns, and slain many of them with Musket Shot, he infused such
terror into the Venetians, as throwing themselves behind the Banks and
Waste-cloaths, and retiring to the safest parts of their Vessels, they did
almost give over all defense, minding e^ch m^n his own safety, and to preserve
themselves from death. General Veniero ran to and fro courageously amongst
them, showing much undauntedness; he encouraged some, threatened others, and
struck diverse, to make them stand to their Arms and Fight: but so little was
Military discipline observed, so great their terror and consternation of mind,
as they gave no obedience to their Generals ^uthority, entreaties or commands:
The wind grew at last to a great storm, in the beginning whereof Veniero
doubting that his lesser Galleys would not be able to k^ep at Sea, made the
Soldiers that were in them pass into the Galle^sses, and ordered the Galleys
to retreat; endeavoring in vain to make the Captains of their Galleasses to
fall upon the enemies Gall^oons now that the defendants were doubled; and he
himself geting into the Galleoon Balby, put his valor to its utmost trial, as
also that of his Soldiers; but their courage and animosity not being
answerable to his, and cowardice and fear of death reigning even there as well
as elsewhere, his presence nor Authority was no more respected then it had been
formerly: At last, the coming on of night, the tempestuousness of Seas and
wind, parted the Fray: The Venetian Vessels, without order or any command,
retreated in disorder into several parts of Slavonia and Albania, being
scattered, some here, some there, ^orn and rent no less by the enemies Cannon,
then by the Storm at Sea; two of the smaller Galleys, with all the men that
were in them, sunk at high Sea; three others running upon shore were split, but
their men saved: And the Viceroy^ Galleoons, the enemies Fleet being fled, and
they consequently being left Masters at Sea, not caring to pursue them, went to
Manfre^onia in Puglia, and from thence to Brindi^i, having lost only 8 fighting
men, and 30 wounded; but their Vessels were much rent by the Venetian Cannon,
which was peradventure the cause why they did not pursue the enemy, and make
themselves masters of the whole Fleet.

The Commonwealth was not a little afflicted at the success of this Ba^tel;
they were so scandalized and incensed with the Captains and many of the
Officers, as they put many of them out of their places, and imprisoned many of
the Masters and Masters-Mates, who had been most guilty of Cowardice;
particularly, the Captains of the Galleasses, because scorning their Generals
Command, they had not the courage to assault the enemy: And Veniero, for having
showed so much courage and valor upon this occasion, was made Procurator of St
Mark, an eminent Dignity in that Common wealth, and next to the Doge; but
finding how little authority he had over his Captains, and that he was a more
practical, experienced, and daring Commander, then became a wary Admiral of the
Venetian Fleet to be; the Commonwealths intrinsical intentions being that by
no means (no not upon evident hopes of victory) he should hazard a Battle as
he had done; they put another in his place; but fearing yet worse, other Ships
and Vessels of war being come to them from Holland and England, with 3000 Dutch
Foot, conducted by Count Levestein at the Commonwealths charges; so as their
Fleet was greater then before, wherein was 40 Galleys, 34 Galleoons, ^6
Galleasses, and other smaller Vessels; they put the Soldiers that were come
from Holland, and those that were come from before Gradisca, into them, and
sent them out of their Washes commanded by Pietro Barbarico, Procurator of St.
Mark, who upon this occasion was made General at Sea: There has not been in
our times any Fleet of the Commonwealths like unto this, so powerful and so
well furnished with fighting men, which being for the most part Foreigners
caused notwithstanding more fear then confidence in the Commonwealth, she
being naturally cautious in all her actions, and extremely diffident of
foreign forces, unless they be justly counterpoised by her own Country men;
therefore not trusting them with so great a Fleet, but apprehending much that
the Fleet might be utterly lost by any unthought of accident, by the sudden
sedition or mutiny of the Soldiers, or secret intelligence between the
Captains; they by a new and unheard of advice, took order that neither Powder
nor Shot should be delivered out to the Soldiers: Thus did this Fleet scour
over the Adriatic Sea, more out of pomp and ostentation, to show that Maritime
Empire which she could but ill make good against much inferior enemies, then
out of any present need; for the Viceroys Galleoons were already by orders from
the King withdrawn into the Tyrbene Sea: The Commonwealth did notwithstanding
apprehend that storm nee at hand, and even with the very City of Venice, which
they so much fea^ed would fall upon their Fleet; for some foreign Soldiers
remaining yet in the City, the Senate had either notice, or were jealous, that
they had secretly plotted to burn the Arsenal, to Plunder the Mint-house, the
Custom-house, and publick-Treasury; and to do yet more, if their design should
prove fortunate.

The Duke of Ossuna was said to be the chief Author of this Conspiracy; who
having taken many Soldiers into his pay at Naples, and of seve al Nations, but
the most of them French, had corrupted them by moneys and large promises, and
had sent them, by a few at a time, to Venice, where they were willingly
entertained by the Commonwealth, by reason of their great scarcity of
Soldiers: This was given out to be the carriage of this business, though the
public Transactions were very secretly suppressed by the Senator; and were it
not for the punishment inflicted upon many, there appeared not any the least
sign of such a Conspiracy, either before or after the execution of such wicked
ones; nay, many circumstances were repugnant, if not to the truth, yet to the
probable possibility of what was divulged: nay there were those who with
rational arguments proved the vainness thereof. It was also observed that the
Commonwealth, which was wont to exaggerate in all Princes Courts against the
Spaniards, and to make their Agents to be conceived violent and insiduous of
what was other men's, said not a word upon this so great occasion, and past it
over with miraculous silence, not only toward the Princes who were their
friends, but rather to their resident Ambassadors; unless it were that not
being able to dissemble the business with the latter, who were present at so
strange an accident, they acquainted them with a certain Plot, but in very
general terms, which was accompanied with much ambiguity: They spoke not one
word thereof to the Spanish Ambassador, though he was firmly believed to have
a hand in it; and who came the next day into the College boldly to demand, as
he pretended, better provision for the safe^y of his person against the popular
insultings; but in effect to witness his innocence to the world by that his
confident appearance: And it is most certain that the people would have hardly
been kep^ from committing some insolences upon his person, if any thing of
certain or of ambiguous had appeared against him: What ever the business was,
many Foreigners, and particularly all the French Soldiers, were with much
universal error led to the common Gaol, and many of them hung up by the heels
afterward, and many drowned; and upon the arriv^l of Faluca sent from Venice
to the Fleet, whilst it was upon the Island Corsola, by order from General
Barbarico, one Iacomo Pier, a French man by Nation, was put into a Sack and
cast into the Sea: This man being a Pyrate, and having gotten some same, was
first entertained by the Duke of Ossuna for the service of the Fleet; and
passing afterward, without leave, over to the Venetians, was received with
great honor and extraordinary pay. Captain Pettardiers, his companion, had
somewhat a differing end; he was first Strapado'd, and then hung by the foot
upon the Mainmast; For the Duke of Ossuna's part, it was manifest, that being
fled from his service to serve the Venetians, he gave public order for the
disbursing of 4000 Ducats to them out of the Venetian Banks, as a gracious
reward for their service, and for the remainder of pay which was due to them;
and that he had been thus liberal ^o them, only for that it being known in
Venice, they would be suspected by the Commonwealth. These accidents, were
they either true or false, did notwithstanding no way prejudice the main
business of the peace agreed upon: For the Venetians (as has been said) had
been very silent therein; being satisfied with the restitution of Fara in the
Country of Bergamo, they were content to attribute all the disorder which had
happened there to military disobedience, and not to the Governors commands, as
the Governor himself confessed it was: For what remained, they promised
reparation for any damage done by the Commonwealth in this Commotion; which
notwithstanding was never given; and but very small satisfaction was given to
the Merchants for their Vessels which were taken in the Gulf; though the King
of Spain writ very punctually concerning it to the Viceroy.

The performance of the Peace of Asti was reserved for the last, and for the
satisfaction of the Duk^ of Savoy, Count Gualdo's Restoration, to the which
none being obliged by the Articles of Asti but the King of France, who engaged
himself for it, it appeared impossible that the Duke of Mantua should ever be
brought to consent thereunto; neither would, nor could the King of Spain in
reason compel him thereunto; but as Protector of Montferrat, he was bound to
defend it, as he had formerly promised to do, against all the delinquents of
that State: Yet the King of France being much concerned in seeing the Duke of
Savoy satisfied, by what he had undertaken by the Capitulations of Asti; and
the Duke threatening new Commotions against Montferrat, which was not likely to
have succeeded without the consent and assistance of the King of France, who
was distasted at the Duke of Mantua's so great obdurancy; both the Kings having
therefore acquainted the Duke of Mantua with the new inconveniences which were
likely to ensue, and also desired him by their Ambassadors, that he would
pardon Count Guido; the Duke preferring Peace and the public good before his
private revenge and anger, and being also moved by the example of both those
Kings, who, as also their Fathers, (Princes of so great Authority) had pardoned
more heinous Delinquents; resolved at last to pardon him, and to restore him to
his former Estate and Honor; whereby the wished for end was put to the Wars of
Piedmont and Montferrat; which certainly would have put Italy into her former
peaceful condition (for there was nothing more desired by the Court of Spain
then this) had not the Statists in Italy, by new and unthought of accidents,
engaged her in new Wars against her Will and Genius.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
Book VII.
The Contents.
IN this seventh Book you have the condition of the affairs of Italy, after the
appeasement of the War of Piedmont. The death of two Popes, as also the death
of the King of Spain, and of the Emperor. The Insurrections in the Valtoline;
the occasions of new rumors which arose from hence, in Italy, of new
jealousies, and of new Leagues made by many Princes against the Crown of Spain.
The Forts of the Valtoline deposited into the Popes hands. The Prince of Wales
his Journey into Spain. The Prince of Urbin's death: and the approaching
Escheate of that State: And lastly, the seeds of new troubles rising between
the Genuese, and the Duke of Savoy, by reason of their having purchased the Fee
farm of Zucca^ello, whereat the Duke was displeased. Here are also touched, by
way of passage, some accidents of War, which happened in Germany, Flanders, and
in the East and West Indies.

THe present Peace of Italy, being procured by the unanimous consent of the two
Kings, and by the Venetians so great cunning, was commonly thought would
continue long; and that the affairs of this Province, agitated by so many, and
so various p^rturbations, would now be in quiet; for the two Crowns being
taught by the last Occurrences, began to know what prejudice their reciprocal
fomenting of each others Rebels and Enemies was to their Authority; and that
being now joined in good intelligence, they should give the Law to all, and
compel all lesser Potentates to reverence them, and to depend upon their
pleasure, and they seemed to ^e so cemented together by their mutual advantage
and interest, as no fear was to be had of any future breach between them:
wherefore though the Duke of Savoy was not fully satisfied with the Peace; yet
having lost the leauingstock of France, and the being fomented by the
Venetians, his coffeehouse was not to be feared, chiefly since finding
palpably by the peaces being concluded: by the Venetians without his
intervening or participation, that that Commonwealth had assisted him more for
their own private ends, then for the good of the common cause, it had totally
deprived him of placing any future hope in them; and if when he was joined with
them, and upheld by the French, he had got no other good by so many wars, by
such labors and dangers, then the bare venting of his anger, and some
satisfaction that he had been the first of all the Italian Potentates that had
dared to withstand the Spanish Forces, which were formerly held so formidable
by all Italy; and mortal to whosoever should provoke them; what could he hope
for, or pretend unto without them? and yet the King of Spain fearing lest the
Dukes dissatisfaction might occasion new troubles in Italy, and that the
unconformity of his humor with that of his, the Kings, Agents in Italy, might
afford fuel for new fire; he sent for Don Pietro di Tolledo back to Spain, and
made Don Gomez Alvarez di Figuer^a and Cordova, Duke of Feria, Governor of
Millain, in his place: a Gentleman of a more benign, and temperate spirit, not
by inclination any way averse to the Dukes affairs; as Don Pietro had appeared
to be, and the King did not only show some dislikes of Don Pietro's
comportments, but gave precise command to the new Governor to have a great
care to keep peace in Italy, and to live neighbourly with her Potenta^es, and
more particularly that he should study by all possible means, how to sweeten
the Duke of Savoy, and to regain his good will, which was much ali^nated by the
late acci^ents; and not herewithall satisfied, he for the same respects removed
Rodorig^ Orasca, Marquess of Mortara, from the Government of Alessandria, and
had like to have done so to by Don John Vives, both of them being thought to be
well-wishers to Novelty, and the Dukes enemies; and for that the latter was not
very acceptable to the Commonwealth of Genoa. But his long experience in the
affairs of Italy, wherein he had been long versed, and his not having any
occasion to meddle directly in the Dukes affairs, kept him in his former place.
Satisfaction was likewise endeavored to be given to the Venetians (so great a
desire was there, not to cause any more troubles in Italy) wherefore the
Marquess of Belmar, Resident Ambassador in Venice, was at the earnest desire
of that Commonwealth removed from thence, and sent to be Resident Ambassador
in Flanders. The Vice^oy of Naples had also precise orders sent him, to restore
the Mahouns and the Merchandise which was taken in the Gulf; and not long
after, at the pressure of the Neapolitans, another was sent to succeed Ossuna:
and a certain difference arising between the Office^s in Millain, and those of
the Commonwealth, by reason of the usual passage of Soldiers, who going from
the Territories of Millain to those of Cremona, touched upon some part of a
controverted Territory, the King caused the business to be decided, with
satisfaction to the Venetians: and the new Governor Feria, who was very
desirous to preserve peace, and to pluck up all occasions by the roots which
might occasion new Ruptures between the Dukes of Savoy, and Mantua, listened
first to the Duke of Mantua, who being impatient to be still subject to be
molested by the Duke of Savoy, and being also desirous of revenge, for the
losses and injuries which he had suffered, endeavored to give the Duke of
Savoy a more powerful neighbor then himself; wherefor coming to Pavia, where
he spoke with the new Governor, he offered to yield up Montferrat to the King
of Spain, upon the receiving of another State, by way of change, which might be
equivalent to Montferrat: a business which could not be effected, as well by
reason of the inequality of the bargain, as for that it was of an odious
consequence, and badly resented not only by the Duke of Savoy, but by the
Venetians, and by the French; and which consequently would have afforded
occasions of new jealousies, and commotion, instead of taking them away;
wherefore forgoing the further pursuit thereof, he fell upon a more pleasing
Negotiation, to compose the differences of Montferrat so as both the Dukes
might be contented, and that wound might for ever be cured which was likely yet
to cause so great Commotions in the now peaceful condition of Italy: but this
endeavor proved vain, by reason of the too great difference of the two Princes
pretentions; so as though Feria treated thereof first with the Duke of Mantua
in Pavia, and afterward with Phileberto, Prince of Savoy, who was at this time
come from Sicily to Piedmont, yet nothing was concluded: but those ends are
seldom composed which are most earnestly endeavored. This so great desire of
peace, and satis^action to the Princes of Italy, shown by the King, and Spanish
Agents, now when the edge of their weapons was taken off by the late accidents,
produced effects clean contrary to their intentions; for the Duke of Savoy, and
the Venetians, finding thereby that the Court of Spain did forgo much of their
high an ancient* pretentions, when they had met with a constant courageous
resistance, grew the prouder; and thinking that they were sure of the Kings
good will, they laid aside all fear of future molestation, and much of their
respect to the Authority, and Power of that Crown; and therefore holding back
from what they saw the King did so intensively desire, they thought by their
being prepared for action, to put a stand to the resolutions of that Court, and
to make them do whatsoever they pleased, as if the King would grant any thing,
and would not refuse any conditions which might be favorable to their
pretentions; and this conceit was of such Force, as the Venetians, were i^
e^ther in resentment of the injuries, and losses they had received, or out of
new jealousies occasioned by the much provision for war brought by the Duke of
Ossuna into Manfredonia, a Haven in Puglia, in the Adriatic Sea, were
imboldned (as was conceived by the stout encounters which were there had) to
cause that City to be entered in host^le manner by the Turkish Fleet, sacked,
and the Ammunition thereon, part taken away, part thrown away; nor did the
other Princes of Italy, who for so many years before had been incumb^ed by the
Spaniards too great authority, disapprove of these comportments; thinking that
the lower the Spaniards were brought, they should be the more excused by the
Ministers of that Court, or at least treat with less pride and surquedry: so as
though they in outward appearance; persevered in their won^ed ^espect and
obsequie,) et they were inwardly glad to see their condition bettered, at the
cost of others. But the French were much exalted in pride and pretentions; for
having twice fomented the commotions in Italy by their Forces, and twice
composed them by their Authority; so as they thought themselves to be become
now absolute Arbit^ators of the affairs of Italy, from which they had so many
years before been excluded; therefore though they kept friendship, and good
correspondency, punctually, with the Crown of Spain, and shunned all occasions
of falling out with them, yet being no less studious then the Spaniards to
increase their friendship with the Italian Princes, (which that they might
continue, they endeavored as much as they could to keep the Duke of Savoy and
the Venetians united, nay to draw them to themselves, and to separate them
totally from the Crown of Spain; the former having been the Bridge and Gate
whereby their Forces entered Italy, and the latter a powerful Instrument to
maintain their Authority: by whose means, and by their Authority in the Court
of Rome, they hoped to turn and wind all things as they listed, and to make a
strong counterpoise in the midst of Italy, where they possessed nothing, to the
Spaniards who had so great possessions there:) to this purpose the King of
France was pleased to give his eldest unmarri^d Sister for Wife to the Prince
of Piedmont; and chose the Cardin^l of Piedmont, who was gone to reside at
Rome, to be Protector of France, assigning over Annual Rents and Ecclesiastical
Benefices to him, and turning all the Authority and Favor of the Crown upon
him, to the end that he might live in the Court of Rome with no less splendour,
then authority: which actions gave no little jealousy to the Court of Spain;
as if the King of France did by these so strict conjunctions, and great
favors, aspire to lay surer foundations for his own affairs in Italy, and to
outdo the Spaniards. The accidents and conjuncture of times did also much
augment the pre^entions of the French and the Venetians; for the Truce being
expired between the King of Spain and the Hollanders which was contracted for
twelve years, in the year 1609 the King of Spain made war upon them, hoping to
reduce them to their ancient obedience; and in Germany, the affairs of the
Empire, and of the house of Austria, met with stout opposition, by reason of
the great wars and troubles of that Province, begun in Bohemia; the
Inhabitants, whereof rebelling against Archduke Ferdinando, who was chosen to
be their King some few years before, went to a new Election, and chose the
Prince Elector Palatine for their King. And therefore Archduke Ferdinando, who
in the year 16^9. succeeded Mathias in the Empire, declared the Bohemians, and
the Palatine, to be Rebels, and made war upon them, to chastise the one's
rebellion, and to allay the others Tyranny; and because the Catholic Princes
of Germany, and the Duke of Saxony, joined in League, and adhered to the
Emperor; and the Protestant Princes joined also in a League, which they called
the Union, and adhered to the Palatine, opposing the others; the King of Spain
was necessitated to assist the Emperor with all his Forces: to the end that
the Cesarian and Austrian Authority beginning to to^er in Germany, it might not
draw after it the ruin of the States in Italy, and Flanders, which were so
near conjoined to the safety and Grandezza of the house of Austria, and Crown
of Spain: so as these two wars being risen up like two devouring whirle-pools
of men, and money, the King of Spain was the more obliged to endeavor peace in
Italy, not to break with France, and to dissemble with the Italian Princes, who
therefore (man's ambition being naturally vast) not being content with not being
troubled, advanced ^e more in their ends and pretentions. Amidst this
disposition of humors, and accidents, the affa^rs of Italy were likely to be
quiet: for neither were the Forces of her Potentate; such as might encourage
them to struggle with the Spaniard; and the Spaniards being far from desiring
novelties, out of the aforesaid respects, would have been quiet, and have
avoided any occasion of disgusting the Princes of Italy. But Italy could not
long continue in this condition; for either the heavenly influence not
favorable to the quiet of Italy, or the anger of God, not yet pacified with
her sins, the Duke of Feria had such occasions administered him of securing the
King of Spains affairs, as they prevailing over whatsoever respect, or
inclination to peace, he thought he should do much amiss not to embrace them;
wherefore causing new jealousies and diffidences in the Italians, and affording
matter of complaint and opposition to the rivals of that Crown, it seemed that
instead of beg^ting good blood, and nourishing Confidence (the Mother of Peace)
between that Crown and the Princes of Italy, as he was wished to do by the
King, he sowed fresh and fertile seeds of new wars, and of more important
perturbations then those that were past.

A secret fire was hatched in a ^ook of Italy, which breaking forth a^wards had
like ^o have set all Italy on fire; just as what usually be^alls great Cities,
whose combustions begin sometimes not from Theaters, or Temples, but from poor
Co^ages. I will take my Narrative a little backwards, to the end that what
succeeded af^erwards may be better understood. The Inhabitants of ancient ^tia,
who are now called Gr^sons, enjoyed their ancient liberty under the name of the
three Unions, or Leagues, whereof the chiefest, and most numerous (from which
the whole Country ^akes its name) was called Griggia, the other two, Dirriture
and Cadedio; and as part of them did long ago rebel against the house of
Austria, and are for the most part Heretics, so they retain an implacable
hatred against that house; and hating extremely the name of Spaniard, have
always held France, and their confederacy contracted with that Crown for above
a hundred years ago, to be the chief foundation of their security, and liberty;
and being defended and protected by that Crown, they were observed by their
neighbors, at least not disturbed in their quiet, and peaceful possessions:
their Country which lies amongst L'ulpi Retiche, or Retian Alps, extends it
self a little into Italy; for descending down the Mountains it (...) some
Valleys as the brinks thereof, amongst which lies the Valtoline, from whence,
and by which the new wars, the great jealousies and commotions of Italy had
their beginning. The Valtoline begins from the Alps which border upon Tirvolo,
just where the River Adda takes her commencement, and running along the same
river it ends in the lake of Como: so as the end thereof confines upon Tirvolo,
which is under the house of Austria, so it joins in the Basis upon the State of
Millain; it is coasted along on the one side by the Rhetian Mountain, and on
the other-side by the Countries of Bressia and Bergamo: this Valley of the
Grisons, as it severs the State of Millain from Germany and Austria, and joins
the Venetians to the Grisons and Swissers, and by means thereof, to France, and
all the Transalpine Countries; (if by any accident it should fall under the
Spanish Dominion, upon the access of Germany to the State of Millain) it would
serve as a Gate or Bridge, whereby to bring as many men as the King of Spain
should please from Germany to the State of Millain, with less expense and
difficulty; and also, if occasion should be, to convey the like from Italy into
Germany, in succor of the Empire, and house of Austria: which is very
convenient and necessary for the sa^ety of the Spaniards, and Austrians, in
Germany; for Germany being the principal help to defend the State of Millain;
and the Kingdom of Naples: as upon Occurrences, the Spaniards have need to ask
leave of the Swissers, for the passage of Germans into Italy, and do purchase
it from them at great rates, and upon hard conditions (for they cannot possibly
hope for it from the Grisons, by reason of their League with France, and their
abhorring the name of a Spaniard) and the Sw^ssers sometimes denying passage,
they would much endanger the States, and Affairs of Spain in Italy; so the
getting of the Valtoline would afford the Spaniards commodity of passing as
many men, and other provisions, as they should have need o^, by a shorter,
safer, and less expensive way, through their own Countries of Germany into
Italy. Moreover, the same Valtoline, whilst possessed by the Grisons, was like
a Gate thrown open to the Venetians, and to the other Princes of Italy, whereby
to receive succor from the Transalpine^ in desence of their affairs, if (as it
was continually doubted) they should be molested by the Spaniards; and being
possessed by the Spaniards, it would be a Bulwark, which blocking up that
passage would exclude all other foreign succor; for the Austrian Territories
invironing all Italy on the outside from Rhetia to Dalmatia, and the State of
Millain coming to those by the Valtoline, (which State of Millain reaches
almost a^' Mare Ligustico) and the King of Spain possessing the Kingdom of
Naples, and the Mediterranean, by means of a powerful Fleet; it will appear
clearly that the State of Venice, and of all other Italians, except Piedmont,
would be environed by the King of Spain's and Austr^an Dominions, and little
less then shut up, and imprisoned; within their Forces: so as the possessing of
this Valley was of great consequence and moment, by reason of the union or
disunion which it occasioned of the States, to the security or prejudice of the
Affairs of all of them: It was no wonder then, if, as the Graecians and Trojans
strove so much for fair Haelena, our Princes did the like for the Valtoline.
The Venetians did very much desire a League with the Grisons for ten years,
from the year 1603. and, afte^ many disputes and contestations, did ob^ain it;
to the end that by that confederacy the way might be open to them for
Transalpine assistance as often as they should have need thereof for their own
defense; and when they had obtained it, they made public Feasts and
Rejoycings. But this confederacy did even then very much displease not only the
King of France, the ancient Protector and Confederate of the Grisons, but also
the Spanish Agents, and particularly Count Fuentes, then Governor of Millain:
so as the Agents of both those Courts, by several means, and out of differing
ends, endeavored by all means to disturb it. The French having by the title of
long confederacy, and protection gotten, great authority and preeminency to
their King, amongst those people, (that they might govern them as they listed)
abhorred tha^ the Venetians when they should have need of assistance either from
the Grisons, or from any other Transalpine Nations, should be succored by
their King, he being Custos and Guardian of that Gate: so as in this respect the
Grisons should be more necessitated to persevere in adherence and devotion to
the French; and the Spaniards, who had long before aspired to draw this Nation
to them by Leagues, and to join it by confederacy to the State of Millain,
believed that their ends were totally interrupted by this new League; and not
being well pleased with the grandezza of the Commonwealth of Venice, they liked
not that it should be rendered more secure by this adherence, or that by having
convenience to bring foreigners into Italy, they might peradventure prove
prejudicial afterward to the Affairs of that Crown: Many therefore were the
endeavors to disturb this new League and Union; by which the Grisons, who were
divided within themselves in parties, and factions, never enjoyed any more that
peace and concord which they had for many years formerly enjoyed. Count
Fuentes, to curb them, and to fo^ce them to forgo these new Conjunctions, and
to join in Le^gue with the State of Millain, as they were desired to do, built
a Fort royal just where the River Adda falls into the Lake, and named it by his
own name Fort Fuentes: which standing upon the Confines, and almost in the
jaws of the Valtoline, did not only keep that Va^ley in perpetual jealousy,
knowing that by reason of the concern and consequence of its situation the
Count aimed at it, but because being upon the Lake it might easily hinder that
Nation from commerce with the State of Millain, and with Italy, by which so
many Grison families live, and have their being. The Grisons, who were chiefly
concerned therein, did not only exclaim against the building of this Fort, but
the Venetians also and the French; and King Henry the Fourth, who was then
alive, was not a little offended at it, as well for the interest of his
Colleagues, as for fear lest the Valtoline being taken, the Spanish Authority
should grow too great: but all this was in vain, for neither the Venetians nor
other Italian Princes had any mind to fall out with the Crown of Spain, which
was then at the height of her greatness and authority, so as they were
necessitated to be quiet; and the King of France, were it either that he was
not displeased that the Grisons should begin to taste the good of the Venetian
League, or that he did not then much value it, would not break with Spain upon
that occasion, which (as he was wont to say) did not principally belong to him;
and the Swissers, who were the Grisons ancient Confederates, although they
muttered somewhat, yet being corrupted in their Diets, partly by their home
dissentions, partly by Spanish gold, did only pe^swade the Grisons to
accommodate themselves to the condition of the times, and to provide civilly
for their affairs; wherefore the Venetians, seeing themselves left all alone,
and that Count Fuentes was ready with a great Army, when the Grisons, who upon
their account had entered into these troubles, demanded aid of them, did at last
declare, that they thought it not fit that the peace of Italy should be
disturbed upon such an occasion. Thus the Fort Fuentes kept unprejudiced by the
Forces or threats of so many Princes. But the year 1613 being, together with
the time of Confederacy, expired, the Venetians bethought themselves not only
of renewing the League, but of establishing it for ever; and, as being a thing
necessary to the very being of their State and Liberty, they laid out great
store of moneys in that Nation, whereby they purchased so many Partakers, and
so numerous a Faction, and so many Votes adhering to their party, as prevailing
over the French and Spanish Faction, both which were too weak to oppose them,
they united themselves by means of the Agents of both the Crowns; and those
Agents joining in their endeavors and designs, which till then had been
contrary to one another, labored to exclude the Venetian Confederacy:
Wherefore the French Ambassadors, who had formerly been held to be the chief
Protectors of the Rhetian Liberty against the Spaniards, began to be much
suspected; and this suspicion grew to be so great, as being turned into hatred,
and not being any longer to be concealed, Monsieur Gueffier, then Resident
Ambassador for France, was publicly dismissed; who fearing the open hatred
and fury of that Nation, and shunning the popular Tumults and Insurrections
which he knew were incited against him (and chiefly by the Preachers) he
withdrew almost in a flying posture to amongst the Swissers: Wherewith the
Grisons having immediately sent away to acquaint the King of France, and withal
to complain of the reason which drove them thereunto, the King being either
displeased at it, or not making such account of the Ambassadors which were
sent unto him as he had wont, they thought themselves treated as Subjects;
wherefore they inclined more then before to the renewing of their League with
the Venetians.

The Grisons therefore chased away the Bishop of Coira (who being a Prince of
the sacred Empire, holds the first place in the Dyets) and began to persecute
the chief Fautors of both the Crowns with Imprisonments, Confiscations,
Banishment, and with corporal punishments, as Enemies to the public Liberty;
nor therewithal content, differing in their opinions, they leaned almost
altogether in the Government of their affairs to their Preachers; who being
Heretics preached nothing but the necessity for preservation of their State
and Liberties, of uniting the people in one Religion; and that therefore they
must extirpate the Catholics, and drive them totally out of their Houses and
Country: Many therefor being forced by this persecution fled, some of them
went to the State of Millain, some to the Swissers, endeavoring to recover
their Country by force of Arms, out of which they were driven by rigor, by
the injustice of the Judges, and by violent faction: Those that fled to the
Swissers made the Ambassador Gueffier their Head-Commander, and the others the
Duke of Feria, with whom Gueffier held secret Intelligence, that he might
interest himself in their Cause, and help them with men and moneys (which were
things they wanted) to return into their Countries. Feria furnished them with
moneys, where with they raised a body of men, and entering into Coira they made
themselves Masters of it; but their Adversaries being stronger then they, they
were soon driven out, and together with them the French Ambassador: Yet they
nor the Duke of Feria not being any whit dismayed, they tried their Fortunes
once more with greater resolution and Forces; for Feria afforded them commodity
of taking 500 Foot out of Tyrvolo, and moreover he assisted them by diversion,
causing an Insurrection in the Valtoline; which being set on Foot between
Radolfo Pianta, Head of the Grisons that were of the French Faction, and
Cavalier Robustelli the chief of the Valtoline Faction, was much fomented by
Feria, but with so much secrecy, as it was not known to any of the Princes
Agents that were in Millain. This Insurrection of the Valtolinians began the
year 1620. The pretense was, that they being anciently Confederates with the
Grisons, the Grisons being the stronger had turned their Confederacy into
Command, and exercised too great Tyranny over them, not only over their persons
and fortunes, but over their Consciences; and would therefore introduce the
poison of Calvinism, and withdraw the people from their Forefathers Religion,
which they had sucked in with their milk: For after they had driven out those
that sided with the French, the Grisons (as has been said) made their
Preachers Arbitrators of their affairs; who began to prohibit Indulgences in
the Valtoline, and to preach Calvinism, to possess themselves of Churches and
Monasteries, and to make Colleges thereof, for the breeding up of youth in
their Sect, to the end that they might totally root out the Catholic Religion:
And that this might the more easily be effected, they put some of the chiefest
and most religious of tha^ Valley to death. Having therefore by Feria's
assistance shaken off the servitude suffered by the Grisons, they put all the
Heretical Officers and Preachers to death that they could lay hands on:
Afterward, the better to maintain the begun Insurrection, they possessed
themselves of the Passes whereby the Grisons might fall down upon them and
vanquish them, and fell to munite them with men and Fortifications; wherein
they were the more fortuna^e, for that Count John Serbellone having by Orders
from Feria assembled about 2500 Foot without the beating up of Drum, was entered
into the Valtoline to assist them. But the Grisons preventing these designs
fell speedily down with a great many men into the Valley of Chiavenna, and from
thence environing the upper part of the Lake, they woond about into the
Valtoline; where having taken and fortified some convenient places to keep out
relief from the State of Millain, they went to Troana, a great Town in the
Valtoline; and coming from thence to the B^idge called Ganda, upon the Adda,
they fortified it, and made themselves Masters of Sondrio. By which successes
the Valtolinians (...) the Grisons made more open recourse to the Duke of Feria
for more powerful succor in this their so great danger: Feria was not dea^ to
their (...), nor backwards in subministring succor; for seeing the Proceedings
of the Enemy, and fearing greater (...), commanded Gil de l'Arena to ende^vour
the securing of the affairs of the Valtoline, who had fortified himself in
Morbegno with those men who came in threeves into the Valtoline; which he
having happily done, and recovered the bridge Ganda, with the death of the
Garrison who opposed him, the Grisons forsook Sondrio, and retreated toward
Chiavenna: But to the end that they might not enter another time by that way
into the Valtoline, Feria ordered Don Ieronimo Pimontello General of the
Light Horse of the State of Millain, (who by his directions was drawn near the
Confines of the Valtoline with some Companies of Horse and Foot) to possess
himself of the Shore of Chiavenna, which being situated upon the Head of the
Lake, lies in the midway by which people pass conveniently from Chiavenna into
the Valtoline: This Shore or Bank was well fortified by some of the Grisons,
who resenting the Spaniards attempts in the Valtoline were fallen down into the
State of Millain, and had given upon some of the nearest Towns thereof, and
carried away some Pillage. Pimontello sent about 500 Soldiers in Barques to
assault that Garrison, which consisted of 300 Foot; who landing not far from
the Garrison went toward the bank, intending to assault it: But the Garrison
being affrighted at their coming, abandoned that Station, and not staying to be
assaulted, fled into Chiavenna; so as the bank fell without any disputing into
Pimontello's hands, which he forth with fortified.

By such like demonstrations as these the Duke of Feria had plainly declared,
that he had sufficiently engaged not only the King of Spains Forces, but his
name in this Enterprise, being moved chiefly thereunto out of two reasons; The
one, because he saw the Heretic Swissers and the Venetians had openly engaged
themselves in the Grisons cause, and in recovery of the Valtoline, that Senate
having sent money into those parts to raise two Brigadoes, the one Swissers,
the other Grisons, wherewith to go to the recovery of the Valtoline: The other,
because the King of France his Agents, by order from their King, who was
offended with the Grisons, did not only consent unto, but had a hand in the
Valtoline insurrection, and desired Feria to protect them: All this was
endeavored from France, to the end that the Grisons being molested on that
part might have the more reason to have recourse to their King, and their King
by that means might govern them as he listed, and causing them to abandon the
Venetian Confederacy, might recover his ancient Authority with that Nation;
wherefore Feria taking courage from the consent and intercession of the French,
and pretense from the Venetians intermission to meddle in that Affair, thought
it might be likely to succeed well, whereby such conveniences and safety would
redound to his Kings Affairs: He notwithstanding cl^aked his designs with the
mantle of Religion, as if he would have it believed, that it was rather his
zeal to the Catholic Faith, and to Gods service, than the conveniences and
interest of State, and of his King, which had made him embrace a business of
that importance; professing himself there^ure to be a better Catholic than
Politician, he sent Priests of holy and devout life into those parts, to preach
the Word of God, and to convert souls to the Catholic Religion: He aggravated
the wicked and detestable actions of the Calvinists, committed against those of
the Valtoline, to force them to receive Calvin's Heretical Doctrine; and the
danger of that disease being diffused abroad in the neighboring parts of Italy
and State of Millain, might infect all Italy with the contagion thereof: Nor
herewithal content, he acquainted the Pope with the whole business, entreating
him, and exhorting him by particular Letters, not only to approve of, but to
concur in his actions, in so pious and Catholic a business: The pretense was
very just, and the colors very lively and apparent to justify so great an
action; nor could there be a fitter occasion to effect it: but the slavery of
Italy, which lay hidden under these religious pretenses, spoiled all the glory
and good which adorned this action; and it being not probable that so many
Princes, whose liberty was concerned in this business, would ever suffer that
the Duke of Feria should ensnare their States and Liberties with such conceits
as these, it might upon better grounds be supposed he would meet with very many
difficulties in bringing them to perfection: so as peradventure it might have
been a more opportune advice for the affairs of his King, and for the condition
of the present times, not to have provoked the Italians with such and so great
a novelty, who were already very much incensed with the Spanish command, who
being become more jolly by reason of the successes in the late wars, were ready
to hold up their heads, and to hazard the wholly laying aside all respect to
the King of Spains authority, and forgoing all fear of his Arms to turn the
world upside down for the preservation of themselves and liberties, rather then
to suffer themselves to be inslaved as they were likely to be by the novelties
attempted, and so strongly endeavored by Feria.

Neither was it likely that the French who did now encourage Feria to this
enterprise, would ever be content that he should reap full satisfaction
therein; for they having no other end, then by vexing the Grisons to force them
to have recourse unto their King for help, it was more certain, that they would
endeavor by all means, that that Valley might not remain possessed by the
Spaniards, lest the Spanish Grandezza might be the more increased, and the
liberty of the Italian Princes might be by them oppressed, and lest that
passage might be blocked up from those of their Nation by the Spaniards; and
besides that the precise Orders and Instructions of the Court of Spain did
repugne such novelties, the example of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and of
Philip the Second, might keep the Duke of Feria from such attempts: which
Princes though they knew how fitting a thing it would be to be masters of the
Valtoline, and would galdly have been so; yet thinking it to be a business
which would be hard to compass, they were far from thinking of it; and the
example of the commotions which happened in Count F^entes time was more fresh,
and of greater force, when by building only that Fort within the Confines of
the State of Millain he was likely to have caused such wars in Italy; the
French, and Venetians having engaged themselves merely for the preservation of
the Valtoline, when the Spanish Forces were at the height of their reputation;
what could he then pretend, or hope for, upon this present occasion, when the
entire usurping of the Valtoline was in question, by the preservation whereof
the liberty of Italy, and by the loss whereof her slavery, did evidently
result? and yet Feria preferring the great good which would be gotten by
joining Italy to Germany, before so many other respects, entered courageously
upon the enterprise, and plunged himself daily more thereinto: thinking that
the glory of this acquisition would be greater, by how much the respects were
the greater which had kept the Emperor, and Philip the Second, from
endeavoring it: he did not apprehend that any one could disturb him, or
bereave him of what he should have gotten, when he should have joined Germany
to Italy by the Valtoline; for having once secured the passage of the Dutch,
neither could the Italians have known how to resent it, being bereft of
foreign aid, nor could foreigners have easily assaulted the State of Millain,
when it should be backed by the neighboring German Forces: he was also the
more encouraged (and his hopes were the more heightened by the troubles in
France, the King being busied in besieging Montalban and Rochel, which were
thought would prove a tedious business, and not to be effected: so as holding
it for undoubted that neither the French, nor (without them) the Venetians, nor
other Italian Princes would stir, he thought they would be content with it, as
they had been with the building of Fort Fuentes; and that therefore he was not
to abandon an occasion whereby he might signalize his Government beyond that of
any of his Predecessors: who though they had always had their eye upon it, yet
they never knew how to effect it. But the Grisons, who were not this mean while
idle, having by the Venetians moneys assembled about 6000 Foot, tried once more
to enter into the Valtoline, by the way of Chiavenna; and finding la Riva well
fortified, they took a great compass along the Mountains, and fell down into
the Country of Bormio, which lies in the utmost part of the Valtoline, where it
joins to Tirvolo: Iovan di Medici, Marquess of St. Angelo, was entered into this
Town with 600 of those Italian Foot who came in Threves from the State of
Millain, and had already begun a great Trench, by which he thought to have shut
up the mouth of a Valley whereby they come from the uppermost part of the
Grisons: but the Work not being yet finished, and consequently remaining
subject to be offended by the Enemy, when coming upon their backs they should
assault the defendants, being therefore set upon on that side which lay yet
open, he forsook the T^ench, and Bormio, and withdrew with his men into Tirano,
a Town, which lies more inward, and almost in the midst of the Valley; and the
Grisons entering Bormio without any resistance, sacked it, unworthily profaning
the Churches, and converting sacred things, and what was consecrated to divine
worship, not only to profane, but to sacrilegious, and scandalous uses: being
encouraged by this good success they fell down upon Tyrano assuredly hoping to
take it with as much ease, but they fared here otherwise; for the Duke of Feria
hearing what had happened at Bormio, gave order to Iovan Ieronymo Pimontello,
that leaving a sufficient Garrison in nella Riva, he should go with all the men
he could gather up in those parts, into the Valtoline: who taking as he marched
some piec^s of Artillery from Fort Fuentes, and having gotten 14 foot Comp^nies
in those parts, came in four days march into Tyrano, where there were already
2000 Foot and 500 Horse commanded by Iovan Bravo. The Grisons were not above
four miles from Tyrano, when Pimontello came thither with his men; and being
discovered, and with stood by some Troops of Horse they fought them and
repulsed them, who being pursued by greater numbers, retired into Tyrano: but
the Grisons keeping behind them with the whole body of their men, Pimentello
and Bravo resolved to go forth aga^n into the Field with 1000 Foot, part
Spaniards, part Italians, and with 400 Horse; and sencing themselves with some
woeful Walls, but breast high, which inviron the Gardens by which that whole
Country is distinguished, they staid waiting the coming of the Enemy, who
appeared upon the descent of a Hill, divided into three Squadrons; the first,
which consisted of 2000 Bernese, and were led on by Colonel Nicol^ Muler, a
valiant and well experienced Commander, advancing more furiously then the rest,
was so sorely played upon by Musket Shot when he drew near the plain, as being
openly exposed to the vollies of shot, he was but ill dealt with: being
afterward come upon the plain he received more prejudice by the Horse which was
commanded by Ottaviano, Governor of Gullara, who drawing near him by a certain
covered way, gave furiously on upon the Foot, and made great slaughter,
insomuch as Colonel Muler, together with five other of the best Captains being
slain, and their ranks broken, after a furious fight, which lasted for some
hours, they were routed; those few that fled were part of them killed by the
Country people, part throwing themselves into the Adda were drowned: as for the
other two Squadrons, the Rear escaped safe away: the other which went to
recover Tyrano, after having made some resistance, fled, with the loss of their
Baggage, which remained in the Enemies hands: the Kings men returned victorious
into Tyrano; and the vanquished finding they were not pursued, rallied together
and went, (being in number about 4000) to assault the Town; but Pim^ntello
having assembled the Foot together, and put them in order, made such
resistance, as the Enemy being played upon by the Artillery, and indamaged by
smaller shot, could do nothing of moment, nor ^urst come to an assault, though
the Walls were in some places weak, and ruinous; but retreated toward the
Mountains which confine upon the State of Venice, from whence going to Bormio
they returned home. The conflict endured five hours, with great courage on both
sides, above 2000 of the Grisons were slain, those being comprehended who were
drowned in the Adda; and of the Spaniards not above 50, amongst which Ottaviano
the Governor (who was one of the first tha^ assaulted the first Squadron) and
a Nephew of Iovan Bravo: the spoil was great, amongst which they found much of
what was taken from Bormio, and 32000 Ducates, destined for the Soldiers pay:
after the Victory, they went to Bormio, which being abandoned by the Garrison
made no resistance; where they built a gallant Fort royal, and munited the Town
with a great Trench; by which, and by three little Forts erected along the
Valley, the one at Tyrano, another at Morbegno, and the third at Sondrio, the
Kings men were masters of the Valtoline; and the new built Forts being kept by
the peoples consent, for Guard of the Country, and the liberty thereof, they
began to settle a form of Religion, and Politic Liberty, to the end that those
of the Valtoline being governed by themselves, might under the protection of
Spain, whereinto they were by a particular Decree received, enjoy their
Religion, and be secured in their liberty, which they had happily recovered.
The Archduke Leopold, who keeping correspondency with the Duke of Feria, aimed
at the recovery of the Towns of the third League, which were a^iently rebelled
from the house of Austria, did at the same time build a Fort, which he called
San Maria, in the Valley of Mosero, in the Grisons jurisdiction, to the end
that remaining just where the Valtoline joins to Tirv^lo, the union on both
sides might be the better secured. To these happy successes more happy
Negotiations were added; for not long after, the Grisons being dejected, pur^ly
by the great blow which they received in the Valtoline, and partly confused for
the repugnancy of opinions which was risen up amongst them, la Griggia, which
is the chiefest of the three Leagues, sent Embass^dours to Millain, and
capi^ulated with Feria touching the restitution of the Valtoline to its former
condition, upon very favorable terms, for the inhabitants Religion and
Liberty; and obliged it self, in name of the other two Leagues, in a perpetual
League with the State of Millain: and (what was much desired by the Spanish
Agents) to grant fre^ passage for the Kings men through their Towns: but this
Capitulation took no effect, though many of the Commonalty of the second League
concurred therein; for the third League contradi^ting it, and particularly
those of low Enge^ina, the number of those who were against the Capitulation of
Millain began to increase, and their faction grew stronger; the rather because
they were much fomented by the Venetians, and French Ambassador, who adhered
unto them. The Ambassador was the same (...), who having held intelligence
with Feria but a little before, had procured, and had had a hand in the
insurrection of the Valtoline; but not being able to see it now ^ain under the
authority, and almost under the command of the Spaniard, and that ^e himself
had been the means and worker thereof, he was pieced again with the Grisons,
and with contrary endeavors favored the oppression of the Valtolinians to
drive the Spaniards from amongst the Grisons to the recovery of the Valley
which they had lost: they were thereunto also incited by their Preachers, who
detesting the Capitulation of Millain, called in their public preachings, and
in their private meeting, the Favorers thereof, Authors of scan^al, Enemie^ to
the public liberty, and Traitors to their Country: so as there proceeded great
altercations between those who were against it; and the Duke of Feria having
taken five Companies of Swissers into pay, in favor of those that sided with
the Capitulation, he sent them into Rh^tia; whereat the Country rise up in
Arms, and the very (...) of the Capitulation not adhering much to their former
opinion, the Swissers were forced to retreat: so as this party having gotten
the upperhand, they began to implead the chief Authors of the Millain
Capitulation, as having betrayed the public liberty, by agreeing thereunto
without the public consent of all. But new Orders being sent at this time from
the Court of Spain, reduces the trouble to a more quiet Negotiation. The
Princes of Italy were much moved at these proceedings of Feria, and resented
them; and the Venetians, who (as has been said) covered both their own, and
the common liberty, and by disbursing out moneys largely unto the Grisons, had
endeavored that he might not compas^ his ends; had also by their Ambassador
made great complaint thereof to the Court of Spain; accusing the Governor as a
perturber of the public p^ace, and as an insnarer of the liberty of Italy; as
did also the new Pope, Gregory the 15th, who succeeded Paul the 5th, who died
in the beginning of the year 1621: this was Cardinal Lodovisio, Archbishop of
Bullognia: he was commonly held to be not well affected to the Spaniard, by
reason of the distastes between him and Don Piedro di Tolledo, when being the
Apostolic Nuntio in Lombardy and Piedmont he negotiated the composition of
those wars; and therefore as one that detested the Spaniards, and loved not to
see them increase in greatness and authority, it was thought he would not omit
suppressing those ends upon this occasion, which did so much vex him, so to
make himself famous by restoring Italy to her former security, and thereby make
the beginning of his Popedom more acceptable. He wrote a Letter with his own
hand to the King of Spain, complaining of, and much resenting the Governors
actions, as prejudicial to the common quiet, and satisfaction; and desiring him
that he would not deny him this favor which he very earnestly desired of him,
in this the beginning of his Popedom: he did also seriously admonish him, that
for the good of the common peace, and for the safety of Italy, and of those
States which ^e the King did therein possess, he would put the affairs of the
Valtoline into so joyful a condition as might give satisfaction to all men. The
Letter either came not at all to the Kings hands, or if it did, it was at his
very last time of life; for he died after Paul the Fi^th, about the end of
March, the year 1621. a King who was more remarkable for his goodness and
innocence of life, then for any thing else; for forgoing almost all business,
and meddling but very little in the administration of affairs, he retained
little of a King, more then the title and fortune: a thing which did much
prejudice the authority and greatness of the Crown, which being gover^'d by the
interest of Favorites, for the space of 22 years, wherein he reigned, and
chiefly in his latter time, he left it much fallen from that height of reputation
wherein he had received it from his Father. He was succeeded by Philip the
Fourth of that name, the eldest of three Sons that he left behind him, of about
16 years of age, who though he gave some greater show of a Royal inclination;
by which it was hoped that he would interest himself more in public affairs
then his Father had done, yet his young years, and the pastimes of youth not
permitting him to partake of the troubles of public Government, the
administration of affairs must necessarily fall into the former condition,
which the Spaniard call di Privanza: or, of affairs being carried by Court
Minions. The chief Ministers of Sta^e were Don Bal^esar di Zuniga, and Don
Gaspar di Gusman, Count d' Olivares: but Z^niga who being long versed in
weightiest affairs, as well within as out of the Kingdom, and who was highly
esteemed by all men, died not long after, to the general grief of all; so as
the whole weight of Government leaned upon Olivares his Shoulders, who being
made a Duke by the new King, and retaining still his former Title of Count,
would be called Conde Duca.

The Valtoline was that which the new King took first into his consideration;
wherein the Pope, the Princes of Italy, and the King of France, had used their
endeavors: The new King would satisfy the joint desires of so many Princes,
and give a taste, in this the beginning of his Reign, of his being content with
what was his own, not desiring to usurp upon other men's states, or upon the
Liberty of the Italian Princes: But because the interest of Religion was
concerned in this business; that he might show himself to be a no less pious
and religious, then wise and moderate King, he agreed upon certain Articles
with the French Ambassador; the substance whereof was, That the same Religion
should be established in the Valtoline which was there used in the year 1617;
And that the State should be restored to the same condition that it was in
before the Rebellion: That the Forts should be demollished, and all Garrisons
removed from thence: That all the Valtolinians should be pardoned for their
Rebellion: That the King of France, Switzers, and Vallesani, should become
sureties to the Grisons for the observance of what was agreed upon: These
Articles came from Madrid into Italy, soon after the Capitulation of Millain;
and as they came unexpected by any, (for even those who did most desire it,
could not expect nor hope for such facile proceedings from that Court, in so
weighty a business, and of such importance to that Court) so the Duke of Feria,
and all those who out of a desire to advance the Spanish Grandezza had
co-opperated in this business, seeing their plots and designs wholly overthrown
wherein they had taken so much pains, were totally astonished, not only for the
prejudice which they thought would thereby redound to the State of Millain, and
to the other affairs of the Crown of Spain; but for the loss of that
ostentation, glory and merit, which Feria and the rest hoped to have reaped
thereby: Yet not being able to withstand the Kings so precise Orders and
Commands, they were forced to be content; and not knowing from whence this
resolution should proceed, some laid the fault upon the new Kings weakness;
others upon the Orders and Commands of the late King; who, upon receiving the
Popes Letters a little before he died, charged his Son to desist from the
enterprise of the Valtoline: Others argued, that the new King being too
indulgently affectionate to his Wife, who was solicited by the French
Ambassador, was desirous to please her at her earnest desire* in not coming to
a breach with her Brother, the King of France, upon account of the Valtoline:
There were not some wanting who affirmed that Don Piedro di Tolledo, out of
private emulation that his successor should so happily effect this business,
which nor he nor so many others of his Predecessors could ever do, did oppose
in the Supreme Council of State, to the end that Feria's actions might not be
approved but rejected, as the original and undoubted cause of great scandal and
troubles: Howsoever it was, by the effects men may easily comprehend either a
Repentance in theie Court of the thing capitulated for; or according to others
(for there never wants sinister Interpreters) an End rather to quiet the minds
of the Italians and French, much moved and incensed by t^ese ese Capitulations,
then to put the thing capitulated for in execution.

Whilst this was negotiating in Spain, the Valtolini^ns fa^ing well in Italy by
reason of the Victory at Tirano, and the Capitulations of Millain; and Feria
exclaiming sufficiently in the Court, that by this resolution the King had lost
so opportune and so important a purchase, the execution of the Articles was
deferred; but the Valtolinians exclaimed more then Feria, as men who were sent
thither on purpose by Feria: They mingled tears with their persuasions, and did
infinitely desire the King, That he would not abandon them, nor force them to
return under the ancient yoke of Tyrants; of Heretic Tyrants, who would rise
up not only against their lives and fortunes, but even against their souls,
crying down the Catholic Religion in the Valtoline: They desired him That he
would inform himself fully what the condition of the Valtoline was formerly,
and what it was now; as well in respect of their natural liberty as Religion;
for by the perfect knowledge of these two Points the cheat would be discerned,
by which his Majesty was persuaded to condescend to those Articles: And as for
the first Point, they showed that the Valtolinians were naturally a free
people, not Subjects nor Vassals to the Grisons, as his Majesty had been
informed, but their Companions and Confederates, to whom neither they nor their
Forefathers had never sworn fealty, nor done homage, or showed any sign of
subjection; though by reason of the diversity of Religions, their liberty,
after having for many years governed the common Republic jointly, had been
oppressed and suffocated by their more powerful Confederate: And the Tyranny
was the more cruelly exercised against them, for that the Catholic Religion
was constantly professed by the Valtolinians, and Calvin's abhorred: Wherefore,
said they, the Commotions of the Valtoline were not, nor could not, be esteemed
Rebellion, but the defense and maintaining of the Catholic Religion, and the
recovery of their natural Liberty, which was not only allowed of, but favored
and assiste^ by all Laws both humane and divine: That this was the reason why
no Prince, how great or powerful soever, having neither jurisdiction nor
command over them, could, without using violence, bring them under the command
of others, and much less under the unjust Tyranny of the usurpers of their
Liberty; from which by singular divine goodness, and by the so great hazard of
their lives and fortunes, they had once withdrawn themselves: Nay, that all
lawful and just Princes, the more great and powerful they were, were the more
obliged by the Laws of Nations, and by Gods Laws, to favor and take into their
protection, the Liberties of oppressed people, and to turn all the forces of
their Kingdoms to the destruction and beating down of Tyrants, who were a^hor'd
and persecuted by all Laws both divine and humane: And if the defense of the
Valtolinians liberty was to be expected from any of the Princes of the present
Age, it did undoubtedly belong more to his Majesty then to any other; who
having taken the Valtolinians Religion and liberty into his protection before
the Capitulation stipulated with the King of France, he could not without
breach of his Royal Word, abandon them, nor make them to do an action so
contrary to the protection his Majesty had taken of them, by forcing them to
return to their former slavish condition; But that this did b^long to him
^lone, much more by reason of the hereditary profession of the House of
Austria, of always being the safe shield and constant defense of the Catholic
Religion, which was so annexed to the liberty of the Valtoline, as the ruin ^f
he latter did necessarily draw after it the ruin of the other; for who would
doubt but if the Val^oline should return again to underneath the slavery of the
Grisons, the Catholic Religion would be there trodden under foot: Nor did that
Article of the Convention, whereby it was agreed that Religion should be
returned to the same condition as it was in the year 1617. make any thing for
the preservation thereof; for his Majesty was abused in that Point as well as
in the other of Religion, being falsely given to understand that the Roman
Religion was that year unblemished and undefaced there; and that this cousenage
was so much the greater, as the inconveniences and exorbitances which did
thereby result were the greater, and that therefore the better provision was to
be had for it: Saying that the demolitions and profanations of Churches; the
usurpation of Church goods; the Martyrdomes and banishment of religious people;
the Schools and Seminaries for the breeding up of youth in Calvinisme; the
abolition of Images, prohibition of Indulgences, and many other impious and
enormious abominations, were introduced in the Valtolme long before the year
1617. And on the contrary, that obedience to the Pope; the Introduction of the
holy Office; the accepting of Bishops and Prelates of the holy Church; the
accepting of the Council of Trent, and of the Gregorian Kalander; the
publication of Indulgencies; the abolishing of Heretical Schools and
Seminaries; the Restitution of demolished Churches; of the goods and persons of
Church men; and finally the extirpation of Heretics and Her sies, were the
fruits and products of Liberty, recovered the year 1620. Who sees not then
(said they) that if that Article being to be put in execution, and that
Religion be reduced to the state it was in the year 1617. That your Majesty
being highly abused, does command that all those abominations which were
abolished in the year 1620. shall return in the Valtoline; and that, on the
contrary, that all of Holy and Catholical, which was blessedly introduced
there, together with liberty, be abolished. We cannot (said they) without
blushing and confusion represent unto your Majesty that which your most
Catholic mind cannot without horror hear, and know to be true: not only all
sacred Canons and most holy Councils of the Catholic Church, do not only
reprove such Conventions, but do punish the Authors, Fantors, and Introducers
of all these abominable impieties, with severest excommunication: the Solemn
Oath your Majesty took a little before your Coronation, to the high Almighty
God, to the Princes and People of this so Catholic Crown, does not admit of
such Conventions. The Catholic Kings, your Predecessors, who have spent so
much Gold, and blood of their best Vassels, for the maintenance of Divine
Worship, and for the beating down of Heresy, who have not valued the loss of
whole Provinces, for not admitting of any other then the Catholic Religion, do
conjure your Majesty, the Inheritor not only of so many Kingdoms, but of so
great Catholic zeal, not to allow of that Covention, to which, the world
knows, had you not been abused, you would not have consented for all your
Kingdoms. They finally concluded with exaggerating the iniquity, and inhumane
cruelties of the Grisons, which they were sure would increase, together with
their fierce hatred against the miserable inhabitants of the Valto^ine, for
their having taken up Arms, in defense of their natural liberty, and of the
Holy Faith.

The King was doubtlesly moved with these Reasons, which being afterward
divulged in the Court, the chief Lords and Officers thereof, and the people in
general, finding the resulting inconveniences by this cous^nage put upon the
King, were much moved thereat, and did confess that nothing more contrary to
the Faith, nor more prejudicial to Catholics, could be contracted amongst
Heretic Princes; and storming thereat, knew not what to do, whereby with
safety to the Kings royal word and agreement, the Convention might be kept from
being put in execution; and whilst they were busied thereabout, a new accident
fell out which furnished them with a means: A Diet was resolved upon for the
execution of this agreement amongst the Swissers, to be celebrated in Lucerna,
one of the chief Catholic Cantons of that Nation: wherein (to boot with the
Deputies of all the Cantons) Monsieur Scappi, Apostolic Nuntio with the
Swissers, was to be present for the Pope, Monsieur Myron, and Monsieur
Monholon, Ambassadors, in ordinary and extraordinary, for the King of France,
and Gueffiere Resident in Rhetia, and Andriano Tomasini, President of the
Parliament of Burgony, for the King of Spain; and the Duke of Feria was
commanded to observe Tomasini's Orders, for what should be resolved upon in
that Diet touching the affairs of the Valtoline: the Deputies also of the
Grisons appeared at this Diet, who presenting the Decree of general pardon
granted to those of the Valtoline, demanded the demollishing of the Forts
lately erected in the Valtoline, guarded at the present by Spanish Garrisons,
and to be repossest of that Valley, according to the agreement made at Madrid;
offering themselves ready to observe whatsoever they were obliged unto by the
said Capitulation: The President of Burgony perused, and attentively considered
the Decree; and finding it to be too full of cavils and snares for those of the
Valtoline, exclaimed much against it, first in words, and then in writing; and
as if a large Gate were thereby left open for revenge, he began to accuse it of
fraud: the words and actions of the Grisons gave more credit to the Presidents
Reasons, and Exclamations, who seemed so incensed against those of the
Valtoline, as not being able to contain themselves, they stuck not to say, they
hoped one day to wash their hands in their blood: the President was followed by
all the Catholic Cantons, which were Confederate with the Crown of Spain; and
by him of Appenzel, which stands in the midst between the Catholic, and
Heretic Cantons; and therefore expressly refusing to stand bound for the
Grisons, as they were required to do by the Capitulation of Madrid, they made a
Decree thereupon, which they called irrevocable: the other Cantons, either not
being willing to appear of another opinion, or seeing that their obligation
would not be satisfactory without the like of their companions, thought it not
fit to be bound. Thus was the Convention of Madrid excluded, or as the Fr^nch
and Venetians complained, deluded by the cunning and secret carriage of the
Duke of Feria, who, as they said, had wrought upon the Swissers by moneys:
neither did the heat of opposition made by the President of Burgony pass
without suspect of some secret Commission from the Court of Spain, which might
have altered her opinion touching the affairs of the Valtoline; and this
suspicion increased the more, for that the Spanish Agents, after the Swissers
refusal, began to pretend that the Convention of Madrid was no longer valid,
but was to b^ understood as Null; as made upon condition that the Swissers and
Vallesa^i would be thereunto obliged: which condition being void, the
Convention was void also: the business of Composition being therefore
desperate, the Grisons being assisted by the French and Venetians, resolved to
go once more armed to the Valtoline, and to endeavor the recovery thereof with
greater Forces: which being presently done, they fared not better then they had
done before: though many men were ready to assist them in the parts about
Bressia, and Bergamo: they fell down with 13000 Foot into the Country of
Bormio, with intention to assault the new Fort, wherein were 600 Foot under
Ottavio Sforza, who being very well prepared for defense, the Grisons thought
not good to assault them; but sent some Squadrons to the taking in of a little
Fort not far off, wherein were about forty foot, who defended themselves
egregiously, and slew and repulsed many of the assailants: hearing afterward
tha^ Iovanni Bravo, who was sent with fresh men from Feria, approached, they
went to meet him; and drawing out their Forces between Bormio and the little
Fort, they staid a while expecting him, intending to fight him; yet when they
heard the Drums which were nigh at hand, they retreated into Bormio, and
setting it on fi^e went toward the Mountains top, and from thence retired
homewards; but being overtaken in their retreat by some Horse, which were sent
by Bravo to fall upon their Rear, where they received some prejudice; and the^r
Commander Herman Pianta being amongst many others slain, all the rest were so
terrified and confused, they began to seek their safety by a disorderly flight
through the craggy Mounta^ns, which though they were rugged and almost
unaccessable, yet by the long practice and experience which they had therein,
they overcame them; and being scattered they past back over the Mountains,
leaving in Bormio cruel signs of their rage against those of the Valtoline:
wherefore by reason of this action, so contr^ry to the Articles of Millain, the
Duke of Feria waged open war against them; and agreeing with Archduke Leopold,
whom Tirvolo and Alsatia did obey, that he should assault the Grisons on his
side the Mountains, he entered himself in person into the Valtoline with 6000
Foot, and 500 Horse, thinking to oppose the Grisons new Forces: but when he was
not well got to Morbegno, a Town which stands in the mouth of the Valtoline,
and hearing there what had befallen Bormio, he turned upon Chiavenna, a Town of
the Grisons, which is the head of another Valley, which runs along la Mera, a
River which falling from the Alps runs into the Lake: there was therein a
Garrison of about 500 Grisons, who trusting more to the open Fields then to
their Walls, drew a long Trench on the outside of Chiavenna, from the foot of
the Mountain, to Mera; whe^ewith crossing the whole Plain above which lies on
the left side of the River, they minded not much the lower side, it being
narrow and moorish: thinking to make head there, they put themselves almost all
in Garrison, and sent for a good strength of men to defend a certain place
beyond the Trench: which being seated upon the skirts of the Mountain, Pitz
commanded the way, and the Plain, The Governor sent a good Band of Carabines
against those that defended this station, who forcing the defendants to abandon
it, the defendants retreated to the Trench, where they showed neither courage
nor valor; for finding that the Enemies Horse had foorded over la Mera, and
was coming about upon their backs, fearing to be taken in the midst between the
Horse and the Foot, which drew near, they fled into Chiavenna; which finding
they were not able to defend, it not being fortified, they abandoned it, and
fled all toward the Mountains. The Governor having first possessed himself of
the Trench, and then entering Chiavenna without any resistance, he sent a party
of Horse after them, who entering the Valley where il Reno begins, and by
Bregiglia, they burnt and destroyed all about them, entering on the one side as
far as Campolzino, and on the other, to Castagnena and Soio; and having
recovered three pieces of Artillery, which with two others which they found in
Chiavenna, and which were kept there in memory of their ancient Victory won by
their ancestors, above a hundred years before in the State of Millain; the
Governor sent part of the Foot to assist the Archduke, who was entered at the
same time with 10000 Foot, commanded by Colonel Bal^irone into the Diretture,
the third League, and had taken the Vall^ys of Enge^na and Paroviz, which (as
has been said) belonging anciently to the house of Austria had rebelled, and
joined to the other two Leagues; they afterward by the assistance sent from
the Governor took Maiafeld, a great Town and of importance, from whence going
to C^ira, the Metropolitan City of that Nation, they presently took it, where
placing the Bishop in his ancient sea^, who (as has been said) was a little
before driven from thence, they left a great Garrison; the Grisons, who were
bereft of all aid and succor, not being able to give the least resistance
against this their so great ruin: wherefore being beaten every where, and
having humbly begged leave, and ob^ained it, to ^end Ambassadors to Millain to
treat of some agreement, ^he Griggionan and Cadedion Leagues (for le Diretture,
the third League, being as a member cut off, and under the Archduke, was not in
a free condition to Capitulate) sent their Ambassadors thither: with them went
also some Ambassadors from the Swisser^, to assist their Friends, and
Colleagues, at least with endeavors, which they were resolved not to do with
Forces: being come to Millain, they desired a cessation of Arm^, whilst some
medium might be found out against so great uproars, and inconveniences. The
Swissers were sent back with good words, and with general terms of the Kings
good intentions, who as also the Duke of Feria, was said not to have any other
end in these Commotions, then to establish a long peace, with safety to the
Catholic Faith: so they returned home within a few days, without entering into
any particularities. The Grisons were treated withal otherwise; for they
desiring to be restored to the ancient condition of the Valtoline, they were
plainly told that this their demand was contrary both to Humane and Divine
Laws; the latter not suffering Catholics to be under the Dominion of
Heretics; and the former permitting those of the Valtoline, as those who were
unjustly subjugated by the Grisons their comp^nions, and unworthily oppressed
in their liberties, to withdraw themselves, whenever they could, from the
yoke of Tyranny; wherefore being forced to submit unto the will of the more
powerful, they came to new Conventions; Whereby liberty of Conscience was
allowed through their whole Country; a perpetual confederacy was agreed upon
between those two Leagues and Crown of Spain, with due respect had to their
ancient Confederacy with the Crown of France: perpetual passage for the King of
Spains men through the Rhetian Alps; and absolute liberty to those of the
Valtoline, with an obligation notwithstanding that they should pay yearly to
the Grisons 25000 Ducats by way of Tribute; wherewith the Bishop of Coira, and
the two Leagues, renounced all Authority, Empire, and Jurisdiction, which they
had formerly had in that Valley; and the Duke of Feria entered suretiship, in
the King of Spains name, for the yearly payment of the aforesaid sum by those
of the Valtoline.

The business between the Grisons and those of the Valtoline being thus happily
composed, after some months some alterations happened, which were soon appeased;
for those of the third League could not suffer subjection; they therefore
plotted Insurrections against Archduke Leopold, by means whereof they
endeavored to re-gain their Liberty. The Commotion began amongst those of the
Valley of Parentz, the boldest and fiercest people of that Nation; who being
solicited by some of the Griggian League, who were ill satisfied with the last
Capitulation at Millain, entered one Holy Day into the Corpse de Guarde, and
finding Arms there, but no Soldiers, they being gone to Mass, they seized on
them, and killing the Garrison, they armed their Compagnions with long staves
(for their Arms had been taken from them before by the Archdukes Officers) and
increasing in numbers they went to Coira and to Maiafeldt, where fighting the
Archdukes men twice in open fields, both which times they were victorious, they
forced the others to surrender up those two places to them; which being taken,
all the Garrisons of all the rest of the Country flying away, they might easily
have re-gained their former Liberty, had not new men been speedily sent them
from the Archduke to quell them; who being led on by Count Sultz, and by the
same Baldrone, beat those of the League twice, and did not only recover all
those places, but forced those of the Diritture once more to submit to the
Archdukes yoke: And a Diet being held not long after in Lindao, an Imperial
Town in Suevia, wherein the Archdukes Deputies, and those of the thirteen
Cantons met, it was declared, That the Diritture did of right belong to the
House of Austria, and that therefore they should render obedience thereunto;
and as being subject to the Austrian Empire they should obey the Archaukes
Commands; and that they could not pretend to any Liberty, but should be wholly
distinguished, and be altogether, and for ever be understood to be, separated
from the body of the Grisons Commonwealth; annulling all actions of Confederacy
which they had made, as the third League, with other Princes, and particularly
with the King of France. Which Declaration was afterward approved of, and
accepted by the Deputies of the said League, who swore Fealty, and did homage
to the Archduke. Thus part of Rhetia beyond the Alps resting in the Archdukes
power, and the rest on this side the Alps, either depending upon, or being
subjugated by the Spaniard, the affairs of the Crown of Spain in Italy, and
those of the House of Austria in Germany were much bettered, by reason of the
great happiness which was gotten by the Conquest of Rhetia, and the Union of
the States of Italy to those of Germany; by which Union the one might
commodiously succor the other; insomuch as the Valtoline, and the League with
the Grisons, procured by so much industry by Count Fuentes and the other
Governors, were of very little consideration, in comparison of this new
purchase: For whereas the League, when it should be concluded, would have been
uncertain and very expensive to the State of Millain, the Dominion over the
Diritture, and the necessary dependency of the other two Leagues upon the House
of Austria, did more undoubtedly secure the same ends without any expense: And
whereas he who will enter into Tyrvolo by the Valtoline must necessarily pass
over craggy mountains unfrequented, and in the Winter season hardly passable,
entrance is much more commodiously had into the Rhetian Country by the Valley
of Chiavenna, then by that of the Valtoline; and from hence a better, shorter,
and safer way is had for Germany then by Tyrvolo, by which entrance is only ^ad
into the Valtoline: So as the King of Spain, without demanding passage from the
Swissers, had the convenience of receiving as many men as he would at any time
from Germany into the State of Millain, and without troubling the Duke of
Savoy, who might deny the reserved passage of Bressa, or, without being
beholden to the French, who may hinder him, he might commodiously, and without
any opposition, pass men from Rhetia into Alsatia, and from thence into the
Palatinate upon the Rhesne, which was won but a little before to the House of
Austria; and from the Palatinate into Flanders and the Low Countries. So the
Spanish and Austrian Empire so much distracted being become united, and
communicable within it self, became more firm, and less exposed to be injured
by others; and the French and other Transalpiners, who envied such Grandezza,
being by such a sound obstacle disjoined and segregated from Italy, could less
easily hold intelligence with the I^alian Princes, or administer hopes of
assistance to them. Wherefore Feria seeing how much by the success of that
Enterprise happily begun under his auspicious Government, and more happily
ended, he had exce^ded the hopes of his Predecessors, returned full of joy and
glory to Millain, triumphing over the Grisons, with the Artillery recovered
after a hundred years, which being adorned with Laurel were in manner of
Triumph drawn before him. But look how much the condition of the Crown of Spain
was better and more advantaged by so many good successes, so much the more did
Jealousy increase amongst the Italian Princes, and the apprehension of their
own Liberty and Command; and together with this jealousy, envy, and endeavors
of opposition increased in those that envyed the Spanish greatness; the latter
not being able to see so great an advancement in authority, nor the others to
see that little loop-hole (much to their grief) shut up, by which their liberty
in the greatest and most urgent streights might breathe. And as some stood
lookers on, and quiet observers of these events, the lesser expecting when the
greater should move; so the Duke of Savoy, though the pre^udice did not chiefly
belong unto him, unless it were that the Spaniards needing now no longer any
passage through Savoy should have less occasion to put an esteem upon him, yet,
were it either that as an Italian Prince he was touched with the danger of
others, or that he thought the too much Grandezza of the Spaniard might prove
dangerous to his own affairs, or that he did desire by all means to cross the
ends and designs of that Crown, he thought it no little diminution to his own
Interests, that the Spaniards should not any more stand in much need of his
Friendship: But the Venetians were chiefly mad hereat, whom the danger did more
nearly concern, as those that saw that the Spaniards and Archduke by getting
firm footing in the Grisons Country, and by the Forts erected in the Valtoline,
had not only disturbed their ends, and bereaved them of the good they hoped for
by League with that Nation, but as it were imprisoned their liberty, and laid
it at their feet: wherefore as if the total of their affairs, and their utmost
ruin were in question, they resolved to remove every stone, to omit for no
expense nor labor, and to refuse no danger, so they might provide against the
prejudice and mischief of so great an alteration of affairs; and finding that
the moneys they had disburst amongst the Grisons and Swissers, the raising of
men intended in those parts, their assisting of those people, that they might
subsist, and not be oppressed by the Spaniard, had proved altogether vain, and
that they of themselves were not able to undertake such a business; They
resolved to move those Princes whose interests might be concerned in the ends
and actions of the Spaniards, t^rouze themselves up upon so great an occasion:
they forbore not to exclaim against those actions, and to make it known in the
Courts of all Princes, as well Italians as Foreigners, what the Spaniards ends
were in entering upon this enterprise; and how under the vail of Religion they
did undermine the Common Liberty, incited people to rebel, ma^e themselves
masters of other men's States, aimed at the reducing of Italy into slavery, to
suffocate the Apostolic See, to give the Law to all Italian Princes, and after
having put the yoke about their neck, make them dependent upon the Spanish
Empire, and be at their beck: that this was a great step whereby to ascend and
arrive at the absolute Monarchy of I^aly, and of all Christendom, which they so
earnestly thirsted after: that the interest of all men, the safety of the
Empire, and the Common Liberty were herein treated of: that therefore with an
unanimous consent they ought to withstand these beginnings, oppose the progress
of these unions and concatenations of States, so prejudicial to all men; to the
end that when all remedies should be too late, they might not in vain bewail
those losses which would be the infallible result of their not having moved
upon this occasion, that doubtlesly, if they would all resent themselves, and
behave themselves generously in this affair, the Spaniards would be forced to
yield to their unanimous will and consent, and desist from the enterprise which
they had begun against the Common Safety and Liberty.

These and the like Reasons alleged by the Venetians at the beginning of these
Commotions in France, Rome, Italy, amongst the Swissers and Grisons, wrought
not much effect, nor were of such moment as such an accident required: The
Court of France not being well pleased with the Veneti^n League, desired that
the Grisons affairs might be perturbed, and that the Venetians might reap but
bitter fruit of their Negotiations: the Pope who was full of years, and of
indispositions, showed not such resentment as would have been necessary: the
Swissers disagreed within themselves, and as the event showed afterward,
inclined more to favor the Spaniards Designs, then the Interest of the Common
Cause; so as the Grisons being left alone in the Field, though set on, and
fomented by the Venetians, were forced to succumb to the stronger. But Gregory
having succeeded Paul in the Popedom (as has been said) who seemed to resent
the business more then his Predecessor had done, and the French finding what
advantage had redounded to the Spaniards by the revolt of the Valtoline, and
how much they had suffered thereby in their own authority, they began to be no
less troubled thereat then the Venetians; and by title of Protection over the
Grisons, the ancient Confederates of that Crown, to pretend that they might be
restored to the entire possession of their liberty, and of the Valtoline.

But many things opposed their desires: the League between the Venetians and
that Nation confirmed contrary to the Authority of that Crown, by which and
from which so many inconveniences did arise: the war which the King of France
made against the Heretics of his own Country, to reduce them to his obedience,
and to the obedience of the Catholic Church; and therefore taking from them
those privileges which they had extorted in the former wars, he was intent
with all his Forces to heal that wound which troubled his Kingdom; and besides
that this war did keep him sufficiently busy, and kept him from foreign
employment; the Title thereof also, like that which the Spaniards did pretend
against the Grisons, would not permit that he, without manifest repugnancy,
should favor those same Heretics out of his Kingdom, which he did with such
fervency, and religious zeal, endeavor to extirpate at home. The peace also,
and good correspondency between his Crown and the Crown of Spain did repugne
it: which being very convenient for the common interest, it did not suit well
with the King of France to discompose, especially his own Kingdom being in
trouble; and by directly entering into war with the King of Spain to kindle new
fires at home, upon the interests of others: the fresh example of his Father
King Henry was also sufficient to keep him from such an enterprise, who when he
was in greatest authority, and his Kingdom in complete peace, did not break
with the King of Spain for building Fort Fuentes, which was so prejudicial to
the interests of the same Grisons: nor would he meddle in those affairs,
otherwise then by intercession: how much, might it be said then, did it become
the present King, in the beginning of his Reign, the Forces of his Kingdom
being divided, amidst so many Domestic troubles, to forgo his Fathers example,
and to engage himself in Foreign affairs, against a most powerful King; the
event whereof being of such weight and importance might certainly be supposed
would prove, if not altogether prejudicial, at least long and dangerous: to do
this it was requisite to have a powerful Army, just as if he went to get the
State of Millain, backed by the German Forces: Besides, moneys, the sinews of
war, were wanting; and many other things necessary for such an expedition: on
the other side, he was obliged by being bound to protect his Colleagues, and
their States, which he could not with his honor see abused: but his Kingdoms
interest did urge him much more the^eunto, to the prejudice whereof so great a
union of the Austr^an Dominions did redound: nor had the example of his Father
King Henry, alleged to the contrary, any thing at all to do in this case;
nothing being then upon the stage but a Fort built by the Spaniards upon their
own ground; whereas now, the usurpation of States was in question, the
oppression of a Commonwealth, confederate with his Kingdom; the manifest danger
of the Apostolic See, and of many other Italian Princes, Friends to the Crown;
which he could not with wisdom nor honor suffer to fall under the Spaniards
slavery: as for examples, that of the same Henry might serve; when not being
able to suffer that the possession of Cleves and Iuliers should be disputed
with the German Princes, nor that the Spaniards should increase their power and
reputation by the oppression of those Princes, and by usurping those States, he
took up Arms against the Crown of Spain, and against the house of Austria; and
incited almost all Christendom against them; that these examples and respects
were to be preferred before anger conceived against the Grisons for making
League with the Venetians; if, contrary to custom, we ought in important
resolutions to have any consideration at all upon private spleens, which were
never known to be preferred, in well regulated Counsels, before wholesome
deliberations. To these Reasons, which were of great force, were added the
Venetians, and the Sovoiards instigations; who showing themselves ready to
concur in the same war wished consideration might be had, that the authority of
the French was at an end in Italy, if the King should not be permitted to enter
by that way, or should suffer those parts to be fortified, by which they might
enter with a few men into that Province, in defense of so many Friends and
Clients of their Kingdom, for the good of the Apostolic See, and to curb the
covetousness and ambition of the Spaniards, who when they should once become
masters of what they had usurped, and have thereby joined the King of Spains
Forces with those of the Austrians in Germany, would grow unsupportable for
their natural pride and arrogance; and invincible by reason of their Command,
Authority, and Power; insomuch as the Princes of Italy being deprived of the
French aid, which was the only support of their liberty, would be forced
wholly, and every where, to yield to the King of Spains pleasure, and to
reverence, and adore the name of Spaniard, as an earthly Deity, from whence
they were to expect, and to acknowledge the life and safety of their affairs,
or otherwise their utter ruin: how great a glory, how great an honor would it
be to the now King, in the first beginning of his Reign, and (as it might be
said) of his life, to win so much authority in Italy, not only by sustaining
the Duke of Savoy against the Forces of the Spaniards, but by becoming
Arbitrator of peace or war between that Duke and the Crown of Spain; wherefore
then should he not only lose so great an acquisition, but by abandoning the
Grisons, the ancient Confederates of his Kingdom, and by permitting all the
Princes of Italy to fall under the slavery of the Spaniard, make the world see,
that the King of France had neither courage, nor power to defend his
Confederates, to strengthen so many Princes who expect from him only cure for
so mortal a wound: to provide against so great prejudice which would redound to
himself in his reputation: and to his Friends and Clients in their Safety,
States and Liberties. These and the like Reasons very much pressed, and
vehemently pursued in that Court, might peradventure work upon their wills, but
could not remove the difficulties of the enterprise; for how was it possible
for that King, who then lay panting before Montalban, a great Town in the midst
of his Kingdom, when France was divided into several Factions, and the Kings
Treasure exhausted; to think of Foreign enterprises against the King of Spain,
and house of Austria, who were already possessed of the Valtoline, and almost
of the whole State of the Grisons: who joining in the Common Cause, the State
of Millain would abound in Dutch, and by means of their Indian Gold they might
turn his Kingdom up-side down, now when it was full of ill humors, the King
and his Council did therefore what was most convenient for their present
condition: which was, to proceed friendly with the Court of Spain, and to treat
of composing the present Occurrences in a civil way. To this purpose Monsieur
Bossompier was sent extraordinary Ambassador to the King of Spain; and finding
there more likelihood of good success then he could have imagined, he thought
the business happily ended: but the French finding afterward that the effects
were not answerable, but that the Spaniards sought by sophisticated
interpretations to annihilate and overthrow all Conventions; and that having
proceeded further in Rhetia, they had in part lacerated, in part subjugated the
Liberty and Commonwealth of the Grisons, putting new and bitter conditions upon
them, wholly contrary to what had been by common consent agreed upon at Madrid;
they thought themselves doubly concerned in this business; for to the ancient
Consederacy, and Protection of the Grisons, was added the Capitulation at
Madrid, which the French could not, without a great affront to their King,
suffer to be so trodden under foot: and by the easiness of satisfying their
desires which they found in the Spanish Court, concerning this business,
conceiving better of themselves, and worse of the Spaniards, they thought that
when the King of Spain should see them in Arms ready to resent the injury, he
would by no means expect their moving; nor that the affairs of Italy should be
more discomposed then formerly for any such respect; therefore, not admitting
that the Treaty at Madrid should be null and void, by reason of the Swiffers,
they pretended it was to be observed: offering new warranties, or cautions,
equal to the former, for the performing of what was agreed upon; and if
otherwise, they threatened making Leagues, and to prepare for Italy; so as
France was full of warlike preparations, giving out that it was to take that
satisfaction by Arms, which they would not do by Negotiation; and to this
purpose the Duke of Savoy (who spurred on this business) being gone to Avignon,
whither the King of France was come in person from the neighboring Camp before
Montalban, the foundations of League were laid wherein the Venetian
Ambassadors did intervene; which certainly would have been perfected, had not
the Popes Nuntio hindered it, by affirming that, for an undoubt^d Truth, the
King of Spain had referred the whole business of the Valtoline to be decided by
the Pope: but all that the Nuntio had affirmed proving afterward to be but
words, the Treaty of the League was reassumed with greater fervency; for the
King of France began to discern by the not observance of the Convention at
Madrid, and by the novelt^es committed against the Grison, by the Archduke, and
Duke of Feria, that the Rebels of his Kingdom were secretly fomented with
moneys by the Spanish Agents, to the end that being entertained with domestic
wars, they should not be at leisure to think upon Foreign wars: which, were it
true or false, being believed by the King to be contrary to the good
correspondency which was then professed between the two Crowns, he was much
incensed at it; wherefore speaking not long after with the Prince of Piedmont,
who was come to Lions, he stipulated the League with him, in the Duke his
Fathers name, which was a little before in Treaty, against the States of Italy,
appertaining to the Crown of Spain, for restoring the Grisons to the ancient
possession of their State and Liberty, and to their possession of the
Valtoline; and it being, divulged that the King was so servent in this
business, as he would compose differences, yea even upon disadvantagious terms
with the Heretics of his own Kingdom, rather then suffer such an affront to be
done unto himself; and his Clients and Confederates to be so much injured;
Italy grew greatly apprehensive of new troubles, which seemed also to be just
then threatened, and foretold, by Celestial Prodigies and Impressions.

In the year 1618, and in the month of November, there appeared a great Comet
above Saturn, and according to the opinion of the most famous Mathematicians,
very near the Stars of the eighth Sphere, whose angry head was like to the Star
called Mars; and tail thereof, which was very long, and like a Squirrils tail,
was extended or spread abroad 20 degrees, with two motions, the one retrograde,
from the East to the West, wherewith it ran from the ninth of Scorpio, to the
eighth of Virgo: the other from the South to the North, wherewith it ^an 64
degrees, the head thereof terminating in that same Star which stands in the
midst of the tail of Ursa Major, and the tail of it almost touching that
misshapen Star which is hard by the tail of the Serpent. It was seen in
Persia, in the Indies, and in Iapan, it ran through all the parts of the World,
and continued till the end of December. A little before it appeared another
impression was seen, which was like a Log of fire, but lasted but a very little
while: Mathematicians Prognosticated several things hereby, and those who think
the success of humane affairs depend upon Celestial influences, as upon second
causes; for these apparitions preceding the Insurrection in the Valtoline, many
attributed the wars which proceeded from thence, to the malign effects of
those apparitions; and the present Occurrence, which grew daily hotter and
hotter, to be a well prepared Materia, to receive the malignity of these
influences: but these Prodigies, which are most commonly fallacious, caused not
these new Ruptures to be so much apprehended, as did the continual practices
which were had every where. Feria appeared very constant and resolute in
keeping what was gotten; and to this purpose had used all his Reasons and
Authority, with his friends in Spain, that the glory of his actions might not
be disturbed by his rivals. On the contrary, the Venetians who were very
fervent in this business, were resolved by all means possible to bring it to
the end which they so much desired. The Duke of Savoy, desirous of new wars,
thought every hour a year till he had begun war with the Spaniard, The Pope,
not able to tolerate that the Capitulation at Madrid, wherein he had
co-operated, should not take effect, was very ill satisfied, and gave manifest
signs of his resentment: the King of France, egged on by so many Princes, who
had recourse to him, as to the chief foundation of common resolutions, was
ready to end this business by Arms, since he could not do it by Treaties. The
King of Spain was doubly concerned in this business; for to the respect of
Religion, which was the chief cause why he had meddled therein, was added the
Decree of protecting the Valtoline, and the liberty thereof: nor could he with
honor abandon the enterprise, though he should not value the other weighty
interests of his Crown: on the other side, seeing so many jealousies, such ill
satisfaction, so great a combination of Princes, who threatened much mischief to
Italy, he began to reflect upon the prejudice which might redound, if new wars
in Italy should be added to the wars of Germany and Flanders, which at this
time were very hot; and how hard would it be, to make sufficient provisions in
all parts; which if they should fail in any one place would necessarily draw on
the ruin of all the rest. Laboring therefore amongst so many weighty and
differing respects, but chiefly under the great apprehension of the immense
troubles which might ensue unto Italy, as that which prevailed over all other
more wholesome resolves, he chose the middle way, which was, to deposite the
Forts of the Valioline into the Popes hands, to the end that he might keep them
with his own Captains and Soldiers, in the name of the Apostolic See, to
dispose of them afterward with satisfaction to Religion, and to both the
Crowns; whereby Religion was not injured: for laying the care thereof upon the
Pope, he himself was freed from further trouble therein; nor was the liberty of
those of the Valtoline thereby prejudiced; for the Pope being to satisfy both
the Crowns therein, it was not to be supposed that the Crown of Spain would
ever be satisfied with any thing which might be contrary to their Liberty. Thus
the war being removed from Italy, it seemed that the Crown of Spain had with
one and the same resolution wisely provided for her own affairs, for the point
of Religion, and for protecting the Valtoline: whereby she witnessed to the
world, that nothing else but zeal to Religion, and the keeping Catholics from
being oppressed by Heretics; and not any reason of State, or desire to usurp
what belonged to others (as was said) had made the King interest himself in the
present affairs: the deposition being accepted, the Pope sent his Brother Don
Horatio, who was Duke of Fiano, and the Churches General, with 500 Horse, and
1500 Foot, into the Valtoline; to whom the Forts of the Valtoline of Chiavenna,
and of la Riva, were immediately delivered up; and the Archduke took the
Garrisons out of Coira, and out of the other places of that Country; and Duke
Fiano leaving the Forces of the Church in the Valtoline under their Officers
and Commanders, returned quickly to Rome. Thus the troubles which seemed to
threaten Italy being pacified in the beginning of May, in the year of our Lord
1623, the Negotiation touching the Valtoline was transferred from the Court of
Spain to that of Rome; and the end of so weighty a business, which was formerly
expected from the Court of Spain, was now looked for from the Pope: but neither
were the Venetians, nor those of the Valtoline, pleased with this depositure;
for the latter complained very much, that he whom they had chosen to be
Protector of their Liberty, after having received them into his Protection, had
turned them over to the Pope; whom by reason of what he had done against them,
they did not only distrust, but feared that he could not well defend them, by
reason of the far distance of his Dominions, when they should be assaulted by
the Grisons, or by any other Potentates: they said the King should rather have
quite given over their Protection, then have put them under another power; for
by giving it over, he would have encouraged them, when they should be at their
own command, either constantly to defend their Liberty, or to die in the
defense, thereof: neither complained they less in the Court of Rome, whether
having sent people of purpose, to Negotiate their interests, they forbear not
to represent the justice of their cause to the Pope, to the Cardinals, and to
the Ambassadors of Princes, not so much in point of Religion, as of Liberty:
they exaggerated the Tyrannical, and unjust actions of the Grisons; their cruel
orders to introduce Heresy amongst them: the Usurpation of their ancient and
natural Liberty: they humbly beseeched that they would not suffer the people of
Italy, who were by nature Freemen, and Catholics, to fall once more under the
Tyrannical yoke of Transalpine Heretics; they showed the danger wherein their
souls and lives should be, if they should fall again under their Dominion, from
which they had withdrawn themselves, for the preservation of the Catholic
faith; and from whom they could expect nothing but severe punishments in their
lives, and detestable violence of Conscience.

But the Venetians, who had labored to get the Valtoline out of the Spaniards
hands, were more vexed and in greater streights then before, now that they saw
it fallen into the Popes power; being no less troubled now to see the Pope made
Arbitrator, then the Spaniards Masters thereof before: and this not so much out
of the great interests which the Popes use to have with the Crown of Spain; as
for that the Venetians having of late begun to struggle with the Sea of Rome
for the first place of Authority amongst the Princes of Italy: And arrogating
more Authority then became them in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and in
conferring Benefices, they thought that if the Pope should keep the Key of that
Gate for which they had striven so much, the Popes Authority would be too
great; and that they of Compettitors being become inferiors, must be forced to
yield, and foregoing much of their high pretentions must depend absolutely upon
the Popes power: And as it is natural to all men to be more willingly under the
power of Foreigners then of those of their own Nation; so they could not
endure not only that they had not been able as yet to compass their desired
ends, not to secure their own liberty and the common Liberty of Italy; but that
instead thereof they had changed, or rather doubled their subjection, being
compelled by the King of Spain to depend upon the Apostolic See: They were yet
more troubled to find that the Pope, who was very straightly joined unto them
till the day of depositure, should now after he had got possession, begin to
waver and to decline from the common Interests; For the Pope seeing the surety
and liberty of the Apostolic See secured by this depositure, that the like of
the Venetians and of the other Italian Princes did thereby depend upon him; and
that the Spaniards and French were thereby also under his Arbitriment; If
seemed that amongst several cogitations he had a mind to make use of the
present occasion, to purchase and establish more Authority and Grandezza in the
Church, and in his own Family: Wherefore beginning to listen more willingly to
those of the Valtoline, he grew cool in his resolutions, and ambiguous in his
Answers; and of a Partner being become Arbitrator of the common Cause, he
seemed to have laid much of his servency aside, and that he did not listen
either to the Venetians or to the French, with that attention as he was wont to
listen unto them, and to confer the secrets of his soul with them.

The Spaniards were not displeased with these the Popes deportments, who were
well enough contented that if any but themselves should possess the Valtoline,
it should be the Pope; and rejoicing that the world should be deceived in the
imputation which they had formerly laid upon the Spaniards, of thirsting more
after Dominion then after zeal to Religion, they used several pieces of
cunning, that the Pope delaying his Resolves might keep possession the longer:
Wherefore to boot with his fomenting the complaints of those of the Valtoline,
of whom the King of Spain still professed himself Protector, making use of the
conditions of the Depositure, he was not content with the propounded
Propositions: And at last, to the end that this private advantage joined to the
public might make greater impression in the Pope, they consented that his
Nephew should marry with the only Daughter and Heir of Prince Venosa, a
Neopolitan Lord, who had for her Portion 40000 Ducats, annual Revenue of
Inheritance, which she held in Fee in the Kingdom of Naples: Nor herewithal
content, they propounded, That regard being had to the ancient Conventions of
those of the Valtoline, a fourth League might be made of them, which being
governed by their own Laws and Magistrates, might sit in the general Dyets, and
give their Vote with the other three in all public affairs appertaining to the
Commonwealth: Or else, That it being made a Principality, it should be granted
to some Prince who was a friend to them all, insinuating the Popes Brother or
Nephew. Proposals which he listened very willingly unto, as being much inclined
to the exaltation of his kindred; but they were mightily abhorred by others,
particularly by the Venetians, who grew as suspicious of the Pope after the
Marriage, as they were confiding in him before, for the constancy which he
professed in the common Cause: To this was added, That the Principality of the
Valtoline being of it self but weak, and lying open toward the State of
Millain, it would too necessarily depend upon the Spanish Authority; and if
this were not satisfactory in any other person, the Venetians must needs abhor
it in the Popes Nephews, by reason of the Wives Estate held in Fee; which being
by the Marriage to fall unto the Lodovisian Family, and to be annexed to his
person who should be Prince of the Valtoline; they were too pregnant proofs of
the necessary dependence of that Principality upon the Crown of Spain: Neither
could the French, though they stormed at the Popes alteration, any ways resent
it; the business being by the Covenants of the Depositure reduced from Forces
to Treaty, wherein the French were to carry themselves cunningly, lest they
might exasperate the Pope, and alienare him the more from their Kings
interests. The Treaty of Marriage which was near concluding between the Prince
of England and the Infanta Maria, Sister to the King of Spain, did not a little
trouble the French, and suppress their pretentions; which Treaty, being one of
the most memorable and signal Negotiations of those times, and for that it was
also of great concernment in the present Occurrences, it will not be
unnecessary, nor will it swerve from our present Narration, to give you a short
account of it.

The King of Spain being deeply concerned in the Bohemian wars, did not only
send men and moneys to the Emperor through the Valtoline before it was
deposited, but commanded Marquess Spinola, his Captain General in Flanders and
in the Low Countries, to enter the Palatinate, and wage war there in the
Emperors name: In obedience whereunto Spinola, with incredible speed and
prosperity, possessed almost the whole Palatinate; and suppressing the Forces
of the numerous Army of the Protestant Princes, associated in assistance of the
Palatinate, who durst not give him Battle, forced them at last to forsake the
Palatinate upon the Rheine, and to receive Law from him: By which prosperous
success the parts of the Palatinate and of the other Confederates being
overcome, they were afterward totally ruined by the Emperors Army, and by
that of the Catholic League in Germany; for these two Armies jointly entering
Bohemia, and joining Battle with the Palatines Army before Prague, they routed
it totally; and the Palatine having lost his new Kingdom, and all hopes of
regaining it, he fled with his Wife, Daughter to the King of England, toward
Holland, that he might go from thence to his Father in Law, and obtain favor
from him, or at least moneys to recover his Paternal Estate, which was
possessed and confiscated by the Emperor, for Rebellion and high Treason. The
King of England could never be drawn to approve of his Son in Law's resolution
of accepting the Crown offered him by the Bohemians; and professing that he
could not with a just conscience assist him in that Cause which he thought to
be unjust, and a pernicious example to all Princes, forbore sending aid or
succor to him; which he did profess at first, and with miraculous constancy
and faith made good unto the last; whereby he deserved very well of the
Emperor, and of the House of Austria, who were so deeply concerned in those
Revolts; But afterward commiserating the exile of his Son in Law, Daughter,
and Grandchildren, and yet resolving not to assist their afflicted Country by
Arms, nor by joining with the other Princes of Germany, who prepared to repair
the Prince Palatine with new forces; he thought he should be able to do him
better service by Negotiation; wherein he had placed no small hopes, by
marrying his own and only Son to the Infanta of Spain, and by his having
deserved so well of the House of Austria; And unusual means being to be used in
unusual enterprises, he with a sudden and very secret resolution, sent his only
Son to the Court of Spain, to desire in his own person the Infanta for his
Wife; thinking that by the Authority of his Sons presence, and by his generous
show of honoring that King, he should cut off all difficulties and hindrances
which might obstruct a business of so high concernment: And that the Court of
Spain being overcome by so magnanimous a favor, should not only consent unto
the Marriage, but in savor thereunto restore the Palatinate, which the Prince
intended to demand, and hoped to obtain amidst the Festivals and Jollities of
the Royal Marriage.

The Prince of England departing from England privately, past with a very small
attendance disguised through France, and came to Madrid before the knowledge of
his departure, and of so strange a resolution, was arrived there: The King and
the whole Court being astonished and confused at the arrival of such a Guest,
knew not whether they were to be glad of the Princes coming, in respect of the
great Honor they received thereby; or to be sorry for it, being necessitated
to grant him whatsoever he should desire, though peradventure they were not
thereunto well inclined: Yet being received with all the demonstrations of
Honor, and with the greatest applause that might be, he found a first very
good correspondency of good will in the King and in the whole Court, and
already desire to please him in what concerned the Match; and for what
concerned the Palatine, such demonstrations were used, as he had reason to
conceive hopes that he should obtain his whole desire by that voyage. As for
the Marriage, all difficulties giving way to the Authority and presence of the
Prince, the point of Religion was the only Remora; wherein the King of Spain
desiring much satisfaction, many debates were had about it: But at last, the
English being desirous of a conclusion, consented to whatsoever the Spaniards
did demand; so as the Marriage was held as good as concluded, and for such
divulged: Very rich Presents past between the Prince and his Mistress, as an
earnest-penny of the future Marriage; and many signs of rejoicing, and of
reciprocal affection and union, past between the two Crowns; There rested only
one scruple on the King of Spains part, which delayed the Consummation, which
growing daily greater became an invincible difficulty; and afterward reverst
the whole business, and did wholly defeat it: For the King of Spain, desirous
to proceed cautiously in so weighty a business, and which was on his side
irretractable, required security for the performance of what was agreed upon;
And the King of England offering his Princely Word and Solemn Oath, (which was
all that he could offer, or the other could pretend unto) the King of Spain was
not therewithal contented; as not being willing by any means (in a business of
so great concernment and importance) to depend upon another will, subject to
so many casualties and accidents of Variation, which might peradventure happen:
And because the business of the Palatinate grew more difficult, the King of
Spain keeping himself within the bounds of not promising any effectualy
estitution, (which the Prince of Wales desired, and pretended that it was
promised) affirming that he would use his Authority and best endeavors with
the Emperor; (to whom, he said, the inte^est of concession did chiefly belong,
and upon whom the disposal of that State did absolutely depend;) men began
therefore daily to suspect more and more, that the Court of Spain having been
from the beginning intentionally and inwardly against the Match, they had only
cunningly held on the Treaty; partly, out of their own ambition and Grandezza;
partly, for the Honor of the Prince, whom they seemed to esteem very highly;
but chiefly that they might gain time, and advance the mean while in the
business of the Valtoline; Which the Prince percerving, he parted from that
Court after he had been six Months there, without having made any conclusion;
and imbarking in a Fleet which was come from England to re-conduct him, he
returned to his own Kingdom, carrying with him implacable hatred, grievous
complaints, revenge and enmity, instead of friendship and a Wife.

Here I, the Translator of this Book, must crave leave both of my Author and
Reader, (which if it may not be granted me, I will presume to take) to insert a
passage which then happened, and does relate to this Story; it being a full and
perfect Vindication of a scandalous imputation laid by some black backbiting
Dogs, nay foul-mouthed Curs, upon this then glorious Prince, my since blessed
King, and now and for ever that undoubtedly happy Saint in Heaven, King
Charles, late Monarch of Great Britain and Ireland; they being defirous to make
the world believe, by their scurrilous speeches and writings, that this pious,
conscientious, and religious King, was a Papist in his heart, and intended to
introduce Popery into this Land: And truly, since it falls out so pat and so
aptly here, I cannot forbear doing it, though I know it be unusual, and
contrary to custom, for Translators to add any thing of their own; and this
it was:

I Who had the honor to be bred up with this hopeful Prince; and who account
it my greatest happiness to have known him, and to have been known by him when
he was King; having heard a street Report that this Infanta, his then Mistress,
and since Wife to the King of Hungary, was turned Lutheran; according to the
gracious freedom his Majesty was always used to afford me, I told him of it one
day when he was at Dinner; upon the hearing whereof, His ever blessed Majesty
was pleased to say; Harry, if this be true, I am confident I know who turned
her; which I desiring to know who it might be, His Majesty answered, Padre
Rohose: This Padre Rohose, said His Majesty, when I came to Spain, was
Confessor to the Infanta; and in the absence of the Kings Confessor, was also
Confessor to the King; He was one (said His blessed Majesty) who gave very
diligent attendance upon me when I came first to Spain, and for two or three
Months space never failed to wait upon me when I was at Dinner; insomuch as
some acquaintance being grown between us, he one day moved me that a
Disputation might be had in public between my Chaplains and some of the King
of Spains Priests in point of Religion; affirming that he knew it would be very
pleasing to the Infanta; I answered, no, saying, I came not hither to turn, nor
to be turned in my Religion by any public Argumentations; nor have I any such
Commission from the King my Father; but rather a Command to the contrary; but
if you, Padre Rohose, have any thing to object against the Religion which I
profess, I will give you the hearing in private: Padre Rohose being glad that
he had got thus much, began to object somewhat against the Religion professed
in my Fathers Dominions; at the beginning whereof, said the Prince, laying his
hand upon the others Arm, No, Padre Rohose, this is not the way, this is to
Dispute de non concessis; But let me give you an account of my Faith, and of
the Tenants of my Religion first, and then if you have any thing to object,
speak your mind freely: Padre Rohose being herewith content, (as surely he had
good reason) the Prince began and made him a full and true relation of the
Tenants of his Religion; which when he had done, Rohose replied, Sir, do you
believe all this? Yes, said the Prince; And will your Highness give me leave,
said Padre Rohose, to affirm this to others from your mouth? Yes, (said the
Prince) do it boldly, for this is the Religion I was born in, and bred up in;
the Religion which is professed in my Fathers three Kingdoms, and wherein, by
the Grace of God, I am resolved to live and dye: Why then (said Padre Rohose)
for ought I know, Sir, you may be saved as well as I. My blessed King having
told me this, I asked His Majesty whether Rohose did not object any thing
against what His Majesty had said; Not at the present, replied His Majesty; but
some few days after he took me aside, and began to allege some trivial things
against what he had heard me say; to which (said the King) I gave him such an
Answer, as I heard no further news of Padre Rohose for a good while; whereat
marvelling not a little, I wonder (said the Prince, one day, in public) why
Padre Rohose has not visited me of late; What is become of him? To which he
was answered by a whisper in the ear, That the Priest Rohose was forbidden
coming any more to the Prince his Court, left instead of his converting the
Prince, the Prince should convert him.

I could not omit mentioning this remarkable Passage here, since (as I said
before) I had so pat an occasion to do it; and since it was to my self that His
blessed Majesty was pleased to make this Relation upon the aforesaid occasion;
And upon the Faith of a Christian, and Word of a Gentleman, this, is the full
sense, and as near as I can remember, the very words His ever blessed Majesty
was pleased to do me the honor as to tell me; which though they wrought
nothing upon me, more then what I did formerly know, and did confidently
believe; if they be not able to stop the mouths of those slanderous companions,
and make them bite out those Tongues wherewith they have endeavored to throw
dirt upon the Memory of His Sacred Majesty; yet at least, his constant
perseverance in the profession and witnessing his Faith at his unpresidented
death, me thinks should make them do it.

And now to pursue my Author again;

These practices made the French grow cooler (as I have said) in the affairs
touching the Valtoline; for doubting lest by this Marriage a straight League
might be concluded between the Crowns of Spain and England; the Kingdom of
France, being placed between them, grew apprehensive of it: And the intestine
wars continuing in France against the Heretics, who were much favored by the
King and Kingdom of England; it behoved the Fench to be very circumspect in
falling foul with the Crown of Spain, when it should be so closely annexed to
the English, as it was likely to be by that Marriage: But new accidents did
this mean while happen, which did much better the French affairs: The Pope, who
was grown very inward with the Spaniards, died about the end of June, in the
year 1623. who was succeeded by Maffeo, Cardinal Barbarino, a Florentine by
Nation, who caused himself to be called Urbane; ^one of a most pleasing wit, as
well for his great Erudition in the more weighty Sciences; as in humane
Learning: He was also well versed in the affairs of the world, and in State
affairs; for having been accustomed to the most important employments of the
Court of Rome, he had also been Nuntio, both ordinary and extraordinary, with
the King of France, and whilst he was in that employment, was made Cardinal by
Pope Paul the fifth; wherefore he was thought to be inclined to the French, and
that he could not wish well to Spain; and yet he did so win upon the Spanish
Faction by his wisdom, dexterity, wit, and can^id com^oitment, as the Votes of
the Spanish Cardinals, and particularly Borgia's Vote, who was the head of
them, weat to the making him Pope: He was created according to the new form
prescribed by his Predecessors; who to the end that the Cardinals might give
their Votes with the more freedom, did by a particular Bull ordain so secret a
way for the giving of Suffrages, as it could not be discovered by any; which
form, though as new and not formerly used, it kept the Conclave a little
longer; yet it being then the Dog Days, and the Cardinals being much
incommodated by their being kept so close, many of them fell sick, and some
died; wherefore, forced by fear and danger, they joined in the election of Pope
Urbane, who was endowed with all those parts and ornaments required in a great
Prince, and in a powerful Pope. Having taken the Popedom upon him, great signs
of constant resolution appeared in him, of a good affection to Christendom,
and that he was not apt to siding: For to the great neutrality which he seemed
to profess in public affairs, and in such as appertained to the Papal dignity,
he added great severity in his private affairs, by refusing great offers which
were immediately made him by the French Agents for the aggrandizing of his
House; but on the other side, being very gracious to the Cardinals of Savoy,
and to the French and Venetian Cardinals, with whom he held close
consultations, he caused much distrust in the Spanish Cardinals and Agents, who
therefore quickly showed little satisfaction in his choice, and were displeased
with themselves for the favor they had done him: And truly the success of
affairs under his Popedom, showed they did not much err in their judgment, nor
in the diffidence which they conceived of him; for Pope Urbane, whether moved
thereunto by his own Genius and inclination to the French, or out of a desire
to restore the Pontifical dignity to its former vigor, and render it less
exposed to the dependancy of another will, or that he nourished more generous
and more exalted thoughts of the Liberty of Italy; he soon discovered himself
no great favourer of the Spaniards, and very much a friend to those, who being
desirous of the like liberty of Italy, strove to oppose the Spanish greatness:
This jealousy was augmented by the knowledge of an important accident which
happned in Avignon, in the Month of October this very year.

The Kings of France, England, and Denmark, the Venetians, Duke of Savoy, and
Hollanders; many of the German Princes; and, as some will have it, Bethlem
Gaber, the Transilvanian Prince, sent their Ambassadors very secretly to that
City; where coming unknown, and in the habit of Merchants, they made a League
between them against the Emperor and the King of Spain, for the liberty of
Italy, for the restitution of the Valtoline and of the Palatinate; The
principal Articles whereof were; That the Hollanders, to boot with the war
which they made in their own Country against the Spaniards, should send Fleets
into America, and possess themselves of Brazil: That the King of England should
assist the Hollanaers with a certain number of men in their Domestic wars, and
should send a powerful Fleet to Spain, to assault those Rivers, and to
intercept the Navy which uses to come thither from America: That the King of
Denmark, together with the Protestant Princes of Germany, should raise a
powerful Army, and wage war with the Emperor in Flanders for the Restitution
of the Palatinate: And that Bethlem Gaber should molest the Emperors Dominions
toward Hungary; to the end that being assaulted on two sides, he might be the
less able to make resistance: That the King of France should hinder the
commerc^ between Spain and Italy with a powerful Fleet to be kept at Marselles;
and should pass into Piedmout with an Army of 25000 Foot, and 4000 Horse; and
that joining with the Duke of Savoy, who was to raise another Army of 12000
Foot, and 2000 Horse, he should assault the State of Millain; for the
maintaining of which Army the Venetians should disburse 100000 Ducats a Month
to the Duke of Savoy: And that at the same time the King of France should fall
into the Valtoline with another Army out of the Grisons Country; and when he
should have possessed himself of it, he should fall down from thence into the
State of Millain; and joining with the Venetians, who for those enterprises
were to join a certain number of men to the French Army, he should assault the
same State of Millain with the Common forces; and that they should assault the
affairs of the Kingdom of Naples with a Fleet of Ships toward the Adriatic
Sea.

This League being made two months after the Pope; Election, in a City
belonging to the Church, made the Spaniards suspect that it never would have
been appointed without tacit intelligence held between the Pope and the
French, who were thought the authors of it: because besides the restitution of
the Valtoline, and the Palatinate, the restoring of the Apostolic See to all
that did anciently belong unto her was agreed upon; wherein it seemed the
Kingdom of Naples might be understood: and place was also left in the same
League, for the Pope, and great Duke of Tuscany, who was also promised to have
all the Havens of Tuscany restored unto him: but the French openly denying any
such Conspiracy, and no wise man being to believe, that a Pope hardly wa^m in
his Chair should enter into so weighty Machinations, whereby the world was to
be turned up-side down, and the Catholic Religon to be disturbed; the
Spaniards, though this Union might seem to be true, by many successes which
insued, not having any certain proof which might clear these jealousies,
thought it a ^afer way to work upon the new Pope by dissimulation, then to
alienate him further from them by complaints, and vain resentments; that which
did most trouble the Pope, was, how to establish the Dukedom of Urbine in the
Apostolic See, which was, as it were, devolved thereunto by the sudden death
of the Prince, only Son to the old Duke, who a little before the Popes Election
was found dead in his Bed, having been very well the night before when he went
into it: for he having no over issue but a very young Daughter, and the Duke
being so very old, as he was not likely to live long, much less to have any
more Children; that Dukedom, when he should be dead, was to fall to the
Apostolic See, whereof it was an ancient Fee (...); and as this so great
addition of State to the Church was odious to the confining Princes, the
Venetians, and the great Duke, so neither did the Spaniards approve of it:
wherefore they began to talk how they might continue that young infant in the
Principality (whereof by the ^enure of investing she was absolutely incapable)
by marrying her to a confiding Prince, and so, with satisfaction to all, keep
that State from being united to the Church: the manifest claim of the Church
did oppose these designs, against which nothing could be attempted without open
violence, and without troubling the whole World. Neither did the P^ety and
Religion of the old Duke permit, that (to the prejudice of his soul and
conscience,) he should leave his people whom he loved very well, involved,
after his life, in fore wars: the difficulty of managing the business was
likewise a rub, and the great contestation which would be found in effecting
it; there not being any Prince to be found for this Marriage, with whom the
other Princes would be content; so great an addition to the great Duke of
Tuscany, Cousin german to the Infants Mother, who was Daughter to Cosmo the
Second, Father to Ferdinando the Second, now great Duke of Tuscony, on whom
men's eyes were more fixed, for this business, then on any other, was equally
suspicious to the Spaniards and Venetians, and to the other Princes of Italy:
It made more for the interest of them all, to leave it in the Church, the
common Mother, and Commonwealth; the Empire whereof is more moderate, by reason
of the Sacerdotal profession, of the often change of Popes, and necessary
vicissitude of Prelates which govern her: and wherein all Princes had more
reason to confide, as being more interessed therein: whereas on the contrary,
by joining that State to Tuscany, too great and powerful a Pincipality would be
constituted in the very heart of Italy: which extending from the one Sea to the
other, and dividing whole Italy, it would have born too great a sway in all
general affairs; and dividing wholly the Kingdom of Naples from the State of
Millain, it might have been too prejudicial to the interests of the Crown of
Spain, in those troublesome times, which afterward happened. To this, moreover,
was added the tender years of the great Duke, who was under the Government of
his Mother and Grandmother, that Archduchess of Austria, Sister to the present
Emperor, and Daughter to the la^e Duke of Lorrein, and therefore little able
to enter upon new undertakings, so much controverted, and of so high
importance: to fix their thoughts upon any of the Popes Nephews, as was then
spoken of, would have been indeed more acceptable to all, for it would have
hindered the connection of States; a thing so prejudicial to that equality by
which Italy is at the present maintained; nor would the Span^ards have been
against it, to shun so great an addition to the greatness of the Church, and to
win the Popes favor: but to boot that the Pope himself was not for it, it was
a scandalous example, and subject to be revoked by the ensuing Popes, by the
precise orders and institutions of the Church, confirmed by the reiterated
Oaths of the Cardinals and Popes, by which the new Feofments of States which
are devolved to the Apostolic See are forbidden; and the Infants age did most
of all oppose it, who was incapable of contracting Marriage: so as by reason of
the continual variation of worldly affairs, no certain resolution could be
taken in a business of such importance, whereby all Princes might be satisfied;
and yet the Spanish Agents did abbet these endeavors: but of all others Don
Antonio di Tolledo, Duke of Alva, and Viceroy of Naples, who was allied to the
great Duke, was most zealous in the business for the great Duke; and the old
Duke of Urbine, being aware that Monsieur Santorio, made by the new Pope Bishop
of Urbine, and who was speedily sent to his Episcopal residence, began to be
busy, and to interpose his Authority in some Affairs which appertained more to
the State then to his Episcopal care, was not only much displeased with
Santorio, but interpreting it, as if the Pope, anticipating the time of the
lapse, had sent him as a Superintendent over the Affairs of the State, thought
himself much injured: wherefore being angered, he sent the Child to the Court of
Florence, and reinforced Tossone and the other principal places, with
Garrisons, and seemed desirous to Marry his Grandchild to the great Duke. The
Pope was certainly much troubled at these passages, being wholly bent to
reunite this State to the Apostolic See; insomuch as waxing jealous he sent
many men to the Confines of Tuscany and Urbine: but they produced contrary
effects to what the Spaniards pretended; for they did the more unite the Pope
to the King of France, who having no Territories in Italy would always be a
great friend to the Churches pretenses and greatness; which increasing, without
any prejudice to his Crown, was prejudicial to the Grandezza of Spain, which
was envied by France; and therefore the Pope, that he might the better fortify
himself against the Spanish Machinations, and that he might be revenged of them
who endeavored to anger him, he showed himself very resolute in the affairs of
the Valtoline; that when he had rid his hands thereof, he might with more
diligence attend the affairs of Urbine; and because the Spaniards, when they
deposited the Forts of the Valtoline, obliged themselves (to the end that the
Church might be put to no prejudice nor expense) to pay such stipends as should
be necessary for the Soldiers, that they might defend them; and the Spanish
Agents having failed in their payments; the Pope, who was in teh mean while to
take order for pay, said with much fre^dom, that he would not forgo what was
his own, for what (according to the Grammarians) was Appellative, nor would he
squander away the moneys of the Apostolic Chamber, in defense of the
Valtoline, which did appertain little or nothing to the Church; but spare them
for the eminent danger of the State of Urbine: which speeches being accompanied
with some other favorable Demonstrations to the French, did trouble the
Spaniards, and made them very circumspect in the business of Urbino, lest the
Pope, to make a greater conjunction with the King of France, might probably
precipitate the business of the Valtoline; and yet being naturally very
considerate, he had two Consultations about the business of the Valtoline, of
the most conspicuous Theologists of the Court, and most exemplary for holiness
of life; who having discus'd the business were of opinion that the Pope ought
not to permit Catholics to return under the yoke of Heretics, out of the
evident danger of their souls, which belonging to the Flock of our Savior
Christ; it became him, according to the Gospel, to defend them like a good
Shepherd, from the Wolves, though with the hazard of his own life. Thus did the
Affairs of the Valtoline alter, out of several respects, in that Court, just
like the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and the Pope not being resolved what to
do in it, that he might hold them both in hand temporized, and delai'd his
resolution: but the French, who whilst Gregory lived were quiet, when they had
a Pope who was their friend, began to rouse up, and to pretend that the
Valtoline, the Forts being demolished, was to return under the Grisons command;
nor did they admit of any exception, unless that for what concerned the safety
of the Catholic Religion, the Pope should be the determiner: this they said
was dictated by the first Capitulations at Madrid; and thus Reason, and the
King of France his Obligation to Protect the Grifons, did require: they
persisted the more in these pretentions, for that they saw their affairs were
much altered; for in the Spanish Court, instead of alliance, enmity with the
English was increased: the Spanish Army in Flanders, and all the Forces of
those States, were busied before Breda, a very strong Town of the Hollanders,
both for Situation, Fortification, and for its being triple fenced by water;
the taking of it was held impossible, the Siege very long, and of uncertain
success, the Hollanders having raised a strong Army to relieve it. The Affairs
of that Court had had but bad success in the Indies, and in America; for Ormuz,
a very strong Town, situated in the mouth of Persia, a principal place for
Merchandise, and of great annual revenue, and of greater concernment for the
command of the East Indies, was taken by those Barbarians, they being assisted
by English shipping: the Baja de todes santos, or All Saints Bay, the chiefest
staple Town of Brasile, being (perhaps in pursuance of the League of Avignon)
assaulted by a Holland Fleet, was taken, and sacked; which having had booty
th^re to the value of above two Millions of Ducates, fortified themselves
there, intending further progress: these were two mighty blows to the Crown of
Spain, which did oblige that King to send a powerful Army, as he did, to
recover them; and to boot that the event of these Affairs was uncertain, they
required great store of shipping, multitudes of men and money: nor were the
wars of Germany yet wholly at an end; for many Rebels of the Empire, and whose
Forces seemed rather to increase then to lessen, did molest it in several
places; for the King of Denmark, in conformity to the League at Avignon, came
into the Field very strong, and had made himself head of the Protestant
Princes, who took up Arms against the Emperor, to restore the Palatine to his
Patrimonial State, and who made great progress in the lower Germany. On the
contrary, the Affairs of France, which till now had been full of troubles and
civil wars, seemed to be brought into a safe Harbor, and by several accidents
to be in a better condition: the King of England, having broken the match with
Spain, had concluded a Marriage between his Son, the Prince of Wales, and a
Sister to the King of France, who was yet unmarried; and joining in League with
him, promised great things against the interest of Spain, both by Sea and Land,
answerable to the League of Avignon; and the tumults of France were either
totally composed, or it was in the Kings power to end them: which accidents
concurring at the same time were able to incite any Prince to novelties, though
never so much an enemy thereunto, much more the King of France, and French
Nation, who were so far interessed and engaged in the business of the
Valtoline; and therefore though after many Consultations had in Rome, between
the Ambassadors of Spain and France, of themselves, and afterward with the
Pope, the Pope put forth at last some Articles touching the security in point
of Religion amongst those of the Valtoline; whereunto the Ambassador did
agree, and made others between themselves in their Kings name, whereby the
Valtoline, when the Forts should be demolished, was to return to be under the
Grisons; but with some Articles, Conditions; and upon pain of Escheat, in case
of swarving from the agreement, and particularly with leave for the King of
Spain to pass men through it; yet the King of France, accepting only those that
were propounded by the Pope, did absolutely refuse those that were agreed upon
by the Ambassador; and being highly offended with the Commandator Sillery, who
was his Ambassador, he sent Monsieur di Bittune to succeed him, and sent for
Sillery back to France; and did not only deprive him of his favor, but removed
his Brother, who was Lord Chancellor, and the Chancellors Son, who was
Secretary of State, together with other of their dependants, from their
employments, being apprehensive (as was said) that they held some secret
intelligence with the Court of Spain; and being incensed against the King of
Spain, desired the Pope that he would either cause the Forts to be demolished,
or else restore them to the King of Spain; to the end that he might make way to
their demolishment, without offense to the Apostolic See: but the Articles of
depositure withstood the demolishing, and the restitution was gainsaid, for
fear of raising new wars between the two Kings: so as, look with how much more
circumspection it became the Pope to proceed in his resolves, so much more did
the fervency of the French increase; who not brooking any delay, and seeing
things in a way for war, furthered the execution of the League, and the
preparations for all things requisite for what was resolved on. But the
Marriage (which was just at this time in hand) between Prince Phileberto of
Savoy, and Princess Maria, Daughter to Francis late Duke of Mantua, did either
totally hinder, or at least retard for the present the effects of so great a
combination: by which Treaty the Duke of Savoy (who if he were not the head,
was a principal member of this League,) was diverted from the common Counsels.
The Spaniards had formerly endeavored by several ways to stave him off from
the other Confederates, showing plainly how much it would make for his
advantage to withdraw the Valtoline from subjection to the Grisons, and make it
dependant upon their King; for his Territories having no need of access by that
way, he would be the only man on whom the Princes of Italy would fix their
eyes, and whose friendship they would mainly endeavor, by reason of the need
they should have thereof; and the two Crowns would be enforced to esteem him no
less then they, since he would be the only man, who, when all other passages
should be shut up, might keep out the French, and all other Foreigners, from
coming into Italy, or who might bring them in. But hatred against the
Spaniards, and a desire to oppose their ends, prevailing more with him, and
conceiving great hopes from the League, he still continued therein: some
Propositions being afterward made concerning this aforesaid Marriage, of some
resignation to be made by the Duke of Mantua, of Montferrat; at least after the
death of the said Duke Ferdinand, and of his Brother Prince Vincenso, both
which for several respects had small hopes of succession, the Duke of Savoy
being exceedingly desirous of new pretentions to that State, easily fore went
any other business; and the Spaniards, who out of many respects were interessed
in these Negotiations, were not displeased that this might be effected, fearing
lest the line of these two Princes failing, the Duke of Nivers, who was to
succeed in those States, should draw the French into Italy; choosing, for the
lesser evil, that since Montferrat was to fall to the house of Savoy, it might
be given to the second Son, in whom they did much confide; and not to the
eldest, who being to succeed in his Fathers Dominions, his Principality would
be too great: and the Duke not being able to forgo so great an occasion of
increasing his Dominions, for the vain and uncertain hopes of the League, which
did not much belong to him, was so much the more necessitated to forgo the
League, and the Friendship of the French; for this Marriage would make the
French his enemies, if the succession of Montferrat should devolve upon the
Duke of Nivers, who that they might have a Prince in Italy, totally dependant
upon their King, would protect and maintain his pretenses: nor could the Duke
of Savoy keep possession of that State from the French, without the Spaniards
assistance. The Spania^ds therefore being desirous to win him over, and to
interest him in their own Affairs, were then very hot in pursuing that
Marriage: knowing very well that if the Duke should be separated from the
League, the plots of the Confederates would vanish, who being, as it were, same
for what concerned Italy, without him they could not, at least not without
difficulty, do any thing they had agreed upon: the design had taken handsomely,
but a petty accident which happened in the River of Genoa withheld the effecting
of it, and the Prince his ensuing death did totally overthrow it: where Liguria
Confines upon Piedmont, stands the little Marquisate Zuccarello, whereof
mention has been formerly made: it was anciently granted in Fee by the
Emperor to those of the house of Caretta; but by alteration of times, and
accidents, being gotten by the Genoeses, and afterward invested in those of
Caretta, it was held and possessed for the space of 200 years by them, as
Feudatories to the Commonwealth, upon the usual recognition of homage: the same
accidents and revolutions of Italy had lately transported it from the
Commonwealth to the Emperors, not without the Commonwealths complaint, which
yielding to the times that were but bad for her, was not well pleased to be
after so many years possession deprived of that Fee, which lay so near, and so
conveniently, to their own State: but the Emperors Authority rising up again
in Italy, after some ages, the Genoeses were forced to be content, and to
expect a better occasion of repossessing it; and therefore in the year 1576,
they purchased an Annual R^nt out of the said Fee, from Scipio del Caretto, the
Marquess and possessor thereof; and this Annual Rent was approved of by the
Emperor, and ratified by a solemn Decree. Not long after the Marquess being
impleaded by the Emperor, for a certain manslaughter, he sold that Marquisate
to the Duke of Savoy, to the prejudice of the Cesar^an Exchequer, and of the
Covenant of Prelation, so to avoid confiscation; and the Emperor proceeding to
Sentence of Death against the Marquess, and to confiscation of the Fee, took it
from the Duke (^o whom it was already assigned over by the Marquess) and held
it for himself, and for the Imperial Chamber: the Duke being deprived of
possession, labored hard in the Court at Germany, sometimes in his own name,
sometimes in the name of the Marquess, and of his Son, to have the lapse and
confiscation revoked; but in vain, because of the opposition of the Cesarian
Exchequer, and of the Commonwealth, which by reason of her ancient pretenses,
and much more by reason of her more modern ones, which she had got therein, was
by the Emperor admitted to give a Vote in that Judgment. In fine, the claim
of the Caretti being excluded, the Emperor, in the year 1624, set it to
public sale by the C^yer, for whosoever would give most; and diverse offering
moneys for it, it was adjudged to the Commonwealth, which offered most; whereat
the Duke thought himself much injured, as supposing that no Chap-men would be
found for it, so as the Fee remaining still unsold, he might obtain it the more
easily from the Imperial Chamber: he thought that the Commonwealth, by buying
it, had spoiled all his designs, and utterly defeated all his hopes of ever
coming by it. He therefore writ to the Commonwealth, complaining of what had
been done, and exhorting her to desist, for otherwise he would (...) it (...):
the Commonwealth had just occasion long before to complain upon this account of
the Duke, since the question being of a Fee situated in Liguria; wherein the
Duke had never either action or pretention, all reason would that, in point of
good neighborhood, he should have forborne it: but that the same neighborhood
allowed the Commonwealth to purchase it, as that which ^ecame her better to do
then any other, by reason of her confining thereupon, out of reason of State,
for her ancient pretenses thereunto, and for the new Article of Prelation: but
being desirous of the public peace, and of keeping good correspondency with
her neighbors, she chose to prosecute her pretentions by a civil way in the
Emperors Court; wherein having after much labor, and expense, obtained her
end; (which she had done by no other way then by purchasing that at a high rate
which she had much reason to pretend unto as her own,) she thought her self the
much more injured person, seeing the Dukes appeals accompanied by such open
threats: and that though she was resolved to keep what she had purchased, so as
she might show her resentment in equal terms, yet thinking moderation did
better become her dignity and gravity, she was more temperate in her answer;
whereby endeavoring to possess the Duke fully of her justifiable actions, she
was resolved to make good what she had done, notwithstanding all his threats.

This constancy and freedom of the answer, the less it was expected, the more
did it sting the Duke to the very soul, who was haughty of himself, but much
more by reason of the present Occurrences, whereby thinking himself to be in
high esteem with the greatest Potentates of Christendom, which strove who
should most favor him, and draw him over to them, he thought himself
formidable to the lesser: he could not thereforefore well endure that a
Commonwealth of Gownmen should so little value his threats; and so much the
less, for that the Commonwealth added Military provisions to her answers,
showing her self ready to make resistance, in case the Duke should second his
words with deeds: they therefore gave present order for new levles of men, for
taking Foot into pay, for sending for Captains and Commanders to serve them;
and for her better justification, she together with the Dukes complaints,
published the merits of the Cause, and the small justice he had to complain;
the business being hereby brought upon the Stage, the Duke was the more bound
to persist in his pretenses, and howsoever to maintain them, if not for the
interest which the having or not having the Fee of Zuccarello would be unto
him, at least in respect of his reputation, wherein he thought he should suffer
very much, if the world should have reason to attribute his desisting therein
to the Commonwealths threats, and preparations: so as resolving to have the
better of the business, he being full of inexhaustible invention, began to
bethink himself how he might find out some plot, whereby his honor might not
precipitate from that height which it was in: he began to invite, and to incite
the Transalpine Nations against the City and State of Genoa, by giving out what
immense riches, and vast prey, they might get from the wealthy Genoeses: from
these fleight accidents, as from a little spark, great and dangerous flames for
Italy arose, which had almost caused an universal combustion; for the greatest
Monarchs of Christendom had a hand in the kindling, and in the quenching
thereof: and because for the knowledge of this, and of several weighty
successes which did from thence result, it will be necessary to know the
condition and state of the Commonwealth of Genoa, which was such as made many
Christian Princes to appear upon this occasion, I will for the present leave
the pursuit of this Narration, and will unfold somewhat briefly of the
Commonwealth of Genoa; which though it may seem superfluous to the present Age,
as being sufficiently known, will be both acceptable, and necessary, for the
knowledge of Posterity.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK VIII.
The Contents.
IN this Eighth Book you have the Description of the Commonwealth of Genoa; her
Interest and good Correspondency with the Crown of Spain. The Diet held at
Sula, wherein two attempts are resolved upon: the one against the Valtoline,
the other against Genoa; for the execution whereof many preparations are made
both in France and in Italy. The French fall down into the Valtoline, under the
conduct of the Marquess of Coure; and driving the Churches Forces from the
Forts which were deposited in the Popes hands, they make themselves masters
thereof: they likewise fall down into Piedmont, under de Digueres Grand
Constable, and joining with the Duke of Savoy, and with his Forces, go to the
Enterprise of Genoa; and proceed far in that State; the Pope sends his Nephew
Legate into France. The Genoeses are reduced into a very dangerous condition by
hostile Arms.

THe Commonwealth of Genoa, which being governed by her own peculiar Laws and
Magistrates, injoys full and fortunate Liberty, possesses the Kingdom of
Corsica, together with all that Tract, which ex^ending from Germany to the
Haven of Monaco, is now commonly called the River of Genoa, and was anciently
called Liguria; and extending her Confines beyond the Appenine, and the River
Magra commands many Castles in Lombardy, and many in Tuscany, together with
City of Serezzana: the City being great of her self, and capable of a numerous
people, is one of the chiefest Cities of Italy; and for the opportunity of her
situation, for her great Traffic, for the immense riches of her Citizens, is
deservedly accounted a rich and noble Mart, the staple, and the noblest
Excheque^, or Treasury, of all Europe; she was in former Ages very famous for
Sea-enterprises, by reason of the number of her powerful Fleets, and by reason
of the famous Victories which she has long ago had over the Sa^asens, and
since over the Venetians, Pisans, and Catalonians: a people who were also very
powerful at Sea, who contending long with her for superiority at Sea were some
of them suppressed, some totally defeated; and certainly she would have gotten
the absolute Empire over the Mediterranean; had not her endeavors and Military
Valor, exe^cised with such glory and advancement of reputation against her
enemies, been turned, (through the ambition and blind unbridled desire of
precedence in her own Citizens) to their own prejudice, and to the prejudice of
their Country; for being divided into parties and factions, and cruelly rent by
intestine contention and strife, she was forced to yield the Reins of
Government, sometimes to the most powerful Citizen, sometimes to some Foreign
Potentate; but the prosperous and unfortunate adventures of the ancient
Commonwealth are already diversely written both in her own Annals, and in those
of other Nations; and they being far from our purpose, I have not room to write
them here: that which is sufficient to know concerning the main business, which
we are now about to write, is, that since the Genoeses drove out the French,
whereby they regained their ancient Liberty, and reduced their Commonwealth to
the present form of Government, (which was in the eight and twentieth year of
the Age next before this that we now are in) they have always kept strict and
sincere union with the Crown of Spain; insomuch as not any Italian Potentate
has showed themselves more a Friend to the Spaniards then they: nor perhaps
was there ever known a conjunction between Princes of so unequal power and
greatness, which has been preserved for the space of a hundred years, with
mo^e sincere faith, and more reciprocal advantage: the Havens, Seas, Passages,
and all other conveniences of the S^ate of Genoa, were always open to receive
the Fleets, and to give passage or any other accommodation to those of that
Crown: whereas they were always shut up to any who might bring prejudice to the
Grandezza, Dignity and Security of the Spanish Dominions. The King of Spain is
permitted to keep a Squadron of Galleys in the Haven at Genoa, for any sudden
or urgent occasion that may arise: which makes very much for the good of the
affairs of that Crown, by reason of the opportune situation of Genoa, which
being seated between the Kingdoms of Spain, and of those o^ Naples and Sicily,
and being also the Staple to the State of Millain, is very convenient for the
uniting and preservation of States, and Provinces divided so far one from
another. On the other side, the same friendship and good correspondency is a
great security and help for the Sta^e of Genoa, for the singular care which
those Kings are forced to have of her preservation, not only by the tie of
extraordinary Friendship, but out of private Interest, so as the Commonwealth
may with good reason suppose all the Forces and Fleets of that Crown to be
always ready to defend her, against whosoever shall plot any thing to the
prejudice of her, or her Liberty: he gave the beginning to this so near
conjunction, who being the first author of the Commonwealths Liberty, deserves
to be by her styled the Father and Free* of his Country, and fellow Citizens.
Prince Andrea Doria, the best Captain in Sea affair of any in his time, and
reputed the best for Maritime Forces, and experience for Military Valor and
happy success: wherein the compassion of his afflicted Countries misery
prevailing more with him, then the great offers, and afterward the anger of
the King of France, forsaking not without great danger to his own Fortune, the
French offers, and stipends, he went over to serve the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, King of Spain; and hoping much in this new conjunction, he betook
himself with incredible courage and generosity to so glorious an action:
wherein being very fortunate, he proved not only an unexpected safety to his
Country, which driving out the French, he restored to happy and miraculous
liberty, but gave a great turn to all the affairs of Italy; for the fortune of
the French, which had then the upper hand, and was almost victorious, began
then to decline; and that of the Emperor which was then at an ebb, began to be
raised up; for the French men's losing the State of Genoa, was immediately
followed by their loss of the Kingdom of Naples, whereof they were almost fully
possessed; and being by Dorias resolution robbed of all their best and greatest
Maritime Forces, and by the revolution of the affairs of Genoa deprived of the
opportunity of being succored by Sea, they fell upon sad incounters; and not
being able to hold out longer, were at last forced to abandon the enterprise to
the Imperialists; who getting to within the walls of Naples, the French did not
only badly defend the free possession of that Kingdom, but lost all hopes of
ever regaining it. The King of France his enterpriprises in Lombardy and in
Piedmont, had no better success both then and afterward: Where the convenience
of the State of Genoa being afforded to the Emperor, and denied to the French,
was of great moment for the Emperors victory, and for the ruin of the French
forces; insomuch as the French being utterly ruined, and the Emperor superior
to all, and able to give the Law, he built up that grandezza of Fortune to
himself, and posterity, which he enjoyed whilst he live^, and which his
descendents, the Kings of Spain, do at the present enjoy.

Doria's name grew very glorious every where for such egregious actions; and
his Authority was very great in the Commonwealth of Genoa for her re-gained
Liberty; and his Power was no less great with the Emperor, who esteeming it
not only a great happiness to have so famous a Commander under his pay, and of
such valor and experience in Naval Affairs, but thinking him also a fit
Instrument to make the City and State of Genoa side with him (a thing of great
impor^ance to his affairs) he studied still to keep him his Friend, by
conferring great Rewards upon him, and unusual Honors: He therefore made him
Lord High Admiral at Sea, and seldom dissented from his advice (which he valued
very much) in Land Enterprises. And as Doria's power with the Emperor rendered
the liberty of the Genoe^es free from being disturbed by so great an Authority,
as some of the free Cities of Italy were; so his authority with his
Fellow-Citizens was sufficient to keep the Genoeses constant in their devotion
to the Emperor; which was the more easily effected, for that the affairs of
Italy being divided into two Factions, the one adhering to the French, the
other to the Emperor, the prevalency of the latter was very opportune and
necessary to the Commonwealth, to preserve her from the evident danger of being
the more oppressed by the former, the French being the more incensed against the
Genoeses for the great prejudice they had received by their revolution. Doria
outlived the Emperor some few years, and continuing in the same Employments
and Honors under Philip the Second, King of Spain, and Son to the Emperor, he
was succeeded by John Andrea Doria, Heir not only to his Principality, States,
and Maritime Fortune, but also to his Heroic Virtue and singular Piety toward
his Country; who after having served the Crown of Spain in places of great
Employment, and given good proof of his Valor and Counsel upon all occasions,
and having kept great sway with his Fellow-Citizens, was of no less authority
in the Court of Spain; in so much as he was preferred by Philip the Second in
command at Sea before many Competitors and famous Captains of Illustrious
Families, and discharged the Office of Lord High-Admiral with splendor and
magnificence answerable to the authority: And as he was a great help, and very
serviceable to the keeping of the same correspondency between the Crown of
Spain and the Commonwealth; so was he a no little supporter of his Countries
Liberty in the jealous and troublesome times which did sometimes happen; and as
the former was honored by the public Decree of the Commonwealth with the
title of Father and Freer of his Country, so was he by the like Decree
honored with the title of Conservator of the Liberty thereof. After his death
(for the chief Command at Sea was reserved for the Princes of the Blood Royal)
his third Son Don Carlo Doria succeeded in the Government of those Galleys
which the King of Spain keeps in Genoa (for his eldest son being by reason of
his private indispositions unfit for Navigation; as also his second son
Giannettino by reason of his Priesthood, he being at the present a Cardinal,
Archbishop of Palermo, and Viceroy of Sicily.) Which Don Carlo, as also
Cardinal Giannettino, treading in their Forefathers steps, proved very
advantageous in the service of that Crown to their Country, and to themselves.
At the same time almost that the supreme Command at Sea ceased in the Dorian
Family, new and extraordinary worth arose in the Family of the Spinolas, a
House of great Alliance and Wealth in the Commonwealth, whose worths fomented
the same good correspondency. Marquess Ambrosio Spinola, and his Brother
Frederick, both of them being young men and very rich, emulating as well the
glory and splendor as the virtue and worth of the Dorii, and not knowing any
more Illustrious Theater then the Wars made by the Kings of Spain in the
Low Countries against the Hollanders, and the United Provinces, for the
maintaining of Religion, and Regal Authority, they both of them offered to
enter upon that warfare upon their own expense; the youngest to serve with a
certain number of Galleys in the Flemish Ocean, and the eldest in Land-service
with a great number of men. But Frederick being slain in a Naval Battle, almost
in the beginning of the War, could not arrive at that height of Glory which the
Marquess his Brother did in a few years; who being a great Commander of Armies
almost before he was a Soldier, and far out-doing the expectation of men most
exercised in Military Affairs, became in a short time the best Commander of
this present age; and having the superintendency and absolute management of
those Wars given him by the King of Spain, he did not only stop but suppress
the Fortune of the Enemy, which like an impetuous Torrent was like to drown the
Kings Authority, and the Catholic Religion in those parts: Moreover he carried
the Spanish Forces into Germany, where he did singular good service, took many
entire Provinces, and was (as has been elsewhere sa^d) a great help to the
affairs of Religion, and of the then tottering Empire: His counsel in civil
matters was answerable to his Military Valor; for which being admired and
reverenced by all Europe, he bare also a great sway in the important
resolutions of the Court of Spain. Thus the Fleets at Sea, Armies at Land, the
most considerable Employments of that Crown, having for the most part past
through the hands of the Genoeses for almost a whole Age, and these drawing
over other of their Fellow Subjects to the Kings service, and using them in
many useful and honorable Employments appertaining to their Governments, it
necessarily followed, that so much confidence being put by the King in the
chiefest Subjects of the Commonwealth, and such Honors and Employments
conferred upon others united the whole Commonwealth of Genoa for ever firm to
that Crown: Moreover, the Squadron of the Kings Galleys which was kept in Genoa
were generally commanded by Genoese Captains, and served with Officers and
Mariners of the same Nation, who did not only maintain their houses and
families by the Kings pay, and by the great emoluments which they got by
navigation, but did augment their own fortunes.

This Squadron of Galleys were therefore a great good to the King, and to the
Commonwealth; to the King, for that to boot with the convenience of that Haven,
which was so fitting for the King of Spain, and for his Dominions in Italy, it
increased the number of his adherents in Genoa; for the Commonwealth, for
besides the entertaining and employment of so many of her Captains and
Citizens, and to boot with the advantage of Traffic and Treasure, it was of
great use to train up her people in maritime skill, which Art could not well
have been preserved amongst them, but upon this occasion; and those Galleys
being commanded and managed by the Genoeses, the Commonwealth had convenience
to make use of them, as if they had been her own, upon any occasion of her own
safety and defense, without any the least jealousy; for these being added to
her own, made up almost a complete Fleet, able to oppose the assaults of any
enemy; but chiefly for that this being one of the best Squadrons of Galleys the
Crown of Spain had, and being in the power of the Genoeses, it must needs be a
good pledge of the Kings good will to the Commonwealth: The Comme^ce also which
the Genoese Mariners have usually in the Kingdoms of Spain, Naples, Sicily, and
Sardinia, and the Traffic which is very great, in the State of Millian, and
in Flanders does employ great part of the meaner sort of the City and State of
Genoa, who by natural inclination, and by reason of the barrenness of their
Country, are given to Negotiation, both by Land and Sea: so as there are but
very few, who for their own peculiar concernments, are not very desirous of the
prosperity of that Crown. But the Contracts or Covenants of the richest and
ablest Gentlemen of the Commonwealth does interest the Genoese Nation with the
Crown of Spain: the most famous and important contract, and of greater
concernment for the affairs of Crown then any other which we read of, or have
heard.

The King, to keep and maintain his Armies in Flanders, Germany and Italy; and
for maintenance of his Fleet in the Ocean, and in the Mediterranean, is forced
to make many expeditions, and send provisions sometimes to one part, sometimes
to another: the Kings Exchequer had not always ready money; or, in case it
had, moneys could not with safety and speed be conveyed into those parts where
they were to be serviceable, but they must either be intercepted by the Enemy,
or sunk at Sea, or come too late to where they were destined, which would cause
the ruin of the Kings Enterprises and Armies: The Genoese Merchants, by the
great affluence of their riches, credit, and corespondency, which they held in
all parts of Europe, did abundantly and beforehand supply what was necessary;
so, as in humane bodies the soul, and natural heat, send forth and supply all
the members with necessary nourishment; just so in the immense body of so great
a Monarchy, the Pen of the Genoese, as the soul and vital spirit of the King of
Spain's Treasure, serves the King to convey ready moneys happily, safely, and
speedily, whithersoever it is needful, with reciprocal profit and convenience;
for the King by making his provisions in good time, and speedily, secures his
Enterprises, wins honor to his Arms by victory, and defends his Dominions; and
the Genoeses get vast gain by the employment of their moneys, whereby their
private fortunes do exceed that of all other Nations; for which advance of
moneys they are paid by the King in annual Revenues, out of the States and
Kingdoms belonging to the Crown, as well in Spain as in Italy: therefore as
this contract is necessary for the main affairs of that King, it oblige^ him to
have a care of the Commonwealth; for without the preservation thereof, the
contract is impossible to be made good; and so great a stock of moneys of the
Genoeses being employed in the Kingdoms belonging to that Crown, serves the
King as a pledge of their good will. These are the Ties, these are the Bonds of
Friendship, and conjunction between the Crown of Spain and Commonwealth of
Genoa; which being confirmed by process of time, and by so many trials, grow
daily stronger, not only for the interests, which multiply continually, but for
the trust and confidence which does also multiply by the course of years: the
Kings of Spain, for the space of almost one whole Age, have had trial of the
good and sincere public correspondency, and of the acceptable, and faithful
service of the priva^e Genoe^es: great were the conveniences and advantages
which they thereby got both in public and private. On the other side, those
Kings having always born much respect toward the Commonwealth, and having eve^
endeavored the preservation of her Liberty, the Genoeses did so confide in
their affection and good will toward them, as the neighborhood and greatness
of the Kings Dominions, wherewith their are environed, and the powerful Forces
of that Crown both by Land and Sea; (sufficient to bege^ diffidence in greater
Potentates then the Commonwealth,) were not only no cause of fear nor terror
to her, but they by long experience began to confide in them; and they served
as a Bulwark and defense to the Commonwealth, against all hostile violence. No
foot of the State of Genoa was ever seized on, no point of her jurisdiction
injured, nor the least part of her liberty; and whereas the Commonwealth, when
she began to adhere to this Crown, being then newly got out of Foreign
subjection, was faint hearted, weak in Forces, rent with intestine discords,
and both public and private fortunes were exhausted; by her regained liberty,
and by this new contracted friendship, she did not only recover her former
spirit and health, but reassuming her native color, and being restored to her
ancient splendor, appeared in public and in private as formerly; and whereas
having been formerly molested, sometimes by one, some times by another
Potentate, and troubled by intestine discord, she had much ado to preserve her
self, but undergoing great storms was subject to many dangers; after the union
and good correspondency with the Crown of Spain, she was brought into a safe
Haven, secure from Domestic and Foreign tempests, she was respected by her
neighboring Princes, honored by those that were further off, not molested by
her rivals, nor offended by any; and if at any time she happened to be molested
by any, she was protected and defended by all the Forces of the said Crown, as
if she had been one of its Patrimonial Dominions.

The Nobility of Genoa prosper'd no less in their private affairs, then in the
public; some of them were honored by that Crown with great Honors and
Employments, others were favored with Offices, Dignities, and great Rewards:
the City her self was embellished with stately Edifices, which were not
inferior for Ornament or Magnificence to those of any other private
personages: private houses were strangely beautified: none were like to them
for Plate, Jewels, nor Movables, neither in quality nor quantity, for the
fortunes of private men, some amounted to the yearly rent of a hundred thousand
Ducates, many to half as much, and very many to less, but still very
considerable sums: by which riches and splendour the Commonwealth being become
very powerful, she might justly be adjudged to be brought to a better
condition, in all respects, then ever she had formerly been; for though in pa^
Ages, when she was wholly intent upon Maritime Affairs, she was become very
glorious for famous Victories, made by her numerous powerful Fleets: yet the
vivacity and refinedness of the Genoese spirits being become fierce by
continual use of Arms, wanting Foreign Enemies, she could hardly keep from
civil dissentions; the result whereof was the ruin of Military knowledge, and
the common Countries destruction: the same vivacity and acuteness growing
wanton by the continual peace of latter times, and being refined in civil Arts
has made them study public Government the more, and more desirous to preserve
their Country and Liberty, as the Springhead of all their good, and as the only
stay and foundation of their private fortunes; and being hereby become so happy
both in public and in private, she had no reason at the present to envy the
condition of former times: her Subjects were no less glorious then those of
former times in Military Affairs, and for what concerns the Gown and Civil
Affairs, undoubtedly, far beyond them: she had plenty of men, excellent for
learning, and for all kind of Erudition, very wise for State-Government; and
(which is seldom seen in so great affluence of private Riches and Authority)
singular for Religion, Piety, and Charity toward their Country: so as though
in point of greatness of State she may yield the upper hand to some of the
modern Commonwealths, yet can she not be thought inferior for unanimity of
mind, for a solid and well regulated Government, nor for the love of Liberty:
The Legislators of ancient times, and those who in their Rules of Philosophy
have left excellent Precepts of Policy, always thought private riches, and
excessive power in private Citizens, to be the corrupters of men's minds;
wherefore as if it were a Plague or pestiferous Venom in a well regulated
Commonwealth, they did so abhor it, as Licurgus, the wise composer of the
Spartan Commonwealth, not being content with an equality of Land amongst the
Citizens of his Commonwealth, he would not permit them the use of Silver or
Gold. In process of time, the same Spartans did of their own free will yield up
the command of Maritime Fleets, which the Confederate Cities of Greece did
maintain in common, to the Athenians, for fear lest their Citizens, being
accustomed to so great a command, might become contumacious to the Orders of
the County, and might some time or other have some Plots upon the public
Liberty; therefore they provided against too great power and authority in their
Citizens, by the Law of Ostracism; and how much did the Agrarian Law trouble
the Commonwealth of Rome. It is too clear and manifest, how the Roman Liberty
was at l^st overthrown, first by the too extraordinary power of Marius and
Sylla, and afterward by the like of Caesar and Pompey: some of the modern
Commonwealths, out of the same respects, give the command in chief of their
Land Armies only to Foreigners, and the Supreme Government at Sea, which they
cannot take from their Citizens, they confide it in them so allaied as they
cannot exercise it within a hundred miles of the City: nor is it permitted to
their Citizens to receive Pensions, or take employments or dignities from other
Princes, nor yet to purchase esta^es or fortunes in other Princes Dominions,
lest their dependency upon that Prince may prove prejudicial to the
Commonwealth. The Commonwealth of Genoa by a singular and happy example, which
does confound both the precepts of the ancient and the institutions of modern
Commonwealths, does not only sustain her (...) by the grea^ness of the private
fortunes of her Citizens, but does from thence take ^orce, spirit and splendour;
and by means of her Citizens great power recovers sometimes her lost liberty,
sometimes preserves it, and becomes considerable to Foreign Nations, and to
neighboring Potentates. The Citizens of this Commonwealth treat with the
greatest Monarchs of Christendom; they get Revenues in Foreign Countries; they
are admitted into administration of the King of Spains* Treasure; they receive
Pensions, Titles and Dignities from his Crown, they receive the chief
Government of his Kingdoms and States, the prime jurisdiction over his Fleets
at Sea, the absolute command over his Land Armies, they are admitted into, and
chosen to be Counselors of his Privy Council; and yet so many, and so great
Dignities, Titles, Employments, Offices and Preeminences, do not at all
prejudicate or weaken the Principality of their common Country, but do rather
strengthen it: The occasion of so many miraculous effects may be attributed to
the union and good Government of the Commonwealth: which keeping her Forts,
Garrisons, and the whole ground-works of the State in her own hands, by the
favor of her people; who are more inclined to live free then any others, and
by the leaning-stock or support of her Nobility, (which being bound up, and
united in one body, does much exceed the grandezza of any one private Citizen,
and is sufficient to suppress any whatsoever force, and to curb any intention
which shall be contrary to the present Government), it may be attributed to the
good opinion of the Kings of Spain, who being, on the one side, certain that
they may have any thing of the Commonwealth, in the condition she now is in,
which they can desire at her hands, always provided her liberty be preserved;
and on the other side, apprehensive of the strange consequences which might
result from the turn of Affairs, they have reason to abhor all novelty, or
alteration of Government. But it may chiefly be attributed to the private
Citizens ardent desire of liberty, who being taught by the calamities of former
times, that the Principality of one alone is unsupportable to a people that are
born free, and how dangerous it is for him who shall arrive thereat; and being
made to know by their present happiness, how pleasant, useful and glorious a
thing, l^berty enjoyed in common is to all men, and how much it makes them be
esteemed in the Courts of Foreign Princes; they love better to increa^e and
better themselves by the preservation, then by the ruin of the common liberty;
and growing greater by their private fortunes, to restore that splendour
multiplied to their Country which at first they rece^ved from her; They are
therefore able to make it known in Princes Courts, where they live, how
advantageous it is for their affairs, (...) Genoa should live in liberty; and
if at any time, by any strange acciden^, they be put to struggle for the
maintenance thereof, they by their greatness of spirit can show themselves so
ze^lous in that behalf, as by a generous refusal of the greatest Dignities,
Preferments and Fortunes which they hold from the King, they are able to divert
ill advised designs, and to free their Country from the sinister influences
which the bad counsels of any Officer can threaten it withal.

The interests then of the Crown of Spain, and of the Commonwealth, being
thus fast linked together, those who env^ed the Spanish greatness could not
bear with such a parity of fortune, and endeavored by all means possible to
break it; sometimes openly endeavoring the common liberty of Italy, (...) they
strove to (...) themselves, as a Prince of Italy: sometimes whispering
jealousies and suspicions secretly between both parties: sometimes upbraiding
the Genoeses with their having received dignities and riches from that Crown,
as gilded ^etters of their liberty, which under the shadow of friendship and
equal confederacy, was the base and servile slavery of the Spanish Empire. King
Henry the Fourth of France, whom the French after his death honored with the
Cognomen of Great, having bent his thoughts, in his latter years, upon quelling
the Grandezza of the house of Austria, and of the Crown of Spain, fixed his
eyes first upon the Commonwealth of Genoa, intending to make his first blow at
her, as at one of the corner-stones of so great a Monarchy, with firm
resolution to cut that knot in pieces with the sword, since he saw it
impossible to be loosened otherwise: but this design falling by the sudden
fatal death of the said King, the image thereof remained imprinted in his
successors, who thinking that the State of Genoa was become more then Spanish
by this undissolvable knot, and that it made too much against the common ends
and designs, did not only abhor the name of a Genoese, but began to betake
themselves against the Commonwealth: thinking that when she should be abased,
the Spanish Empire should receive a shrewd blow; and that taking their rise so
high, the success must needs be good; for they made their account, that when
they should have possessed themselves of the State of Genoa, the State of
Millain being shut up on that side, and being debarred from succor by Sea,
would be the sooner taken by Land Armies, and that the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily being so far distant from Spain would hardly be kept: the breaking of
the Contract, which would certainly be effected by the loss of the Sta^e of
Genoa, incited them as much as any ohter respect; and the Crown of Spain
rema^ing unable to make provisions for Armies, they held for certain that the
chief sinews of the Spanish Empire being thus cut in pieces, the affairs of
that Crown would give against such encounters as would make way for much
further proceedings: they therefore resolved to bend all their endeavors, to
plot any thing, and to use all force against the State of Genoa, as against
that which did chiefly withstand the ends and interests of the common cause: no
provision was had for this by the last League of Avignon: but the enmity which
not long after arose between the Commonwealth and the Duke of Savoy, touching
the Marquisate Zuccharello, much fomented these their machinations; which
enmity daily increasing, a great combustion brake forth from a little spark.
The Duke was not inclined at first to make war with the Genoeses upon this
account, for though he was senfible enough of their resistance, and appeared to
be already much in that resentment, yet the ^reaty of Marriage between Prince
Philiberto and the Princess of Mantua detained him, and forced him to swallow
down any thing, out of a desire of getting more pretenses to Montferrat by this
Match, and to reunite himself to the Crown of Spain; for to break with the
Genoeses did diametrically oppugn both these ends, which his mind was then
chiefly set upon; for there was no doubt, but the King of Spain would interest
himself with the Genoeses: wherefore forbearing rigorous proceedings, and
falling upon a more moderate way, he tried to get out of this trouble by some
fair means; he endeavored to get the Spanish Agents to delay the assigning
over of Zuccharello for a while, upon agreement that he would plead the utmost
of his pretenses within a few days in the Cesarian Court; and that if he did
not then obtain his intent, it should be lawful for the Commonwealth to enjoy
this their new purchase without any disturbance. The Spanish Agents who were to
manage this matrimony, and the reconciling of the Duke of Savoy, were desirous
to please him, and that the Commonwealths delay should be granted him; lest the
purchase of that little Castle might not only be a hindrance to that which was
in Treaty, but might occasion new rumors, and noise of wars in Italy, to the
prejudice of the public peace: wherefore means being used with the
Commonwealth, to forbear, they also under hand delaied the assignation of
Zuccharello; and some Propositions of accommodation were with the privity of
the Cardinal of Savoy offered to the Ambassadors, who were then in the Court of
Rome, to pay their wonted obedience to the new Pope; by which the controverted
Fee should be delivered to neither of the parties, but should be invested in
some third person, who might be a friend to the other two; insinuating Don
Carlo Barbarino, the Popes Brother: but all was in vain, for the Commonwealth
fearing that the Dukes power would at last prevail over what was right, and
fearing that they might prejudice the King of Spains reputation, if they should
put over the business to the Arbitrament of any other Princes; or else thinking
that to yield to any thing would seem that they were afraid of the Dukes
threats, persevered constantly not to put that to the Arbitrament of another,
which was undoubtedly theirs, and which they had lawfully purchased from the
Imperial Chamber: so as being resolved to keep it just as they had bought it of
the Emperor, they complained of the delay made by the Governor of Millain:
but at last, all difficulties being ove^come, and the Commonwealth being
possessed of the Fee, the Duke was necessitated to think of resentment: where^n
he found himself much engaged both by the Letter which he had written, and by
the Commonwealths refusal: the way for his resentment was made more free by
Prince Phileberto's death, which happened at this time in Palermo, that City
being visited with a sore Contagion: which did not only put an end to the
Treaty of Marriage, but cut off all hope of ever piecing it up again; for
though he left two brothers unmarried, yet since the same parts, nor
circumstances, did not concur in them, it was impossible to continue it;
neither of them being acceptable at the Spanish Court, they having openly
declared themselves for the French party; and moreover, the Cardinal had
appeared openly an enemy to the Duke of Mantua, almost upon all occasions. A
petty accident did also more irritate the Duke, which had he not considered too
much and published it to be one of the chief incitements to the war, would not
deserve the reci^al: some little boys of the meanest sort of the Genoese
Plebeians seeing the Soldiers rendezvous, which were daily made in the City,
they also put on counterfeit and childish Arms, and ran up and down the City,
meeting and exercising their Arms: it happened that at a certain encounter, the
one side took the Captain of the other side Prisoner, who was to represent the
person of the Duke of Savoy, and led him about as in Triumph: which action
though the Senate did not leave unpunished, yet being given out to be greater
then it was, it came to the Dukes ears, who peradventure desirous to have
better justifications for wh^t he should do then his buying of Zuccharello made
process like wise be made himself, but more according to what was reported than
to what was true; it being said that the Dukes Image was cast into the fire and
burnt: and sending this Process, formed by himself, into the Courts of Rome,
and of other Princes, he complained very much the^eof, as of an action done by
the privity of some Gentlemen of Genoa, in scorn and contempt of his person.
There were besides this some ancient rancours remaining between the
Commonwealth and Duke, touching a controversy about their Confines, and some
Castles which they had been long at Law for; but more of late, for favors
privately administered to the Duke of Mantua in the War of Montferrat; and
afterward more openly to the King of Spain, in the taking in of Oneglia and
Mar^; which hatreds and heart burnings the longe^ they were concealed broke
forth afterward into the greater flame, when the way was made open for them.

The French therefore, and the other Confederates, made use of this occasion to
keep the Duke constant to the League; to which purpose a Diet was held in ^sa,
a Town in Piedmont, at the foot of the Alps which divide Piedmont from
Dolpheny; wherein met the Duke of Savoy, Deguieres, who was a little before
made Lord High-Constable of France, the Marquess of Cricc^e, Claudio Marini,
French Ambassador with the Duke, the Venetian Ambassador, and some other
Ambassadors of the Confederate Princes: Here the Duke of Savoy, after having
made grievous complaints against the Genoeses, for injuries which he pretended
to have received from them, proposed it, as the better and more secure course,
to turn their Common Arms against the State of Genoa, before they should fall
upon the State of Millain, as was agreed on at the League of Avignon: He said
the victory would be the more easy and certain by reason of the weakness of
the chief City, and of the other Towns in that State, by reason that that
Commonwealth was totally unprovided of foreign Forces, and that she could
make but little use of her Natives, they being imbased by long peace; that he
himself had many friends, and many that would side with him, in that City, and
in that State, who being desirous of innovations would be a great help to the
Enterprise: He represented, that when that Common wealth should be subdued the
Contract would be at an end, whence many inconveniences would result to the
Crown of Spain, and, in particular, that the Siege of Breda, which was under
the eyes of all the Confederates, upon the fail of moneys would undoubtedly be
raised; but he chiefly endeavored to inform them, that when the Valtoline
should be taken, which was to be assaulted in the first place by their common
Arms, though thereby the State of Millain would be kept from relie^e by
Germany, yet the way by Sea being open, it might be succored from Spain,
Naples, and Sicily; whereas when Genoa should be taken, and the River thereof,
the State of Millain being blocked up on all sides, and debarred succor, would
become an easy and secure prey to their common Forces.

These reasons of the Dukes being the more efficacious, because the rest saw,
that unless they would give way thereunto he would not join with them in their
League, they did not only approve of his opinion, but contrary to what was
agreed upon at Avignon, they promised to join their Forces with his, to the
suppressing of Genoa; and that the Fleet of Marselles, and of England, which
were destined to go against Spain, should assist the enterprise of Genoa, not
only with Arms, but with abundance of Victuals, Ammunition and Men: they were
said moreover, to divide the Commonwealth of Genoa thus amongst them, that the
City of Genoa, and all her River as far as Savona, should belong to the King of
France; that Savona, and the rest of the River till you come to Villa Franca,
should fall to the Dukes share: that the number of the French should be between
ten and twelve thousand Foot, and 1000 Horse, and on the Dukes side 15000 Foot,
and 200 Horse, and sufficient provisions of Victuals, Ammunition and Artillery:
the Venetian Ambassador did not join in this enterprise against Genoa; for
that it not being comprehended in the League of Avignon, he said he could not
consent to this new enterprise, without new Orders from his Commonwealth: but
time being given him to write to Venice, and to receive resolution from thence,
he received Orders to conclude, in conformity to what was agreed upon by the
French and by the Duke.

This new League being made, or reformed, in satisfaction to the Duke, they
proceeded therein with as much privacy as was possible, left if it should be
known, those against whom they were chiefly intended should take up Arms: the
French professed openly that they would submit to the Popes resolution for what
concerned, the Valtoline, and that the (...) (...) should for bear innovating
a^y thing against the Ensign or Garrisons of the Church: they affirmed the same
in the Court of S^in, declaring further, that the King would attempt nothing to
^he prejudice of ^he peace; and reciprocal correspondency* and the Pop^
believing their words and promises made not any preparation in these so great
commotions: nor did the Spanish Court confide less in the promise of the
French, then the Pope: the King of Spain having contracted a^mighty debt, by
reason of the late wars of the Val^line, and of Italy, and being obliged to
make great provisions of moneys and men for the present wars of Germany,
Flanders and Brasile the winter season which drew on, being incommodious to
prosecute wa^s already begun, much more to commence new wars, added to this
belief; for the meeting a^ ^sa was upon St. Martines day, and November was
wholly ever, before the Consederates appeared to make any preparations; and
none being able to believe, that the French Armies would pass the Mountains
that Winter, it was thought that the meeting (...) (...) would make more noise,
then deeds, or that it did serve but a^ threats to advance the Negotiators
parties and conditions: but so great a^action could not ^be kept long
concealed; for to b^ or with (...) (...) at (...), which afforded sufficient
reason of suspicion; the Marquess of (...) going to the Swissers, and his so
long stay amongst them, occasioned much jealousy; for though he seemed to go
thither as (...) Ambassador, to adjust old accounts between that Nation and
the Crown of France; yet being always accompanied by the Embassado^ of Venice
and Savoy, and by the chief of the Grisons who were dri^ from their own home^
and he being very busy in ^aising men, and in making preparations for war, it
was judged that he tarried there for more then the business of that Embassy.
Many Posts were also observed to pass frequently between the Confederates, and
that much business was in hand; the which the less they could be seen into,
they gave the more occasion of distrust: no less shows appeared on the
Venetians behalf, in whose Territories, but particularly in those of Bergamo
and Bressia, great preparations were observed to be made of Soldiers,
Victuals, Artillery and Ammunition. The people destined for the enterprise of
Genoa fell down already from the Alps into Piedmont; and the Duke also levied
many men in his State; and for the greater s^crecy, he kept them in the dales
of the Alps which were nearest Piedmont; and the Constable of Dolpheny made
great levies of men, giving out publicly enough, that he would pass over the
Mountains with them himself in person. The more sollicitous the Confederates
were in their proceedings and preparations, the State of Millain was the more
remiss in theirs, which was at this time almost wholly unprovided and unarmed;
for the King not being contented to have appeased the minds of the discontented
Princes by depositing the Forts o^ the Valtoline; but the more to satisfy
them, and to remove all jealousies from them of being infested, and
consequently to take away all occasions of new troubles, he had ordered the
Duke of Feria to send all the men he could into Flanders, and he to obey him
had sent 6000 Foot, and 800 Horse thither, a few months before the Diet at
Susa; and had moreover sent Cavalier Pecchio's Brigade to Winter in Sardignia:
but Feria finding afterward, that this his showing himself to be inclined to
peace was not able to withhold the Counsels and Resolves of the League, but
that it did rather hasten the execution thereof, he advertised the Court of
Spain thereof, desiring orders and provisions to prepare against the ensuing
storm. This advertisement, though confirmed from other parts, was not credited
in that Court* but he and Don Sanchio de Monry, Marquess of Castagneda, who
succeeded Vives in the Embassy at Genoa, having informed the King, by Letters,
of the great danger wherewith the State of Genoa was threatened, and how ill
they were provided to defend themselves; the King writ to the Commonwealth,
offering her all his Forces both by Sea and Land for her defense: The
Commonwealth, which besides what she ^ad already done, proceeded to make great
provisions, were it either that she bel^eved too much in them, or that she
would stand upon her honor with the Court of Spain, or that she thought it
dangerous to bring the Kings Auxiliary Forces into her Dominions, writ back,
giving a large account of what provisions she had already made, and what she
was to make, seeming as if she needed no succor: by which the Court of Spain
argued, that the Agents in Italy did amplify the danger more then they had
reason for. But Feria finding the danger to grow every day gre^ter, and to draw
nearer, and despairing of being able to make the Court take order for
assistance, he thought he was bound to do it himself: he therefore recalled
Pecchio's Brigade from Sardignia, he gave order for another to Count Giovan
Serbellone, together with some Horse companies; he desired, and obtained a
Brigade from the Duke of Parma, and another from the Duke of M^dena, he could
get no more from Naples save one only Brigade, and some Troops of Horse; for
the Viceroy hearing of the English Fleet; would not unfurnish the Kingdom of
many men; and casting it up that these men being numbered into the usual
Garrison of the State, they would not amount to 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, he
knew they would not be sufficient to defend the State, and to succor Genoa and
the Valtoline, if (as it was feared) they should be assaulted all at once: he
therefore betook himself to think upon Foreign Forces; and since he saw he
could hope for none from Spain, by reason of the Courts great aversion
thereunto; and for that the Fleet which was gone to recover Brasile had carried
away 10000 men from those Kingdoms; and that Marquess Spinola, who was employed
before Breda, did rather want then abound in men; and that for the aforesaid
respects he could not ground much upon the Kingdom of Naples; he betook himself
to Germany, where without expecting any order from the King, he gave out
Commissions for making great levies of Germans. Besides, because he could not
expect provisions of moneys from Spain, and that the State of Millain was so
exhausted as it could not furnish him with any, he applied himself to the
Genoeses: nor was his application in vain; for some of the richest Gentlemen of
Genoa, and who did most study the interests of that Crown, seeing how much the
welfare of the Commonwealth was concerned in the preservation of the State of
Millain, furnished him immediately, upon his ^are obligation, with between
three and four hundred thousand Ducates, by which he was enabled to disburse
the first payments, and to raise four Dutch Regiments, consisting of 4000 Foot
apiece: he believed that the Confederates intended their first blow against the
Valtoline, because he understood the preparations were in greatest readiness in
those parts: all the provisions of the Counties of Bergamo and Brossia were
brought into V^lcomonica, which confines upon the Valtoline. The Marquess of
Coure had already raised two Regiments of Swissers, and one of Vallesani,
besides two others which were come to him, together with 600 Horse, from
France, through the Country of Berne: much Victuals and Ammunition was sent him
from the Country of Bress^ by the Rivers and Lakes of Helvetia; so as not being
able to conceal that any longer which was apparent to all men's eyes, Feria sent
often Messengers on purpose to advertise the Marquess of Bagni of every
particular, he being the head of the Ecclesiastics in the Valtoline; which
Messengers being experienced in affairs of war, and known in Fortifications,
might visit those Forts, and might see whether they wanted any thing or no,
and who might offer Bagni Forces to reinforce his Garrisons, and to withstand
the approaching assault: but Bagni still refused his offers, alleging that he
had no orders from the Pope, to receive, nor to introduce any Garrisons of
Foreign Princes into his Forts; and the Pope did refuse it as well as he, whom
the Duke of Pastrana, Spanish Ambassador at Rome, did very much press
thereunto in the name of the King, and of Feria; giving him a particular
account of the danger the Valtoline was in of being assaulted by the
Consederate Forces. The occasi^n of this r^fusal appeared plainly to be,
because the Pope, as also the Court of Spain, trusting in the express and clear
promises of the French that ^ey would bear all respect to the Forts which were
guarded by the Ecclesiastics, and that the Kings Forces would never commit any
hostility against the Ensigns of the holy Chuch, did not apprehend the fears
which were thought to be very remote, and idle; and therefore being unwilling
to beget diffidence and distrust in either of the Kings, he added, that the
succors which were offered were superfluous and dangerous, lest they might
draw humors to that wound which they endeavored to heal by succors; for he
said it was probable that the French would take pretense to assault the Forts
of the Valtoline from the entering of the Spanish succors thereinto, and would
turn those Forces against them which they professed were intended elsewhere;
and that they would assault them, not as deposited in the Popes hands, but as
assigned over by him, contrary to the agreement of the Deposition, to the
Spaniards; so as esteeming the remedy a mischief, he thought the Articles of
the Depositure, and the Majesty of the Popes name, and Ensigns, to be a surer
defense, and a fitter means to remove new occasions of war, then the Auxiliary
Arms of that Crown: he therefore did so far persist in his constant refusal, as
the many and pregnant evidences which were laid before him by the Spanish
Agents, that the French preparations were intended against the Valtoline, were
always by him repulsed as imaginary jealousies, vain rumors, and as sub^le
Spanish inventions.

Thus did the Pope carry himself in these and in other Commotions, which not
long after happened against the State of Genoa; for a great many Soldiers
being already passed from France into Piedmont, where the Constable was already
arrived, and the Duke of Savoy making also great preparations for war out of
his immense hatred against the Genoeses, the Commonwealth had recourse to the
Pope, that he would intercede with the Duke, and that he would assist them with
some men in this so great, and so near at hand danger; but all these endeavors
and applications were to no purpose; for the Pope constant to his resolution of
Neutrality would not grant her any succor; only, to show himself desirous of
her preservation, he proposed a League between him and the great Duke for the
defense of the States in common: which Proposition the Genoeses took to be
either a kind of honorable denial of their request, or an endeavoring to
separate the Commonwealth from the Crown of Spain, to the prejudice of that
conjunction which, if ever at any time, was now necessary for them, and from
whence they might promise themselves more potent, certain and undoubted aid,
then from any other Prince or Potentate; and thereby to draw her insensibly
into a League with the contrary parties which were chiefly ill minded toward
her; for there being but little correspondency then between the Pope and the
King of Spain, and (on the contrary) much distrust, the Commonwealth could not
join in League with o her Princes, and particularly with the Pope, without
offending the King of Spain, and without injurying the good will,
correspondency, and the weighty interests of the common affairs; nor could she,
without danger to her self, separate her self from the union of that Crown
which she had found to be so certain for the space of so many years, so
advantageous, honorable and faithful; which Crown (were it only for the
necessity of her own interests,) was forced to sustain her with all her power;
so to cast her self into the arms of the Confederate Princes, who so vehemently
conspired her ruin; and yet the Commonwealth, trying the Pope, as it were,
with the like cunning, answered, that they would willingly accept of the
Confederacy, if the King of Spain were therein comprehended: which the Pope not
giving way unto (for it would be an apparent parting from his professed
neutrality, and a drawing the enmity of the King of France, and of the other
Confederates, upon him) the Commonwealth was therefore not to hope for any
assistance from the Pope; for 1000 Foot being at the same time desired of him
by the Commonwealth, and by the great Duke, who had but little need thereof, he
granted them to the great Duke, and denied them to the Commonwealth, then whom
none could have greater need thereof; and he denied them also those Corsicks
which were granted to the Pope for the service of the Apostolic See, in the
time of peace. But for all this the Genoeses wanted not Forces to sustain and
defend themselves; for having always doubted that the clouds of Susa would
discharge themselves in a great tempest upon them, they had not been sparing,
nor negligent in making provisions against it: they sent into Germany for two
levies of Dutch, the one of 2000, the other of 3000 Foot: they took order for
30 Companies, to consist of 200 Foot apiece to be raised by the richest and
chiefest Gentlemen: they sent for 600 Foot from Corsica, they brought in the
Prince of Bozolo, with 800 Foot, and 200 Horse; Prince Doria raised 400 more at
his own particular charge; and finally, they had many Commanders, and other
Citizens, who assisted the Commonwealth with men paid by themselves, and with
ready moneys: these Forces being put together, and added to those of the
preceding year, and being secured by the choice Militia of the State, they
thought they needed not fear the Enemies assaults; for though all the aforesaid
preparations could not be in a readiness at the appearing of the Enemy, yet
they would have a strength of between eight and ten thousand Foot and 200
Horse, in the State, all of them being paid; besides as many more of the
ordinary Militia; and the State of Genoa being begirt by the Apenine toward
Piedmont and Lombardy, the Enemy must either enter in a gross body, or by small
numbers; if in a gross body, the strength of situation, the sterility of the
Country, the difficulty in bringing Victuals, and other impediments, did secure
them from the progress of the Enemy; it being impossible for great Armies to
continue long in that enterprise without much Victuals; if in small numbers,
the Army of the Commonwealth being assisted by the same difficulties, and being
accommodated by the Country, would be sufficient for defense: to this was
added, that howsoever the Enemies Army entered the Mountains, they must needs
leave the State of Millain on their backs; wherein though there was not very
great Force; at the present, yet the few that were there, and the ordinary
Militia of so great a State, was, doubtlesly, sufficient to shut up the passes,
so as neither Victuals, nor provisions could be brought them; and having them
behind, they might be enclosed between them and the Forces of Genoa, on their
Front, which might occasion them many troubles and dangers, and be such a
hinderance to them as they could not long continue in oppugning the City: but
when the Forces should be augmented in that State, according to the orders that
were given, and provisions that were ordered: the ruin of the Confederates
Army did plainly appear, since it would be shut up between barren Mountains,
and the Sea, without Victuals, Provisions, or hope of succor: they must
therefore of necessity be very circumspect in their proceedings, in engaging
themselves far within the Ligu^ian Mountains, having considerable Forces on
their Front, being not safe behind, and exposed to the assaults of a powerful
Enemy: especially since the Commonwealth, besides ten Galleys of her own which
she had then at Sea, being to receive all the King of Spains Galleys for her
defense, together with the succor of men, which were already preparing in
Naples, and in Sicily, the Enemy could hardly be relieved by Sea; and yet the
Duke of Savoy and the Constable, preferring vain and uncertain supposals before
so solid and undeniable ground-works, doubted not to enter courageously upon
the business; for making account that the English Fleet, and that of Marcelles,
should appear strong and powerful in the Ligustick Sea at the same time that
their Land Army should draw near the Sea, and that being to be much more in
number and Forces, then the Galleys of Spain and Genoa, they thought they would
not only be able to keep those Galleys from them, but supply their Army with
abundance of Victuals and Ammunition which they should bring along with them;
so as not only the danger of Famine, and the difficulty of bringing Victuals to
the Land Army ceased, but the expense thereof: they thought themselves
sufficiently safe from being disturbed by the Millain Forces, by the union and
good correspondency which continued still between the two Crowns; the which
they firmly believed their proceeding against Genoa would no way oppugn, since
that State was not directly comprehended under the Territories of the Crown of
Spain; nor could they persuade themselves that the Governor of Millain should
move, for fear of being the author of the breach, or that he would commit any
hostile act against that Army, in which together with the Ensigns Royal of
France, which he saw therein displaied, the Lord high Constable of that Kingdom
did wage war in person; and the State of Millain being then almost unarmed, and
unprovided of any manner of warlike provision; having the French in the
Valtoline, and upon the Confines of Como, and the Venetians armed upon the
Cremonesian Confines, they thought their moving would be rather desired, then
dreaded, on that part; since their Army in all warlike reason was to be
superior, as they were much superior in numbers of fighting men, and in
valiant and experienced Commanders; for which cause it was likewise probable,
that the Governor finding himself in such a multitude of business, with but a
few men, and those ill ordered, he would not dare to meddle with a fresh,
gallant and impetuous Army, led on by two of the most famous Commanders of the
present Age.

And to the end that new levies of Dutch might not pass into the State of
Millain, the King of France held Treaties with the Swissers, that they should
keep their Passes shut, till such time as the enterprise of Genoa should either
be perfected, or brought near perfection; and of so great authority were the
Confederates, especially the French, at that time, with that Nation, as all the
Cantons, the Catholic Cantons being comprehended, which are united to the
Crown of Spain, and confederate with the State of Millain, suffered the French
to pass armed through their Country, and in order, contrary to their ancient
customs and institutions, and which had never upon any occasion been violated,
of not allowing passage to Foreigners, unless either unarmed, or few at once;
and this for nothing else but out of their great desire of preserving their
liberty: nor did it seem that so unaccustomed a thing did proceed from ought
else but from their firm opinion, that the Confederates preparations would
devour the State of Millain, which they saw was wholly unprovided of defense;
so as if they adored the French as Victors, they durst not anger them. Thus the
Duke and the Constable, taking it for granted that they were sure of the State
of Millain by going to Genoa, and being abundantly provided of all things by
the Fleets at Sea, they thought nothing could obviate their Victory, save the
defense which would be made by the Genoeses, who they thought would be able to
do very little, being straightened at Sea, and assaulted by Land: they confided
not so much in the valor of their own men, as in the weakness of the Enemy,
and of their Discipline: they, moreover, grounded their hopes of Victory upon
the Duke of Savoys assuring the Constable, that for certain he held very much
intelligence in that City, by means whereof, as soon as they should come before
the Walls, confusion and disorder would fall out amongst the disagreeing
Citizens, so as, undoubtedly, the Gates of the City would be thrown open, and
they should be let in into the City; and when they should have taken Genoa,
they supposed the State of Millain, being enclosed by their Forces, would soon
submit to their discretion: upon such supposals, and such foundations, which
their hope of Victory, and desire of revenge made appear easy unto them, (but
which in reason were very uncertain, and which the success was likely to
gainsay,) they resolved to commence the enterprise: they began first in the
Valtoline, about the end of November; the Marquess of Coure who had 8000 Foot
with him, and 600 Horse, all well in order, thought it no longer time to delay
executing their designs: discovering himself therefore, of a peaceful
Ambassador, to be become a Commander in Arms under the King of France, and the
Confederate Princes, he past from amongst the Swiffers into the Grisons
Country, and suddenly took lo Staico, a chief and important pass, by which you
come from Tirvolo into Rhetia; and having afterward taken the City of Coira he
went to the Consultations of the Diritture, who having driven out the Archdukes
Officers had reassumed their liberty: having restored the Grisons to their
former ancient condition, and driven the Bishop of Coira from his seat, he fell
down with his men into the Valtoline, about the end of December, in the year
1624, and totally laying aside the Protestations and Declarations made a little
before by himself, and by the other French Agents, that all due respects should
be born to the Ensigns, and Garrisons of the holy Church, he fell upon the
Forts of the Valtoline, which were guarded by the Forces of the Church: those
of the Valtoline, when they saw the Enemy approach, applied themselves to the
Governor of Millain, and to Bagni, desiring the first that he would send in
some Spanish succor, and the other, that he would receive them; without which
they saw it was impossible for them to defend themselves: whereupon the
Governor, who had sent many men already into Comasco under Ioh. Ieronymo
Pimontello, to make head there, and to defend the State against any hostility,
sent again to offer those succors to Bagni, who when he saw the danger so
near, would not notwithstanding accept thereof, building, as he professed, upon
Coure's word; for when he saw him pass armed from the Swissers to amongst the
Grisons, he sent his Secretary unto him, to know his intention: answer was
made, that by the orders he received from the King, he was to bear all respect
to the Apostolic See, and that he would observe it: wherefore Bagni would not
draw upon him the insulting French, by receiving succor from Millain, in which
abuse he continued so long, at least seemed to continue, as when he afterward
desired those succors, it was too late to receive them; for the Count entering
the Valtoline, by the Pass of Ploschiavo, did at the very first take
Piattamala, a Castle defended by some few Forces of the Church, and by them
forsaken at the very first appearance of the French. Then drawing near Tiranno,
not above a mile distant from Piattamala, he threw a Bridge over the Adda, by
which passing those men over he kept three days idle beyond the River,
expecting that the Horse which were sent with 1500 Foot, a little lower, to
take the place called Tiglie and Pontc di San Pietro, (by which way only
succor might be brought from Millain) should have made themselves masters of
those places: afterward absolutely denying that he had given his word to Bagni
not to prejudice him, he assaulted the Town of Tiranno on two sides, wherein
Bagni was with 600 of his men; and whereinto Cavalier Robustelli was entered a
little before with 800 of those of the Valtoline, people of the Train bands who
were but little exercised in Arms. Coure had but one small piece of Artillery
with him, which being levelled against that part of the Wall where the
Valtolinians were, had hardly made one shot, when the Valtolinians were so
terrified, as throwing down their Arms they abandoned the place; and Robustelli
not being able to make them stand to their Arms, they retreated into the
Castle, which was more defensible; whereinto Bagni being also retired, those of
the Town, see^ng themselves abandoned by their Chieftains, surrendered upon
Articles, and incontinently the Venetians who were at la Veletta, which stood
upon the Mountains that divide the Valcamonica from the Valtoline, fell down
with their Artillery, Ammunition, and all things belonging to war; and placing
their Battery against the Castle, Bagni articled to go with all his Soldiers
out of the Valtoline, without entering into any of the Forts. Coure, when he had
taken the Castle, went to Bornilo, accompanied by the Venetians, and by their
Artillery; and having easily taken it turned backwards, and took the other
Forts, and the Towns of Sondrio and Morbegno, toward the State of Millain;
whereby the Valtoline was wholly in the possession of the French. Bagni, when
he saw Coure so near, had sent to demand those succors from Feria which a
little before he had refused, who gave order forthwith to Pimontello to send
1500 of his best Foot, and a Troop of Horse, under Count John Serbellone; and
they being come to St. Pietro, at the same time that the Castle of Tiranno was
surrendered, seeing it possessed by the French, who we^e fortifying the opposite
Bank, they past no further on, but returned back to the State of Millain, Feria
feared that the French would not be satisfied with getting the Valtoline; but
that being backed by the Venetians, by whom they were continu^lly furnished
with Moneys, Munition, and continual recruits of men, they would assault the
State of Millain; and that the Venetians would do the like, according to the
Conventions of the League at Avignon to Crema, and Giaradadda, as soon as the
French should have given the first assaults on their side, or at least, when
having taken any Town they should have got footing; wherefore being troubled at
the imminent danger, he found out a means whereby keeping the French from
invading the State of Millain, the Venetians should also be forced to forbear.
La Riva di Chiavenna, being taken at the first commotions from the Grisons, as
it was a hindrance to keep them from entering the Valtoline, so it being now in
the power of the Ecclesiastics, he thought that if he should take it, it would
be a mighty stop, to keep the Enemy from assaulting the State of Millain: he
plotted with John Francisco Sacchetti, the Popes Commissary-General in the
Valtoline, who was then in Millain, to reinforce the Garrison of Riva with a
thousand Foot, which (if he would give way thereunto,) he would send thither:
Sacchetti consented, as either not knowing the importance of the place, or
thinking it too hard to deny so small a matter in such a precipice of affairs:
so as 1000 Foot entering, they reinforced that place both with Fortifications
and Garrison: La Riva is nothing but an Inn, to which is joined a little Haven,
where the Merchandise, which go and come from Germany into the State of
Millain, do lade and unlade; it stands upon the top of the upper Lake, which,
as being lesser, is called Agheto; and joins by a strait channel to the lower
Lake, just as the head is joined to the breast of the body, by the neck: the
situation of La Riva is very narrow between the Lake and the Mountains, which
drawing near the waters in this place leaves a little margin which serves for
a shore: a certain little Mountain stands over la Riva, over which many high
Mountains stand. This place is of such consequence, as whosoever will pass from
the Valtoline into the State of Millain with Armies and Artillery, must either
go full upon Fort Fuentes, which is upon the left side of the Adda, where she
falls into the Lake, or go about by the River of the Lake, and pass over to the
shore opposite to the Fort, and go from thence into the State of Millain; and
therefore, as Fort Fuentes is too hard an encounter for those that will fall
down by that way, and assault that State, so to go about by the Rivers of the
Lake is impossible, if la Riva which is in the midst thereof be fortified: the
Governor got leave to have it in his hands, and to fortify it strongly, and
munite it with men, to oppose it as a fence against the Torrent of the French
Forces: nor was his Counsel therein bad; for Coure having possessed himself of
the Valtoline, as he would go to the recovery of Chiavenna by the River of the
Lake, and when he should have taken it, would have saln down with his Army into
the State of Millain, he saw his design prevented by Feria's diligence: so as
being forced to change his way, he turned back again by the same craggy Rhetian
Mountains, by which he came into the Valtoline, and was necessitated to take a
long and troublesome compass about, by the Vale of Chiavenna, but without any
encumbrances or Artillery; which because he was not able to bring through those
Mountains, he was fain to leave in the Valtoline. Chiavenna made some
resistance, but not being able to hold out, yielded, as did the rest, to the
French; and Coure finding that it would be impossible to pass by thence into
the State of Millain without Artillery, knew he must necessarily first expugne
la Riva: the which was the only deposited Fort that remained untaken; leaving
therefore some of his men in Chiavenna, he returned with the rest into the
Valtoline, by the same craggy Mountains by which he was come. The Duke of
Feria, on the other side, commanded Serbellone, that to boot with the thousand
Foot which were already entered, he should enter la Riva with 2000 more Foot,
who being come thither made many Fortifications, as well upon the Plain of the
Mountain, as upon the Passes toward Chiavenna, and toward the way that leads
from the Valtoline; and moreover, that he might keep the Enemy from passing
over with Barques into the opposite part of the Lake, he munited all the Passes
which were on the other side of the River of the Lake and of the Channel, that
were fit for landing, to the end, that Coure might not effect that by Water
which he could never do by Land, as long as la Riva held out: so as that very
Inn was able to put a stop unto the vast designs of the French, and the other
Confederates, who when they should have taken it, thought to have done great
matters in Italy: Thus la Riva only excepted, all the Valtoline, together with
the Counties of Bormio and Chiavenna, which by joint consent of both the Crowns
were deposited into the Popes hands, were taken by the French and Venetians,
more by cunning and dissembling then by open force. The Duke of Feria, as he
could not meddle in the defense before the taking of the Valtoline, without
order from the Pope, so professing that the business did not belong unto his
King after the depositure, would not go to the recovery thereof without new
orders; but being content to keep la Riva, expected new directions from the
Court; and the Court unwilling to come upon this occasion to a breach with
France, had recourse to the Pope, laying all the burden of this affair upon
him, and pretending the observance of agreement from him, desired him that he
would endeavor the restoring of the Valtoline, and offered to assist him
therein, if he from whose hands the Valtoline was taken would use his own name
for the recovery thereof.

The Pope, abhorring to break with France, no less then the King of Spain, and
thinking that the Spaniards would lay all the burden upon his shoulders,
examined this business otherwise: he considered how unworthy a thing it would
be, for the Pontifical Office to become the Author and Promoter of Discord and
Wars between two Kings, between whom, as Sons of the holy Church, he was bound
to endeavor peace and union: he considered that the ambition of some of the
Spanish Agents, contrary to the safety of the affairs of Italy, had given just
occasion for the present commotions, wherein he neither out of right nor
justice, nor State-interest, ought to favor them; that possibly the King of
France might have no hand in Coure's actions, or that if he had, his aim might
only be to suppress the Spanish ends, and to secure the common affairs of
Italy: that therefore it was necessary first to spy into his intentions: that
difficult and dangerous businesses were brought with more ease and safety into
the Haven, by fair means, then by rigor and severity; and that it would not be
wisely done to fall foul at first, whereby if the King should grow obstinate in
the business, he would by all means make it good: that it was not the part of a
Pope to give the King occasion to cast off his obsequiousness, and respect
toward the Apostolic See: nor by making himself a party, to give him such
reason of distrust, as if a breach should happen to fall out afterward between
the two Crowns, he should be made unfit to recompose it: that the Grandezza of
the Apostolic See consisted in this, which if she should be a partaker, she
would necessarily cast the balance on one side, and by standing Neuter she
should keep them both her friends: so as by his Pontifical Authority, and by
the credit he should get by his neutrality, he should be the better able to
compose businesses: Being therefore desirous to proceed maturely in so weighty
a business, he resolved first to use peaceful endeavors with the King, and to
procure the restoring of the Valtoline, by civil means, and by Negotiation: but
so much circumspection in such urgency of affairs was interpreted a
luke-warmness, and coolness of Counsel; especially by such who are better
pl^ased with actions of resentment then with such as are considerate, and duly
weighed; and much more by such who might reap advantage by the Popes
resentment; and therefore the Popes circumspection made all men wonder, and
afforded variety of discourse and interpretation, no less then did the fervency
of the French, and their double-dealing upon the present occasions: On the one
side, none could conceive so little respect from the French, to be used toward
the Apostolic See; that so little account should be had of the reciprocal
conventions touching the depositure, and of the Promises and Declarations made
by them but a little before, in the face of the whole World, of not innovating
any thing concerning the Valtoline: on the other side, it past not without
admiration, that the Pope, not making any the least account of so many
Counsels, and so many Protestations, and offers made by the Spaniards,
accompanied by the evidence of such preparations made by the French, and by the
Venetians, would first wait for the blow, before he would hold up his hand to
fence it; and that he did so slightly resent it, when the blow was given; and
none being able to believe that he was really deceived, it was therefore
argued, that he suffered himself to be deceived, by secret intelligence; and as
suspicion when it is once entertained, draws unto it all the actions of those,
who are already become suspected; so the Pope, who from the beginning of his
being Pope was held to be sufficiently inclined to the French, it was thought,
that partly to please that King in that wherein he was so much pressed in point
of honor, partly not to incense the King of Spain by the express delivery up
of the Forts; after his Declaration made in points appertaining to Religion,
that he saw this practice which did indeed give some color to this commotion,
and did oblige the Pope to provide for it; and perhaps also, as some men
thought, because he was not of opinion that the depositure of the Valtoline did
suit with the interest of the Apostolic See, even when he was Cardinal, and
much less now, when if the two Kings should fail the Soldiers which were in
the Valtoline, the Pope must supply their defaults with the Churches moneys:
that therefore he chose the middle way, and did permit the French to make
themselves masters thereof by force, to the end, that afterward he might
dispose thereof with advantage, and reputation to that Crown; and so with
greater safety, and satisfaction to the common affairs; and that therefore
thinking this the best course he could take for the safety of Italy, over which
he was very vigilant; and to suppress the unextinguishable fire of war which
did hang upon the Gates thereof, he chose, as the l^sser evil, to consent to
the wills of the French, of the Venetians, and to the common sense of the
Italian Princes: some setting aside such nice Considerations, said more freely,
that the Pope was no l^ss troubled then the Venetians, that the Spaniards under
pretense of Religion should get footing in the Valtoline, thereby to trample
upon the Liberty of Italy, and reduce the Apostolic See and so many Princes
i^to slavery; and that therefore abhorring their intentions, they were vexed at
nothing more then to see themselves undone by such ambitious ends; so as not
accepting the Spanish succors, he gave secret orders to Bagni, that he should
suffer himself to be overcome by the French: many also discoursing yet more
freely of the Popes mind said, that the Pope not being content with excluding
the Spaniards from the Valtoline, to have thereby deluded their ends, and
secured the Common Liberty, did nourish yet greater designs in his bosom, and
aspired to curb their immense power and ambition, so to reduce the affairs of
Italy to within such a compass, as the Princes thereof being gotten free from
the Spanish tutelage, might govern themselves as they listed, and dispose of
themselves, and of their own business, without such respects to that Crown* and
that therefore joining with the French, the Venetians, and Duke of Savoy, he
did go along with them in the same common ends, which was, to pull down the
Spanish greatness.

This opinion was much strengthened by the great conformity of genius between
him and Cardinal Magallotti, Brother to his Brothers Wife, who in his first
conferring of promotions was by him made Cardinal, whose Counsel he did so
highly esteem, and so much confide in, as he was wont to say, that if there
were another World, it might be governed by his opinion; and though the Pope
himself was of solid Counsel, and very capable of Public Government; and that
he needed not to be advised by any one, and that his favors conferred upon
Magallotti, and his having imploi'd him much in public Affairs, might be
attributed to his alliance, to his ancient Friendship, and to the desire which
is usual in Princes, to exalt their Favorites; yet the most difficult affairs
of the Papacy passing through Magallotti's hands, and all men esteeming him to
be high in the Popes favor, it was necessarily thought that he had a great
stroke in all public resolutions; and therefore Magallotti being rather of a
brisk and stirring spirit then given to mildness and moderation, and much more
inclined to the French then to the Spaniards, made men think that the Popes
deliberations, passing through Magallotti's Forge, did partake more of that
temper then of neut^ality, which he did so publicly profess: whilst in these
ruptures, having taken into consideration, how much the affairs of Religion
would be endangered, and how much he ought therefore to have opposed himself
even in Arms, against whosoever should bring wac into Italy, he was wont to
say, that of a Judge, he would not make himself a party: that he would not
break with either of the Crowns; that he would not exasperate the King of
France, nor provoke him to any strange resolution, by which that Kingdom might
separate it self from the Church, whereof there being some speech at that time
in France, whereat the Pope was much troubled, would sometimes say, that he
would not imitate another Florentine Pope, who by not knowing how to carry
himself dexterously in point of neutrality, had given occasion to the disunion
of Englaud: These were the opinions, these the discourses which were commonly
had in Italy, and even in the Court of Rome, which being somewhat controverted,
grew afterward somewhat stronger, and got a little more field-room, in the
troubles and dangers, which not long after befell the Genoeses: at the which
being but very little moved, it was conceived that being herein also of
intelligence with the other Confederates, he was not less displeased to see
business proceed successfully against Genoa, then with those that had proceeded
in the Valtoline. The Valtoline being taken, the Pope hearing the rumors which
were spread abroad through Italy, and in the Court, of his intentions, and
seeing that all men's eyes were bent upon him, he sent Bernardine Nari to Paris,
who was his Chamberlain, and one that he loved very well, and who was
acceptable to that King, as having been formerly a Page in that Court; to
complain of Coure's actions, and showing himself to be thereat offended, he
gave order for levying of men, and made some other preparations for war: which
being unseasonable for what was past, proved also unuseful for what was to
ensue; for what remained, he held very secret Consultations with the Cardinals,
and Ambassadors of Savoy and Venice, so as he seemed to continue his former
Friendship, and good Intelligence with them, and that those his preparations
were in order to somewhat else, then for the recovery of the Valtoline, or for
the defense of the present state of Italy against the perturbers of her peace.
A little after the French entered, and took the Valtoline under the Marquess
Coure, the Constable of France, falling into Piedmont with about 14000 Foot,
amongst which were some Veterane Regiments, and with 1500 Horse; and joining
with the Duke of Savoy, who had 14000 Foot and 2500 Horse, together with much
Artillery and Cannon for Battery, they marched toward the State of Genoa, the
Constable being accompanied by his Son in Law, Marquess Crickey, and the Duke
by his Son the Prince; and were not only favored by the Duke of Mantua, who
gave them free passage through the lower Montferrat; but also by the season of
the year, which though it were in February, 1625. yet contrary to the custom of
that Country, and to the season it self, they were not hindered either by by ice
or snow: there was no title nor reason on the behalf of France, for the war
against Genoa, nor were there any Heralds sent from that Court, to demand or
pretend unto any satisfaction for any offense done to that Crown by the
Commonwealth, nor was there any to be alleged: nor did any of the French
mention any end their King had in that enterprise, save only some that vaunted
that they went to free Genoa from being oppressed (as they said) by the Spanish
Tyranny: others, who were not so close, let it sometimes slip out of their
mouths, that the King assisted the Duke of Savoy in resenting the injuries he
received from the Genoeses, by reason of the interest of alliance which he had
with his family: but when they were entered the State of Genoa, they minded the
making themselves masters of the Towns which they took, and put Garrisons into
them in the Kings name, as belonging (as they affirmed) to the ancient
Patrimony of France. The Duke and Constable intended at very first to besiege
the City of Genoa, the Metropolitan of the whole State, which not doubting but
that they should easily take, they thought they should find little difficulty
in the rest of the enterprise: news came at the same time, that the Duke of
Guise prepared a Fleet in Marcelles, who having declared himself an enemy,
before any of the others, had taken 150000 Ducates, which being sent in small
Vessels from Spain to Genoa, came into the Ports of Province, as into Friends
Havens; and it was given out that both that, and the English Fleet, would
quickly appear in the Seas of Genoa. The Commonwealth did not believe that the
enemy would aim so high at the very first; but that bending their first
violence against the Western Seas, and taking some important place, they would
fix their footing there, and making it a Rendezvous for Arms they would wait
upon such occasions as time and condition of war would produce, and proceed
further afterward, and advance against the City; wherefore they had
distributed the greatest part of their best and most experienced men into the
Towns of Savona, Albenga, (...) Mauritio and Ventimiglia: but receiving assured
advertisement, that the enemy was resolved, the first thing they did, to fall
upon the City of Genoa, they va^ed their form of defense; and leaving Savona
well Garrisoned, which is a chief place of the State, nearest the City, and
nearest the enemies Army, they recalled all the rest of their people which were
distributed along the River, the greatest part whereof were presently sent to
defend the Passes: there are two ways which lead to Genoa from the lower
Montferrat, through which the Confederates Army past. The one by Rossiglione,
which passing over the Apenine, goes to Voltri, a great Town upon the Sea, ten
miles Westward from the City: the other by Gavio, which passing also over the
fame Apenine, falls by the Valley of Poz Zevera, to St. Pier d' arena, two
miles distant from the City toward the same side: the latter being the more
ordinary way for Carriages is more large and open, and made more commodious,
and plain, by Art, as far as the situation will permit; at the entrance into
this way is Gavio, a Town indifferently great, but weak, unless it be for a
Castle seated on high, and (though little) of no little consideration: it is
hard to bring Cannon by either of these ways; and almost impossible by that of
Rossiglione. The Commonwealth therefore resolving to quit the defense of Novia
and of Occada, two great Towns, the first beyond Gavio, and the other beyond
Rossiglione, fell to fortify Gavio, and put 2000 Foot therein, to defend it:
she also caused some Trenches, and some Redoubts to be made beyond the straits
of Rossiglione, for the better security of that Pass; for Garrison whereof were
sent 2500 Foot, by which and by the strength of the situation, it appeared (by
the relation of experienced Commanders who were sent thither) so secured as the
Pass was thought almost invincible: looking therefore (...) the enemy would be
longer detained, they gave themselves, with much study and industry, to Munite
the City; which though it be walled about with great Walls, and flanked with
good Bulwa^ks, yet being over-looked by Mountains which incompass it, they
chose to fortify the top of those Mountains by a long continued Trench, which
beginning from the head of the Lanthorn which shuts up the Haven Westward,
should run upon the back of the Mountains; and bending toward the East, should
descend into the Valley of Bisagno, and should terminate there almost upon the
point of Carignano, which is the furthermost part of the City toward the East;
and because the Commonwealth knew she wanted a Commander in Chief, who might be
well experienced in war, to whom they might commit the weight thereof, they
chose Giovan Ieronymo Doria, Knight of St. Iago, to be their
Camp-master-general, of whom mention has been formerly made: an ancient and
experienced Commander, but whose great age did diminish that vigor in him, by
which in his youth he had done much in the behalf of the Catholic Religion,
and of the Crown of Spain, in the wars of France and of Flanders; and they made
Don Carlo Doria, Duke of Turcis, chief General for the defense of the City.

The Camp-master-general Doria being brought into the Senate to spea^ his
opinion touching the total administration of the present war; shewe^ that the
chief defense of the City consisted in keeping the Enemy as long as they could
beyond the Apenine; for the City being situated much underneath the
neighboring Mountains, and it being to be conceived by the great Train of
Artillery which the Duke brought along with him, that he meant to begin the
Siege by Battery, there was great danger of terror and confusion in the City,
not being accustomed to such furious noise of the Cannon: so as not approving
the former resolution of abandoning Novi and Ovada, he moved for their defense;
for though they were not able of themselves to stand out, yet they would afford
time and commodity to make their Trenches already begun upon the Mountains, and
for the coming of succors from Naples, and from the State of Millain. (...)
The Commonwealth approved of this advice, and sent Georgio Centurione and
Henrico de Franchi, two Senators, to defend Savona, with titles of Commissaries
General, and ordered Doria to defend the State beyond the Apenine: furnishing
them all with such men as they could spare without disfurnishing the City:
Doria passing over the Apenine sent his Nephew George Doria, with some Forces
to Novi, and he in his own person undertook to defend Ovada: the Enemy had not
as yet appeared before any of these places, only a Trumpet came some days
before to Ovada, to summon it to surrender; and the scarcity of Oxen and
Horses, for the Train of Artillery, together with some other impediments, was
such, as not sufficing to conduct them, they were forced to bring part of their
Artillery some miles forwards, and to send the same Cattle back to bring on the
rest: which occasioned much delay in their march; and the deep Mire, and Rivers
which were swollen by the great fall of Rain, retarded them much more; and yet
the Dorii, finding neither Victuals, Munition, Artillery, nor any manner of
defense in either of these places; for the Inhabitants finding that the
Commonwealth had abandoned them, had for the most part quitted those Towns, and
carried away the Artillery and Munition along with them, which were impossible
to be brought back, the Enemy not being many hours march off when the Dorii
entered: Iovan Ieronymo was forced to abandon the enterprise, and to retire to
within the Trenches of Rossiglione; which finding to be ill ordered, and not
defensible, he writ unto the Senate, advising them to remove the people from
thence, lest they might be lost; and it being impossible to go with the Army
and Artillery that way to Genoa, he counseled that the whole defense should
return to Gavio, by which the Enemy must of necessity march; and whither he
would go with his men, as he did: going therefore to Ottaggio, a great Town
upon the same way, five miles more inward then Gavio, he thought to send aid
from thence to Gavio and Novi, which he held would assuredly be the first
places which the Enemy would fall upon; and by thus keeping them from entering
by that way, to keep the City from being assaulted, and from the misfortune of
the imminent war. Doria was not well got out of Ovada, when the Van of the
enemies Army, which was advanced, not meeting with any obstacle, entered
thereinto, and finding no resistance took it; and the Count of Overgnia,
General of the French Horse, advancing by the way of Gavio, took Novi also upon
surrender; and the Enemies Army which came on, lay idle for some days,
quartered in these two Towns, and in the adjacent parts; waiting for the rest
of their men with the Artillery and Munition, which came on but slowly, by
reason of the aforesaid difficulties, The Duke being quartered in Cremolino, a
Town in Montferrat, near to Ovada, was busy in taking the Trenches which
guarded that Town; and the Count d'Overnia, who was quartered in Novi, and in
the Cottages thereabouts, had his eye upon the Town of Gavio, which was
defended by Benedetto Spinola, who upon this occasion was made
Commissary-General beyond the Apenine, a Soldier much imploi'd in the wars of
Flanders, in chief commands, for a long time; he had with him 1500 Foot, most
of them Country people, and one Troop of Horse from the State of Millain: he
having speedily fortified the place, withstood a fierce assault given by the
General, who going to surprise it with almost all his men, but without
Artillery, was forced to retire with the loss of many of his men, and some of
the chiefest, and also to abandon some stations which he had taken before the
assault. The Dukes men had no better success in an assault which they gave to
the Trenches of Rossiglione; for the station was manfully defended by Iacomo
Spinola, the head of 500 Soldiers of the Militia of Bisagno, with no small
loss of the assailants: so as the people of the Commonwealth, though for the
greater part of the meaner sort, having gotten the better in these two
assaults, and in some lesser attempts, began to take heart, and to think the
face of the Enemy less formidable; and the Commonwealth her self, fearing
before how her men would behave themselves, seeing things succeed better then
they expected, and that the Enemies Army lay still idle, doing nothing worthy
the threats, and same which was given out; began to build more upon the
difficulties the Enemy would meet with, then upon the strength of their
situations, and of the valor of their own men: wherefore they would not
(according to Doria's advice) abandon the Fortifications of Rossigllone, which
they were told by others were not to be taken; and hoping every day for better
success, they thought that the Enemy, being straightened in those parts, began
to experience those difficulties, whereinto they had unadvisedly brought
themselves; and this the rather, for that Don Ieronymo Pimontello, General of
the Horse of the State of Millain, being entered by order from the Governor
into Torona, with 4000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, stood observing their ways, that
he might fall upon them in the Rear, if they should pass further into the
Mountains of Liguria: all this while the peace was not violated, nor was there
any breach of a war conceived to be made between the two Crowns; though for the
Duke of Guise his having seized on the 150000 Ducates, as has been said, in
Provence, the King of Spain, pretending an interest therein, had made a
reprisal of all the French goods that were in Spain; and the French had done
the like to those of Spain, that were in France; therefore the Duke and the
Constable, professing to observe punctually friendship, and good correspondency
with the States, and Subjects of the King of Spain, did not permit any act of
hostility to their men; and if any accident should happen to the contrary, they
proceeded to severe punishment against the Delinquents, as done without their
order, through military licentiousness, and excused themselves; which was not
only accepted by the Spanish Officers, but seeding the French with the same
food, they assured them they should not be injured by their Forces: many
invitations were made moreover to the Duke, and to the Constable, and
reciprocal friendly Offices past between them; and upon complaint made by the
Constable that some loads of Meal were taken by the Subjects of the State,
restitution was forthwith made; the Governor, who was unarmed, being unwilling
to provoke an Army which was strong and powerful upon his Confines: but when he
should have past the Apenine, where the numbers of men would neither be an
help, nor hinderance, it was certain he would not keep within the same bounds;
for it being as impossible to keep Genoa without the assistance of the State of
Millain, as to defend Genoa when that State should be lost, it was apparent the
Spaniards would be forced to break with all the World rather then to lose
Genoa; for these Reasons the Genoeses were reasonably well satisfied,
especially since they saw none of the Enemies Fleets appear: but the Duke being
desirous to clear the Pass of Rossiglione, resolved to assault it with the
gross of his Army on Holythursday, the twelfth day after Ovada was taken: the
defendants, who had had the better upon other occasions, were afrighted to see
so many men appear in good order; so as distrusting not to be able to defend
themselves, they all basely forsook the Trenches before the Enemy came within
Musket Shot, and retreated, unless it were a Company of the Corsicks, which
being placed higher made honorable resistance: but afterward fire taking in a
Barrel of Powder, at the blowing up whereof 20 of them were burnt and slain,
and seeing the places behind them abandoned, they likewise forsook their
stations, and retreated to Rossiglione; and the Enemy following their blow,
became masters of the Trenches, and soon after of Ros^iglione also, which was
likewise forsaken by the rest, who making it a Rendezvous for Arms, for
re-inforcing those who defended the more inward Trenches, seeing that they all
ran away, they likewise beg^n to run: so as the place, together with the
Victuals, Munition, Moneys to pay the Soldiers, and other provisions, fell
(without any opposition) into the Dukes hands: they continued running away,
till they came to the Sea; only two Companies of Soldiers staid in Mansone,
where there was a little Castle, very strong by reason of the narrowness of the
Passage, fifteen miles distant from Rossiglione, toward the Sea; wherein there
was two small pieces, and whither sufficient Victuals, Men and Munition were
sent from Genoa: the Enemy entering Rossiglione past on to Campo, a place only
three miles more inward then Masone: here they halted, trying those of Masone
with small Skirmishes, and Articles of agreement, who still defending
themselves did manfully make good that Pass, and that Castle: all this while
the new work of incompassing the Mountains with Trenches was hardly begun in
Genoa: the Walls of the City were not at all fortified; and their Artillery,
whereof they had great store, and very great ones, were yet in their Magazines,
unmounted, as in time of peace, and lying one on the top of another, they had
no experienced Cannoneers, little store of Match, and the meaner sort of people
was beyond measure increased, by the concourse of women, and others fled
thither from the neighboring parts for refuge: the Soldiery, which for a
whole year were there assembled at the great charges and industry both of the
public and private, much diminished: those few that were left were sent to
Garrison Gavi and Rossiglione; and many of the latter were dissipated through
the terror of the preceding day: 200 Neapolitans, who at the earnest entreaty
of Ianetto Spinola were by John Ieronymo Pimontello sent to Tortona some days
before what had happened at Rossiglione, as they past a long, without thought of
being assaulted, were cut in pieces by the French: wherefore, the City appeared
to suspect Feria, as being abandoned in her so great danger: so as the
unexpected news of Rossiglione being brought to Genoa, the City was in great
terror and confusion; which increas^d by the children, old men and women of
Vettri, who flocking to Genoa, full of fear, and believing that the Soldiers
of the Commonwealth, who fled from Rossiglione, and returned by the way of the
Mountains toward the Sea, were the Enemy, affirmed that Masone was taken, and
that the French did draw near; that therefore which befell Rome, the City of
Mars, after the rout at Thrassimeno and Canna, and at Hannibals approaching the
Walls of Rome; and of later times, Paris, when the Army of the Duke of Burgony
and of the other Confederates, in the War for the Common Good, was heard to
arrive; and yet of later years, when she feared to be assaulted by Charles the
Fifths Army; that which befell the Venetians after the Rout at Giaradadda, befell
the City of Genoa: a City bred up for almost a hundred years in peace; where
there was not any that had ever heard the noise of an Enemies Drum or Trumpet:
some of the Gentlewomen went from the City, some of the weaker sort of people
fled; others freed their houses of what they had of most value and worth, and
sent them to Ligorne. The Senate amidst such a multitude of affairs and
troubles, hearing the opinion which was had of the greatness and neerness of
the danger, resolved forthwith to abandon Savona, Gavio, and all the other
places of the State, and to withdraw all their Forces to defend the City of
Genoa, upon whose safety and welfare, all their thought were set: therefore on
Good Friday, the very day that they heard this news, they sent all the Galleys
that were in the Haven to Savona, with order to the Commissaries, that leaving
the Citadel provided for, they should presently return with all the inhabitants
to the City: Orders were likewise sent to Camp-master Doria in Ottaggio, to do
the like with all the Garrisons thereabouts, and with those of Gavio: the first
Order was obeyed, for on Easter Eve the Galleys returned from Savona, with the
people and Commissaries, but not the other; for Doria being experienced in
warfare, thinking it to be a rash resolution, wrote back, before he obeyed it,
that the Enemy having brought so many and so great pieces of Artillery by the
way of Rossiglione, there was no danger that they could possibly app^oach the
City without them; and that the people might run danger of being lost, if they
should be brought away, the Enemy being so near; he therefore exhorted the
Senate to make head against them in Gavio, which whilst it was maintained did
obstruct, and being abandonded did make way for free passage to the City. The
Senate approved Doria's advice; true it is that the Commonwealth building much,
in this so great terror, upon his Counsel and Valor, and upon the like of
Benedetto Spinola, who kept to defend Gavio, sent for them both to Genoa, that
they might assist to defend the City; and Spin^la, (who upon this occasion was
made Camp-master-general) was by Doria's direction, succeeded in the defense of
Gavio, by Iovan Baitista Meazza, of Pavia, Captain of the Millain Horse who
were there in Garrison: it was therefore ordered contrary, to the former
resolution, that the Galleys should return the next morning with the people who
were not yet landed, to defend Savona. Lodovico Guasco's coming to Genoa did
also much encourage the Inhabitants, and appease the confusion they were in,
who was sent by Feria with 2000 Foot, and 200 Horse to the relief of the City;
and coming on the Easter Eve, when the confusion was so great, was received
with great joy, not only for the Forces which he brought with him, but also for
that thereby the jealousies which were had of Feria ceased, and they hoped for
greater succor: so as now some hopes of preservation appeared; especially
since they heard that the Enemy came on no further by the way of Rossiglione:
they therefore knew that the City had conceived too excessive fear by the
disaster of Rossiglione, and Proclamation was made, that upon pain of Death
none should depart the City, or send away any Goods or Movables; and they
began very diligently to make Trenches, to mount their Cannon, to dig Ditches,
and to make other Fences for the City, all, both men and women, being very
intent upon the preservation of the public safety and liberty: but on the
other side, the Senate fearing that some new invasion might be made in the
Western River, especially since they heard that at this very time the
Pimonteses were gone to Sassello, a Town belonging to the Commonwealth, lying a
little above Savona, and that they had taken it; and fearing that General
Doria, by reason of his great years, would not be able to provide at the same
time for the defense of the River when it should be assaulted, and of the parts
beyond the Apenine whereby the the Army marched, they chose Tomaso Caracolla,
who was then in Millain, for their Camp-master-general; and deputing him for
defense of the State beyond the Apenine, they sent Doria to recover Sassello,
and to defend the Western River. On Holy-Thursday, the Popes Galleys, and those
of the great Duke, appeared in the Haven at Genoa, which waf^ed Cardinal
Francisco Barbarini, the Popes Nephew, to Marcelles, who was sent Legate a
Latere to the King of France, upon the occasion of the Valtoline, and of these
present occurrences: a provision which was thought by many to be very weak, and
unseasonable to keep off this imminent storm; and therefore as it proved
useless afterward, so was it of very little hope now: the Legate being arrived
would not come on shore, nor accept of any public or private invitations, many
whereof were offered him, excusing himself upon his precise Commissions and
Orders limited by the Pope: insomuch as there were some who interpreted this
Embassy to be for some other more secret ends: being staid there some time by
contrary Winds he departed on Easterday, early in the morning, toward Savona,
where he tarried some days, expecting Monsieur Pamphillio, Auditor di Ruota,
who going along with the Legate, was to remain N^tio in ordinary in Spain, and
was sent from Savona to the Duke, to get from him some cessation of Arms. The
Duke seeming somewhat scandalized, that the Legate came not himself in person,
gave Pamphillio but a cool welcome; and by reason of the Victory at
Rossiglione, thinking that he had the City as good as in possession, he did not
grant the demand, alleging for his refusal, that being but a Soldier of the
King of France in that war, it was more then lay in his power: not long after
what had happened at Rossiglione, the Duke and Constable turned their Forces by
the other way of Gavio and Ottaggio: distrusting as, I conceive, to be able to
advance by the way of Rossiglione. The Genoeses penetrating into the design by
what Doria had said, and being somewhat freed from their first astonishment,
thought it necessary to turn their defense that way, not only to oppose and
weary the Enemies Forces, but to get more time by delay for the coming of
succor from the State of Millain, from the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily,
where they were raising; and though all agreed in this, yet they differed in
their opinions touching the way of putting it in execution: some were for
re-inforcing the Garrison of Gavio, whither Doria (before he went from
Ottaggio,) had sent 1500, who if Gavio should be lost, might entertain the
Enemy, till more succor should come: others were of opinion, that all the
Kings and Commonwealths Forces should march toward Ottaggio, or the
neighboring parts, and make use of the Mountains situationous: and that giving
more encouragement to the defense of Gavio, they might force the Enemy to live
more close, and with more trouble and unquietness. During these discourses,
Thomaso Caracciolo, and the Baron Batteville came from Millain, who unwilling
either to approve or disapprove, any of the aforesaid opinions, before they had
gone in person to know the situation of the Country, and condition of the
places, that so they might give their opinion the better upon what was
propounded: it was forthwith resolved they should go into those parts, and take
with them 1000 of Guasco's Soldiers; and that Guasco himself should go with
them and be assistant to them in Counsel; and that Doria should go to Savona,
and from thence to the recovery of Sassello, which was soon recovered. Camillo
Cattaneo, Knight of Malta, came also to the City from Sicily; one that had been
long versed in the wars of Flanders, who was presently sent with 2000 Foot to
Masone, and finding it not capable of so great a Garrison, he was ordered to go
to Ottaggio; so as between those who were there already, and those that were to
come thither within a few hours, Caracciola had with him in Ottaggio about 5000
Foot, and 80 Horse; Caracciola, leaving Guasco behind him, to follow with the
Foot, came to Ottaggio about the going to of night; and understanding
immediately that the Duke, being then very strong both in Horse and Foot, was
come to Caroxo, a little Village in the mid way, but nearer Ottaggio then
Gavio, and not thinking that he would come to an assault so soon, he was not so
diligent as was necessary, the enemy being so near with so great Forces, and
himself so courageous; and the night being dark and rainy would not permit him
to discover the condition of the situation, and circumstances of the Country:
some few men were only sent to guard the Passes, and to reinforce some of the
neighboring Hills; and news coming to Genoa, that for certain the Duke would
make himself master of Ottaggio, before he would attempt Gavio, as well for the
Victuals which he was confident he should find there, as that the enemies being
driven out of those quarters might be no hindrance to the taking of Gavio, they
only staid expecting the next days light, to give necessary orders, and make
requisite provisions: only they argued that night, whether if the Duke should
advance, they should do better to wait for him within the Town, or meet him in
the Field: Camillo Cattaneo was for keeping within to defend the Town, and
Caracciola, that they should go out: but supposing that the Duke could neither
have Cannon, nor be prepared for an assault, they thought they should have time
enough to do what should be best, so as it would be superfluous to talk thereof
now, hoping that time, the proceeding of the Enemy, and the next days light,
would counsel them what they had best do. Ottaggio is great and populous,
situated at the foot of the Apenine toward Lombardy, upon the left hand of a
rivulet, which falls from the Mountain, and runs along the Plain on which the
Town stands, which is weak, and almost open; for the ancient walls are ruinated
in many places: on the top of it there stands a little Castle, much decayed by
time; and standing upon the high-w^y which leads to Genoa, it was rich and
populous through the Merchandise, and passage which went and came continually
from Lombardy; and the Geno^ses thinking that it might be made very tenable, by
reason of the situation, if it should be fortified, they made many Trenches in
several parts, as well to defend the way as the neighboring Mountain: the
chiefest were, one made to defend a little Bridge called Frasso, half a mile
beyond the Town; the other, a long Trench, which extending from the foot of the
Mountain to the rivulet, sheltred the Town and the whole Campagnia on the
front; by these Works they thought they might be able long to withstand the
oppugning of Ottaggio, and keep the Enemy from entering by that way, not
considering on how many sides an Army may make its way. The Duke who expected
the speedy arrival of his Artillery, resolved not to march that day, so as the
Commonwealths Captains might have had better convenience to provide for
defense: but Monsieur Di San Anna being sent by the Duke with some Forces about
break of day to discover the way, and the first Fortications, took the
Fortifications of Frasso, almost before he had discovered them, which were the
first, and were basely abandoned at the first appearance of the Enemy; he sent
forth with to acquaint the Duke with this his happy beginning; the Duke was in
doubt whether he should keep behind, with all or with part of his men, or make
them retire from the place he had taken; and whilst he knew not what to resolve
upon, he might hear a Skirmish which had happened between his men, and 400 Foot
which were sent from Ottaggio to recover the abandoned place; he was advertised
of what was done, and was sent to for succor, for that his men were in great
danger: so seeing himself engaged, contrary to the orders he had given, he
commanded his men to advance, crying out aloud, and with much confidence, this
is a day of Victory: going forth with all his men into the Field, and sending
part of his people by the Hills beyond the water, who should seem as if they
went to assault that Town on the back, he disposed his Cavalry a long the
River, and kept the rest on this side, and went with a large Front to assault
the Plain, and the Hills which stood over them. The Genoese Commanders betook
themselves to defense with no less courage, though with worse order and
fortune; for Caracciola's power prevailing, they marched into the Field; and
whilst the 400 Foot which went to recover Frasso entertain the Duke, they
ordered their men thus. The Plain which lies between Ottaggio and Frasso is
divided; on the left side whereof, which is under the Hills, they disposed of
the Foot, wherein were comprehended Guasco's men, who were come but very then,
weary and wet: in the way that lies nearest the River they placed 80 Horse,
divided into four small Squadrons; they sent some to reinforce those that were
to defend the Hills, by which the Enemy might advance: the mean while, the Duke
having not only defended and kept Frasso which St. Anna had taken, but repulsed
the 400 Foot that went to recover it, he pursued them, though not without
trouble and difficulty; for they retreated slowly, still resisting and
fighting; and continuing thus for some hours, the Duke came at last within
sight of the Plain of Ottaggio, where he might see the Commonwealths Forces in
order, and prepared for defense; and staying his march a while, that he might
form his Squadrons, and give fitting orders, he sent to assault them on all
sides, those who defended the Hills were the first that gave back, who being
pursued by much a greater number, retreated toward the Plain; whither being
come, they disordered their friends Files, who being justled by their friends,
and assaulted by the Enemy which pursued their friends, they could not resist;
and the 80 Horse which they had placed in another part, wheeling about, at the
first appearance of the Enemies Horse, without striking one stroke, the flight
and confusion grew greater every where, then the fighting: so every one
endeavoring their safety by retiring toward the Town, the Field was forsaken;
and Caracciola, who fought there manfully with a Pike in his hand, and Agostino
Spinola, were taken Prisoners: great was the slaughter of the Genoeses,
especially at a Portcullies which they found shut; for there being here a great
press of those that pursued, and those that were pursued, and little or no
resistance made, the Dukes men had opportunity to kill many: yet this slaughter
was not without revenge for the Portcullies being beaten down, and the Dukes
men entering the Town, were very hardly dealt withal, not only by Musket Shot
from the windows, but by two Barrels of powder, to which fire being seasonably
set, many of the Dukes Soldiers perished, amongst which many of the chiefest
both for Birth and Valor: yet that first part of the Town was taken by the
Duke; who without giving any time of respite fell upon the main Town, which was
divided by a little rivulet from the Suburbs which were taken; where also the
falling on was not only great, but also the resistance; and the oppugners
received most prejudice, who remaining an open mark to the shot of the
defendants, (for there were neither Trenches, nor covered approaches) they
fought for the space of three hours: the defendants playing upon them from the
Windows and tops of Houses: yet the oppugners increasing every moment, and a
rumor being spread abroad amongst the defendants, that the Enemy was entered by
another part of the Town, the Captains and other Officers, being surprised at
so sudden a news, and not knowing what to do, they gave over making further
defense, and fled to the Castle, hoping to get out from thence by the way of
the Mountain, and go safe to Genoa: but they failed in their design; for seeing
the skirts of the Mountains possessed by the Enemy, and having neither Powder
in the Castle, to defend themselves, nor Victuals to maintain themselves, they
had but little hope of safety. The Town, by their retreat, slackned their
defense, and being at last either abandoned by the defendants, or overlaid by
the assailants, whose numbers increased by continual recruits, and the Duke
being there in person, it fell into the power of the Enemy; and soon after the
Castle; wherein there being neither Victuals, nor any thing for defense, Guasco
and the other Commanders who were shut up there, surrendered upon Articles:
which being agreed upon by word of mouth, but not in writing, afforded occasion
of wrangling; those within pretending that they were to have their liberty
together with their lives; and the others, that their lives were only granted
them; wherefore the Duke kept them all prisoners; and the more to justify his
doing so, said that they had broken their Articles by setting fire to a Barrel
of Powder, which slew many of both sides, and amongst the rest Monsieur di
Flandes, one of the chief Officers of the Dukes Army, and one whom he esteemed
very much for his valor: at the which unfortunate accident the Duke was so
disgusted, for the loss of his men, and especially for that of Flandes, as he
thereby pretended to detain them all, and to deprive the Commonwealth, in such
an exigent of time, of their chief Commanders, attributing the accident to the
Enemies maliciousness. Thus all Articles were broken; and the Soldiers entering
the Town presently sack it; wherein not only much ^avenous cruelty was
committed, but great impiety, to the great prejudice of those of Ottaggio, they
being destined to suffer the first mischiefs of war which was begun against
Zuccharello, 80 miles distant from thence: great was the prey that was here
got; for this was the usual Market for Victuals which past from Lombardy to
Genoa; and the Ottaggians being naturally industrious, and given to Trade, were
very rich in Moneys, Household Stuff and Corn: whereby the Dukes men, who had
known the miseries of war, clothed themselves anew, and got great store of
Moneys, Victuals, and of many other things: the Prisoners were very many,
amongst which, nine of the prime Gentlemen of Genoa, besides many other
Captains and Officers; seven Ensigns were there taken, and the Victory was
great, for here did the chiefest of the Commonwealths Soldiers and Commanders
fight; but yet it was not without the loss of a great many of the Dukes best
Soldiers. Ottaggio being taken, the Duke took some Horse with him and rode up
the Apenine; where when he was come to the top, he looked advisedly upon the
Valley of Pozzevera, which lay beneath, and upon the Sea which was near unto
it: for the City which is environed with nearer Hills cannot be seen from
thence; and devouring that prey with his looks, and desire of revenge, which he
was never to get, he thought every hour a thousand years till he had got the
City: not knowing, nor being able to imagine that God had prefixed that place
where he now was for the boundure of his vast designs, and for the utmost
limits of his Triumph. The Duke could not so fully enjoy this his Victory; for
to boot with the loss of his best men, his joy was embittered by the news which
he heard the next day, touching his Admiral Galley, which the very next day
after the Battle was brought, with his chiefest Standard in her, captive into
the Haven of Genoa: the Commonwealth had sent three Galleys some few days
before into the Provencal Seas to annoy the Dukes Coasts, who hearing that the
Dukes Admiral was at St. Honorato, a very small Island in that Sea, anciently
called Lerino, not far from Nice, and disjoined from the Continent by a little
Channel, they resolved to go in pursuit thereof: when they came near the
Island, two of them kept without at Sea, and Galleazzo Giustiniano, who
commanded the Genoese Admiral, entered between the Island and the Continent, and
lighting upon the Dukes Galley, (which seeing what danger she was in retired)
and strove to get into some Town of Provence, but was overtaken and forced to
yield to the Genoese Admiral: but though the unhappy success at Ottaggio did
not occasion so great terror and confusion in Genoa, as did the loss of
Rossiglione but some few days before; (for she was the better accustomed to
bear with such disasters:) yet the wifer sort knew, that this loss was much
greater then that of Rossiglione, by reason of the defeat given to all their
best men, and the imprisonment of sogallant and experienced a Commander, in
whose worth and valor the Commonwealth reposed so much trust, together with
the like of their Captains, and prime Gentlemen: they considered the danger
they were in, that the Duke following his good fortune might present himself
before their Walls with his whole Army, and that of the King of France: so as
being inwardly afflicted with so great a loss, they knew not how to sustain so
imminent a danger. The Senate calling a Counsel of many of their Captains and
Counselors, (whereinto was admitted the Marquels of Castagnedo, being the
Spanish Ambassador, whose advice they much valued, as being one well
experienced in the Wars of France;) and the Duke of Turcis; they were of
differing opinions, as were also their Captains and Counselors: some thought
it a pernicious advice to consume their best men in the defense of a weak
place, against so powerful an enemy; and thinking it a better course to make
use of them for the defense of the City, whose danger could not be greater, nor
nearer hand, they advised to abandon Gavio, and to withdraw the Garrison, to
defend the chief City: others persevering in their former opinion, said, that
the Enemy losing also many of their best men, which were the very sinews of
their Forces, they became weaker, and consequently less able to expugne the
City; and that succors being daily expected from Naples and Sicily, the City
could run no danger: so as it might do well, though with the loss of the
Garrison at Gavio, to entertain the enemy, and to gain time not only for the
coming of the foresaid succors, but for the arrival of the Germans, who (they
heard) were already entered the State of Millain. In this difference of
opinions, they resolved to consult with the Duke of Feria, and to be governed
by him: the Duke of Savoy, on the oath other side, grown proud with Victory,
prepared to pass with all his men over the Apenine, and to come before the City
Walls; and was very careful in preparing all things fitting for the enterprise:
but the Constable kept him from this resolution; who being unwilling to leave
Gavio behind his back, which was well fortified, and had a great Garrison in
it, it being an inlet for succor, and a place of safety for the Enemy to
retreat unto upon any occasion, gave order for the expugning thereof before
they should advance further. The Duke thought it somewhat hard to foreslow the
course of Victory; but not being able to do otherwise, he was forced to give
way to the Constables will; without which he could not prosecute the intended
enterprise: and because the Constable thought the loss too great which was
received by the former assault given to place by the General of the Horse, and
the loss greater which was received before Ottaggio, because they had proceeded
in those actions according to the Military manner, he would therefore proceed
orderly in the taking of Gavio, with Artillery, Approaches, and making of
Trenches: Captain Meazza, Governor of the Garrison of that place, laboring
how to defend it, and how to offend the Enemy by often sallies, conceived such
hopes, as he writ to the Senate, that he would make good that place for the
space of ten or twelve days; nor would he peradventure have failed to do it,
had not one who had gotten privately into Gavio, given him some orders from
Stefano Spinola, and from the Resident for the Commonwealth with Feria at
Millain, whereby he was told that Feria thought it a better and safer way, to
preserve their men, then to lose them together with the Town; the preservation
whereof was desperate: that he should therefore give over the defense thereof,
and provide the best he could for the safety of the Garrison. The Senate had
writ to Meazza when they left the decision of the business to Feria, that he
should observe such Orders as he should receive from Spinola from Millain; and
they had written to Spinola that he should direct Meazza what to do touching
the maintaining, or abandoning of Gavio, according as Feria should think fit:
hereupon Meazza about midnight, without knowledge of the Townsmen, went away
with the Garrison of 3000 Foot toward Serravalle, a Town lying toward the
State of Millain, about some five miles of; but finding the ways bad, and
therefore having spent much time in his march, he began to fear being surprised
by the way, the next day: wherefore resolving to return back, he did so, with
the like silence as he had come out that night; and upon Articles to march out
with his men the next day, he yielded up the Town, but not the Castle, which
was not at his disposal: this third accident did again afflict the City, which
the day before the surrender had received Meazza's Letter, by which he assured
them he would maintain the Town fourteen or twelve days at least: in which mean
time the Genoeses believing that for certain, that relief would come from
Naples and Sicily, they began to hope, that the succor would come before they
should see the Enemies Army: but now failing of that assurance, and not seeing
the succor come, every one apprehended his own misfortune, and were astonished
at the Enemies success; and finding that they prospered in all their actions,
they thought it impossible they should do otherwise in the enterprise of Genoa.
This their affliction and astonishment was presently increased by the loss of
the Castle, which happened not long after; for the Duke being desirous to remove
all pretenses and impediments that the Constable could allege, for not going
to Genoa, speedily prepared the Battery, wherewith having for a while played
upon the Walls and prejudiced them a little, the Captain of the Castle (though
he were strongly situated, and well provided of all things, yet being) but
young and unexperienced, he came to Parley, and obtained Truce for three days,
with leave to send to Genoa, to advertise the Senate of his condition; but the
Duke having made some Trenches during the Truc^, and the Captain not having
received any advertisement from the City during those three days (for the Duke
had detained the Messenger) he also surrendered: so the Army, having no other
obstacle to keep them from going to Genoa, unless it were the craggedness of
the Mountain; the Duke eg'd on by ardent desire, and by the great hopes which
so noble a concourse of Victories afforded him, he pressed the Constable very
hard, that without giving further respite to the Enemy, he would give order for
the advancing of the Army and Artillery, assuring him of undoubted Victory.

We have already (said he) opened the gate, paved the way to the City: all
obstacles and impediments are already removed; the Enemies are routed, their
chief Commanders are our Prisoners; the City her self, before the Victory at
Ottaggio, being full of terror and confusion, had (as we understand by some
Prisoners) sent to Article with us, and to offer us great sums of Money: many
of the chief of the Commonwealth do the like to redeem themselves from us, and
our hands; from whence knowing their own weakness and being confounded with the
presages of imminent ruin, they very well know they cannot possibly escape,
what will they now do, after so many defeats, in the heels of one another?
after having lost their best men? when they shall see themselves deprived of so
many Chieftains and Officers? deprived of their General at the very first
encounter, in whom they did so much confide? shall we think that they will hold
out, at the very first appearance of our Ensigns, that they will wait for the
noise of our Cannon? shall we believe that a City accustomed only to Traffic,
and to give account how they have gotten so great riches as they have now
within their Walls, and as they have distributed elsewhere, shall dare to make
any resistance against our Forces, our Ensigns, our Fame? against the dread
which the French Forces bear with them every where, and which are every where
so feared and reverenced? let us go, for Gods sake, before they by their flight
rob us of such riches as are already ours: before that being fortified, and
succored by the Spaniards, they may dispute that Victory, which nothing but
speed can, in all probability, assure us: what terror, what consternation has
the loss of their Trenches, the rout and defeat at Rossiglione, imprinted in
our Enemies? how near was that City then to be abandoned; and shall we now,
after the defeat of Ottaggio, after the loss of Gavio, when they are deprived
of their best Soldiers, best Commanders, doubt that they will not undoubtedly
be readier to run away, then to defend themselves? that they will not rather
think of their own safety, then of making resistance? I pass by the many
intelligences which we have with those Citizens; I mention not the discontents,
and dissatisfactions which are in that City; which certainly will much
facilitate our Victory. Let us go on then, great Constable! not to the
oppugning, but to the expugning of this City, not to the Assault, but to the
Conquest thereof; not to the Combat, but to the assured Victory, which is
promised, and prepared for us, by so many Circumstances and Arguments: whereby
the name of France, and the Empire of that Crown, which is already in the wane
in Italy, shall be by us raised up again; and to our perpetual glory, be
restored to her former splendor and dignity; and your Excellency by so signal
an action shall crown your so many former praises, and gloriously concluding
your Heroic Deeds, shall render your name more famous amongst the French, and
other Nations, then that of any of those ancient Commanders which we remember
or read of.

The Dukes Authority was not so powerful with the Constable as it had been; and
as fellowship in command is always full of emulation, and jealousy; the ends
of Commanders not being always the same, it appeared by several signs, that
neither were their wills the same: he therefore answered.

If your Highness, His Majesty's Agents, and the other Confederates had, in
some sort at least, corresponded to the Obligations of the League, and to the
great offers made to me at Susa; surely such exhortations as these would be
superfluous to me: nor should I, who have always incited others to glorious and
gallant actions, need now such an Inciter; for the very Reasons, and the same
Courage, which in obedience to his Majesty, and to serve so many Confederate
Princes, moved me in my old Age, and in the midst of Winter, to pass over the
Alps, would of themselves be sufficient to bring the Enterprise to an
honorable end, which was resolved upon so good grounds, and begun with so
great preparations, and greater cheerfulness: but in a business of such weight
we must go to work with understanding, and casting up our accounts well, we
must not golgroping in the dark amidst so many dangers; best we repent our
rashness too late, and lest instead of advantage, which we pretend unto, and
the glory which we hope for, we reap ruin, loss and dishonor: we go against a
great City, well peopled, munited with strong Walls, and environed with many
Fortifications, as we are informed: we go by uneasy ways, by a barren Country,
by strong situations, by craggy Mountains, by Countries which have nothing left
in them for the maintaining of an Army; where are our Victuals for nourishment?
where Cattle for Carriage? where Carriages for other Implements? does your
Highness know how far the Provisions which you ought to make prove short? how
far inferior to your obligation, and to what you did assure me they should be,
first in Susa, and afterward in Turin? I do not here Dispute whether it be out
of will, out of negligence, or impossibility, that they have not yet appeared:
whatsoever the reason be, it cannot be denied but that there is great want of
them, and that the consequence thereof is great for what we have to do: the
English Fleet, and that of Marcelles, which were the chief ground-works of our
enterprise, have not only not yet appeared in the Seas of Genoa, but are not
(for ought we can learn) come yet out of their Havens: the supply of men, which
should be prepared in France, for the necessary recruit of our Army, which is
weakened very much already, and very much lessened, we do not hear that they are
yet sent, no not so much as in a readiness: nor is there any care had of us in
that Court, more then if we had never come out of that Kingdom; and who can
think but that a resolution wisely put on upon these ground-workes must needs
run to ruin, when these foundations fail? and yet your Highness, persisting in
the same fervor, thinks it great shame not to pursue that which it would have
been great weakness to have begun without these foundations, or to have
resolved upon, and which it would be great rashness to pursue: whether of our
two advices be the better, (if it were not convinced by common sense and
reason) would be better comprehended if we would but duly consider what our
condition was when we had past the Apenine: it being impossible, if we should
have met with any indifferent resistance, to keep there idle, destitute of
Victuals, and of all humane provision; and who can doubt but that any the least
stop, any the sleightest hinderance to this your Highness his pretended
Victory, will redound to our own total ruin and destruction? but why talk I of
stops or hindrances? our only tarrying for the bringing on of our Artillery,
and other Provisions, which cannot March as fast as our Army; the time only to
distribute out Quarters; to make our selves masters of their Sentinels or
Sconces; to the disposing of our Artillery; (if we should meet with no other
lets,) will be undoubtedly sufficient to ruin us, and to destroy our men, if
we carry not Victuals along with us, sufficient for our maintenance the mean
while; so as we shall have come thither, for nothing else but to make our
selves a ridiculous spectacle to the world, through our rashness, and
indiscretion, whereof our very enemies, whilst sitting within their Walls, will
be the first and nearest spectators: what will become of us then, think you, if
the State of Millain, which we shall leave behind us, as a sure enemy, shall
move? who can assure us that they will continue their hitherto feigned
friendship with us, when we shall have passed the Mountains? what will the
event be, if the great succors and aids which are preparing in Naples and
Sicily shall come from thence this mean while? with what courage, with what
Forces, can we at the same time mind the expugning of a City well walled, well
provided and succored, and resist the Forces of the State of Millain, which
shall come upon us, whilst we are oppressed by so many troubles, straightened by
so great necessities, shut up between the Mountains and the Sea, and deprived
of any mortal succor? will your Highness confide in the weakness of Enemy, in
the Peoples astonishment in, the disorders of the City, in the great
intelligence which you confess you have there? let us suppose, that this being
our condition, the City Gates should be thrown open to us, and that that should
be the only way remaining for us, in this extremity, to get the Victory, or
rather to save our selves? will your Highness (persisting constantly in your
opinion,) place, I will not say the happy event of the Enterprise, but the
safety of our selves, and of our reputations, upon so acrial, and so uncertain
points? the battle at Ottaggio may make your Highness know that the enemies are
not so full of baseness and cowardice, as your Highness believed them to be but
a little before: the taking of that little Borough which made nothing at all
for our main affair, which wanted Artillery, and whose Walls were for the most
part down, cost us the blood of our best men, as your Highness very well knows;
and shall we think that they who have sold so little a Town at so dear a rate,
will be ready to throw open their Gates, that they will so easily give
themselves, their Wives, Children and Riches, in prey to us? let not, oh let
not the too immoderate desire of Victory, the too great thirst after glory and
revenge, make us too rash; and let us not be misled by vain intelligence with
discontented people, wherein the total of our lives and reputations does
depend; nor let us not place the groundwork of our Enterprise upon the peoples
confusion, and sudden fear; for I protest and declare, that we shall assuredly
be deceived if we carry with us no other preparations, no other inforcements
for Victory, and for our own escape: the intelligence, and plots of
malcontents, may easily be discovered and hushed, they may be withheld by the
coming of new succors, changed by the alteration of success, vanish through
the difficulty of performance, or suppressed by the diligence of the Governor:
a little time appeases hidden commotions, a small opposition curbs popular
insurrections; and by what we hear of the union and good order of that City, we
have more reason to fear, then to hope for Victory; and I who have some
experience of the worlds affairs, as I build somewhat upon such occasions, and
accidents, when Forces are adequate to the Enterprise; so where I find them
inferior, I have always thought them to be but baits to ruin, and to the
destruction of those that lay the groundwork of their success thereupon.

The Duke replied many things, whereby to draw the Constable over to his
opinion; sometimes showing him that being so far advanced, they could not
without much shame forbear prosecuting: sometimes endeavoring to free him from
the fear of the State of Millain, by telling him in what straights of men and
money the Duke of Feria was; sometimes that the French Forces had the better of
it in the Valtoline, and were Conquerors on that side, who would at the same
time fall there upon the State of Millain: sometimes mentioning the Venetians,
who being ready to break into war upon the account of Cremona and Giaradadda,
would reduce that Governor to a condition of rather needing succor, then of
succouring: that therefore they were to make use of the reputation and heat of
Victory, which does often time bring Enterprises to a happy end, though they be
otherwise impossible, and desp^rate, to the appearing of all humane reason:
that all sinister events ought not to be thought upon, which may intervene in
humane actions; since there are none so certain, nor so surely grounded, which
may not be hindered by a thousand accidents; upon which he who would fix his eye
too attentively, must not hope to do any thing; that many things were to be
left to Fortune, which bearing a great sway in all humane actions, but
particularly in those of War, does commonly assist bold and courageous actions:
that it could not be long ere the Fle^ts would arrive, the necessity whereof
he, out of many considerations, did not much value: But the Constable
demanding, finally, provisions to maintain the Army for at least three months
beyond the Apenine, before he would move from those quarters where he was; (and
not long after these Disputes, news coming, that great succors were come to
Genoa, from Naples and Sicily) the execution of this so great Enterprise was
almost quite given over.

The Duke being necessitated to steer on his course, resolved, to shun lying
idle and loss of time, to turn part of his men toward the Western River, which
by the Capitulations of Susa, were assigned over to him; and where he
understood the Genoese had taken Oneglia from him, together with all the
Valleys of that Country, and were entered into that of the neighboring Prela:
he gave the charge hereof to the Prince, who forgoing for then to attempt
Savona, turned upon Pieve, the first Town of the Genoese, of the nearest to
Piedmont, and the Marqui^ate of Ceva; 2000 Piedmontese of the Trained-bands of
Mondovi, and of the Marquisate of Ceva, were entered a little before into the
River to defend Oneglia, not knowing that it was taken by the Genoese: these
^aving past the Apenine at the place which is called Passo della Nava, by which
the way lies to Pieve, (a Pass naturally very difficult, and unaccessible, and
almost abandoned by those of the Commonwealth, came not time enough to defend
it, nor to relieve Oneglia, which was already taken by the Genoese, but going
to Prela, it was their good luck to relieve and free it; for there being none
before it but an unexercised Mil^ti, without an experienced Commander, with
little or no Military Discipline, they gave over the Siege at the appearing of
the Piedmonteses: so as returning with the same ease, and success, into
Piedmont by the same P^ss of Nava, and having acquainted the Prince with the
weakness of the Guards at those Passes, and how easily they had relieved Prela,
and how they had not met with any opposition in their return, they encouraged
him the more to the enterprise; where by the example of his Subjects who were
returned from those parts, he had reason to expect but small resistance: he
therefore with hopes of good success, began it: nor failed he in his hopes, for
finding the Passes, as he had been informed, but badly guarded, he fell down
from thence to Pieve, a great Town at the foot of the Apenine toward the Sea;
and the Market being usually there as great and populous, used by the
Piedmonteses and Genoeses, but not weaker to be defended then that of Ottaggio,
Camp-master Doria was entered thereinto, being sent thither from Genoa, when the
danger of that side was known: he had only a thousand paid men given him by the
Commonwealth; so as though he had refused to go thither with so small a number,
yet to obey the Senates Orders he went: but with protestation, that he went, to
the manifest loss of himself, and of his men: so gathering together 1500 more
of the common people of that Country, he came together with them into Pieve;
and holding it was impossible to take that Town without Artillery, which he
also thought was impossible to be brought thither, he gave all necessary
Orders, and made all requisite provisions for defense: he fortified the
Monasteries of St. Austine, and the Capuchins which were without the Town; and
munited them with sufficient Garrisons: he did the like at a certain station
which was called la Morte, all which places he thought untakeable without
Artillery: so as thinking himself sa^e within the Town with those
Fortifications, he expected the coming of the Enemy.

Doria was not deceived in his opinion; for the Prince appeared without any
Artillery, and sitting down before St. Austines Monastery, he met with great
opposition, and for some days had little hope to take it; but Artillery
arriving the fifth day, beyond the defendants expectation, all impediments were
removed; for levelling them at the Monastery, and beating down the Steeple, it
slew many of the defendants with the fall thereof, he infused such terror into
the rest, who returned tumultuously into Pieve, leaving that station in the
Princes power: their example was immediately followed by the rest of the
Guards, so as the Prince (being master of the Field,) sat down presently
before the Town, which being by so unexpected a chance fuller of confusion then
order, and the Walls not being fit for battery, the Captain began to Parley;
and having the word of one of the Dukes Captains given him, that he might march
out, he, not minding who it was that gave it, or what power he had to give it,
was presently made Prisoner; and it being given out amongst them that were
within, that for fear of troubling of the Treaty, they should put out their
Matches, the Besiegers approached the Wall without resistance, and beating down
the Gate with a Beam of Wood they entered the Town, and those within fled away
by another little Gate that was toward the Sea: but they mist of their design,
which was to escape, for that other Gate being presently possessed by the
Princes Soldiers, many of them throwing themselves down from the Walls, which
were not very high in that part, were some of them slain by the Musketeers who
were placed on the out side, and other some perished in their falling down:
here was the greatest slaughter of the best men, to the number of 200; but
those that kept within the Town met with more mercy; for the Town being taken
whilst the surrender was in Treaty, the Prince provided for the peoples safety;
and the Soldiers falling to plunde^, and their ava^ice being greater then
their cruelty, none were troubled but those that withstood plunder: many were
taken Prisoners, amongst which, Camp-master Doria, and four other Gentlemen of
Genoa, two others who were got into the Castle yielded not long after, upon
promise of safety of life and liberty, which was readily observed. Thus was
Pievs taken, Doria made Prisoner, and the people of the Commonwealth, who were
destined to guard that part, were defeated: La Riviera, having lost its
Garrison, and not hoping for relief, ^ell into the Prince his power: all the
Commonalty ran to receive him, and brought him the Keys: they ^reed themselves,
by moneys, from being sacked, and rendered obedience to the Prince, being
ordered by the Commonwealth to do so; which minding only the defense of Genoa,
suffered them to complain with the times, so to keep from being sacked, and
from the violence of War: Whereupon Albenga, Alassio, Porto Mauritio, San Remo,
and the City of Venti^iglia, the chiefest Towns upon the River, together with
Oneglia, fell (without any gainsaying) into the Princes hands; as did also all
the weaker places, unless it were Triora, which being seated upon the top of a
Mountain, held out, and kept still manfully for the Commonwealth, and defended
it self manfully against many attempts. The Castle of Ventimiglia held also for
the Commonwealth, which resisted for some days after the Town was surrendered,
till the Prince having caused some Artillery to be brought from Nice by Sea,
began to batter it, and also to make a Mine; whereupon the Captain who was but
little experienced in the Militia, a^ the end of eight days surrendered it:
whereby the Prince became absolute master of the River, which extends it self
for the space of 70 miles, from Finale to Monaco. The Duke, at the same time,
notwithstanding the Constables backwardness, persisting in going for Genoa,
made many provisions in Gavio, which were sent from Piedmont: he brought
Artillery to Ottaggi^, he caused Scaling-Ladders to be made, ^e assembled
Pioneers to plain the ways upon the Mountains; and having taken many Fee-farms,
which held of the Empire beyond the Apenine, from several Gentlemen of Genoa,
in the Valley of Serivia, he sent his natural Son, Don Felice, to take
Savignone, another Fee of the Empire, a great Town, distant only six miles from
the City, on the Noth side: by which way being able without any impediment to
fall into the Valley of Bysagna^, he made way to assault the City on that side
which was thought the weakest. Don Felice succeeded therein happily, and
without resistance; for the City being brought into great streights and
anx^ety, was wholly intent upon fortifying herself; and to keep off the danger
which she saw drew (every day) nearer, she was very diligent in making
^renches, in furnishing the Walls with Artillery, in digging Ditches, in making
Plat-forms, and Stockcadoes, to fence the weakest places. Thus the Affairs of
Genoa were thought to be brought to the last period: moreover, the City was at
this time in great want of Moneys; for some Galleys being gone into Spain to
fetch moneys durst not make the Voyage for fear of the Fleet at Marcelles: they
therefore made use of the Plate of private persons, which being turned into
money did in part supply the need, but the expense being excessive ^ame far
short of what was requisite: there we^e not many men ready in the State of
Millain to come into the Field, the Germans not being yet come: and some few
that were already come were sent to desend la Riva, which was so necessary for
the preservation of that State; and Don Ieronymo Pimontello, not thinking
himself safe in Tortona, thought it better to retreat with those few men he had
into Alessandria: at which the Genoeses were not a little astonished, who by
the fear he showed upon this occasion, were not well pleased to see him go
further from the City, instead of drawing nearer to the relief thereof; and the
like scarcity of money being there as was in Genoa, the Swissers, who were much
in Arreer for former pay, seeing the great necessity of the Spanish Officers,
and being set on by the Princes of the League, denied passage to the Germans
who came to defend the States of Millain, and Genoa. The failing of the
Genoeses credit insued the want moneys; for their State being given for lost,
throughout Italy, and all Europe, it was thought that the private Fortunes of
those Citizens would perish with the public. The fear which was had in Genoa,
of the English and French Fleets, was of no small consideration, and did much
afflict the minds of all men; it being hourly feared that they would appear in
those Seas, by reason of the continual news which they had of great
preparations made both at Marcelles, and in England; and of moneys sent by the
Duke, and his Son, when they were before Ventimiglia, to the Guisans, that they
might put the Fleet in readiness, and appear as soon as might be in the River
of Genoa: to which Fleets it was feared that 40 Frigots or men of War would
join; which being come from forth of Holland, and it not being known whither
they were bent, all men thought they were intended for the Enterprise of Genoa:
great was the danger, lest taking Corsica, or some of those Havens, they might
fortify it, and make it serve for a Bulwark against the State of Genoa; and
there hinder the passage of shipping between Spain and the Kingdoms of Naples
and Sicily: the Genoeses were no less jealous of the Princes of Italy, who
having room left them to be admitted into the League, it was not known how they
stood affected to these present commo^ions: it being feared that either
apprehending to share in the ruin of Genoa, they should not dare to declare
themselves, or run the same fortune for assisting them, or that out of a tacit
abhorrence of the Spanish Empire, they might not be sorry to see an alteration
in the State of Genoa, which was so nearly joined to the Spanish Grandezza; and
that some out of a desire of bettering themselves in the ruin of that
Commonwealth, might wish it; for a Rendezvous for Arms was made in the City of
Pisa, and a great assembly of men, and preparations for War; and though it was
said to be done under the color of being ready upon all occasions to defend
Tuscany, yet the Genoeses wanted not conjectures of danger to Serezzana and
Serezzanello, belonging to the State of Genoa upon those Confines: which places
the great Dukes of Tuscany, under pretense of the Florentine Commonwealth, have
always had an eye upon, and (sometimes) some secret practices: it was certainly
known that the great Duke did at this time treat with the Duke of Feria, that
he would suffer him to possess himself of them, and of the Gulf of Spetie, and
to keep them, and defend them against the Confede ates Army, lest when they
should have taken Genoa they should take them also; and that answer was made,
that neither by the King of Spain, nor yet Feria's self, that any one-foot
belonging to the State of Genoa should be possessed upon any whatsoever
pretense. The Genoeses were therefore much distracted, being forced upon these
urgent occasions to lessen their own necessary defenses, so to provide for the
defense of Corsica, and of the two other places, of such concernment; whether
they notwithstanding sent people, and provision for the maintaining of them:
though the danger from the Duke of Mantua, (who was thought to be privately
very partial to the French) were not so great, yet the jealousy was no less,
by his giving free passage to the Confederates Army through Montferrat; and
more by the offers made afterward by him in secret to the Commonwealth, to join
with them against the same Army which was already past; promising to fall upon
them in the Rear with 6000 Foot and 1000 Horse; if they would give him money to
raise them, and to maintain them in the field: which offers, as contrary to the
ends and proceedings of that Prince, were not only not accepted, but (as not
too much to be trusted in these times,) they were rejected. The Venetians
forgoing that so noble study and endeavor publicly professed by them upon all
occasions, of the lib^rty of Italy, being now joined with Foreigners against
the Genoeses, were held to be little less then open enemies to them: they had
no old quarrel against the Commonwealth, nor any new occasion of enmity or
resentment to incite them to so hostile a resolution: but after the ancient
emulation for Empire at Sea, the two Commonwealths had always kept upon fair
terms: the uniformity of their Government, and their being both of them Italian
Potentates, might have been sufficient to interest them in the reciprocal
maintaining of each other: only the common end and desire of the Confederates,
to abate the greatness of the Austrians, and of the King of Spain, which was
more suspicious to the Venetians then to any others, by reason of the
neighborhood of Germany, was sufficient to work upon that Senate at this time,
and to make them (together with the rest) plot the ruin of Genoa: it was
commonly said, that this business being handled in the Consiglio de Pregati,
and it being argued what disorder and inconveniences would ensue to the common
affairs by the ruin of Genoa, at that time particularly, when that
Commonwealth was desired, in the Diet at Susa, to ioyn with the rest in the War
against Genoa; Rainero Zeno, a Senator of great sway and eloquence, should say,
that the inconveniences were most apparent, but that the danger of their
affairs, by reason of the great power of the Empire, and of the Crown of Spain,
was such, so imminent, and so near their State, as all other respects and
considerations whatsoever being laid aside, it ought in good Government of
State to be preferred before all things else; and that since all disorders could
not be prevented, they ought, in so weighty and important resolutions, too have
an eye upon the greater, and wink at the lesser; just as wise Physicians do,
who (to preserve their Patients life) stick not sometimes at the amputation of
a Leg or an Arm, which being preserved would be his death. And though the
Venetian Forces, being far from the Confines of Genoa, were not much to be
doubted: yet being near the Cremonese, and joined with the French in the
Vatoline, they kept the State of Millain employed, and consequently were no
little hinderance to the succors which might be brought from thence to the
Genoeses; whose condition was now such in Venice, as the Merchants of Genoa
durst not appear in public, they were so generally hated; and great was the
rejoicing of the Venetian Nobility and Commonalty, when they heard of the good
success of the Confederates Army against the State of Genoa; and no less
triumph and rejoicing was made in the Court of Rome, where the Genoeses through
sinister news, spread abroad of their misfortunes, had lost so much reputation,
as they mocked, and publicly laughed at them, as if they had already been quite
vanquished; and were it either by reason of the great joy which great
alterations cause, or were it that the Officers of the Palace were for the most
part Florentines, or such as depended upon Florentines, they were not
displeased to see the liberty of others lost, though their own was therein
concerned: a thing which made some men argue that the Pope was not overwell
affected to the Commonwealth, and which did much detract from the fatherly zeal
which he professed to bear her, and from the words which he was used to say, when
he heard ill news of the Commonwealth, wherein he was wont to deplore the ruin
of so Christian and Catholic a State: to this miserable and ruinous a
condition the Affairs and Liberty of the State of Genoa seem to be reduced.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK IX.
The Contents:
BY relief of Moneys and Victuals sent from Spain, and Men from Naples, Genoa
is comforted in the midst of her troubles; she is encouraged by the wants of
the Enemies Army, and through the disagreeing of their Commanders; and is at
last wholly freed by Friends coming into the Field with a powerful Army. The
Enemies Army retreats from the Enterprise of Genoa, and attemps Savona; but
being overtaken by Feria, retires to Piedmont. Feria takes the City of Acqui;
he goes afterward to Asti, and from thence to Verrua; where he stays long to
little purpose, leaving many of his men behind him; and being forced to give
over the Enterprise, returns with his Army much lessened, into the State of
Millain: many actions happen at the same time in the besieging and defending of
Riva di Chiavenna; wherein the Spaniards have still the better of the French;
they drive the French at last out of the Valtoline, and raise the Siege of
Riva. The English Fleet falling upon Spain, is repulsed; and having in vain
endeavored to take the Plate-Fleet which came from America, retires into
England, torn by Tempests. A Discourse upon the quality and usual Navigation of
the Plate-Fleet: the Apostolic Legate returns from France to Rome; and is sent
from Rome to Spain; whither being come, he finds the Peace concluded between
the two Crown^; and the Affairs of I^aly, and of the Valtoline, composed. The
Pope, and all the Princes of the League are very much displeased with this
Peace; as also all the Princes, and the Court of France. Some of them do
therefore conspire against the Kings person, In pursuance of the Peace, the
Forts of the Valtoline are restored, and demolished. New occasions of disgust
between the Genoese, and the Duke of Savoy. The Duke of Guise his Fleet goes
from Marcelles, and comes to Ligorne; and returns from thence to Marcelles,
without having done any thing. The Duke of Mantua dies; and long after, his
Brother, who succeeded him in his Principality. The Genoese Factors, who were
interessed with the Crown of Spain, are much prejudiced in their private
fortunes, by reason of the alteration of Payments, and of other Decrees, made
to their prejudice, by the King.

BUt the troubles and dangers of Genoa, which were not much compassionated in
Italy, met with more favor and benignity from the hands of God: whose anger,
the Senators being desirous by all means possible to appease, public
Processions and Vows were added to the private Prayers and Processions which
were privately made in Churches, and in holy places; their Piety seemed to be
presently seconded by Gods goodness; for at the same time that the Doge,
Senate and People, were pouring forth Prayers to Almighty God for public
preserva^ion, a Galley entered the Haven which brought in her a Million of
Ducates from Spain: a favor the more singular, by how much more necessary for
the present need; and which was acknowledged to proceed the more from Divine
mercy, in that it came when least expected; for two days before the arrivaly of
this Galley, news came from Corsica, that the same Galley being gone from Genoa
15 days before, fearing to be discovered by the Fleet that lay at Marcelles,
had lanch'd out into the Sea, and was driven by the wind upon that Island,
where the Genoese thought her to be still detained by the same wind: the news
was true, but the conjecture false; for the wind changed there, by favor
whereof the Galley came seasonably to Barcellona; and receiving in the moneys,
which lay ready there, returned with great speed and success, to Genoa: soon
after some other Galleys appeared, which brought with them six Millions more
from Spain; whereby the Commonwealth abounding in money was largely enabled to
supply her urgent necessities; and the private men of Genoa, to whom those
moneys belonged, having redeemed their credit, were able not only to furnish
Feria with moneys, to hasten the Levies of the Dutch, and for other necessaries
for marching into the Field against the Confederates Army: but also, moreover,
to provide for the Armies in Flanders, according to their obligations with the
Court of Spain.

The Rivals of the Genoese grandezza were astonished, and not without reason,
when they saw their Commonwealth, which they held to be in a perishing
condition, not only able to subsist, and to maintain her self, but to
administer help to Forre^gn Armies, and make them move to their prej^dice who
had plotted her ruin: Nor were her enemies less amazed, whose whole thoughts
were set upon her extirpation; so as instead of flocking to so rich and
plentiful a prey, they began to fall from their hopes of success; just as befell
Hannibal, who whilst he was with an Army before the walls of Rome, understood
that some L^gions were sent out by other Gates, to recruit the Spanish Armies,
sent into that Province. They fell yet further from their hopes, when they
heard that great succors of men were almost at the same time come to Genoa:
For from Millain (to boot with those that were sent with Guasco) came the
Cavallier Pecchio, after the loss of Gavio and Ottagio, with part of his own
Brigad^e, and part of those of Modena and Parma, which did amount in all to
about 3000 Foot; and the Marquess della Croce came about this time to the City
with 33 Galleys, wherein were 4000 Foot, all very good men, and whereof 2000
were Veterane Soldiers, trained up in the Wars of Flanders; and a little
before 1500 Neapolitans were come thither in some Galleons: The Sicillian
Galleys came also thither with 600 Spaniards, which were sent by Ianettino
Doria, Vice roy of that Island, at his own expense, in defense of his Country:
Marquess Bozzolo came thither also with his three brothers, 800 Foot, and 200
Horse, besides Infantry, which came daily from Naples; so as with these, and
those which Guasco brought from the State of Millain, those that were sent from
Lucca, and those which came (though somewhat late) from Germany, the
Commonwealth was in a short time provided with about 15000 paid Foot, for
defense of the State and City; besides many Commanders, and people of Quality,
and experience, who were brought thither from several parts upon extraordinary
pay: By means of these Forces, and of her own people, who were very vigilant in
defending their Country and Liberty, and with the Militia of the State, the
Affairs of the State were prettily well secur^d, and almost brought into a
condition of safety. The Popes Galleys, and those of the Great Duke, came along
with Sancta Croce, which returning from Marselles, whither they had carried ^he
Legate, and meeting with Sancta Croce, as he came from Naples to the relief of
Genoa, turned back the same way, by Orders directed to the Captains from their
Princes, which Orders Sancta Croce brought with him: it was not thought strange
that the Great Duke should issue out such Orders, who professed himself a friend
to Spain, and to the house of Austria; the Popes Concession came more
unexpected, he being commonly held to be not only averse to the Spaniards, but
to join in ends with their Rivals; and the French Ambassador Resident at Rome,
did exclaim much against it; yet it was thought that the Pope to remove so
great suspic^ons which were had of him, had done it at the persuasions of the
Duke of Pastrana, who pressed very much for it. The first thing that was
consulted of in Genoa, was, touching the whole matter of defense; they all
joined in opinion, That being now only to mind defense, their first care
should be to defend the City, the Head of the State, and to ^efend Savona, a
principal Member thereof, and hold them play till either the Enemies Army
should grow less, which was said to moulder daily away, or till ^he Duke of
Feria might assault them in the Field, and drive them out of the Commonwealths
Territories. Seeing therefore that the loss of la Riviera, as long as Genoa and
Savona should be preserved, did not at all concern the main business, they took
not much care to defend it, that they might not disfurnish the City of a
Garrison in a time of such danger, nor hazard her (...) never so little, to be
insulted over by the Enemies Army, which being so near, when they should see
those who were come in to her succor employed in defending la Riviera, might
approach her Walls, and attempt an assault: howsoever, what should be lost
would be easily recovered, if Genoa and Savona should be kept, by reason of the
situation of la Riviera, which being naturally open and undefensible is soon
taken by any that will endeavor it; and when the danger of the neighboring
Army should be over, it would be more easily recovered by the Commonwealth,
then by any others, as well by reason of the peoples inclination, (who by
reason of the interests they have in the City, and by their continual necessity
of providing things necessary from thence, would desire to return to their
ancient obedience;) as also that the Commonwealth being master at Sea, it would
be very hard for any who should hold the Town to defend it against a Fleet at
Sea; and yet though so many succors, come suddenly, were sufficient to secure
the present condition of affairs, yet were they not sufficient to free the
Commonwealth wholly from the imminent danger of the neighboring Army; and much
less to free the Genoese from fear, who were troubled at the successful
proceedings of the Enemy in Rossiglione, Ottaggio, Gavio and la Riviera del
povente; and being still full of anxiety, could not be at quiet, whilst they
were still subject to be molested by the Enemies Amry; and it being requisite
to expect the total freedom of the Sta^e of Millain, though it were hindered by
many impediments, the Genoeses were still fearful, and full of troubles; for
together with the want of people which the State was in, the Dutch not being
yet arrived, the defense of la Riva (which was a great curb to the French and
Venetians) not being to be abandoned, kept the Governor from thinking of
relieving Genoa. Count Iovanni Serbellone was there (as has been said) well
fortified on all sides; and to keep the Enemy the further off, he had extended
his Fortifications on the left side, by which you come from the Valtoline, even
to the Town of Campo, (a Town upon the River of the Lake) wherewith he
encompassed that Town and la Nova, which did almost join upon la Riva. The
Count being past over (as has been said) to the other side, into the
Valtoline, with the greatest part of his men, was very intent upon f^eeing
himself of that hinderance which crossed his designs and proceedings: being
therefore resolved to attempt the Town of Campo first, to keep it from being
defended, he made la Riva be assaulted on the opposite side, by those who he
had left in Chiavenna, as he returned into the Valtoline: to the end that when
he should assault Campo with his whole body he might the more easily take it:
he mist of his intent, though his design succeeded; for those few defendants
who remained to defend Campo, when la Riva was assaulted on Chiavenna's side,
did so stoutly maintain the defense, as they got time to be succored; for
Count Iovanni leaving Chiavenna well defended, came himself in person with many
men to Campo, where the Siege was more fierce: so as the defendants increasing
in number courage and valor, a strong conflict was begun; which being often
reinforced by the French, Coure perceiving that his enterprise succeeded not
so easily here, as in the Valtoline, against the Forts which were guarded by
the Ecclesiastics; and remembering that he had left 400 of his men before that
assault, and that many others were wounded, he withdrew into his Quarters:
^aving done but little harm to the defendants, whereof hardly 20 were slain;
though they were played upon by the French Artillery, placed in fitting places.

After this Count Iovanni found that Campo, as being too far from la Riva, was
dangerously defended; wherefore resolving to give it over, he made his
Fortifications more inwards toward the Town of Nova; and the French, who could
not take that Town by force, seeing it abandoned, went immediately thither,
took it without any difficulty, and fortified it; and not satisfied with this,
they would advance to the top of the little Hill, that they might go by that
way to Chiavenna, and fight the Garrison that was there: but they failed of
their intent by the gallant resistance which the defendants made, who opposing
all their Forces, had always the better of them: wherefore Coure, who desired
still to join with those that were at Chiavenna, and to make them come unto
him, was forced to make them pass over hither, and come to Campo by a further
way about, and over craggy Mountains: in which passage the French having,
possessed themselves of the tops of the higher Mountains which over looked the
little Hill of Riva, they threw down great stones into the Valley which lay
under the little Hill, wherewith they did much annoy the Rampires, and the
Defendants, who would not have been able to defend that so important station
long, had not Count Giovan sent a good many Soldiers to the tops of those
Mountains to drive them from thence; and herein he succeeded happily, for the
French being unexpectedly assaulted; threw away their Arms, and begged their
lives: but their prayers prevailed not; for being made prisoners, and tied back
to back with ropes, they were tumbled down the same precipices, which was a
most horrible spectacle. Coure for all these unfortunate accidents would not
give over the Enterprise, but fell from assaults to Siege: those of la Riva
received Victuals and Succors by two several passages, the one by the Lake,
the other by Land: by the Lake, by Boats, which past from the lower Lake into
the lesser one; and by Land, by Conducts which were brought to the Territories
confining upon Chiavenna, by the three Chapels of ease which lead to Riva.
Coure possessed himself of these ways, and placing part of the Garrison of
Chiavenna to defend them, he blocked up that passage; and having the coming of
Victuals by Land, he endeavored to do the like by water: he, by the help of
experienced Artificers, and Mariners, brought from the Arsenal of Venice, built
certain Boats and Brigantines; and putting them armed into the water, he made
himself master of the little Lake, and of the Channel by which Boats came with
Victuals and Ammunition to those of Riva: remedies were found for both these
inconveniences; for Count Iovanni sent men to Riva, who taking from the French
the Fortifications which they had possessed themselves off, made the way open,
and rendered that pass free for Provisions and Succor; and the Duke of Feria,
having also sent for experienced Ship-wrights and Mariners from Genoa, he also
put other Barques and Brigantines into the River, which being well armed and
manned, and some pieces of Artillery being placed in fitting palces upon the
side of the Lake, kept the way open as well by Water, as by Land, for Victuals
and other Provisions, and forthwith freed la Riva from being besieged: but
Coure's men being this mean while much recruited by more men and moneys sent by
the Venetians, who desired to see that Enterprise ended, to the end that when
the French should fall upon the State of Millain, they might also assault it on
their side; and new Regiments of Soldiers being come unto him from the
Swissers and Grisons, Feria being very careful to defend that pass, sent 2000
of those Dutch thither who came first to the State of Millain: which happened
very opportunely; for Coure being thus recruited would needs go to assault la
Riva, and do his utmost to take it; and he found the Defendants also recruited,
who marching into the Field encountered the Enemy in a little Plain, beyond
Nova, and fought them; the Combat was very fierce and stoutly fought on all
sides; and the French being often times recruited the Fight continued till
night; upon the coming on whereof, the French were forced to retreat with the
loss of many of their men; and could not only not come near Riva, but forsaking
Campo, withdrew into their Quarters about Vico and Vercei, which were lower,
and farther distant from Riva. These happy successes afforded the Duke of Feria
breath, he thought himself so safe from assaults on that side, as he might have
more leisure to think upon the affairs of Genoa, in the freeing whereof the
Victory in all parts did depend: but the delay of the Dutch was a great
hinderance to it, which did proceed not only from the endeavors to the
contrary of the Confederates, and of the French, but also from the avarice of
the Cantons who were to permit them to pass; who being Creditors to the Crown
of Spain for pay, denied them passage till they were paid their Arraers; and
the Governor being in great want of money, much time was required to get the
moneys wherewith to satisfy them, before the coming of the Galleys from Spain
to Genoa: nor would they grant them free passage when they were satisfied, as
they had granted to the French, but with many limitations, which caused much
delay; and the Governor being much solicited by the Genoeses, whom he could
not please before the arrival of the Dutch, he made use of appearance, instead
of effects; for making all things ready for marching, he went from Millain to
Pavia, giving out that he would go to relieve Genoa; and here according to what
was published, he was very diligent in making all requisite provisions for that
succor, and for the people who came daily from Genoa: a show which was very
seasonable, and which was thought did much detain the Enemies proceeding, who
seeing him ready to march, could not without apparent danger to themselves,
keep their Quarters, much less could they advance to their Enterprise; to the
home and neighboring provisions which secured the Genoeses, foreign and
further distant accidents were added, which though far enough off, yet made
much for their main business; Don Frederico di Tolledo, who was gone with a
powerful Fleet to recover Brafile, returned at this time victorious into Spain.
and Marquess Spinola after nine months Siege took Breda; in the defense and
preservation whereof, not only the Hollanders did labor with all their Forces,
but the Kings of France, England, Swethland; and Denmark: so as the Fleet which
was returned from Brasile, was a strong defense to the Mediterranean, against
the English and the Flemish Fleets, if entering the Mediterranean they should
make for Genoa; so also the Flanders Army, being freed from besieging Breda,
might commodiously and without any impediment go whither it listed, and keep
France in j alousie, which was then rent and disturbed with home discords; and
when the affairs of Genoa, wherein that Crown was so concerned, should require
it, it was sufficient by molesting that Kingdom on that side, to divert France
from offending the Genoeses; and the King of Spain, being quite of these two
impediments, might employ grea^er Forces in defense of the State of Genoa: to
boot with these two Foreign accidents, whereby the conditions of the affairs
of Genoa were bettered; three others which happened nearer hand, did much impair
the affairs of the Confederates Army: the one was, that the Victuals and
Provisions in the English Fleet were corrupted, then, when it was ready to put
to Sea for Italy; so as it was foced to tarry some months to take in new
Provisions: another, that the Heretics in France began again to tumultuate,
and the King being necessitated to quench the fire which was kindled in his own
house, could not furnish fuel to mantain combustion abroad: the third, that the
Duke of Guise, who was to put with his Fleet from Marcelles, notwithstanding
the 150000 Ducates taken from the Genoeses, and other moneys which the Duke of
Savoy furnished him with upon this account, proceeded slowly in his
preparations, and could not put to Sea, according to appointment: therefore the
Duke of Savoy and the Constable failing in the chief ground-works of their
Enterprise, and seeing the Enemies preparations to increase both in Genoa, and
in the State of Millain, they were forced to think more upon their own
safeties, then upon the ruin of others. The inward discords of their own Army
was also a great break-neck to their affairs; which keeping about Gavio,
Ottaggio, and the neighboring parts, uncertain, and not resolved what to do,
began to want Victuals, the Country being barren, and those spent which were in
the Army at its first appearing, and at the taking of Ottaggio; for they could
not hope for any from the State of Millain, now that it was provided of
Soldiers; and very little came from Piedmont, by reason of the length of the
Journey, the difficulty of the Guides and Conducts, and by the hindrances they
met with by the Montserrians, who being irritated, and angered at the ill usage
they received from the Army, as it passed through their Country, declared
themselves fierce Enemies; hindering their Conducts, killing the Conductors, and
all such Soldiers, who to get rid of the sufferings of the Camp retired either
into France or Piedmont. The trocb'es were no less which they received from the
Pozzeveraschy: these are those that inhabit the Valleys and the (...) of
Pozzevera, a Torrent, which falling from the Apenine, and running for the space
of ten miles through the Valley which lies beneath, falls into the Sea two
miles Westward from Genoa: they are men for the most part given to Husbandry,
but very fierce and strong, who having no well-ordered Militia, whereof they
are altogether incapable, prove (on the contr^ry) excellent at scattered
Enterprises which require neither Discipline nor Order; and particularly in the
defense of Passes, and of the neighboring Mountains, by reason of their
experience and practice in those Valleys, and by their being well versed in
those craggy Mountains: these men appeared, divided into Troops, on all sides,
taking all such of the Enemies party prisoners, who fled from their Quarters
for prey, or driven by any other necessity: which happening often times, did so
terrify the Enemy, as none durst stir from the Camp, for fear of being slain,
or taken prisoners: so as being in a manner besieged in their Camp, they were
forced to keep in; and as by reason of this, and of famine, and other
sufferings and sicknesses which began to increase amongst the Soldiery, and by
the running away of many the Camp grew daily less; so by the disagreement of
the Commanders their main enterprise grew still less prosperous: a manifest
disagreement appe^red between the Duke and Constable; which arising at the
first out of slight occasions and jealousies, did daily so increase, as did
totally destroy the common resolves. The Constable came into Piedmont, inflamed
with high desires, and almost as fervent as the Duke in the business of Genoa:
being come near the Genoese Confines he cooled in his ardour, and seemed (as
has been said) to weigh the condition of the war with too much caution: so as
being much perplexed, and unresolved in point of advancing, he proposed the
enterprise of Alessandria to the Duke, as being by all the reasons of war,
necessary to proceed that of Genoa, wherein he appeared to dev^ate from his
former resolutions, and desirous to busy himself in new wars, and greater
troubles, against the State of Millain; which the Duke being hot in the
enterprise, and in his resentment against the Genoese, did absolutely abhor:
but the Constable making objections against advancing into the Ligurian
Mountains, without having first made sure their retreat; which he said could
not be done without taking some strong place, and capable to receive them; the
Duke having removed so many difficulties, did by the happy success at
Rossiglione, Ottaggio and Gavio, tacitly accuse the Constable of coolness and
de^ay; several were the debates and contestings between them touching who
should be master of Gavio, and many other things, whereby they came little less
then to an open breach: Yet the Duke, lest lesser respects might spoil their
greater ends, was content that the Constable should put a Garrison into Gavio,
till such time as the King, to whom they both writ, should decide the business;
the King returned an Answer, but in favor of the Constable; at which the Duke
was highly scandalized: but the Duke was most of all troubled, for that he did
firmly believe the Constable was bribed by the Genoese Gold to delay the
business; for to his jealousies which he had in this behalf, even since when he
was in Asti, other conjectures were added which made his suspicion the more
probable: one amongst the rest; that Stefano Spinola, who was one of the
prisoners at Ottaggio, was sent by the Common wealth to try the Constables
mind, by the means of Claudio Marini, who was Ambassador from the King, with
the Duke, and whose Wife was Spinola's Sister; and to bargain with him, upon
the (...) of a great sum of money, that he would forgo the Duke, and give over
the business. This jealousy was occasioned by its being known, that the day
before the taking of Ottaggio, Spinola had obtained by Marini's means, a safe
conduct from the Constable to come to the Camp, and speak with his Brother in
Law: nor wanted there secret advertisments sent craftily from Genoa to the
Duke, whereby he was fully informed of these proceedings: he who was naturally
suspicious, and prone to give ear unto such informations, and who made himself
believe he had many adherents in Genoa, who did privately favor this his
enterprise, began to believe that to be undoubtedly certain, whereof he had
formerly had some deep impressions; especially since the Constable was known to
be naturally covetous, the Duke began to impute this his so great change of
will, and resolution, to manifest corruption; and to complain freely enough
that he was cousened in this Enterprise; and the news which he affirmed he
heard from Piedmont, of the continually passing of French Soldiers through
those parts, who returned into France from the Camp, with the Constables Pass,
increased these his complaints: from hence (were these relations and suspicions
true or false) began reciprocal detractions; and little respect or intelligence
was had between the Courts of these two great Commanders; and in this interim,
the Supreme Magistrate of Genoa who was Superintendent in the Government of
Affairs, was informed that about 500 Oxen were grazing in the Enemies quarters,
which served for the Train of Artillery; and he considering that without those
it was impossible for the Enemy to approach the City, and give battery; gave
order to the Pozzeveraschy, who by their success were become bold, and
formidable to the Enemy, that they should use all means to scatter them; the
Pozzeveraschy betook themselves courageously to the business which was hard
enough otherwise to be effected: nor was their fortune inferior to their
courage; for coming in the night season to the Enemies quarters, they slew the
Sentinels, and came to the Corpse de guarde, and entering thereinto, slew many,
and many of them endeavoring safety by flight abandoned the Oxen, giving the
Pozzeveraschy means not only to disperse them, but to lead them alive through
unusual ways, but which were well known to them into Pozzevera, and from thence
to Genoa, to the great joy of the City, and no little praise unto themselves,
entering as it were in triumph for having done so generous an action: whereupon
the safety of not seeing the Enemies Artillery planted against their Walls did
much depend; so as being made unable to move, they could neither come to Genoa,
nor return to Piedmont: they were therefore forced to expect carriage Horses
from France, which were suddenly given order for; which preparations were
afterward employed in Italy, for other more necessary occasions of that war:
this loss was succeeded by the like of Savignone, which was taken by the same
Pozzeveraschy, and by other Mountainers of those parts; where Don Felice was
said to be with 200 Foot, but ill provided of Victuals or Ammunition. The
Pozzeveraschy went thither with 200 Foot which were sent them from Genoa, and
being accompanied with many others of the neighboring Villages, they sat down
before the Castle, hoping rather to take it by keeping them from Victuals, then
by assault; and they would have soon regained it, and have taken Don Felice
prisoner, had not the Duke, apprehending his Sons danger, resolved to free him:
he therefore chose 500 of his best Foot, and 50 Horse, and having overcome the
asperity of the Mountains, he came so suddenly and unexpectedly upon the
assailants, as quitting their stations, they afforded the Dukes men free access
unto the Castle, and convenience to take the Dukes Son and the whole Garrison
out, and to return with them: yet this retreat was not without some trouble and
loss unto the Duke; for the Pozzeveraschy keeping behind him in those rocky
Mountains; slew some of his men, amongst which, Crotti, the Dukes chiefest
Secretary. The Duke of Feria kept still in Pavia, idle and irresolute; for
though a great many of the Dutch were already come; yet could he not march out
for want of moneys to pay the Soldiers, and for want of other Provisions; and
the fear of breaking with the Crown of France did so perplex him, as he knew
not what to resolve upon; especially since he had received Orders from the
Court, to be very cautious in what he should therein do.

The Duke and Constable being aware of these delays and perplexities grew more
encouraged to persevere in the Enterprise; and being sure that Feria would not
second his threats with effects, they were daily less afriad to be assaulted in
their quarters; and not having wholly given over their hopes of succor by Sea,
and of being recruited from France by Land, they thought they might have more
leisure to expect them. The Commonwealth, on the contrary, which had the
Confederates Army still within their Dominions; and which was not yet out of
fear of the Fleets by Sea, could not be free from apprehension of danger:
wherefore being afflicted with their so long expectation of succor from
Millain, they resolved to put it to a push; and sent Iovan Vincenzo Imperiale,
Son to Iovan Iacomo, to Pavia, who had been Doge a little before, to the end
that by his Reasons, and by moneys, whereof he carried good store with him, he
might facilitate the Governors coming into the Field: the resolution was very
seasonable, and the expedition very acceptable; for l' Imperiale, being come
unto the Governor removed all impediments by his present moneys, and wan so
much credit by the efficacy of his persuasions and counsels, as he was
admitted into their most secret Consultations, where he wrought it so, as, the
Governor laying aside all other respects, resolved to go to the delivery of
Genoa: he therefore went with those of Pavia into Alessandria, and prepared to
march into the Field, and to fall upon the Confederates with a powerful Army:
the Dutch who were come, and who were to come into Italy, were 16000, divided
into four Regiments: one under Baron Papenhaim, another under the Count di
Solmes, the third under Count Sultz, and the last (which was not yet arrived,)
under Charles Count Mansfield. Besides these, many Horse were come from Polonia
and Croatia, to the number of between two and three thousand; to which the
Neapolitan and Lombarde Horse being added they made up 5000: but because so
many Foreigners in the body of an Army, went accompanied with danger of
Sedition, Mutiny, and other greater mischiefs; the Governor who had but few
home Forces to counterpoise the Foreigners, resolved to take out all the
Spaniards and Italians who were in Garrison at la Riva, and send thither a
greater number of Dutch in their places: he sent Papenhaim thither with his
Regiment, consisting of about 6000 Dutch, to which he added 500 Italian Foot,
and 500 Horse; and sent back for Count Iovan Serbellone with all his Spaniards
and Italians, and kept them in his Army: The Duke and Constable grew fearful
when they saw so great a body of enemies so near; (for it was calculated that
the Governor, leaving all his Towns well Garrisoned, was to march into the
fields with above 20000 Foot, and 4000 Horse) and their hopes of the English
Fleet, and of new supplies from France, being vanished, they began to see
plainly that the business of Genoa grew daily more desperate; and that it
became them better to think of retreating then of advancing any further.
Leaving therefore Novi and Gavio well munited, and in the latter 19 of their
greatest Cannon for Battery, which they could not possibly carry along with
them for want of Oxen; and firing Ottaggio they resolved to return into
Piedmont by the same way they were come, not having with them above 8000 Foot
in very ill order, and 2500 Horse, and some small pieces of Ordnance: It is
true they were met in the County of Neice by Prince Victorio, with part of the
Garrisons that were left in the Town della Riviera: This was the issue of the
ill undertaken Enterprise of Genoa, meted out rather by vast thoughts, and
ardent desire of revenge, then by any civil or Military wisdom.

When they departed, to the end that their Retreat might be the less
dishonorable, they resolved to go to the taking in of Savona: The same, nay
greater difficulties opposed this design, then had done that of Genoa; the
same sterility of soil; the difficulty of the ways, unproper for the bringing
of Artillery; the weakness and small number of those they brought, which were
unfit for Battery, especially of such new Fortifications and strong Rampires as
were made to defend the Town; the many Soldiers and Commanders which were gone
thither from Genoa, (for Genoa being freed from danger, they turned all their
thoughts and forces upon defending Savona) the smallness and weakness of their
Army: whereas on the contrary, that of Millain was multiplied, and ready to
march; so as if when their forces were entire and fresh, some of these respects
kept her from proceeding against Genoa, whilst the Governor was unprovided,
and whilst relief from Naples was not come to Genoa; what could they hope for
in so great an alteration of Affairs? But the Duke thought it too great a scorn
to be forced to return to Piedmont weakened in forces and Reputation, not
having done any thing worthy his threats and preparations: He therefore for the
honor of their joint forces, and for the performance of what they had agreed
upon at Susa, propounded this advancing toward Savona to the Governor; who
having been never to be moved in what concerned the enterprise of Genoa,
suffered himself by the Dukes importunities and reproaches to be persuaded unto
this.

This Enterprise appeared to have two foundations; one, That they had
discovered new and precise Orders sent from Spain to the Governor, whereby he
was absolutely forbidden to come to a Battle; wherefore supposing that all the
Forces in the State of Millain would stand idly looking on, they thought any
enterprise feasible: The other, for that they had received new advertisement
that the Fleet at Marcelles being come from out that Haven should appear in
those Seas with Recruits of men, victuals and munition, at the same time that
they should come to Savona; and that landing a great many men, they would keep
between Savona and Genoa out of a double end; The one, to keep relief from
Genoa; the other, that they might play upon the City with their great Guns from
Sea, whilst it should be assaulted by the land Army; and so to facilitate the
surrender of Savona: And to this purpose Prince Victorio had given the Duke of
Guise 40000 Ducates, when having taken La Riviera he was in Ventimiglia: Upon
these so slight and weakly-laid foundations they would once more try their
fortune: Thus leaving their Quarters they marched through Montferrat toward
Acqui, whither they came within a few days without any disturbance; For the
Genoeses being more desirous to preserve Savona then to fall upon them in the
Rear, sent all their men thither: Nor could the Governor of Millain, who was
come to Alessandria, fall upon them as they retreated, though he intended so to
do: For being got on Horseback to that end, and being ready in Arms with his
forces; as he was saluted according to the Military manner, by a Dutch Company,
his Horse rose up on end at the noise of the Musket shot, and threw the
Governor, who was somewhat corpulent, down, so as he was forced to keep his
bed for some days. Thus their Retreat proved fortunate, though between two
enemies Armies; yet as the Rear was bringing up some small pieces of Artillery,
with about 800 Horse, they had a bickering with some Troops of Horse which were
quartered in Sesse, a Town of Alessandria, which is upon the way by which the
Rear passed: The Encounter was gallant and stoutly fought; the Spanish Horse
were fewer in number, but coming to blows had the better of the enemy, with
little loss unto themselves; for the French Horse had only breastplates on, and
the Spaniards were armed at all pieces; so as they slew and wounded the enemy
without being hurt themselves: Being at last dis-intangled and got loose, they
retreated commodiously. The Army being come to Acqui, and persevering in their
intended march to Savona, they destined Acqui, though it were very weakly
walled, for a Rendezvous for their Arms, and for a safety on their backs:
wherefore leaving 3000 of their best Soldiers there in Garrison, with all the
Ammunition and provision they could bring from Gavio, they marched on with the
rest, which were not above 8000, toward Savona. When they were come to Spigno,
a Town which stands in the midway, they made Prince Victorio and Marshal
Crickey, advance with part of their men to Cairo, which was defended by 250
Neopolitans; and playing upon it with some small Pieces of Artillery, they
after having made two shot, took it upon Articles: But the Governor having
recovered his ^all, and finding that they marched on still toward Savona, held
it now no longer time to stand idle, nor to suffer that Town to be taken whilst
he and his Army looked on, which being of such importance to the State of
Genoa, was also a great concernment to the Crown of Spain: Setting therefore
all other respects aside, he went out of Alessandria with 22000 Foot, all very
good men, and with 5000 able Horse, and marched toward Acqui; whether being
come, he forthwith possessed himself of all the eminent parts thereabouts, and
planted his Batteries; which caused such terror in the French, who saw how
weak their Rampires were, and that the Citizens would not for the^r sakes run
the hazard of being sacked, parleyed presently; and agreeing to march out, the
Soldiers only with their Swords and Daggers, and the Officers with their Horse
and Baggage', but upon obligation to return into France by the Country of the
Vallesani, lest they might return to the Army: 2300 Foot marched out; many who
through great weakness were not able to go staying behind: They found 17
Banners left there, 500 Barrels of powder, many Sacks of Victuals, many Cannon
Bullets, Arms, and artificial Fireworks; and which was more remarkable, the
Dukes Wardrobe, wherein were rich Liveries for Pages and Footmen, Saddles,
Bridles, and other Furniture for Horses, all very richly wrought; and Movables
to a great value, which the Duke had provided, thinking assuredly to enter in
triumph into Genoa: So far had this Prince suffered himself to be transported
by his aspiring imagination.

The Duke and Constable, finding by the loss of Acqui (which they heard of in
Spigno) the falsehood of the Report that the Spanish Forces would not move for
fear of disturbing the union and friendship of the two Crowns, they were
astonished, seeing in what danger they were of being assaulted by two enemies
Armies, being enclosed between them amidst those Cliffs: The Duke hearing the
news, got immediately on Horseback, and leaving the care of all things wholly
to the Constable, went with some few Gentlemen toward Piedmont. The Constable,
seeing himself abandoned, termed the Dukes departure down right running away,
and complained of his being left to manage the business himself alone; and
speedily calling back the Marshal from Cairo, with whom came also Prince
Victorio, they went altogether to Bistagno, where there being a Garrison, they
were received without any withstanding: But being aware that the Governor did
advance with part of his forces to fall upon them in that place, and that he
had sent another part thereof to hinder their retreat and victuals, they
resolved to get out of those streights, and to get into the open fields of
Piedmont. The Retreat being thus resolved upon, the Constable and the Marshal,
heading the Van, wherein were about 2000 Foot, and almost all the Horse, they
parted early in the morning; and marching apace, they came without disturbance
to Canelli: The Prince kept in the Rear, wherein were the b^st men; and making
the Artillery advance, he also retrea^ed, leaving the place to the enemy; who
ere he was well got out entered B^stagnano, and pursued him without any
intermission, so fast, as being got near unto him upon the going to of the day,
in the Valley of Mun^stero, they faced one another within Musket shot: Some
small Skirmishes passed here, which the night parted, without much loss or
advantage to either side: The mean time, the Prince being careful of the
Artillery and other encumbrances (which he had much ado to get up the
Mountains) made great diligence be made in the climbing up; and at the same
time minced his own defense against the enemy, who were at his heels: But
hearing that at last the Artillery was got to the Mountains top, he also
retreated thither without any trouble; for the enemy having no order to fight,
nor to advance, retreated to Bistagno, and suffered them to retreat quietly
into Canelli, where he was received by his Father, and by the Constable, with
great applause, who had been in great anxiety for him. The Governor would have
made use of the present occasion, and would have assaulted the Rear, and taken
away all the Artillery and Baggage; But Don Ieronimo Pimontello, Don Lewis di
Cordua, and Don Francisco Padiglia, took him off from so seasonable a
resolution; first by persuasions, then by protesting against it; who out of
private emulation, envying (as it was thought by many) the glory of so happy an
achievement, proposed unto him the precise Orders of the Court to the
contrary; the danger and assured ruin which would ensue of things should not
succeed well; which if they should do, the good thereof was not to be
paralelled with the danger: For what more can we expect, said they, if we
should get the Victory, but the routing of the Relics of a miserable Army,
which being already consumed of themselves, cannot prejudice us: but say we
should be worsted, what danger would thereby result to the Kings affairs, both
from the Venetians who are ready to make war in the Cremonese; from the French
in the Valtoline, and from the Duke and Constable, if they shall have the
better of the Conflict? Besides, that the Confederates party, who were now
quite overthrown, if they should get heart again by any the least encounter,
they would for certain become more fierce and fervent then ever. The Governor,
who was better versed in State affairs then in what belonged to war, suffered
himself to be persuaded by those who were better experienced in war then he,
and so let slip a signal occasion of putting an undoubted end to all the
present war with one little action: The like advice being given to the Marquess
of San Croce in Savona made him keep from marching out of Savona, and from
falling upon the enemy on the Rear in their retreat from Cairo and Spigno; it
being certain that if San Croce and the Governor had known how to make use of
the occasion by enclosing the enemy in those difficult places, they would
undoubtedly have ruined them: And yet the remainders of this Army, ruined as it
was, which the Spanish Commanders thought not worthy their destroying, did
within a while after ruin the Governors entire Army; and not long after the
Spaniards needed to be protected and defended against those weak remainders:
Thus does Fortune often vary the condition of humane affairs; and the loss of
opportunity does often times carry victory to those who in all likelihood would
have been overcome.

The Genoeses being thus freed from fear of the enemies Army; the first thing
they did was to think of recovering what they had lost, and of what the enemy
were yet masters: The first Town that returned to the obedience of Genoa, was
Novi, wherein was a French Regiment under Monsieur della Grange; partly by
means of the Pozzeveraschi; partly by the means of the Townsmen and other
inhabitants of those parts, who being dispersed by the war went wandering up
and down about the neighboring Towns. About 300 whereof met at the Capuchins
Covent, not far from that Town; part whereof entering by night, by a Vault under
ground, into the Town; and being assisted by some of the Burgers who were
acquainted with the Plot, first slew the Sentinels, and then forced the Gate
della Valle, and let in their Companions by the Portal which they opened with
their Axes; who going jointly to the Gate della Strada, where most of the
French Garrison were, they put them to the Sword, and made themselves masters
of the Gate: Then running about the Town, and putting it into an Alarm, they
slew all the French they met with; and then going to the Castle, whither the
greatest part of them were with their Governor retired, they begirt it on all
sides, threatening to kill them if they did not immediately surrender the
Castle: The French being astonished at so sudden and unexpected an accident,
yielded before the Sun rising upon discretion of the enemy: About 300 of them
were slain in this conflict, amongst which the Governors Son; a young youth,
who contrary to his Fathers Example, chose rather to fall manfully with his
Sword in hand, then to purchase his life upon base conditions: The number of
the Prisoners were twice as many; the chief whereof were the Governor Monsieur
de la Grange, his Lieutenant, il Signior di Bellagrada, and his Brother, who
was a Knight of Malta; Monsieur Bonneville; the Baron Latte, nine
Ensigne-bearers, and four Lieutenants. The recovery of Ovada, Rossiglione and
Campo, succeeded that of Novi, which were abandoned by the enemy; who flying so
to shun death, met with it, by being miserably slain and cut in pieces by the
country people: The recovery of Gavio proved somewhat harder; wherein were
about 1800 Soldiers under Monsieur di Sonsi. About this time the 2000 Dutch
came to Genoa, commanded by Verrema, who, together with Monsieur Bozzoloe's
men, and some others were sent by the Commonwealth, under the Baron Batteville,
to recover the Town. Being come to the Town they took up their Quarters,
planted their Batteries, and fell to work; but first they tried the defendants,
and began to treat with them upon surrender upon Articles: whereupon they
quickly agreed; so as the Town remained in the power of the assailants, but not
the Castle; they therefore planted their Batteries against the Castle, and
played upon it for some days; and though by reason of the far distanc^ they
could not prejudice it much by their shot, the defendants yielded it upon
agreement to the Commonwealths Commanders, who recovered it in less time, and
with fewer men by much, then the Duke and Constable had taken it, with so
powerful an Army. There were therein 19 great Pieces of Artillery, great store
of Arms and Powder, of artificial fires, and other warlike preparation, which
were left there by the enemy, and were taken by the Captains of the
Commonwealth; 17 Colors were likewise therein taken, part belonging to the
King of France, part to the Duke; which were all brought to Genoa in a kind of
Triumph: All the people and Citizens ran with great joy to see it; who could
not satisfy themselves with seeing those Tools brought captive to the City,
which were but a little before destined to make them Captives. The Duke and
Constable could not relieve these places, as they faithfully promised the
Commanders whom they left to defend them when they went from thence; and as so
noble a Train of Artillery left behind them obliged them to do, in regard of
the Governors unexpected coming out against them, and of the necessity of
their retiring from Canelli; from whence they afterward recovered Asti, where
they consulted rather how to defend what remained, then to keep what they had
gotten.

Feria was at this time come from Acqui to Rocca a' Arazzo, and from thence to
Occimiano, a Town in Montferrat, four miles distant from Cassal; whither Don
Gonzallo di Cordua, a Captain of good account came to him by order from the
King, out of Flanders, to be assistant in Counsel to the Governor, and in the
managing of the present war; wherein the Governor who was not over well
experienced, and who had Captains and Counselors about him, rather Rivals then
Confidents; had need of a Counselor and Moderator, who might not only be
experienced, but faithful: And Don Gonzallo was allied unto the Governor,
wherefore he had reason to confide in him. They consulted of all things in
Occimiano; wherein the Consultors differed in their opinions; to attempt Asti
or Vercelles, so to open their way into Piedmont, would be long and laboursome
Enterprises, and the event uncertain; wherein, together with the ruin of their
whole Army, their Honor was much hazarded, without any apparent sign of
profit; for if peace should be made they must be necessitated to restore them:
And it was already supposed for certain, that the King was not inclined to
possess himself of any thing belonging to the Duke, with an intention to detain
it: To what purpose would it be then to take so much pains, to shed so much
blood, and spend so much money, in taking a place which was afterward to be
restored? It was therefore agreed that it would be better and ^arer by making
In rodes into the open Towns of Piedmont, and by destroying and burning them;
and so to afflict the Duke by those means, as that he might be quiet for the
future; and that he might not afterward think it lawful to disturb the peace
of Italy upon any slight occasion: Thus they thought that without danger of
wasting their men, or hazarding their reputation upon the uncertain taking of a
Town, they might safely enter Piedmont, and overcome it with a fresh and
numerous Army, and with the Polack and Croat Cavalry, which were naturally good
at In rodes and the laying of Countries waste: For that the Confederates Army
being weakened, and almost annihilated, would not dare to fight, nor appear
against them in open field; which resolution being divulged infused such terror
into Piedmont, as not only the Inhabitants of the weaker Towns, but even the
very Citizens of Turin, not thinking themselves safe within those walls, nor
under the shelter of that Citadel, they fled toward the Alps with all the
best things they had; in so much as the Duke began to taste of that fright and
fear in his own Territories, which he had a little before occasioned in Genoa:
But this resolution, which undoubtedly was the safest, was out-voted by
another; which was, to attempt the taking of some Towns in Piedmont first; and
this, not so much out of good reason of war, and for securing their entry,
which they resolved to do howsoever; as out of Ambition; thinking it not
becoming the Grandezza and Reputation of so numerous an Army to do nothing but
make In-rod^s, and lay the Country waste; They were the more easily induced to
give way to this, for that they thought they might secretly, and without much
difficulty, effect their desires: Fixing their eyes therefore, according to
wont, upon the Cities of Asti or Vercelles, or upon the Towns of Verrua or
Crescentino, they kept still in Occimiano, a place almost equally distant from
those four Towns; providing Bottoms to throw a Bridge over the Poe at
Pontestura; giving out that they would pass thereby over either to Vercelles or
Crescentino; to the end that the Duke not being able for want of men, to
furnish all those Towns at one and the same time, might by betaking himself to
defend some one of them, afford them opportunity of turning upon that which
should be worst provided; which thinking they might easily take, it might open
the way for them to prosecute their resolution of prejudicing Piedmont.

But this design, which by speedy execution might easily be effected, was
hindered by the accustomed, and almost natural slow proceeding of the Spaniards;
for though the throwing the Bridge over at Pontestuna made the Duke bethink
himself of Crescentino; and that therefore he came with the rest of his men to
the Banks of Poe, leaving Prince Thomaso with only 2000 men in Asti. Feria went
immediately toward Asti with his Army, out of a double intent; either to draw
the Duke thither with all his men, and so leaving the rest of his Towns
unprovided, and as it were abandoned, Feria might make use of the occasion, and
turn upon some other of them, and take it easily; or else, if the Duke, not to
leave his other Towns abandoned, should not come to defend Asti, he might
possess himself of the ways about Asti; and keeping it from being relieved by
the Duke, might easily make himself master of it: but being come to the Osteria
della San Croce, where he kept idle for some days, and suffering his Horse to
scour the Field only, without passing over la Versa, he afforded the Duke
opportunity to send the Marshal first thither with 3000 Foot, and to go
afterward thither himself with the rest: failing therefore in his design of
taking this City unprovided, he fell to his other design, to go to some one of
the other three Towns, which by reason of the necessity of defending Asti were
abandoned. Verrua was that which was pitched upon, as being nearest, more
commodious, of more profit and consequence; for by taking it he should so
divide Crescentino, and all the County of Vercelli, from the County of Asti, as
the one should not be able to assist the other: nor did he fear the taking of
it, as well by reason of the littleness thereof, as also for that it was only
guarded by 300 Country people: but the same slownesse, and irresolution of the
Spanish genius, ruined this design also, which required haste ^n execution;
for if the chief of the Army, without stirring from the quarters where they
were, had entertained the Duke in the defense of Asti, and had at the same time
sent a flying Squadron of Horse with Musketeers en croupe, they might easily
have taken it at the very first, or at least have possessed themselves of the
Passes thereabouts, and have blocked up all succor so, as it must soon fall
into the possession of the Army which was to come soon after: but either not
loving to divide their Forces, as being too contrary to that security which
they so much studied, (so thinking that whatsoever diligence the Enemy could
make, they could not keep that little Castle from them;) they will go thither
with their united Army. Thus parting from the Banks of Versa, without having
attempted any thing against the City of Asti, they went with all their Forces
to Verrua. Prince Thomaso and the Marshal marched out with 800 Horse, part
French, part Piedmontese, to fall upon the Rear; and seeing some Troops of the
Dutch Cavalry, which marched under Colonel Lillo, far from the body of Horse,
they assaulted them; and having the better of the business, they dispersed
them, and wounded Lillo very sorely; and had utterly routed them, had not some
other of their friends Horse come in to succor them; who charging the French
and Piedmontese Horse, slew many of them, and amongst the rest two Captains,
the Baron d' Hermanza, the Dukes Commissary-General of Horse: so as being
repulsed, the Spanish Army might quietly pursue their March; and yet neither
this, nor any other impediment which they met with, which retarded the
proceeding of the Army, nor yet the Castle of Rubella, which being in the
midway would not yield till it was battered, would have hindered the taking of
Verrua much; the Army not finding it any way better provided with Garrison, or
better fortified, then it was when they went from their first quarters to take
it: so as they might have done the same thing which they might have done before
Asti, with their flying Squadron; for though the Duke, when he was free of the
danger of Asti, went with such of his men as were readiest into the Field, and
coasting along by the Enemy, intended him no good; yet because the way by which
he saw them march led both to Cheri and to Verrua, and that he knew not whither
of the two they meant to go to; he was forced to suspend his resolution, and be
ready to go whithersoever he should see them bend: moreover, when he saw them
incline toward Verrua, he must if he would succor it, go to Crescentino,
which was on the other side of the Poe: and not being able to pass to the other
side, but by the stone Bridge which was near Tarino, he was fain to take a
large compass to pass his men over it, to Crescentino: so as the Governor had
convenience enough to have found that Town unprovided, and to have done what he
pleased with it: but neither he nor Don Gonsallo, who then ordered and provided
all things under the Governor, being able to make use of so happy an occasion,
lost it by these and other negligences; and by the destruction of that
flourishing Army, made that little Borough, which was not otherwise
considerable, famous to posterity; and with no little loss of honor, raised up
the Dukes almost quite lost reputation. Verrua is a little Town, upon the right
side of the Poe, not of any consideration but for the seat thereof: it stands
upon the top of a little Hill, stony and broken on all sides except on the
South, wherein somewhat a gentler descent it sustains a little Suburbs, which
cover almost all the descent of that Hill: on the North side the Poe enlarges
it self, leaving ^a little plain in the midst, full of Trees: it has not any
Fortification, except a little Castle upon the top of the Hill, from which if
you take away an ancient Tower, it is more like an old ruin, then a
Fortification: the Suburbs which lies upon the descent of the Hill is begirt
with an old weak Wall; the Country about is full of Hills which inviron the
Hill whereon Verrua stands.

The Governor encamped himself upon these little Hills on the East side, to
the end that Montferrat being on his back, and the Poe on his right hand, he
might receive Provisions both by Land and Water: afterward extending his
quarters toward the West, instead of falling to assault the Town at his first
arrival, and of presently possessing himself of so weak and ill guarded a Town,
he (as if he were to besiege a great Town, in the face of a powerful
Enemy-Army) began to fortify his Quarters with Trenches and other Works; and
waiting for provisions, which were but slowly brought, he took no care to block
up the Avenues; insomuch as soon as he saw the Enemies Army bend toward
Verrua, having sent the Marquess di San Rerano thither with his Regiment of a
thousand Foot, there was not any one that moved either to stop him by the way,
or to hinder his coming into the Town: which he did at full noon, and in sight
of the Enemy by the Gate of the neighboring Suburbs, near the Enemies
Quarters, with no little note of infamy to those that suffered it. The Duke
whilst the Governor minded nothing but making of Baracadoes and Rampires, sent
to the Marshal, who was left with Prince Thomaso to defend Asti, to come after
him, and join with him in Crescentino, whither he speedily marched; and coming
with his men first thither, whither the Marshal came also within some days
after with 5000 French, he betook himself wholly to defense: being past by the
Poe from Crescentino to Verrua, he found that the Enemy, having quitted the
Banks of the River, and the Plain, minded nothing but fortifying himself upon
the little Hill; and thinking that it made much for the defense of Verrua, to
make himself master of the Plain before it, he presently past over some of his
men in boats, and quartered himself there without any gainsaying: being then
advised by some of his Officers to defend Verrua on the upper side, and to
abandon the Suburbs which was upon the hanging of the Hill, as that which being
weakly walled was not tenable, nor was the main business much concerned
therein; he contrary to their opinion undertook the defense thereof, thinking
that any whatsoever opposition would either abate the edge of the Enemies
Forces, or else weary them, and occasion delay: which afterward proved much
for the defense of the Town: he therefore began to perfect a Raveline before
the Suburbs, which was formerly begun by the Towns folk, which did partly
cover, partly flank the Wall on the Front; and placing a sufficient Garrison,
he Plat-form'd the Wall it self, and afterward cut through the very Suburbs
with a threefold Trench, at equal distances: to the end that those who should
assault the Raveline; and the front of the Suburbs, should not only be annoyed
by those Trenches which arose as did the Suburbs; but that if the defendants
should be repulsed at the first onset, they might have more advantageous places
to retreat unto behind them; from whence reassuming the defense they might make
head again, and driving the assailants from what they had first taken, might
recover it with more ease: he likewise placed some Artillery in fit places of
the highest Hills, which served not only to defend the Raveline and the Suburb,
but to offend the Enemy who were encamped on the opposite Hills; and (which
made the defense more safe) he threw a Bridge of boats over the Poe between the
Banks of Crescentino and the Plain before Verrua; by means whereof those who
were quartered in Crescentino might communicate with those of the Plain, and
those who were in Verrua; and the latter might be relieved and refreshed by the
former, whereby the defense might be made more easy, and consequently might
last the longer: nor herewithall content, for the greater security of the
Bridge, and of the Garrison which lay in the Pla^n, he erected a great Trench
between the point of the Hill toward the East, and the Banks of Poe which did
shelter almost all the Plain and the Bridge. Things being thus ordered, the
Governor who not making any opposition was this mean while preparing how to
offend the Town, found the business harder then he at first imagined it to be;
for to fall absolutely to assault the Town with all his Forces, as he was
advised to do by many, though it might peradventure have proved the shorter,
and more efficacious course, yet was it too severe, especially for him, there
being so many Soldiers to make defense, and he being naturally averse to
hazard himself; for the assailants being commanded by the Hills, by the
Trenches which crossed through the Suburbs, and by the Batteries which were
placed upon the Hills, they would not have been able to advance, nor without
much danger have continued the assault; and when they should have made some
advancement they would have found it very difficult to entrench themselves, and
shelter themselves from the imminency of the situation; so as they would have
been repulsed with much loss, and would have been forced at last to forsake
their stations, which they had possessed themselves of with much labor and
loss of blood: to drive the Enemy from the Banks of the River, though at first
it would not have been very hard to have done, yet when the great Trench was
made, it was thought impossible, by reason of the continual succor which might
be had by the Bridge, and of their being played upon from the higher places:
which was soon known in some attempts which they made, wherein the assailants
were with no small loss repulsed: to deprive them of the use of the Bridge,
which would have been the most advantageous and safest course, was not easy to
be done; for being sheltered partly by the Hill, and partly by the great
Trench, it could not have been easily beaten down by their Artillery; though
two of the Boats were sunk, and the Bridge loosned by a Battery planted against
it by Don Philippo, Son to the Marquess Spinola; for they being supplied by the
diligence used in fastening of Boats together, and in substituting others in the
places of those that were sunk, the wonted convenience of passage was soon
provided for; and to the end that it might not be subject another time to the
same chance, the Duke made it be drawn a little lower, where it was wholly
sheltered from battery by the Wood in the Plain, which kept it from being seen:
the like provision had, for another disaster which a few days after was
occasioned by the fullness of the River, which driving a Mill broke the Bridge,
and disordered the Boats, did seasonably repair the loss which was received:
the least of evils, since all other ways was held impossible, and desperate,
was to begin with expugning the Suburbs, which being won by little and little,
would make way for them to get to the top of the Hill, where the Town and
Castle stood: but here they would also have enough to do; it being to be
opposed not only by the Raveline, and by other Fortifications made by the Duke,
but by the very situation of the place; for the rising of the Hill whereon the
Suburbs stand, being on both sides rocky, and hard to climb, it was
unaccessible on any of those sides; they must therefore necessarily attaque it
on the Front; which being very narrow, a small number of defendants, would be
able to make it good against a much greater number of assailants; and hence it
was that the Duke was not prejudiced by the scarcity of combatants, nor the
Governor advantaged by numbers thereof; and notwithstanding the oppugners
being confident that their labor and diligence would overcome all
difficulties, thought they might prove greater then they expected; and because
it was necessary at last to do something, they made some Trenches against the
Front of the Suburbs, and making their approaches at the same time, they came
to an assault; which being given by Don Lewis di Cordua, and by Count Sultz his
Dutch, was stoutly withstood by those within; for though they were twice
entered, they were twice beaten back: the third assault made the assailants
masters of the Suburbs but they were forced to quit it that very night by the
Marshall, who was sent by the Duke to recover it: he coming out of the
Raveline, made himself master of some of the Enemies Trenches and Approaches:
this Raveline may be said to have been, for a while, the stumbling block
against which they often times gave; and the business was brought to such a
condition, as it being often times taken and recovered, at last, as being a
place too prejudicial, and too much controverted, it was abandoned by both
sides; and served for a while for nothing, but for a Stocado for the
encounters, and for a Scene or Stage, on which these valiant Soldiers did
alternately by death Triumph. The assailants finding themselves more prejudiced
then advantaged by assaults, fell to play with their Cannon and Musket Shot,
not upon the Rampires or Fortifications, but to beat down the Houses, and kill
the Soldiers who defended the Trenches; and though the Houses which were but
weak were at last thrown down; yet knowing that those ruins made nothing for
the main business, they began to make Mines, hoping thereby to effect their
work with less prejudice and loss of men: but neither did they succeed better
therein, by reason of the extraordinary diligence and vigilance of those
within; who having very cunningly made counter-mines, sometimes made them play
against the Enemy, and by disturbing the Enemies proceedings rendered them vain
and unefficacious: the defendants becoming this mean while more hardy; and not
being content to stand upon their def^nce, made some sallies out upon the
Enemies Quarters; but fared not so well therein, as whilst they stood upon
their defense; for they were much prejudiced thereby; and more particularly in
a Camisado by night, made by 1500 French, led on by Monsieur di Vallentienes,
who went to fall upon the Italians Trenches; which lying utmost toward the
West were quartered farthest off: but the assault being valiantly sustained,
and the assailants beaten back, Vallentienes remained prisoner there, and 400
of his men were slain upon the place; which causing the defendants to betake
themselves to defense only, wherein they were advantaged by their Situation and
Fortifications, they durst not sally out any more; but minding the motions of
the Enemy, were content to keep them aloof off from their Ammunition: on the
contrary, the assailants finding the business grow daily worse and worse began
to doubt the effecting of it; finding how far the Dukes diligence, industry and
wariness, accompanied with the strength of the situation, and the condition of
his Quarters, did exceed the greatness of their Forces: Affairs were brought to
that pass, as they were not now to think barely of the expugning of Verrua,
unless they did first, or at the same time beat the Enemy from their Quarters
at Crescentino; which was impossible to do without dividing their Army; and to
boot, that this dividing of the Army was contrary to the Governors genius, and
to the mind of the chief Commanders of the Army, who desired to proceed warily,
these Quarters were as hard to be taken, as was Verrua; having Crescentino, a
strong place, on their backs, the River before them, and beyond the River the
Quarters of Verrua, which was joined by the Bridge to those of Crescentino; on
the right hand the Dora Baltea, with a Bridge of Boats, by which all Provisions
and necessary Ammunitions were brought to the Camp from Piedmont; and this
Bridge was at both ends very well munited with two small Forts; on the left
hand, which was the place the Duke doubted most, because of the Bridge which
the Governor still kept at Pontestura, it was sheltered by a long Trench
flanked with Bulwarks, which beginning from Crescentino reached to the Rivers
side: the banks also on Crescentino's side, as well above, as below the
Quarters, were secured by several Corpse de guarde.

These difficulties which were thought not to be overcome being considered,
doubtlesly the best course would have been to have quitted the Enterprise,
chiefly at a time when the Army was not afflicted with sickness, which ensued
afterward, and when the Season was proper for them to betake themselves to
some other Enterprise; for to persevere obstinately against so many
difficulties was no better then to bury so gallant and powerful an Army before
so igneble a Castle: But the first building of the bridge at Pontestura, where
it was given out that they would go either to Crescentino or Verrua, the change
of this afterward to the Enterprises of Asti and Vercelles, their not
persevering therein, but betaking themselves to that of Verrua, would not
suffer them so much as to think of such a resolution. The Governor and other
Commanders thought themselves too much obliged to persevere before Verrua, lest
it might be conceived, that so flourishing and numerous an Army changing their
Sails so often should go wandering up and down here and there, as if they were not
resolved what Enterprise to fall upon, nor mind to do any thing: To the fear
of losing too much reputation, if in this condition of affairs they should rise
from before Verrua, was added their expectation of more men which were shortly
to come to the Camp. Four thousand Foot came very soon from Genoa of those who
were under Guasco and Pecchio; new Levies of Foot were made in Naples; and
Charles Count Mansfield was to come speedily into the State of Millain with his
Regiment of 4000 Foot and 1000 Horse: And these recruits being added to the
Army, enabling them to make two Camps, one whereof might fall upon the Quarters
at Crescentino, and the other keep still before Verrua; it was held that the
Duke being assaulted at one and the same time on two sides would be worsted at
least in one, and the victory in one part did secure the victory on the other.
They were yet more invited hereunto by the diversion which they expected from
the maritime parts; for the Marquers of Sta Croce was to enter Piedmont with
8000 good Foot of the Kings and Gen^ese; and to this purpose 500 Horse were
appointed to him under Manfrine Castiglione, which together with 200 which the
Commonwealth was to pay, were to be a safeguard to the Foot, whilst they
should enter into the Plain of Mondovi: In which case the Duke must either be
forced to abandon Verrua, and to relieve that other part which was wholly
destitute of defense, or, that he might maintain Verrua, leave that other part
to be preyed upon by the Enemies Army: To which so e're of these the Duke
should betake himself, the Spaniards would assuredly have the victory, either
on the one or on the other side, and peradventure on both; and the victory in
either side would have satisfied the Kings intention, which was not, quite to
ruin the Duke, but to keep him under: Moreover, the Dukes Forces were not
such, nor so many, as that they could of themselves make any long stay or
resistance at Verrua; and the less, for that being deprived of almost all
external helps, he had not so much as reason to hope for any, by reason of the
continual troubles of France which totally cut him off from any. Out of these
hopes, and out of these probabilities of succor, the Governor persevered in
the Enterprise of Verrua, and the Duke kept constant, and undaunted in the
defense of this little Borough, against so great Forces, and so many
preparations, and upon so many disadvantages; and he succeeded therein; for the
Governor failed not only in his hopes and calculations, but the affairs of his
Camp grew daily worse and worse: the sickness which was begun in the Camp did
so increase, as not only many of the common Soldiers, but even the chief
Officers were infected with it, and many of them died: three Camp-masters died,
and all the rest fell generally sick; as many Sergeants, Officers, Commanders,
and persons of Quality, who were near about the Governors own person; nay, he
himself being infected with the Disease was carried to Pontestura for cure;
leaving the charge of the Army with Don Gonzallo, rather in a posture to
retreat, then to continue the Enterprise.

This so sore sickness was not occasioned only by the influence of the
intemperate air which was excessive hot this Summer, and which in those boggy
and plashy parts became pestilential, but the great labor and hardships which
the Soldiers endured, and chiefly the scarcity of victuals, of which those
that were brought by the Poe were often intercepted by the Dukes men, who
scowred up and down on the opposite Shore, hindering Navigation, and sometimes
seized on the boats which brought provision; and those that came by Montferrat
were stopped by those of that Country; either out of the hatred they bore to the
Spaniards, or, as some would have it, by private Orders from their Prince, who
would never declare himself for the Spaniards, but hated them extremely, though
the King of Spain had spent, and fought so much to protect him against the
Duke, who would have suppressed him. Hence also arose great scarcity of Fodder
for the Horses, which having wasted all that was near hand went far off to
fetch it, not without great weariness and danger: the want of moneys added much
to all these mischiefs, whereof very little or none came from Spain; and their
former Provisions were already spent: Pay being therefore wanting, the
Soldiers were brought to so miserable a condition, as not being able to
provide for covering their nakedness, they could neither fence themselves from
the excessive heat of Summer, nor from the cold of Winter which drew on: as one
evil therefore draws on another, many mischievous accidents proceeded from
hence in the administration of the War; streightness and difficulty in
Ammunition, want of Military Discipline, contumacy and disobedience amongst the
common Soldiers; the Officers who were half sick, and half amazed, not being
able to make their Soldiers obey them, who were tattered, famished, and ill
paid: supply came in very slowly and scarely; very few Soldiers, and far short
of the need and expectation, came from Naples; and Mansfields Soldiers, who
came late into the State of Millain, refused to go into the Field till they had
received their Pay. San Croce's diversion, whereupon they did chiefly rely,
proved also vain: he was to have entered Piedmont with those Forces which were
in Savona; and with Manfrino his five Horse, by the way of Savona, such an
expedition at that time and by that way would have produced three very good
effects. First, entering the enemies Country, which did abound in Victuals,
wanting Forts and Ammuniiion, and which was bere^t of all defense, he might
have easily possessed himself of it, without any gainsaying; by this diversion
if made in a seasonable time, have very much helped the business of Verrua; and
lastly, the River of Genoa being by the interposition of this Army cut off from
Piedmont, and (consequently) deprived of all hopes of succor, it would at the
very appearance of the Galleys have been abandoned by the Garrisons of
Piedmont: so as, of it self, it would have fallen to the Commonwealth. San
Croce's genius, who was better versed in maritine affairs then in band service,
and loved not to go far from the shore, opposed this resolution, which
certainly would have been the most commodious and best for the common cause: it
was opposed also by that which serves always for an excuse to any Commander,
for either not beginning, or not prosecuting an enterprise, the scarcity of
provisions; wherefore being resolved that the recovery of Riviera should
precede his entrance into Piedmont, it was conceived that private emulation
between him and the Duke of Feria bore greater sway with him, then any respect
of the common Cause: wherefore not caring for the good success of the
enterprise of Verrua, he was not displeased that his rival might reap but
little honor thereby: parting therefore about the midst of July from Savona,
accompanied by two Senators, Iovan Battista Saluzzo, and Agostine Centurione,
who were chosen Commissaries by the Commonwealth, at whose expense, and in
whose name the whole business was carried on; and carrying with him 8000 Foot,
and two Troops of Horse, they betook themselves to the recovery of la Riviera;
the first in order was the City of Albenga, which being first assaulted came
first into the power of the Commonwealth, though it were recruited but some
days before both with Men and Victuals by the Galleys of Marcelles: the battery
began from the Galleys, which by their Cannon beat down the Houses; for the
City stood within Musket Shot of the Seashore: but that battery doing but
little harm, the people were that mean while landed, and two great Cannons,
which being levelled against the Gate and Wall which we^e toward the Sea; after
having played upon them a while, the defendants began to apprehend the assault,
which they saw was preparing to be given: so as beginning to parley, they
yielded within a few hours, upon Articles; that the Captains should march out
with Arms and Baggage, and the Soldiers with their Swords, as also they were
not to serve for that Summer against the King of Spain, nor the Commonwealth.
Albenga being taken, all the Towns till you come to Porto Mauritio, Oneglia
being therein comprehended, most of them being without Walls, and abandoned by
the Dukes men, returned under the obedience of the Commonwealth: from hence
they went to Porto Mauritio, a place strongly situated, munited with Artillery,
having a good Garrison in it, and abundantly provided of Ammunition; it stands
upon a great Rock, which being for the greatest part environed by the Sea, is
as it were a Peninsula: their Men and Artillery being landed, they had no
little labor to draw them up those craggy cliffs, for many necessary things
were wanting for the train of Artillery, and the weather was then very hot.
Thomaso Raggio, Iovan Battista Adorno, and Iacomo Moniglia, three of those
Gentlemen who had raised and maintained seven Companies at their own expense,
and had continually served the Commonwealth with them very affectionately, had
the care thereof given them; who not only by their Authority, but by their
example, brought them in a short time to fitting places: they raised three
Batteries, two on the Flank, and one behind; and the Defendants ordered their
defenses very fittingly against these Batteries: by two days continual battery
a breach was made, fitting for an assault; and the three forenamed Gentlemen
were ready, with their Companies, to give an assault; when the Defendants, who
had enriched themselves by booty taken at Ottaggio and Pieve, being loath to
adventure what they had gotten, parlied, and on the third day surrendered the
place upon the same terms that Albenga had done: but the Kings Soldiers
missing the prey which they thought they should have had if they had taken the
Town by assault, turned upon many of the neighboring Towns, plundering and
sacking them, to the great grief of the Commissaries, who could not bear with
so great mischief done to the Subjects of the Commonwealth, or with such an
affront to themselves; and finding that the Kings Captains took no care to
prevent such an inconvenience, Thomaso Raggio, a man of a great spirit, who
upon all occasions had showed much zeal toward the affairs of the
Commonwealth, offered to remedy this inconvenience by force of Arms; which
offer being accepted of, he was sent with many Companies of Soldiers, to
suppress this prejudice done unto the Country by the Kings Soldiers; who
hearing of his coming joined together in a body; and yet he had the good luck
to make them soon retreat; and imbarquing themselves in the Galleys with San
Croce, they went some of them to Savona, some to Genoa; for San Croce, by
reason of the excessive ^eat, and of the sickness amongst the Soldiers, would
not continue the enterprise, which he might easily have prosper'd in; for after
the surrender of Porto Mauritio, all the Towns as far as Ventimiglia being
abandoned by the Dukes Garrisons, returned to the anti^nt command of the
Genoeses; so as when he should quickly and happily have dispatched this
business, he might have facilitated the taking of Verrua by diversion: but that
so much time might not be s^ent in vain, the Commonwealth gave order that
Pigna, a great Town belonging to the Duke, lying above Ventimiglia, should be
gone against, where they understood that many of those who were gone out of
Albenga, and the rest of the Towns which were recovered were got together; and
it was feared, that (contrary to the Articles of surrender) they might be a
great disturbance to the Enterprise of Ventimiglia, which upon the ceasing of
the excessive heats, and the amendment of the Soldiers, was preparing for:
This business was committed to the Baron Batteville; who coming thither with
about 3000 Foot, and having long battered the Trenches which joined to the
houses, and served for a wall or Rampire; at last the defendants fearing an
assault yielded upon Articles; which being agreed upon and performed, they
delivered up the Town to Batteville; in the delivery whereof the Ammunition
fell on fire, which occasioned much mischief to many; amongst the rest to Iovan
Antonio Sauli, General of the Commonwealths Artillery, Son to Lorenzo, who had
been Doeg, he being therein burned to death: And at last the weather growing
cooler, and the 3000 Dutch who were raised by Philippo Spinola, being arrived,
they went with all their forces, about the midst of September, to the taking in
of Ventimiglia; which was reduced with little labor: For the City being after
some Cannot shot abandoned by the Garrison, who betook themselves to defend the
Castle, fell into the Genoeses hands. The Castle being played upon on three
sides, held out a little longer; but the assailants being gotten under the
Counter-scarfe, and the defendants fearing to be undermined, which they saw
they were begun to be; they after eight days Battery yielded upon Articles,
That only the Officers should march out with their Swords, and all the rest
without Arms: The little Marquesate of Zuccarello, the first beginning of so
many evils, was yet in the enemies possession: A 1000 Foot were sent thith^r,
to whom all the Towns were instantly surrendered, except Castle Vecchio; which
was longer ere it was taken then it deserved tobe, for that it was requisite to
bring Artillery to batter it, which by reason of the roughness of the way, and
height of the situation, was not without much labor and expense of time
effected; but at last, all difficulties being overcome, the Cannon being
presented, and the Castle somewhat battered, it was also surrendered upon
Capitulation, to Iovan Ambrosio Casella, a Senator, and Commissary of the
Commonwealth, who succeeded Centurione. Thus in the space of few Months the
Commonwealth of Genoa, which was assaulted by powerful forces, and partly
abandoned, partly fought against, partly plotted against in private by Italian
Princes; being solely protected and defended by the King of Spain, kept not
only unprejudiced from the fury and hostility of so many forces raised against
her, and from so many Princes which conspired against her; but preserving her
natural Liberty, did in a short time recover all that the enemy had taken from
her; and entering the assailant Dukes State took some of his Towns, and
indamaged him as much as he had done her; For to boot with the Towns of Oneglia
and Pigna, which were taken at the same time that La Riviera was recovered; San
Croce having regained Ventimiglia sent some Foo^ to Maro, a Town appertaining
to the Duke, which lies above Oneglia; and without much difficulty took it, and
all the Valley of Prela: When La Riviera was recovered, the same forces of the
King and Commonwealth, which entering Piedmont should have helped to raise the
Siege of Verrua by diversion, as the Duke of Feria's Army had facilitated the
recovery of La Riviera, by lying before Verrua, kept a good while, partly in
Savona, partly in Albenga: and afterward being come from Albenga to enter
Piedmont, Sun Cr^ce would first take the Town of Or^a, one of the Dukes Towns
which confined upon the Commonwealth; which though it were great, and well
peopled, yet made not much for the main concernment of the war; and which for
the badness of the ways by which the Artillery was to be brought, did much
delay the entrance into Piedmont: The forces drew near that Town, but without
Artillery, which was not yet come, but was speedily expected: And this Town
standing in a Valley between two Mountains, through the which the Tannaro runs,
which takes its rise from a little above, it was impossible for the Horse to
quarter very near it; they therefore quartered two miles off, which was the
cause why they could do but little service upon an occasion which happened not
long after they were quartered: Don Carlo, the Duke of Savoy's natural Son, and
the Marquess di San Trinita coming from Garrissio with about 2000 Foot, and 200
Horses, endeavored to relieve Ormea; but falling upon the Neapolitan Quarters,
under Don Antonio Tuffo their Camp master, though they charged home, yet two
Troops of Horse coming in under Captain Sp^ra, and other assistance with them
from the neighboring quarters, the Piedmontese were beaten back with great
loss, which would yet have been worse if all the Horse had been there, which
(by reason of their being quartered so far off) could not be present at that
action: When the Artillery was come, they raised two Batteries, and having made
a sufficient breach, an assault was given, which was stoutly fought on both
sides; but the assailant getting the better at last, the Town was taken, with
much ruin, and effusion of blood; and was afterward sacked, to the great
enriching of the Soldiery, who got as much booty there, as the Piedmontese did
at Pieve: The Town being taken the Castle yielded the next day, and both of
them were freely delivered up to the Senators, who were in the Camp; who
receiving them in the Common wealths name, placed 600 Foot in Garrison there,
under Mark Antonio Brancaccio, who upon that occasion was chosen Camp-master to
the Commonwealth.

From hence they went to Garrissio, another great Town of Piedmont, wherein
there was a good Garrison under Monfieur di Flesce; but the fierce assault and
taking of Ormea, which happened with so great mortality, did not terrify the
Townsmen of Garrissio only, but the Garrison also; who abandoned the Townsmen
before the enemy appeared; wherefore they sent the Keys of the Gates to San
Croce, in sign of surrender; yet the Castle held out nine days, which whilst
it was played upon by the Artillery, and undermined, the Horse overran those
parts even to Ceva, plundering and much prejudicing the Campagnia: wherefore
those of Bagnasco, being wise at the cost of others, sent also to surrender to
San Croce; and the Castle of Garrissio, which was at last surrendered, was
slighted by San Croce. I^ was now about the midst of November, when they went
to Garrissio; and the season grew daily more obnoxious by reason of rain and
cold; it was also given out about Garrissio and the Marquesate of Ceva, that
there was an assembly of men, and that the Duke himself was speedily advancing
with all his forces: It was true that the Prince of Piedmont was come into the
field with a Body of Foot and Horse, to defend those parts; and that joining
with his Brother Don Carlo, and the Marquess of San Trinita, he thought to
oppose San Croce: But the news of the Dukes coming himself in person was the
more confirmed in the Spanish Camp, by the news of the Governors withdrawing
from before Verrua: wherefore San Croce was the more perplexed what to do; but
this difficulty was eased by a Letter which (as it was said) came to him from
the Governor; wherein he was advertised, that it being impossible for him the
Governor to continue longer before Verrua, (which had caused him to rise from
thence) it was superfluous for him to advance any further on that side: Fitting
Orders being therefore given upon this advertisement, they resolved to return
toward the Maritime parts; which being divulged through the Army, the greater
part thereof believing the report of the Dukes coming, thought that the retreat
was occasioned by the certain knowledge thereof: So as overcome with too much
fear they retreated in very little order, almost in a flying posture; leaving
part of the prey they had got at Garrissio behind them, and one great Piece of
Cannon, which they could not bring over those rocky Mountains.

This was the success of San Croce's entering Piedmont; and the Prince, when he
was gone, went to before Felizzano, a Town belonging to the Marquesate of
Finale, and subject to the King; but with no success; for San Croce having sent
forces to defend that place, the Prince retreated also into Piedmont: At the
same time or a little before these things happened, the Camp before Verrua not
having by all their Assaults, Mines, and Batteries, been able to get above
twenty two foot into the Suburbs, grew daily more afflicted with sickness and
mortality; so as being reduced to a very small number, it was not only not
longer able to continue that enterprise, but neither to retreat without danger
of being lost; especially for that the ways so sunk by the fall of rain, and
the dirt was so deep as the Foot could not march without much ado, nor the
Artillery and other encumbrances be carried along: But this was seasonably
helped by the coming of Mansfield with his Dutchmen, who were at last
satisfied in point of pay; and these men being fresh proved very fit to back
the Army in its Retreat: which being thus secured by the assistance of these
new men, Don Gonzallo made the Artillery be removed from his Quarters, and be
brought to the Rendezvous for Arms. The Constable, who being recovered of a
long sickness was returned from Turin to the Camp, seeing this, did not let
slip the occasion of assaulting the enemies Trenches, which wanted defense and
Artillery, and were negligently looked unto by the Soldiers, who minded more
their retreat then making defense: So as upon the change of the Guards which
was made in the Dukes Trenches in the plain before Verrua, he assaulted them so
furiously, as possessing himself of the foremost, he came almost to the Dutch
Quarters; which he would likewise have taken if he had not been first stoutly
resisted by Count Salma's Lieutenant (who was slain in the fight) and afterward
by the Count di Solts, who did not only repulse the enemy from the assaulted
Quarters, but made them forego the Trenches which they had already taken: The
next night the Governor began to remove quietly, without the beat of Drum or
sound of Trumpet; yet this stolen Retreat was not so silently performed, but
that the Duke, who was aware thereof, early in the morning went after the Army,
which marched but slowly: His men, though they were repulsed by Mansfield's
Dutchmen, slew many of those who not being able to follow remained behind
upon the way, besides two Spanish Captains, who resisted valiantly in the Rear:
This Retreat was very seasonably made; for a Recruit of 6000 Foot was at last
come from France into Piedmont, under Monsieur di Vigneles; who at the same
time that the Army removed, came to the City of Inurea. The Governor was
afraid that these forces being joined to those of the Duke and Constable,
passing through the Vale of Sesia, and the Principality of Messerano, might go
to prejudice the Territories of Novara; he therefore went with his Army, which
was reduced to a very small number, to Novara; but the Winter coming on, and
finding himself free from that danger, he returned to Millain.

The Duke of Feria was not he alone who did partake of the misfortunes wherein
the this-years Enterprises miscarried; for it was observed that some sinister
influence of the Heavens opposed it self against the good success of the
Armies, and Enterprises of this Year. The so flourishing Army of the Duke and
Constable was unfortunately lost amidst the Mountains of Liguria, not having
effected any thing worthy the greatness of their forces and designs: That of
the Marquess di Conre, backed by the Venetians, and maintained by their moneys
and provisions, was likewise unfortunately lost in sitting down before an Inn,
a woeful Harbor for Mules and Muletiers; at the taking whereof having more then
once offered, he did not only return worsted, but being assaulted in his own
Quarters he received much prejudice, and was dishonourably affronted; for
Papenhaim (who succeeded Serbellone, as has been said, in defending Riva)
having been content to keep there loytering for a few days with his Dutchmen;
finding at last that Coure despairing of doing any thing of moment was retired
into the Valtoline; and that leaving Garrisons only in Vico, in Verce, and in
Sasso Corbe, he had distributed almost all his men in the Valtoline and in
Chiavenna; and being impatient of so long idleness, he resolved to assault
those Quarters, which being fortified only on the Lake, and on Riva's side,
were not at all fortified behind, the height and ruggedness of the
neighboring Mountains being esteemed a safe defense. Papenhaim having
therefore learned by certain men whom he had sent to discover those Mountains,
that people might be brought to fall upon them by that way, he sent a thousand
Foot by that way; and he, having armed his Barques and Brigandines, went to
assault those Quarters by water at the same time that the thousand Foot should
fall down by the way of the Mountain upon them.

The event suited with the resolution; for the Defendants being set upon
unexpectedly on the back fled toward the Valtoline, abandoning their Quarters
and Fortifications, which were presently taken by Papenhaim, together with
eleven pieces of Artillery, and much Victuals and Ammunition; nor there withal
content, he pursued them into the Valtoline; and coming to the Fortifications
of Troana and Morbegno, he thought to have assaulted them, whereof he writ to
the Duke of Feria; who being with small hopes before Verrua, would not by any
new enterprise hazard the defense of Riva, which was of such importance to the
State of Millain: so as Papenhaim being master of all the Fortifications which
the French had upon the lesser Lake, was consequently master of all the upper
Lake. Thus ended this enterprise, no less unfortunately for the French, then
did that of the Duke of Feria before Verrua, and that of the Constable and Duke
of Savoy against the Genoeses: nothing else of moment happened this year, unless
that the English Fleet, going from that Kingdom about the beginning of October
with 93 Ships, wherein were about 10000 fighting men, appeared in the beginning
of November, in the Spanish Seas, and entering the Bay of Cadiz, landed some of
their men in the Island, and five pieces of Artillery, intending to fortify
themselves there, and wait for the Plate-Fleet, which was shortly to come from
America. The Soldiers were three or four days busied about taking the Fort
called Puntale; and having gotten it upon Articles, they endeavored to make
themselves masters of the Bridge, which joins the Island of Cadiz to the
Continent: but being hindered partly by the rain that fell, partly by those who
came to defend the Bridge, they could not effect their desire. Don Ferrante
Girone, who was there in defense, after he had well fortified the City, issued
out; and coming to blows with the Enemy, a slight Skirmish insued, with some
prejudice to both sides: at last the English finding that they could do no
great good neither there nor in any of the neighboring parts, which were all
well munited, they resolved to be gone; and making toward the West, the
Spaniards were afraid (as they had learned by some Prisoners) that they were
bent for Cape San Vincent, the utmost promontory of Spain toward the West, to
intercept the Plate-Fleet; wherefore very much apprehending some adverse
fortune, they sent out some Carvels into several parts, to find out the
Plate-Fleet, and to advertise them how near the English were, and in what
danger they were of them; and that therefore instead of coming to Cape San
Vincent, they should enter into Corogna, the utmost Haven of Gallitia: one of
these Carvels light upon the English Fleet, which hearing of the Orders sent to
the Plate-Fleet by so many parts, steered its Course towares Corogna, supposing
that the Plate-Fleet would undoubtedly light upon some of those Carvels, and
would, according to their Orders, make toward that part: a wonderful accident
happened, which because it exceeded all humane foresight and providence, may
deservedly be called a miracle; not any of the Carvels met with the
Plate-Fleet; so as the Orders which were sent to them falling into the hands of
the English, was the occasion of turning the English out of their way; for the
Plate-Fleet, which coming from out the Channel of Bauma, does usually sail
Northward till it come to the 45 degree of the elevation of the Pole, and then
declining toward the East and South, comes into the Terzere and into Portugal,
and to Coast a long the Cape San Vincent, not being able this year, by reason
of the great Northerly winds, to enter between those Islands and the Continent,
was forced to pass on the out side, and to run along Africa, even to the shores
of Morocco, at the same time that the English Fleet lay before Cales: but when
the English Fleet going from Cales went to find the Plate-Fleet out, the wind
blowing very briskly from the South, it happened that as by the favor thereof
the Plate-Fleet came successfully from the Morocco shores to Cales, so the
English Fleet leaving Cales behind them, the more they thought to meet with the
Plate-Fleet, the English being driven by the same winds toward Corogna, the
further were they from it, and consequently left the entrance into the
Streights, and the Spanish Seas, free to the Plate-Fleet, whither it was bound.

Now because often mention is made of the great Treasure and Riches which this
Plate-Fleet brings every year to Spain, it will not be much from the purpose,
to make here a particular Discourse thereof: lest the Narration of that which
is now so well known, being not spoken of by us, may peradventure leave the
like obscurity to posterity, as we find in the Holy Writ, touching the Land of
Ophir, from whence we read that Gold was brought every third year to Solomon.
The King of Spain, as he is King of Castile is Master of the great Kingdoms of
America, which is now called the new World, and which being totally unknown to
the Ancients was first discovered and found out by Christophoro Colomba, a
Citizen of Genoa, in the year 1492. and as King of Portugal he possesses many
Towns, Havens and Maritime Provinces in Africa, Asia, and in the Indies, and
more Eastern Islands; whereinto by long endeavors and dangerous Navigation he
had penetrated a little before Colomba: from these Oriental and Occidental
Regions infinite Riches and Treasures are yearly brought into Spain: but
particularly from America, as more abounding then any other Region in the
unexhaustible Mines of Silver: between the midst of March and beginning of
April, eight great Ships fraught with Merchandise, and eight well-armed
Galleoons, do usually go every year from the City of Sivil; which sailing
toward America, steer their Course toward that Province which is commonly
called Terra Firma: and putting to shore first at Carthagena, the chief Haven
of that Province, eleven degrees distant from the Line toward the North, and
315 degrees in Longitude; do there unload part of their Merchandise, and pass
forwards with the rest toward Porto Velo, the chiefest place for Trade, in
that Istmus; which dividing the uppermost Sea, which they call the North Sea,
from the nethermore, which they call the South Sea, joins the two chief parts
of America together, just as Africa is joined to Asia by the Istmus of Egypt.
Porto Velo is a place of receipt for all the Merchandise which go to and fro
from Peru; and for all the Gold and Silver which is brought in great abundance
from the unexhaustible Mines of the Potosi in Peru; and from the others of
those parts; for as all that passes from Peru, and from those Provinces by the
South Sea into the North Sea, to be conveyed into Spain, puts in at Panama,
another noble Haven and place of Merchandise, on the opposite side of the
Istmus, which lies upon that Sea, and are carried cross the Istmus upon the
backs of certain creatures not unlike our Rams, to Porto Velo. so those which
are destined for Peru, and those other Regions which lie toward the South,
from Spain and the other American Provinces which lie Northward, are unloaded
at Porto Velo, and are carried upon the same creatures to Palma, from whence
they are sent in Ships destined for Peru, and those other Provinces: the same
Ships when they have unladed the Spanish Merchandise in Porto Velo, are
presently fraught with those which are come from Peru, and those other
Provinces, except it be the Gold and Silver, which for the greater safety are
for the most part put into Galleoons; which are very great and capacious
Vessels, each of which carrying 36 pieces of great Cannon, and 300 select
Mariners, may be said to be the Plate-Fleets Garrison: these being loaded with
Gold and Silver depart in company with the Ships of Merchandise from Porto
Velo, to Havanna, a Haven which for capacity, safety and Fortification, may be
accounted the chiefest, not only in America, but peradventure, in the whole
World; which being situated in the Island of Cuba, just under the Tropic of
Cancer, turns toward the North, and is opposite to that part of America which
is called Florida: whither when they are come, they find about 35 other Ships,
which coming from Spain about the end of the preceding June, pass to San Iovan
di Lua, which is the landing place of Mexico, and of that Province near
America, which is commonly called Nova Spagna; and having here unladed the
Spanish Merchandise, and taken up those of Nova Spagna, they endeavor to be in
Havanna at the time that the Galleoons and other Ships use to come thither;
which is just about the beginning of September; to the end that, guarded by
those Galleoons and other Ships, they may pursue their Voyage with more safety,
and less danger of Pirates; to boot with these, other Ships of the neighboring
Kingdoms use to come thither at the same time: so as the whole Flotta, as they
call it, amounts to between 60 and 70 Vessels; when they part from Havanna,
they must by the Straight of Beama, a very dangerous Straight between the
Island Beama and Florida, fall into the open and immense Ocean, whither when
they are come, they give fire to all their Artillery, in sign of joy for that
they have escaped so dangerous a passage; and calling a Council, they open a
Packet which is brought from Spain, wherein there are Orders and Instructions
from the King, how they are to steer their Course in their return; and in what
height they are to keep from Climate to Climate: to the end, that their Enemies
may not know what Course they steer, who often times lie in wait to surprise
them: these Ships which are called la Flotta d' America come usually into Spain
in November; and entering the Gulf of Cales, go to Sivil by the great River of
Guadalquivir; where the Merchandise and Treasure are brought to the Kings
Officers, and are by them delivered out, according to their several
proportions. They bring with them commonly to the value of eleven Millions of
Gold; whereof two Millions consist in Merchandise, the rest in Gold and Silver;
the fourth part whereof is calculated to belong unto the King, the rest to
particular Merchants: the Merchandises are Cuchunel, Indico, Campeggio or
Campeche, a medecinable wood, Tebacco, and beasts hides tan'd, to make
shooe-soles withal, which they call Covie: of the Ships when they go from
Spain, those which go first away with the Galleoons carry Silks and
Woollen-cloath, Cloth of Gold, and other things of value: the rest, which are
intended for Terra Firma, carry great quantities of Linen, Wine, Oil and
Olives: in which things those Countries which stand in need thereof do abound;
for the King, to keep those Provinces united, and dependant upon his Kingdoms
of Spain, requires (upon rigorous and severe penalties) that two things be by
them observed: the one, that neither Vines nor Olives be planted in America,
though that soil be very capable thereof: the other, that the Exchequer-rents
and Kings Revenues of those Previnces, may not upon any terms be sold to
private men; and hence it is, that those Inhabitants being in a possibility of
being besieged by Spain, forasmuch as belongs to Wine and Oil, they are
necessitated to keep Commerce with Europe, and to tolerate the Sovereignty of a
far distant King, to the end that they may be provided thereof; and not having
elsewhere, where to employ their Riches, they must send them into Spain, to
purchase annual revenues out of the forfeitures of those Kingdoms; which by a
Spanish word drawn from the Latin, they call juri: whence it is that almost
all the ready moneys of America being transported into Spain, raises the rates
of the juri, and occasions plenty of ready money; and which is of greater
importance, the same juri serves the King as a pledge and surety of their
fidelity and vassallage: so as they can the less easily Rebel.

Nor were the Portuguese less fortunate in their Maritime Enterprises; who some
years before Colomba's Navigation, undertook by Maritime Art and Study,
Navigations no less uncertain, dangerous, unusual, and (in man's opinion) not to
be achieved; for the ancient Mathematicians and Cosmographers holding that the
torried Zone was uninhabitable, thought that that part of Africa, which being
washed by the Western Sea extends it self from the Streights of Gibraltar
toward the South, did enter into that Zone, and that therefore it was in vain
to sail any further that way, or to coast along there, without evident danger
of their healths who should come to the Precincts of the Zone: so as it was
impossible to penetrate, by Navigation, from the Occidental African Ocean into
the Oriental, which washes Asia and India: but the Portugueses endeavoring to
advance further, did first discover the great Promontory of Capo Verde, and the
adjoining Islands which the ancients called Hesperides; and then advancing much
further, when they had past the Equinoctial line, they arrived at the Kingdoms
of Congo and Angola; then passing the Tropic of Capricorn, they at last
compassed the enterprise which was before held so desperate; and discovered the
furthermost Promontory of Africa, which they called Capo di buona Speranza, or
the Cape of good Hope; and sailing from thence through the open Ocean toward
the East, they coasted so far along Africa, which turned about thitherwards, as
discovering the mouths of the Arabian and Pe^sian Gulfs, they came at last to
that of the great Indo: where laying the foundations of so great an Empire upon
friendship made with some of those Barbarian Kings, by the sole Trafick of
Spices, and other Levant Merchandiz, they began to interpose themselves in the
Wars which they made one against another; adhering to some with their Arms,
suppressing some others, insomuch as having gotten some Towns, partly by
agreement, partly by force, and fortifying themselves very well therein, they
laid some better groundworks of Empire in the midst of that Nation, which from
nothing, or from very little, increased so fast as exceeds all their
Neighbors, if not in greatness and union of State, at least in Worth, Maritime
Forces and Civil Policy: which by (peradventure an unheard of example)
proceeding from so far distant parts, curbs almost all the Kings and Potentates
of those Regions; for being either Tributaries, adherents or Vassals of the
Portuguese Empire, they either by force or by private interest, are become
dependants upon the King of Portugal: nor have they kept their Navigations and
Acquisitions only within the Confines of India; but as if one afforded
materials for an other, they still advanced, till having gotten to the head of
India, which they call Comorino, and has on its Front the ancient Taprobana,
they entered into the Gulf of Bengala, and from thence into the Molucca Islands
(the fertile Mother of Spices) and to the great Kingdoms of China and Iapan;
and so bold and fortunate have they been, as overcoming the Seas, and finding
them navigable, they have gone about the whole World, and joining the East unto
the West they have rendered the opinions of the Ancients fabulous and foolish,
who denied that the World was round, the possibility of the Antipodes, the
peopling of the Zone, and the conjunction of the Seas.

The Kings of Portugal governed this Empire; and now the Kings of Castile, in
succession to those of Portugal, by a Viceroy, to whom (retaining unto
themselves all that is on this side of Capo dibuona Sper anza) they give all
Supreme Arbitrament, and disposal of all that belongs to them from the said
Cape to the utmost part of the East: upon this Viceroy, who usually resides in
Goa, all the Kings who are Vassals, Tributaries, Friends and Confederates, all
the Government of Civil, Military and Maritime Affairs, does depend: they keep
possession of these Seas by four Fleets, distributed into fitting places and
Havens: insomuch as none of those Kings or People may sail thereon, without
leave and authority from the Viceroy, no not so much as upon occasion of
Traffic or Merchandise. A singular thing, and which was never pretended to,
nor put in execution by any Roman Emperor, or other King: the Kings of Spain
reap many advantages by this Navigation; for to them belongs all the Spices
which are carried away in Ships, to boot with many other Merchandises and
Jewels which are carried from the Indies to Portugal: by reason of this so
great wealth, which comes every year to the Kings hands, the Crown of Spain is
held to be of the richest Monarchies that ever was known, or at least which are
at the present; and yet the Wars of Germany and Italy have so exhausted him,
and brought him into such streights, as to boot with all the Kings Revenues
sold and engaged, Spain is now the poorest of any Kingdom in Europe, in point
of Silver and Gold; in so much as brass money runs curr at through all the
Kingdom of Castile, which they call Moneta del Veglione, instead of Gold or
Silver, which occasioned disorders of great importance to that Crown.

Now to return to where welefr, and to reassume the thread of our former
History. The same English Fleet being deprived of all hope of prey, whilst it
returned for England, ^an great shipwreck by a cruel Tempest which arose, which
driving many of the Ships on shore, and splitting them, the rest returned torn
and rent, and in very bad order, without having done any good, home to England:
so as this powerful League proved no less unfortunate at Sea, then it had done
at Land: the Negotiations, Treaties, and conclusion of peace which succeeded
afterward, as shall hereafter be said, were more unfortunate, and less worthy
so great preparations. Cardinal Barbarino returned about the end of February,
in the year 1626, to Rome, from his French Embassy; who got nothing by it, but
an acknowledgement that the King had aided the Duke of Savoy (who had been
hainously offended by the Genoeses) not so much in respect of his alliance with
the house of Savoy, as to keep the Spanish Forces employed in defending the
State of Genoa, so as they might not oppose his men in the Valtoline; that it
might be supposed that when the business of the Valtoline should be decided, to
the satisfaction of all, and in conformity to the Articles of Madrid, he would
forbear offending the Genoeses, whom he had neither reason, nor will, directly
to injure. But the orderly disposing of the affairs of the Valtoline pretended
unto by the King seemed to be such, as that they offered to restore all the
Forts that were taken in the Valtoline, to the Pope, upon condition that they
should be immediately demolished, and that being demolished the Valtolinians
should return to their ancient obedience of their Lords and Masters the
Grisons, the Kings ancient Confederates: the Pope would not consent to such
hard conditions, as repugnant to the Catholic Religion, and to the Popes
endeavors: so as the Legate departed from the Court, and returned toward
Rome, little satisfied with the King, and less with Cardinal Richelieu; the
Pope intending to send him upon the same Embassy to Spain found great
resistance amongst the Spanish Agents, who thought they should suffer too much
in their reputation, if the Embassy of Spain should seem to depend upon that
of France; wherefore protesting that the King should not receive him, the Pope
sent for his Nephew back to Rome, thinking to send him, as with a new and
different Embassy, from thence into Spain: but neither were the Spanish Agents
pleased with this, who liked not that in the same Negotiation the King of
France should have the precedence given him before the King of Spain: after
many debates this accommodation was found; that the Title of the Embassy
should be from the Pope, relating to the Baptism of a Daughter of the Kings who
was born about that time, and that the Negotiation of peace should come in the
second place, as depending thereupon: but for all this new Embassy, the Pope
forbear not to prepare for Arms, in case he could not effect peace by his
Embassy; for thinking that he should not suffe^ a little by the worlds
opinion, in his own dignity, and in that of the Sea of Rome, by the usurpation
of the Valtoline, which had been done with so little respect to his Men and
Ensigns who defended it; and being moreover scandalized that his Embassy was
not received with such esteem in the Court of France as became the Grandezza of
the S^e of Rome, and his deserts; he took it also ill, that the King of Spain
did not readily restore what he had usurped, but did stand upon unreasonable,
and impossible conditions: he therefore resolved to resent himself by force of
Arms; and after having used friendly and benign endeavors to little purpose,
he would show that animosity and resentment which the world had desired to find
in him, from the beginning of these commotions; and would send men to recover
the Valtoline, and the Forts thereof, which were possessed by the French: so as
the Spaniards continuing their former offers, of assisting him with Men and
Arms, he sent 6000 Foot into the State of Millain, commanded by Torquato Conti,
Son to the Duke de Poli, to the end that joining with the Spanish Forces they
might go to the recovery of the Valtoline: but the Duke of Savoy, and the other
Confederates, prepared forces for the next season, as well as did the Pope;
thinking to renew the war more fortunately, and with greater forces then they
had done the year before; and news was likewise heard in Italy, of great
preparations which were made in that Kingdom to the same purpose; wherefore the
Commonwealth of Genoa, not willing to be found unprovided, let what would
happen, willingly listened to Proposals made by the Marquess di San' Croce, and
the Marquess di Castagneda, of making League with the Crown of Spain, in
defense of their common Dominions; to which purpose an Army of 8000 Foot, and
500 Horse, should be by them jointly raised; two thirds of them to be
maintained by the King, and the rest by the Commonwealth; and this Army was to
be commanded by Francisco Qelio Brancacchio, with title of the chief Commander
of the Commonwealths Forces, which together with many Germans and Italians,
entertained at her own charges, caused two Brigades to be likewise raised, the
one by Philippo Spinola di Giulio; the other by H^ctore Ravaschiero, Prince of
Satriano, who raised them upon his own charges: but these and the Popes
preparations, as also those of the Confederates, proved vain, as did likewise
the Embassy sent into Spain: private Negotiations of peace began at this time
to be had between the two Crowns, which were happily concluded, and with
incredible speed. The King of France, moved the reunto either by the
unfortunate success of the League, or by the troubles of his own Kingdom, (or
were it that he saw that he must be forced to make a new war in Italy, touching
the Valtoline, and other concernments with the Pope, who was irritated and
incensed and joined with the Spanish Forces;) and considering how costly and
how little advantageous the Confederates Counsels proved, conceived it better
to secure his own affairs, then to busy himself in those of other men's: laying
therefore aside all the ends and interests of the Confederates, he thought it
best to close upon any terms with the King of Spain; and the Court of Spain
hearing no more welcome music, then the sound of peace in Italy, willingly
listened to the endeavors that way tending; the conclusion whereof, with the
same easiness and good inclination of all parties, was appointed to be made on
the sixth of March, the year 1626. in Monsone, a Town in the Kingdom of Aragon,
where the King was gone to keep the Courts of that Kingdom: so as the Popes
men, who were come into the State of Millain, at the same time almost that the
unexpected news of peace came thither, served only to receive peaceful
possession of the Forts which in conformity to the Articles of peace were
delivered up unto them, in the name of the Apostolic See; the chief Articles
whereof were: That the Roman Catholic Religion should be preserved in the
Valtoline, and in the Counties of Bormio and Chiavenna: That things should be
reduced to the same condition as they were, in the year 1617. That
notwithstanding the people might choose their Magistrates, and Governors, by
whom they were to be ruled, without any dependency upon the Grisons: That the
confirmation of those that were to be elected should belong unto the Grisons;
who if they were not confirmed within eight days, they might administer
Justice, and exercise their Office and Jurisdiction: That if the Grisons should
fail twice in this confirmation, they should be understood to have for ever
forfeited this their power of confirmation: That the Valtolinians and their
companions should pay unto the Grisons, in recompense for the jurisdiction
which was conferred upon them, a certain annual sum of money to be agreed upon
between themselves; wherein if they should not agree, it should be decided by
the two Kings: That the Grisons should approve of these Articles, and should
swear to observe them: That such Forts as were held by either of the two Kings,
in those parts, should be put into the Popes possession; who upon restoring the
Artillery and Ammunition which should be therein at the time of depositure,
should immediately demolish them; but that the demolishing should not be
delayed, for fault of consignation, since the King had past his word they
should be consigned: That in case the Pope should defer the demolishing, the
two Kings should jointly entreat it at his hands, so as they might be
effectually demolished: That the Grisons should not enter armed into the
Valtoline, nor the Spanish Agents keep any more armed men then usual in the
Confines of the State of Millain: as touching the differences between the
Commonwealth and the Duke of Savoy: That their two Majesty's, and either of
them, should procure a Truce with their Colleague for four months; and should
choose two Arbitrators, who should end the differences within the said prefixed
time; in case the differences should not be terminated within four months,
their two Majesty's should undertake to determine them, and cause each of their
Colleagues to observe them: That their two Majesty's should jointly end any
differences which should arise between the Grisons and Valtolinians, and should
not permit them to take up Arms one against another: That if any differences
should happen in Italy, between the Friends of either Crown, their Majesty's
should not adhere with arms unto their Colleague, till such time as one of the
Kings had treated in the other Kings Court, and procured an amicable agreement.

This was the substance of the chief Capitulations of Peace, at Monsone; then
which more honorable, or more advantageous, could not be expected, nor hoped
for, for the Crown of Spain; since the King got in this business of the
Valtoline all that he therein pretended to, as well in the Catholic Religion
which was there very well settled and secured; as in respect of the state and
liberty of those people, who were thereby also freed, from the yoke and slavery
of the Grisons; for though it was agreed that the condition of affairs should
be reduced to the state they were, in the year 1617, (in which the Rebellion
not being yet begun, the Valtolinians were under the Grisons obedience) yet was
it more in show, then substance; for the election of Magistrates, the necessary
confirmation of them, the free and independent exercise of their jurisdiction,
were such exceptions to the condition of the year 1617, as they did almost
totally alter it: and the Valtolinians, having shaken off their ancient yoke,
which made not only for the benefit and freedom of the King of Spain, for the
neighborhood of Fort Fuentes, and for the necessity of Commerce which those
people stand in with the State it self, they were constrained to keep united to
the Crown of Spain, and to depend upon the Governor of Millains authority: so
as the passage through that Country, which was the most important point, was
kept shut up, and open at the free will and pleasure of the King of Spain and
his Agents; for the Crown of Spain having concluded peace upon so advantageous
terms, after having so fortunately defended Spain against the English Fleet;
after the safe arrival of the Plate Fleet; after the recovery of Brasile, after
the defense and preservation of Genoa, did gloriously triumph over the League,
and over so many Forces, and Plots contrived by her Rivals and Enemies, to
suppress the Grandezza of her King; and truly, we have not these many years
read or heard of any peace made with such advantage and honor to that Crown;
especially in a time when by the same which was given out of so great
preparations for war made by the Consederates she was thought to be furthest
off it, and that she was likely to enter into longer and more dangerous wars
then the former: but the confusion and astonishment of the Confederates was as
great, as was the glory, and satisfaction, which the Spaniards received by this
peace; for finding themselves abandoned by the King of France when they least
expected it, and that by the dissolution of the League their ends and interest
thereby pretended unto were lost, they fumed and complained of the King of
France, not so much for that he had made that peace without their knowledge, as
for the prejudice of the common affairs, which, being by him abandoned, were
totally ruined: the Grisons who were chiefly concerned in the prejudice of the
Valtoline, could not tolerate, that after having run so many dangers in point
of liberty, and suffered such calamities, they should be deprived of so noble a
part of their Dominions; nor that their Protector, the King of France, should
after his public profession made to the contrary, have consented so far when
they did most believe to be restored by his Arms: so as they complained
bitterly, and did openly refuse to accept of those Articles by which they were
enforced to renounce their own interests: the Venetians were mad, seeing
themselves deprived of that advantage which they thought themselves sure of,
after the expense of so much Treasure, after having undergone so many Troubles,
after so many Plots and Artifices, whereby, for their own safety and the safety
of Italy, they had turned the world upside down: the Pope was variously spoken
of herein; those who minded the reality of affairs thought he had reason to be
very well satisfied with this peace, since he had thereby vindicated his
reputation, by the restitution of the Forts, which were to be put into his
hands again; and might pretend that his taking up Arms had been a great cause
why the King of France had been brought to more moderate conditions* on the
contrary, those who were more speculative, and who were already sufficiently
ill conceited of the Pope, thought that as he had with so much dissimulation
suffered the King of France to enter armed into the Valtoline, so, to secure
Italy from imminent slavery, and to abate the Spanish Grandezza; so likewise
that he took it very ill, that the King of France should have stood upon so
hard terms with his Legate in composing the affairs of the Valioline; and if he
were not ill satisfied for these respects, they thought he could not be very
well pleased, finding that his neutrality which he had so publicly professed,
and the course which he had steered upon these present occurrences, had not
only not made him Arbitrator of the present Controversies, but that the two
Kings had agreed them without his knowledge, and not without some prejudice to
his authority; and the Duke of Savoy was no less impatient at this, then were
the other Confederates; for considering that instead of the resentment which he
pretended unto against the Genoeses, instead of the acquisition which he had
hoped to have made in their Dominions, he had lost many of his Patrimonial
Towns, lost his Artillery left in Gavi, and his Galley with the Sea-Standard;
he thought that being to re-have them by agreement, and not by force, was to
acknowledge that he had been a loser by that war: so as he knew not well what
to do: to this was added, that the peace being proclaimed in France, just at
that time that the Prince, his Son, was in Paris, and was gone thither to keep
the King and that Court steadfast to the League, and to procure new and greater
preparations for war to be reassumed the next year; which preparations, that
they might be the more certain, and more dependent upon the Dukes authority,
and that he might have no occasion to contend with the French Captains and
Officers, as he had done with the Constable; the Prince had desired, and (as it
was afterward reported) obtained from the King, the charge, with title of
General of the King of France his Forces in Italy; wherefore the Duke being
become proud, as thinking himself grown formidable to his enemies, and more
regarded by the King of France then any of the Confederates, now that he saw
himself fallen from such an height of expectation, and abandoned by the French
Court when he least expected it, he held himself to be highly affronted, and
that the world would laugh at him: but it was in vain to complain; for the two
Kings were firmly resolved to see their determinations effected; and the
Confederates not being able to do any thing without the King of France, were
forced to succumb, and patiently to swallow down so bitter a pill, and of so
hard disgestion; and the King of France, who had no excuse for what he had
done, cared not much for their being unsatisfied: his Agents, sheltering
themselves under the Kings greatness and authority, alleged not any thing in
defense of what their King had done, but that the interests of the Kingdom
required it should be so; with which (they said) it behoved and was necessary
that the Confederates should comply; sometimes suffering it to escape out of
their mouths, when they were strait put to it, that the Confederates not being
any ways to be compared to their King, they must look upon him as their
superior: The Princes of France were no less ill satisfied with the peace it
self then were the Potentates of the League; wherefore hating the King, as well
as him who had been the chief cause of concluding the peace, some who were
discontented with the present condition of affairs, and desirous of novelties,
and pretenses to conspire against the Kings person, and against Armand du
Plesses, Cardinal di Richelieu, the Kings chief and most intimate Counselor
and Favorite; and it not being known what the true causes were which caused the
King to be so sollicitous in procuring this peace so speedily, and with such
secrecy, some would have it (and it was afterward publicly spoken) that the
signs of the dangerous conspiracy which was discovered in the Court of France
against the Kings person, forced him to compose businesses abroad, upon any
conditions, that he might the more securely provide against home conspiracies;
but the business being discovered in Nantes, four months after the peace was
concluded, does totally exclude that consideration: but whatsoever the matter
was, were it that the peace were the effect of the Conspiracy, or the
Conspiracy of the peace, some Princes of France, taking the unhappy conduct of
the Kings affairs, by the unfortunate success of war, and by the dishonorable
peace, as pretense for their Conspiracy; and finding that they could not pull
down the Cardinal, by reason of the constant belief the King had in him,
plotted to pull down the King himself: many were thought to be accomplices in
this Conspiracy; the Duke and Cavalier di Vandosme, natural Brothers to the
King; many were imprisoned upon this account: the Count di Soissons, Prince of
the blood, his absenting himself from the Court made him be suspected to be
guilty: many said that Monsieur d'Orleans, the Kings Brother, and heir to the
Crown, together with several other chief Officers who were very inward with the
King, were held to have a hand in it. The Plot, was that the King should be
killed or deposed, and that having no Sons, the said Orleans should be made
King; upon whose genius, as being more tractable and conformable to their
humors, those laid their foundations, who endeavored new resolutions in the
world, and the ruin of the League, in prejudice to peace: the Duke of Savoy
was held not only to be conscious of this Conspiracy, but the chief Author and
Composer thereof, out of anger that the peace had been so concluded; and that
the Abbot Alexander Scaglia, a chief Agent of the Dukes, and then Resident in
that Court, was not only a great Contriver thereof; but that being sent from
thence by the Duke into Holland and into England, he should treat of novelties
with that King and with those States, in the behalf of the Rebels and
Rochellers, who were at that time besieged and in great streights: in relief of
whom the King of England sent forth three Fleets, which were all repulsed: the
Duke of Savoy did also foment the Duke of Roan, head of those that were risen
up against the King: he received and entertained Count Soissons in Turin, who
was gone from the Court; and offered the Duke of Orleans safe reception, and
the command of his State, when for fear of the King he should retire thither:
by which accidents, seeing himself in open breach with the Court of France, and
fearing that lying in the midst between the two Crowns he might be equally
hated by them both, he began to endeavor to join again with the King of Spain;
to the end, that if he should be assaulted by the one King, he might be
sustained by the other: this business being brought into the Court of Spain,
and there discussed, met with many difficulties, as (for the most part) new and
great affairs do; for though at the first view, it was well and willingly
listened unto, as an excellent means for the good of the affairs of Italy,
whereby to remove the inconveniences which had happened by the Dukes alienation,
yet it missed not some contradictions: some inclining to embrace the examples
of Charles the Fifth, and of Philip the Second, who by rewards and alliance had
always studied to keep that Prince their friend; others were troubled at the
Dukes genius, who was various, unquiet, naturally a friend to novelties, hard
to be governed before he were broke, harder afterward; when all respects being
thrown aside, and the reins given to resentment, he had already troubled the
affairs of the Crown so many several ways: so as they thought his
reconciliation would be unsafe and costly, and which could hardly be integral,
after so many injuries done and received; it being impossible to reduce him to
his former obsequie and observance, wherefore he was likely rather to trouble
and perplex the Kings affairs, then to secure them. The Conde Duca's authority
prevailed: he being desirous to signalize his inwardness with the King, before
that of his predecessor the Duke of Lerma; who suffered in his fame for having
been too severe in depriving the Crown of this Prince his adherence, by whose
alienation such prejudice, and so many troubles had resulted: so as thinking
his reconciliation would prove as advantageous, he was of opinion that if it
should succeed in his time, and by his means, it would add as much to his
reputation, as his alienation had detracted from that of his Predecessor: the
execution thereof was therefore out of good respects put off till the
conclusion of peace between the Commonwealth and the Duke, The mean while they
went forward with the peace of Monsone, by virtue whereof the Forts of the
Valtoline were restored to the same condition they were in before they were
taken from Torquato Conti, in the Popes name, after many delays interposed by
the Marquess di Coure, who would have had the Forts demolished before
restitution, which the Pope did constantly deny: but did forthwith demolish
them, together with all the Fortifications of la Riva and Chiavenna: so as the
peace was ratified on that behalf fully, with satisfaction to all men: but the
peace between the Genoeses and Savoy met with greater and more inextricable
difficulties; the Duke would have his Towns that were taken, his Artillery,
together with the Galley and Prisoners, restored, before the Truce, and that
they should proceed to decide differences; to which purpose he nominated
Claudio Marini, for his Arbitrator; and the President of Grenoble came from
France to Piedmont, by direction from the King, to be assistant, together with
one who should be named by the King of Spain, in the Arbitrament which was to
be made by Marini, and by an Arbitrator to be named by the Commonwealth. The
Commonwealth, on the contrary, would have the Arbitrators first chosen, who
should determine the differences before any restitution should be made: nor did
they allow of Marini to be an Arbitrator, as being formerly accused by them,
for that he had been in the Confederates Army in the present war, and that he
had, as Ambassador from the King of France to the Duke, intervened in the
Consultations and Wars against the Commonwealth: but the Duke being resolved
not to consent to the Truce whilst the Genoeses should hold his Towns, and the
business being thereby entangled, the Marquess of Castagneda found out this
accommodation; that without passing any express formal word, each party should
keep armed in their stations, but with Orders to their Captains, that they
should stand only upon their Gurd, and that in case any contention should fall
out between the Country people and the Inhabitants, none of them should
interpose themselves in the behalf of their friends; and having agreed with the
Commonwealth that this should be observed by them, he by Letters acquainted the
French Ambassador who was at Turin, with what he had done; who writ back, that
the Duke had made the same agreement, and had sent such Orders and Commissions
to his Captains and Officers. Thus the business seemed to be conveniently
adjusted, rather by reciprocal intelligence, then by any express Truce, or any
formal word given or received for suspension of Arms.

In this interim, the term of four months, prefixed to the Arbitratours by the
Capitulation of Monsone, being expired, the Treaty of Peace was turned over to
the Court at Madrid; where the Conde Duca was for the Genoeses, and the
Marquess of Rambollietto, being gone to that Court upon an occasion of the
birth of one of the Kings Daughters, was detained there too, by order from the
King, for this Affair. The difficulties were many; the Commonwealth refused to
restore the Artillery and the Galley which were demanded by the Duke, as things
which being taken in open fair War are never restored in peace: but the French
pressing this point much, who were desirous to appease the Duke, he being
offended and angry at the peace made at Monsone; and the Spaniards desirous to
gratify him the most they could, in what was more of show then substance, that
they might thereby draw him over to them, conformable to the endeavors which
were had of reconciliation; they desired the Commonwealth to give way to this,
at the request and for the satisfaction of the two Crowns, whose aim was to
settle a good and a secure peace. The Commonwealth considering that restitution
does increase and not lessen the glory of what is gotten, preferred the increase
of reputation before the advantage of retention: whereunto they were persuaded
by their no want of Artillery nor Galleys; and chiefly, because the Duke had
showed the like respect to them in the Artillery which were taken in Riviera:
greater difficulties remained about the principal point of Zuccharello, the
Duke requiring that it should be restored to him, as a thing bought by him
before, or else that he might be recompensed with as much Land elsewhere; and
the Commonwealth refusing both these, the difficulty was reduced to be decided
by moneys; wherein the Mediators at last agreeing, they disagreed in the sum:
The Duke did not only demand what he had disbursed, but the interest, which
amounted to too immoderate a sum; wherefore, and because the French demanded
reparation should be made to Claudio Marini, for the prejudice he had suffered
in having his house pulled own; whereunto the Commonwealth not consenting, the
French Ambassador departed speedily for France, and left the business
undecided: but whilst the business concerning peace was thus negotiated in
Spain, affairs did not pass with that quietness and safety in the River of
Genoa, as was hoped for by Castagneda's Negotiation. Mark Antonie Brancacchio,
Camp-master and Governor for the Commonwealth in Ormea, went by leave from his
Uncle the General with 600 paid Foot, and as many of the Militia, to surprise
and sack Briga, a great Town not far off, belonging to the Duke of Ormea; being
come to a Bridge near the Town, which, contrary to his opinion, he found well
munited, he met with stout resistance; which spun out the business to such a
length, as though the Genoese had possessed themselves of the Bridge and of
some neighboring Houses, yet some Soldiers coming from Tenda to defend it,
they worsted the Assailants, and slew a hundred of them, so as the rest were
forced to sit down by their loss, and to retreat to Ormea, from whence they
were come: the Duke pretending that this was done in time of Truce, exclaimed
much against it; without whose knowledge this dissaster had happened; and being
desirous to know how it came to pass, found that Mark Antonio by License from
his Uncle, General Brancaccio, before he had received Orders from the Senate to
abstain from doing any offense, had done this, the General having forgotten to
recall his License: a frivolous excuse, and which would not have kept the Fact
unpunished, had not the Dukes Captains violated the suspension of keeping from
doing any injury made by Castagneda, a little before; for one of the Dukes
Galleys going from Villa Franca had given chase to a Barque of Genoa, and had
taken it near Albenga, and brought it to Villa Franca, the Masters of the
Merchandise, nor of the Barque, never having received any satisfaction: but the
Duke impatient of affront, watched for revenge; and having had private
intelligence with the Captains of the Garrison in Zuccharello, he sent 600
Horse, with Musketeers encroupe, to Garessi, a Town near Zuccharello, with
intention that being let in by the Conspirators in the evening, privately, by
the Conspirators, and killing as many of the Garrison as should resist them,
they should make themselves masters of the Town, which being done, they should
go that very night, being guided by one that was of the Plot, to Albenga about
six miles off; where General Brancaccio, relying upon the Garrisons of Pieve
and Zuccharello, did carelessly reside; and as if he were to acquaint him with
somewhat of great importance, whilst he could not have advertisment of what had
happened at Zuccharello, he should beat down the Gate of the City, and let in his
companions, who should not be far off, take the General prisoner, make himself
master of the City, and make way for the taking of Pieve, and of all the Towns
till you come to Porto Mauritio; which Towns were not likely to make any long
resistance, when Albenga should be taken. The design had prospered, had not the
Conspiracy which was very near being effected, come to light: but it being
suppressed, and the Author and Accomplices thereof imprisoned, they according to
Military custom, were made to pass the Pikes; and the Garrisons being changed,
and the places of greatest importance reinforced, the Dukes men were forced to
give over the enterprise, and to retreat. The peace of the Commonwealth was
likewise disturbed by the Duke of Guise his sudden coming from Marcelles with
seven Galleoons, amongst which was l' Almirante, a Vessel of great burden, and
very well munited with Artillery: the end thereof was never known, for Guise
meeting with a tempest whilst he was under sail near Corsica, he was driven by
the violence of the wind to within sight of Genoa. The Commonwealth sent speedy
Orders and Advertisment to Corsica, where it was thought the blow was aimed;
and presently Rigging out 12 Galleys, part her own, part the King of Spains,
and furnishing them with excellent Soldiers and with all warlike preparations,
they put to Sea two days afterward, conducted by Don Carlo d' Oria, who upon
this occasion was chosen General of the Fleet: but it being presently known
that Guise, being forced by tempest, was got to Ligorne, where he staid to make
some repairs for what he had suffered by the violence of the Seas, Don Carlo
made thitherward, and came to Anchor at Marzocco, a safe Harbor within two
miles of Ligorne; after two days, Guise put to Sea again, and made strait for
Marcelles, being still pursued by Doria within Cannon-shot, till going out of
the Ligustick Sea he came into that of Provence, and so retreated to Marcelles.
Many men thought that he had only made this show of coming out, wherein nothing
of hostility past, except the making some shot to no purpose afar off at the
Galleys which pursued him, to satisfy the Duke of Savoy for the moneys he had
received from him.

The year 1626 passed over with these petty accidents; about the end whereof
Ferdinando Duke of Mantua died, who having no Sons, was succeeded by his
Brother Vincenzo, the third Son to Vincenzo, the only issue that was left of
the Line of his Grandfather William, and of his Brothers. The year 1627
insued, a year which proved very calamitous to many private Gentlemen of Genoa,
in their fortunes; for those that did Traffic with the Court of Spain, having
about ten millions of moneys owing them, which they were appointed to have
received out of the moneys which were to come in the Plate-Fleets; the King
altered their payment, giving them satisfaction in lieu thereof in juri: with
irreparable prejudice and loss of the Contract; for these particular Genoese,
owing great sums of money to other men, since they were not paid in ready money
by the King, could not satisfy others, but with the same juri, or with much
delay of time, when selling those juri they might pay them in ready money. The
Conde Duca was the chief cause of this great grievance to the Genoese; whereby
the Crown of Spain reaped so much discredit, as the Kings Revenues nor the
Plate-Fleets Treasure, being able to supply ordinary provisions, the King could
not find any afterward who would supply him upon any the most urgent
occasions; and whereas formerly all the Gold of Europe was ready at his service
by reason of his Credit and Correspondency with the Genoese, the Contract
failing, and the King and Genoese failing both of them in their Credit, all
Nations called in their moneys, and would no longer trust them who negotiated
with the Crown of Spain: so as the King instead of the wealth and affluence of
Gold which he hoped for by his Decrees, found extreme penury and incredible
scarcity of ready moneys. The Court Affairs were yet more intricated, for that
the Conde Duca through his hatred and abhorrescence of the Genoeses, resolving
not to make any more Contracts with them applied himself to the Portugueses,
and drew them to Contract and exalting them with extraordinary favors,
professed that for the future he would make use of them instead of the Genoese:
to the end that they being for the most part such as are descended from those,
who turning from Judaism to the Catholic Faith are treated as servants or
slaves in that Kingdom, he might the better manage them, and wind them at his
pleasure, and make use of their means and substance with less respect, and
force them to Contract upon any conditions: but failing in this his new counsel
and course (for the Portugeses were not sufficient to undergo so weighty a
business, neither by their own Wealth nor Credit, nor by their correspondency
with other Nations) he was aware, though too late, that by one sole Decree he
had irreparably prejudiced the Kings affairs, and had destroyed that
well-adjusted frame, which as the chief groundwork of the enterprises and
strength of that Crown, whose Grandezza was envied by her Corrivals, the
Leagues, nor Forces of so many Confederate Princes could not beat down, the
late preceding years: nor was it long ere he reaped the fruit of so unfortunate
a resolve; for no means being found to send moneys into Flanders, the Kings
business was greatly endangered; the Army not being able there to go that year
into the Field; so as he did not only not make any progress in his affairs that
year, but the Hollanders took Groll, with but indifferent Forces, a strong
Town, and of great consequence, in the County of Zutphen; and the next year,
not fearing the Enemies Army, they turned all their Land-preparations, to the
like at Sea; for raising 80 Men of War, they sent them toward America; and
entering the Gulf of Mexico they took the Merchants Ships, which parting from
Don Iovan di Sua went to Havanna, to join with the Galleoons; and moreover,
took many other rich Vessels in several parts of the Ocean, which past from the
Indies and from America to Spain: which losses were the occasion of yet greater
mischiefs, not only for what the Spanish and Portuguese Merchants suffered, by
the interruption of their Traffic in the Indies, and in America; but also for
that the Hollanders being enriched by so great booty were able to increase
their Forces the next year, and made greater acquisitions, of Weesel and
Bolduke, places of great concern in Guelderland and in Brabant; and on the
contrary, the Spanish Army entering Holland by the Velen, was forced to retreat
without doing any thing. The losses and calamities which befell some Gentlemen
of Genoa in their private fortunes, was succeeded by another public calamity;
which though it happened the ensuing year 1628, had its rise, as the Duke
professed, from a petty accident which fell out this year: the Town of Pigna,
being taken, as has been said, by the Genoese, paid obedience to them, though
there was no Garrison in it. General Brancaccio thought it fit, after the Peace
to quarter some Companies of Dutch Soldiers there, who for their greater
satisfaction, and for the safety of the Town, made Trenches round about it;
where having kept quiet for some months, it so sell out, as some of them going
upon their private occasions to Busso, a little Village under the jurisdiction
of Pigna, not above a mile off, which formerly had rendered willing obedience to
the Captain of Pigna, they found a Garrison of the Dukes men in it: which being
told to the Captain, and by him to General Brancaccio, order was given to drive
them from thence: the Dukes men defended themselves; but not being able to
resist, the most of them, together with some of the Town Inhabitants, both men
and women, were slain. The Duke who had not forgot what had happened at Briga,
was very much scandalized with this second accident, which seemed to be another
attempt against that intercourse which had been wrought by the mediation of
Castagneda; and exclaiming sufficiently against the Spaniards both in the Court
of Rome, and to other Princes, he published a Manifesto, wherein he accused the
Genoeses as infringers of the Truce, and of the agreed upon suspension of Arms;
for having retaken Pigna, which they had formerly abondoned, he hereunto added
the assault at Briga, the spoiling of the Country, the extortions and damages
occasioned to his Subjects by the Soldiers of the Commonwealth; that they had
attempted to suborn his vassals, cut down many Chesnut-tree in Ormea, and that,
lastly, by what had been done at Busso, they had manifested how little they
valued the Spanish Agents, their Faith, their Word, and the suspension of Arms
made by the Spanish Agents; wherefore he demanded satisfaction, if not, he
threatened revenge: to this purpose he sent the Abbot of Virgis to Genoa, to
treat with the Marquesses of San' Croce and Castagneda: the Commonwealth
appointed process to be made against those who had used such cruelty toward
women and children at Buss^, and none being found guilty but some few Corsicks,
who were fled, only one of them that happened to fall into the hands of Justice,
was hanged: but the Duke continuing his threats, seemed as if he would once
more assault the Commonwealth. The Duke of Feria was at this time sent for back
into Spain, who till further provision should be taken was succeeded by Don
Gonzalle di Cordua, who fearing some novelty to be made by the Duke, and
thinking himself by the new League made with the Commonwealths obliged to
defend her Territories, he sent Count Luigi Terto to the Western River with his
Brigade, against which the Duke did likewise greatly exclaim in the same
Manifesto; pretending that the King ought not to assist those who by the breach
of Truce had given him just reason of resentment; nor could he do it without
express breach of the Convention at Monsone, by which it was agreed that if any
tumults should arise in Italy between the Colleagues of either of the Crowns,
none of their Majesty's should assist his Colleague, till the occasion of
difference had been discust in the others Court, and there compounded: whilst
these things were in debate, Vincenzo the new Duke of Mantua died, which
occasioned greater commotions in Italy, and seemed to divert the Duke of Savoy
from his new threatened resentments against the Commonwealth, upon these slight
occasions.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK X.
The Contents.
THe Duke of Nevers succeeds Vincenzo in the Dukedom of Mantua and Montferrat;
he is opposed by the Emperor, King of Spain, and Duke of Savoy. Don Gonzallo
di Cordua, the new Governor of Millain, having divided Montferrat with the
Duke of Savoy, goes with his Army to before Casalle; which whilst he endeavors
to take, the Duke takes Alba, Trino, Montcalvo, and many other Towns belonging
unto him by the division. A Conspiracy is discovered in Genoa, whereof the Duke
of Savoy being found the Author, he pretends the impunity of the Conspirators.
The Spanish Agents being desirous to satisfy him, favor this pretention;
which occasioneth some distastes and jealousies between the Commonwealth and
the Crown of Spain. Succors fall into Italy from France, in behalf of the Duke
of Nevers; but being opposed by the Duke of Savoy are soon dissipated. The
Spaniards take Nizza, Ponsone, and other Towns in Montferrat; and finding it
too hard to assault Ca^alle, they fall to besiege it; they are forced to
forsake it by the Kings coming with great Forces into Pieomont. Which whilst
the Duke endeavors to oppose he is beaten by the Kings men, in a conflict near
Susa, wherein the King being victorious, takes Susa; and forces the Duke and
the Governor of Millain to an agreement; by which Casalle is freed, and the
States of Mantua and Montferrat secured to Nevers. The King returns to France.
Marquess Spinola is made Governor of Millain, goes from Spain into Italy, to
provide either by War or Peace, for the Affairs of Spain which are in a bad
condition, by reason of the preceding accidents.

BY the death of Duke Vincenzo, who died in Christmas, the year 1627, the
States of Mantua and Montferrat fell to Charles Gonzaga, Duke of Nevers, Son to
Lodovick, who was youngest Son to William, Grandfather to the three last
deceased Dukes; there was none of the legitimate male line of the Gonzagli, who
were to precede him; (for the legitimate male-line of William ceased by the
death of Vincenzo) who the day before his death did therefore command his
Subjects of Mantua, to swear allegiance to the Duke of Retell, eldest Son to
Charles, who was absent, in the name of his Father Charles. This Retell was
sent for to Mantua by Duke Ferdinando, and was kept there during his life, and
after his death, in consideration of the future succession: the same Duke, a
little before his death, for the beuer security of succession, would have this
Duke Retell Marry the Princess Maria, Daughter to Duke Francis, and Niece by
the Mother side to the Duke of Savoy; (she of whom so much has been spoken in
the beginning of this Book) and to this purpose a dispensation was already
privately procured from the Pope. The Duke of Savoy was not a little troubled
at this Marriage; nor were the Spanish Agents less troubled then he: both
parties complained grievously, that this young Lady should be disposed of
without the participation of the King or Duke (who had so much interest by way
of Alliance in her) not so much as waiting for their approbation; and
professing much amazement at it, they had well nigh threatened public
resentment: but the outward show of this dissatisfaction differed from what lay
concealed in the bosom; the Duke of Savoy intended this Lady for Wife to the
Prince Cardinal of Savoy, so to add by this new title to his ancient pretenses
of Montferrat, the acquisition whereof he thirsted more after in this present
conjunction of times, then ever he had done formerly; and the Spanish Agents
(who abhorred that Nevers should succeed in those Dominions) hoped (as it was
thought) if they could have effected it, to make use of this Princess, whereby
to exclude him totally; nor was it long ere both these parties discovered their
aversion to Nevers his succession; for though falling into the Valtoline by the
Swissers and Grisons, and from thence being come to Mantua through the Venetians
Territories, he was readily received by all the Mantuans, and obeyed as their
Prince; yet the Spanish Agents refusing to receive him, or to call him Duke of
Mantua, and the Duke of Savoy professing to proceed, and do in this business,
as the King of Spain should do, and that he would totally depend upon his
authority; the Orders of Germany and Spain, whither these advertisments were
speedily sent, were expected: from whence they hoped and undoubtedly held that
orders and resolutions would be sent, to cross the succession of the new Duke,
because they knew that this had been discus'd and almost resolved there, before
the death of Duke Vincent. The Emperors intention was that the succession of
these States being to divolve upon a cross line, and that many would pretend to
this succession; the possession thereof should be delivered up to him as to the
Supreme Lord and Sovereign Judge, that he might afterward dispose thereof to
those who should have most clear title thereunto: this, he said, the peace of
Italy required, and this was wont to be done by the Imperial Chamber; that it
was thus observed in the succession of Montferrat, when it was ventilated by
many Competitors, after the death of Iovan Georgie Falleologe. The Duke of
Savoy did not concur alone with the Duke of Nevers, in his ancient pretentions
to the Dukedom of Montferrat, but also Margaret, the Dowager Duchess of
Lorrein, eldest Sister to the three last Dukes, pretending by her proximity of
relation, not to exclude the Duke of Nevers only, but also Princess Mary, her
Brothers Daughter, respect being had to Duke Vincenzo, last dead; whose
succession was now the thing disputed, and not the succession of Duke Francis,
Father to Mary, who was succeeded by her, Ferdinando, and since by Vincenzo;
and as for the Dukedom of Mantua, whereof women are made incapable, Don
Ferrante Genzaga, Nephew to that so famous Captain, Don Ferrante, who was
younger Brother to Frederick Duke of Mantua, the new Dukes Grandfather by the
Fathers side, did concur: he grounded his title upon the interpretation of
certain words of the ancient Investment; and upon Nevers his incapacity (as he
alleged) of succeeding in those Dominions, for that both he and his Father had
born Arms against the sacred Empire, whereof those States are ancient Fees.
Pretentions which were thought to be willingly listened unto by the Emperor and
by the Court of Spain, that they might thereby exclude Nevers as they intended
to do: nor were those of the house of Gonzaga against Don Ferrante's
pretentions, thinking that by Nevers his exclusion, their succession grew
nearer; and therefore some of them were suspected to have had private dealing
and treaties with Don Ferrante, presently upon the death of Duke Vineenzo, to
put him into possession of that City, and to cry him up Duke; and when he died
there we e some Soldiers ready to do it, who being suppressed more by
dissimulations seasonably, and by provision taken to the contrary, then by
punishment or by being publicly taken notice of, their endeavors proved vain:
Nevers, on the contrary, pleading the clear and undoubted meaning of the Law,
by which the next Heir to the last Lord is to be admitted into possession of
the Fee, not only against those who lay in wait for the succession, but against
the Sovereign and lawful Lord, (when laps or the devolution of the Fee should
be pretended) said that the Decree of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, made
against the Duke of Savoy, being passed between the Ancestors of either of
them; since which the said Duke, not having gotten any new pretenses, he could
not prosecute his former claim, as long as it continued in the possession of
Nevers his Ancestors, otherwise then in the awarded manner; and for the
Duchess of Lorrein, that she was excluded either by the male-kindred, though
never so remote, as it had been formerly practiced; or by her Niece, who was in
a nearer degree to succession: but as for Don Ferrante, who was clearly
descended from the second Son of him by whom they all laid claim, what color
of reason had he to pretend to the ancient investment, whilst the line of the
eldest Son was not yet void: which Investment prefers the first born, and those
that do descend from them, before all others, by express order of Birthright;
and as for the incapacity that was objected against him, he denied that either
he or his Father had ever carried Arms against the Sacred Empire; and showing
the scars, yet remaining in his Breast, of the wounds which he had received in
Hungary, wherein he had fought in behalf of the Cefarian Majesty and of the
house of Austria; he said, that no incapacity could be objected against him,
for any peace that had since insued: in the Articles whereof a full and ample
pardon was granted to any of the contrary party, who had drawn their swords in
that war: but the strong endeavors to the contrary made by the Spanish Agents
prevailed more with the Emperor, then these solid and evident Reasons; who
knowing that this Prince was bred up in France, allied to the blood of France,
joined in Kindred to the King; (who was Feudatory to that Crown, by the great
incomes which he possessed in that Kingdom,) thought it to be too dangerous for
them to permit a Lord of two Dukedoms, and a master of several strong holds
upon the Confines of Millain, to be placed in the bowels of Italy, lest being
upheld and adhered unto by France he might afterward raise up new parties and
factions in Italy, by which their Kings authority might decline from that
preeminency, in which he did more easily and more securely maintain himself,
without any fear of the French, who had not one foot of Land in Italy: a danger
which the present condition of times made to appear very probable, by the
desire which, upon many of the Occurrences, was discovered in the French of
getting greater power in Italy, then the Spaniards had; and by their being
fomented by many Italian Princes, to the end that they might, for their own
interest, see the authority of France prevail over that of Spain, or at least
stoutly counterpoise it. The Spanish Agent did therefore servently endeavor
that the Emperor (who to keep the house of Austria in chief authority amongst
all Christian Princes, was concerned in the same ends and designs,) might
readily lend his hand, and join with them in excluding the new Duke; and the
Spaniards authority was greater at this time with the Emperor then usual; for
the late merit by powerful aid both of men and money afforded by the Crown of
Spain in the troubles of Germany, added to the community of concernment;
without which he could hardly have made his party good against the Rebellions
and contrary Factions of Germany; and the continual need he stood in of the
like assistance, for that those flames were not yet quite extinguished: so as
it becoming him to second their interest, he to pleasure them had given them
order, whilst Duke Vincenzo was yet alive, (but not likely to live long,) that
if the Duke should die, they should possess themselves of those States; which
when the time came, they forbear to do, not thinking the time yet proper, nor
affairs well prepared; and though the Emperor seemed, when the Duke was dead,
to continue in the same mind; yet he appeared somewhat cooler in the manner of
proceeding; claiming therefore the possession of those States by public
Decree, as due to him, he sent Count John di Nassaw into Italy, with the title
of Cesarian Commissary, to take possession of them in a civil manner, if the
new Duke should willingly assign them up; and if he should refuse to do so,
then to proceed by Citations and Declarations, and afterward by Imperial
Proclamation, and so by force of Arms: the Spaniards who upon the first Orders
had betook themselves to the business, and who were most and neerliest
concerned in the danger, appeared more hot and fervent; for thinking it would
be more easy to drive a new Prince suddenly out of his State, then to tarry
till he should be consolidated therein, and might by making Provisions and
Fortifications make the enterprise harder, they admitted of no delay; and the
rather for that the King of France (whose opposition they only apprehended)
being busied with all his Forces before Rochel; and therefore not able to apply
himself much to the affairs of Italy, nor to send succors to the new Duke;
they thought they should lose time, if they should not readily embrace so
opportune an occasion. The Duke of Savoy invited them much thereunto: who
professing that he would keep firm to that Crown, promised many things on his
part in favor of the new enterprise: but the instigations and relations of Don
Gonzallo di Cordua prevailed more with the King and Court of Spain, then any
thing else; who desirous to have the free and absolute Government of the State
of Italy, being Governor there now (as has been said) till a new Governor
might be provided; as soon as he heard of Duke Vincenzo's death, began to hold
intelligence in Cassalle, to have one of the Gates of Cassalle delivered up
unto him; and having agreed the business, he informed the Court by Letters of
the intelligence he held in that City, and how easily it might be gotten; which
being done, he said that the acquisition of the rest would with the same
facility follow: in fine, not only he, but all the rest of the Spanish Agents
labored to exclude the new Duke. But the Court, which long before Duke
Vincents death had foreseen this accident, and perhaps had resolved not to
permit the French to get such power in Italy by Nevers his succession; yet
being de^ained from moving therein, in consideration of the unjustness of the
fact, or weary of their unfortunate success in the late Wars of Italy, it
abhorred to have to do in so scandalous a novelty; and therefore did at first
put on the more just and favorable resolution, not only of consenting to
Nevers his new succession, but to receive him into the protection of the Crown,
and to be his friend: and in conformity to so holy and wise a resolution,
dispatches were already sent out of the Kings Chancery; which not being yet
come to Italy, the Dukes Letters and the Advertisments of Don Gonzallo, and of
the other Spanish Agents, arrived at the Court; whereby they acquainted the
King with what intelligence they held in Cassalle: whereupon the mind of the
Court was soon altered, and the justice of the Cause being born down by the
apparent advantage of the new acquisition, and of the assured safety which
would thereby redound to the affairs of Italy; they resolved to oppose the new
Duke, with might and main, and by open war to keep him from the succession of
those States; and the charge of this new enterprise, together with the absolute
Government of the State of Millain, (which was the thing he aspired unto,) was
given to Don Gonzallo, the chief Author and Promotor of so unhappy and
unfortunate an advice: in the execution whereof, though the Emperor had not as
yet absolutely consented thereunto, Don Gonzallo began to declare war in the
Emperors name; and for his better preparing of Men and Arms, he alleged the
Emperors Decree of Advocation for the ground work of the Enterprise; and said,
That whereas the Duke ought to have been put into possession of those States by
the Emperor, he had actually, and of his own Authority intruded thereinto,
contrary to the said Decree: He also gilded over this new Commotion with
endeavors for the public Peace of Italy, and for the safety of the Affairs of
the Crown of Spain. And lastly, but rather by way of complaint, than of any
lawful occasion of new War, he added the Marriage of the Princess Mary,
concluded without any respect to the Kings Alliance or Authority. These were
the reasons alleged for this present War, which being but little allowed of by
the tacit consent of most men, and as they rendered the Spanish Forces but
little justifiable, and Cesar's resolutions not correspondent to the fame and
universally conceived opinion of his Piety and Religion; so did they, on the
contrary, reconcile, through commiseration, the general favor to the new Dukes
Cause; as if being oppressed merely for reason of State, he had been suffocated
only by the covetousness and force of a more powerful Adversary: But it being
apparently known, that the Emperor proceeded herein, more as forced by the
urgent and importunate instigations of the Spanish Agents, than by his own
genius and will, as it did in part excuse him from men's sinister opinion, so
did it lay all the odium and blame upon the Spaniards; which appearing naked in
the Field, unassisted by the Imperial Name or Authority, which they carried in
their foreheads, written in golden Letters, they did appear to men what they
intrinsecally were, not bent to favor the rights of any of the pretenders, nor
to the maintaining of the Cesarean Authority, but to the new acquisition of
Territories, and to the further enlarging the Kings Empire in Italy, by the
suppressing of that Prince; so as the Insurrections of the Valtoline, sustained
and fomented by the Spaniards, had filled Italy with jealousies and suspicions,
and rendered their name odious; so their present betaking themselves to the
manifest usurpation of a Principality, without any the least colorable reason,
forced the Italian Potentates to privide for their private and for the Common
safety, which, if the Spaniards should obtain their ends, they foresaw would be
much endangered. The Duke of Savoy's reconciliation to the King of Spain did
accelerate the Enterprise against the new Duke; for the Kings Agents, to make
the business easy to themselves, and to lay the way open for the taking of
Cassalle, which they did so excessively desire; and firmly believing the Duke
would not stand idle upon such an occasion, nor suppress his ancient presences;
and on the other side, the Duke seeing that he could not better advantage
himself in the present conjuncture of times then by help from Spain; therefore
all other respects being laid aside, they thought neither of them could do
better than to hasten the conclusion of the Agreement, which had been treated
of long before, touching the division of Montferrat; by which Trino, Alba, San
Damiano, and many other Towns of Montferrat, being assigned over to the Duke
(which being more incorporated with Piedmont, was very advantageous for the
union of that State;) the Spaniards were to put themselves into the possession
of the rest, wherein was comprehended Cassalle, Pontestura, Montcalvo, Nice,
Acqui, Ponzone, together with the adjacent Towns, which, as being annexed unto,
and confining upon the Marquesate of Finale, and the River of Genoa, made much
for the accommodation of the Spaniards. It was agreed upon by colorable
pretense, That each of them should prosecute the Enterprise in Caesar 's Name;
That it should not be lawful for the Duke to fortify any place he should take;
and, That neither of them should be a hinderance in the possessing of what
should fall to them by the Division. So the Duke, that he might get part, since
he could not get the whole, was content that his Niece, the Princess Mary,
should be quite bereft of the whole; and the Spanish Forces, which till now
withstood the Dukes pretenses, for their own interest, began now to protect him
therein. The French had long before this endeavored to disturb this
reconciliation; and to this end it was thought, that in the Negotiation of
Peace between the Duke and the Commonwealth, they held the Dukes pretenses
very high, not so much to gratify him at the Genoeses cost, and to mitigate
the injury done him by the Peace of Monsone, as for that Peace remaining
unconcluded by reason of the Dukes high demands, the reconciliation should not
be effected; and not herewithall content, that they might keep him to fide
still with them, they, during Duke Vincent's life, held Treaties of Alliance
between the Cardinal of Savoy and Princess Mary; and between her Mother the
Dowager Infanta, and the Duke of Nevers, with some settlements touching the
pretensions to Montferrat; and Monfieur Sanchiamond being to this end sent
Ambassador Extraordinary from the King to Duke Vincenzo, after Duke
Ferdinando's death, by the usual way of condoling and congratulating, he, as he
passed through Turin, and went afterward to Mantua, treated thereof with them
both in the Kings Name: But Duke Vincent dying not long after, the no sincerity
of the Negotiation appeared, by the sudden match which was concluded, not
without satisfaction and joy to the French, and to the same Sanchiamond, (who
because he was in Mantua when the Duke dyed, and when this match was made, was
thought to be conscious of all things that had past) whereat the Duke was very
angry, and held himself to be much injured, and complained grievously thereof
to the same Sanchiamond, who was at this time returned from Turin to Mantua,
and to Monsieur di Guron, a Gentleman sent by the King of France to keep him
from the new Reconciliation, with new offers, not only touching his new
pretensions, but of assured and powerful assistance against the Genoeses, for
recovery of the Towns upon the River, which were allotted to him by the
Articles of Susa; for the King of France, being sufficiently employed and
intent about the business of Rochel, did not omit any endeavors whereby the
Affairs of Montferrat might be friendly compounded between the two Dukes: This
was the Auge or Vertical point of this Princes Greatness; he being at one and
the same time sued unto in his own Court, and Idolized, as a God on Earth, by
the Agents of two great Kings, and tempted by most advantageous conditions to
join with them, as if all their actions did depend upon him, and as if the
whole Foundation of the safety of the present Affair did in him consist. And as
it often falls out in humane affairs, that when things are come to the highest
point they begin to decline, so fared it with this Duke; for not being able to
mount higher, and not being able through the volubility of Affairs to continue
long in that pitch, he was forced afterward to stoop from that exaltation, and
was brought to lose a great part of his State, and almost to his utter ruin:
Being amidst so many Proposals, and finding himself, together with the former
offenses, injured by the French, by the duplicity of this Matrimonial Treaty;
and being conscious to himself of the fresh injuries done to the King and Crown
of France, he gave no belief to his Agents great offers; and thinking that he
might build more safely upon the favor of the Spaniards, by reason of the
community of Interests, and by the advantageous bargain which he should get
from them, in the dividing of Montferrat, he rather chose to join with Spain
than with France; and afterward acquainting the French Agents with this his
resolution, he tacitly pleaded the Peace of Monsone (made by their King) for
his defense, without acquainting his Confederates with it, nor making any the
least account of their concernments, and in a gibing manner added, That he had
learnt of their King to join readily with the Crown of Spain, which being now
so faithfully united to that of France, as might be seen by the helps which
France received from Spain in the business of Rochel, it showed that it was not
to be doubted, but that he being also joined to the Crown of Spain, would never
be able to disunite it from that of France, nor be any prejudice to it. The
French Agents being therefore dismissed with small satisfaction, as also the
French Soldiers who were under his pay; but keeping Marini, the French
Resident in Turin, till such time as his own Resident should return from Paris,
his Reconciliation with Spain was perfectly established, but unhappily, as it
proved by the great prejudice which (contrary to their supposals) befell both
him and the King of Spain.

By the conclusion and exclusion of these practices the new Dukes affairs were
brought to a very bad condition, both in hopes and opinion; for the King of
France, who was his chief Protector, not being able to sustein him, either by
authority or force, he had little help to expect elsewhere, against the
Emperor, King of Spain, and Duke of Savoy, who joined all together to drive
him out of his State, the latter two by force of Arms, and the first by
Judicial Authority and Edicts; so as none of his other Friends, who wished him
well, could assist him, without indangering themselves, since he wanted the
strong support of France: And the Princes of Italy, though they were much
troubled at this Prince's prosecution, for the example and consequence thereof,
yet were they forced to proceed very circumspectly in declaring themselves, and
much more in assisting him: nay, it was to be feared, that, if required, they
would have declared against him. The Emperors Authority was at this time very
great and formidable, having gotten the upper hand of the Prince Palatine, and
of his abettors; all the Princes and Hans Towns of Germany rendered him exact
obedience, not so much for fear of his powerful Army of above 100000 fighting
men, which being distributed into several parts of Germany, were ready at hand,
as for that by his happy Successes, and continued course of Victory, he seemed
to be miraculously favored by the Heavens: And truly he was in his actions the
most formidable of all his Predecessors; and undoubtedly had he turned his
Forces upon Italy, he would have found ready obedience; so as the Pope and
Venetians, in whom all Nevers his hopes did rest, were forced to proceed with
great caution in these present affairs, which did not directly appertain unto
them. The Venetians, that they might keep from provoking him, by adding new
injuries to the ancient enmities contracted with this very Emperor, when upon
the Croates account they assaulted Gradisca, and endeavored to deprive him of
his Patrimonial Estate in Friuli; and the Pope, for that Peace between him and
the Emperor, making much for the good of Christendom, it became not him to
break it upon the score of the new Dukes succession.

Cesar's Authority was likewise augmented by the Peace made by him at this time
with the Turk and Transilvanians, and by the advantageous offers which were
made unto him by his Rebels, and by the Head of them, the King of Denmark, who
being several times routed by him in Battle, and berest of a great part of his
Kingdom, desired Peace: wherefore it was to be doubted, that these Commotions
being appeased, which were those which did only disturb the Affairs of
Germany, the Emperor, to maintain his Authority and Command in Italy, should
have made good his threats of passing into Italy with powerful Forces, when the
Process should be ended which was then begun against Nevers; and that War
should be published against him, in case he obeyed not the Imperial Edicts or
Banne. Reason was added to these respects, which ought to detain the new Dukes
friends from declaring themselves to favor him: For the Emperor being Supreme
Lord of these States, and of the new Duke, none could or ought legitimately to
interpose between him and his Vassal, nor reprove or correct any Judgment that
should pass, there being none to whom recourse was to be had in point of
grievance: And yet Nevers thinking, that to quit his possession willingly was
the worst of evils, resolved to keep it till the last; he therefore betook
himself to munite Mantua and Cassalle the best he could, both of them being
very strong places, the last by Art, the other by Nature, and stood prepared to
receive so great a storm; he notwithstanding offered (since the King of France
could not assist him) several Proposals of accommodation to the Duke of Savoy,
and to the King of Spain, desiring the King that he would receive him into the
accustomed protection of his Crown, as he had done his Predecessors, and
professing to be willing to depend in all things upon his Authority: Moreover,
to the end that he might not appear contumacious to Cesar's Decree, and to the
end that the Citadel of Cassalle might not keep the Spaniards in perpetual
jealousy, he of himself offered to receive Dutch Garrisons, which should
depend upon his Cesarean Majesty, and to set up the Imperial Ensigns, into all
the Towns of his Dominions, except the City of Mantua, which was not (as he
said) a Magazine of Arms, and Cassalle, where in lieu of receiving in a
Garrison, he offered to beat down the Walls and Bulwarks, which divide the
Citadel from the City, to the end that being both joined in one Body, they
might be the more easily taken; which Proposals not being accepted, they did
not at all retard the going on of the Enterprise, nor were they sufficient to
keep off the Process and Citations of the Imperial Bands or Edict, which were
intimated unto him, and threatened by the Cesarian Commissary, who was at this
time come into Italy. The Marquess of Canossa was Governor of Montferrat, and
the Marquess di Rivara was Governor of the Citadel; the latter a Montferrian,
the other a Veronese; but the Chancellor Traiano Guiscardi's authority was
Superintendent in the conduct of public Affairs; one who was very well versed
in the Affairs of the world, quick witted, very vigilant and careful of the new
Prince his interest, and partial to France. These providing all things
necessary for the defense of these and all other places of Montferrat, did
attentively observe the proceedings of the Governor of Montferrat, and of the
Duke, who growing daily more fervent in the business, prepared for offending:
Nevers did the like in Mantua; and the Governor, nor other Spanish Agents, not
having been any ways diligent, after Vincenzo's death, in keeping either
Subjects or Foreigners from entering to desend that City, many Soldiers came
by threeves into Mantua, through the Valtoline, through the Venetians Towns,
and those of the Genoese; and many French who were cashiered after the Duke of
Savoy's reconciliation and declaration, were got into Cassalle: so as before
the war began, the new Duke had got about 6000 Foot, and 1000 Horse into
Mantua, part of the same Nation, part Foreigners, and of those, most French;
and in Cassalle there were about 4000 Foot, and 400 Horse, all of them
Montferrians, unless it were 500 French, who being cashie^ed by the Duke of
Savoy had listed themselves under Monsieur di Guron. There came thither also,
after the Enemy was encamped before it, the Marquess of Beveron in disguise,
who was come from France to serve in that war, that he might be readmitted
from banishment, which he had a little before incurred for fighting a Duel. A
gallant Gentleman, and well versed in arms: these two Towns being strong and
abundantly furnished with Garrisons, it was probable that both the Sieges might
prove long and difficult; and that therefore the oppugners, who were but few in
number, might not come off with honor from that Enterprise, as being either
weary or wasted by time, by warlike actions, by sufferings and hardships, or
forced by French succor, or by some other strange, unthought-of accident.
Besides Cassalle, two other Forts were to be expugned, Nizza and Montcalvo, and
two Towns, Ponzone and Pontestura. The taking whereof, they being reasonably
well munited, would require length of time, and more men: on the contrary many
things made against the Duke of Savoy and against the Governor, whose eyes
were chiefly fixed upon Cassale; scarcity of men, the^e not being then in the
State of Millain above 2000 Horse and 12000 Foot; 2000 whereof were to be kept
in Como, for the necessary, defense of the passes toward the Swissers and
Grisons: 4000 others, and 800 Horse, were of necessity to be kept in the
Quarters of Cremona upon the Mantuan Confines, against the new Duke; whose
numbers being increased threatened many things: so there were no more then 6000
Foot, and 1500 Horse to march into the Fields. True it is, that a Truce for six
months being agreed upon be ween the Commonwealth of Genoa, and the Duke of
Savoy, he obtained 5000 Foot from the Commonwealth, wherewith having
sufficiently garrisoned the Towns della Riviera, he seemed to have no want of
men during the Truce: some men, but not many, were likewise expected from
Naples, Sicily and Sardigna: to the want of men were likewise added the want of
Victuals, by reason of the great barrenness of that years Harvest; and the want
of ready moneys, by reason of the suspension of payment made the King, as has
been said; and these were necessarily accompanied with the want of credit
amongst the trading Genoeses, and of the Court it self: so as the chief sinews
of war being wanting, it was impossible to raise more men, or to make much
provision for the Enterprise, It being impossible to sit down upon so many
disadvantages, and upon so ill grounds, before Casalle, a place strong of it
self, but much stronger by the Cit^del, very capacious, and of a large
situation, flanked by six Bulwarks, begirt by large and deep Ditches, and which
being wholly planted and fortified by all the rules of modern Fortification,
was deservedly thought, and commonly held to be a royal Fort, and the strongest
that was in all Italy, except Palma in Friuli; it would have been more wisely
done to have deferred the Siege till a more fitting time; and though the desire
and haste of this new acquisition did exceed all other considerations, it had
been more to the purpose to have taken first some of the Towns about it; and
putting 500 Foot, and 200 Horse into each of them, and to have cleared the ways
with them, to the end that neither Victuals, Men nor Munition might have been
brought thereinto; and whilst they should have thus besieged it at a distance,
to have gone with the rest of their men to before Nizza, and from thence to
Montcalvo and Ponzone; and having reduced the weaker Towns, to have gone then
with all their Forces to besiege Casalle; and streightening the Siege, to bring
it to a necessity of either surrendering it self, or of being stormed. But this
being a business of length, and the Governor being desirous, according to his
promise made to the Court of Spain, to end the business in a short time, he
preferred the taking of the place before any other resolve, being thereto
invited not so much by the small quantity of Munition, which (as they say,) he
was made believe was in it, and by the intelligence which he had therein; as
building his belief upon the small experience and resolution which he thought
to be in the defendants, who were (for the most part) Montferrians, common
people, who being affrighted and terrified by the loss of their Houses and
Fields, when they should see them ruined by the Enemy, would not in likelihood
persist long in defending Casalle. But their Calculations proved false, and
their designs vain; for the Munition and Provision did far exceed opinion; and
the Montferrians proved not only more valiant, but more faithful and constant,
then Subjects use to be to a Prince who was hardly known to them: the
intelligence wrought no effect, either through the diligence of the Duke of
Mantua's Captains and Officers, or out of the diffidence and fear of those that
treated therein. The Governor, notwithstanding, coming into the Field about
the end of March, and passing over the Po at Valenza, came with his Army to
Frassinero, the first Town of Montferrat, two miles distant from Casalle; where
making a Magazine for Arms, for Victuals and Ammunition, he mustered his men;
wherein he found not above 8000 Foot, and 1500 Horse; wherein were comprehended
2000 Neapolitans, who were first of all come from the State of Genoa, under
Antonio dal Tuffo.

The City of Casalle stands upon the Banks of Po, in a Plain on the left side
of the River: the form thereof is irregular, but rather round then of any other
shape: it is begirt with Walls, unless it be on the North side, where the Poe
coming almost up to the Wall serves for a Ditch: on the South side, where the
Plain extends it self, is the Citadel, within half a mile whereof the Hills
draw near, and ancient Castle defends it. It was thought very fit by many to
make themselves masters of the Hills, not only because they command the City,
but for that the defendants would thereby be straightened in Victuals; for being
to expect succors only from Montferrat, which lies behind the Hills, the
seizing of them deprived the defendants of all hope of succor: but we^e it
either that the Governor, who was almost equal to the defendants in Foot, was
loath to part from the Plain, where he was superior in Horse; or that he thought
if he should incamp upon the Hills he should be too far from the River, from
whence he was to receive Victuals and other Provisions, not without danger of
having them intercepted by the City which would be between the River and him;
or that he thought his very accosting the City would be enough to take it, he
kept upon the Plain; and going from Frassinero went in Rank and File toward
Casalle; whither when he was come so near as that the Cannon could not reach
him, he halted, and quartered himself before that part of the new wall which is
called Alla nuova, which thrusting out from the Citadel toward the Poe, joins
with the ancient wall of the City. At the sitting down of the Camp, those
within, according to the custom of Soldiers, sallied out very strong both in
Foot and Horse; and showing great courage, made a stout Skirmish that day,
which lasted till night; and though they were manfully withstood and repulsed,
they failed not to make another sally the next day, out of a double design: the
one to hinder the Enemy as much as was possible from fortifying himself, and
from making his approaches, or at least to retarde them: the other, that they
might gain more time to fortify themselves the better on the side whereon they
were assaulted: nor did their endeavors prove vain, for being defended by
Artillery from the Citadel, which played upon that side, they came to underneath
the Rampires, where they fought valiantly; and being afterward pursued, they
retreated safe to underneath the shelter of their Cannon. Continuing to do thus
many days, they afforded their men convenience to fortify their new wing,
against which the Enemy bent their whole Forces; and they had made two
Half-moons beyond it, which defended the new Gate, and two great Plat-forms,
which did also shelter the Mills which furnished them with grist: but the
assailants being got so near as they were able to plant Batteries, they raised
four, one of Italians, on the side of the Capuchins Church, the other three of
Spaniards, nearer the Poe; from whence, though they began to play furiously,
yet did they advance but a little; for the shot gave only against the highest
houses, and sometimes slew some of them who wrought upon the Trenches; and
having spent some days thus, and finding themselves deceived in their opinion
of taking the Town ^o easily, and of the sm^ll resistance they should meet
with, they began to distrust the sequel, and to know by experience, that all
they did was but apparent loss of labor, time and reputation: they knew also
that Victuals were daily brought into Cassalle by the way of the Hills, and new
men and fresh Provisions, which the Montferrians, who extremely hated the
Spaniards Government, and were desirous to keep under their natural Prince,
brought in: so as finding now for certain that it would be too desperate an
enterprise for them to attempt that place without being masters of the Hills;
and knowing the necessity thereof, it became them to desist from what they had
begun, and fall to another manner of Siege, that would be more convenient, and
more profitable; which they might the more commodiously do, for that all the
men that could come from the State of Genoa were already come; and from Naples
1200 Neapolitans, and as many Spaniards, to boot with 400 Sardinians from
Sardinia: so as the Camp being stronger in men, was likewise more able for the
enterprise of the Hills then before: but being loath to acknowledge an error,
and a certain ambition peculiar to Commanders, who rather then to amend
resolutions already taken, will be subject to any inconveniences that may
thereby result; and the hopes which they had given at Court of the easy, and
speedy dispatch of the business, would not suffer the Governor to re-begin it,
when by his promise he was obliged to have ended it: so as deceiving both
himself and the Court, he continued his former supposals; and (with some new
additions,) forced himself to persist therein: wherefore without quitting those
Quarters he resolved upon two Enterprises: The one, to deprive the Enemy of the
Mills; the other, to take Rossigliano, a Castle upon the Hills, five miles
distant from Cassalle; not so much for that when they should have taken it, it
would avail much for the taking of the Hills, as for that it was a receptacle
for the Montferrians who were a Convoy to the Victual which were brought to the
City, and which oftentimes did infest the Spanish Horse which were quartered
abroad in those Countries. But neither of both these Enterprises did hit; for
Don Frederico Enriques, going with six Companies of Foot, and three of Horse,
to surprise that Castle, and having to that purpose carried along with him some
Petards, ^e got not thither before Sunrising, through the maliciousness of his
Guide, who was a Montferrian, and prolonged his March: so as being discovered,
and finding the Drawbridge up, and the Walls full of defendants, he was forced
after a slight attempt to retreat, with the loss of eight of his men, and
having fifteen wounded, (amongst which he himself was one, being hurt, though
but a little, in the head with a stone;) and Luigi Trotto, Campmaster, who had
the Enterprise of the Mills given him, not being able to advance straight
forwards, for the two Forts which defended them, went with 3000 Foot, and 200
Horse commanded by Gambacorti into the Island which the Poe makes, over against
them; and having raised a Battery there, he did nothing of moment, being
hindered, partly, by a great B^nk, which was erected over against the Enemies
Battery upon a sandy hill between the Battery and the Mills, partly by the
fullness of the River, which twice overflowed a great part of the Island, to the
danger of himself, and of some of his men, whereof some were drowned in the
River; and that he might avoid that danger, he was forced to retire to the
other Bank, where he raised another Battery, but did thereby no good, by reason
of the far distance, as also for that those of Cassalle removed the Mills a
little higher, where they were hidden, and sheltered from the sight of the new
Battery; so as being forced to forego the enterprise there also, he retreated
to his former Quarters. The Duke of Savoy, going at the same time out of Turin
with 4000 Foot, and 1200 Horse, had more luckily begun to get what was by the
division allotted to his share: he fell first upon the City of Alba, whither
being come he easily took it, there being only two Companies of Soldiers in
it, too weak a Garrison, and not suiting with the large circuit of the Walls:
but in a slight Skirmish which happened between his men and the defendants which
stood upon the Wall, some of his men were slain, amongst which the Count di
San' Trinita. Alba being taken, together with the Country there about, he went
to Trino with 4000 Foot and 1000 Horse; he begirt it on the side which lies
toward Casalle, by which way only succor could be brought: he made a long and
crooked Trench about it, and played upon the Wall with 20 pieces of Cannon
placed upon five Batteries; and then drew near the Ditch with Pickaxes, and
endeavored to bereave the defendants of their Rampires: the defendants were
not above 300 paid Foot, 200 of the Train Bands and two Troops of Horses: it
was but ill provided of Artillery or Munition; there being only three small
pieces in the Town, and some barrels of Powder: wherefore the Duke having come
with his approaches to the Ditch, and taken a little Half Moon, and being
afterward gotten under a greater, which was over against the Gate, he began to
undermine it from the one end to the other; then threatening the defendants to
give fire unto it unless they would yield, the Captain of the Garrison, though
the breach made by Battery was not great, and that he had other Plat-forms to
retreat unto, yet terrified with fear of the mine, and having spent all his
Munition, he demanded that he and his Garrison might be suffered to come forth
with their Arms and Baggage, and that they might be conveyed into Cassalle:
which Articles being agreed unto by the Duke in ambiguous terms, the Captain
and five of his Officers were permitted to go into Montcalvo, and the Soldiers
were set at liberty: but the Governor understanding what Articles the Duke had
made, sent some Troops of Horse toward the way which leads from Trino to
Casalle, which kept the Soldiers from entering (...): these two places being
taken, the Duke was possessed of all that by the Articles of division fell to
his share: for the other Towns being but small presently came in unto him, and
swore fealty; and the Duke, for the better establishment of what he had gotten,
began to build a Fort Royal about Trino; which being in a short time finished,
began to be almost as untakeable as Cassalle, with no little prejudice to the
State of Millain; and this Fortification being contrary to the Articles of
Division, the Duke to appease the Governor, sent to take Pontestura, and
having obtained it upon Articles, he caused it presently to be delivered up
unto him, as what belonged to the King by the Articles of Division: being
afterward desirous to take Montcalvo, a Town which did not belong to him by
the Articles, he turned all his Forces upon it. The Governor and other of the
Kings Commanders were not a little troubled at this the Dukes so speedy
success, for they being employed about the taking of a Town, which proved every
day harder then other to be taken, from whence they could not in honor
withdraw, nor make any advantageous advancement in the business of Montferrat;
they envied the Dukes prosperous proceedings; nor could they without
indignation tolerate to be constrained to keep there useless and idle, and
expect that the Kings Forces should be aided and assisted by the Dukes Forces;
and because to fall again upon the taking of the Hills, as they found at last
it was necessary to do, would be a business of length, and was generally
detested by them all, since thereby they must confess their error committed at
the beginning of the enterprise; they bethought themselves of reaping the same
advantage, as they should do by making themselves masters of the Hills, by
another shorter, and more easy way, and more to their honor. Nizza della
Paglia held out still for Mantua, and being, as it were, the head and Bulwark
of the lower Montferrat, many things were brought from thence, by way of the
Hills, into Casalle; this Nizza lies upon the road that leads from the Sea; and
now that Trino and Montcalvo were taken, none of the rest of the upper
Montferrat, being taken out of the power of Mantua, could afford any help to
the besieged: so as when Nizza should be reduced, all the rest of the lower
Montferrat would be kept from doing so likewise; and then Casalle not being to
be relieved by of the Hills, nor from elsewhere, what could it think of but of
surrendering? this was also chosen before the making themselves masters of the
Hills, by reason of the news of the coming of the French; who having no place
of refuge when they should be come into Italy, but Nizza, it was to be feared
that they might fortify themselves there; and making it a Magazine for Arms,
they might prove a great impediment to the chief Siege: out of these Reasons,
this Enterprise was thought to be more honorable, more necessary and
convenient, and was therefore preferred before that of the Hills: 4000 Foot were
therefore immediately sent thither commanded by Count John Serbellone, together
with 50 Horse, and ten piece of Cannon: there was nothing in Nizza but the
Montferrian Militia, two Sakers, and one Murdering piece, and there was
scarcity of warlike Munition: but it is true that Count Egmonte, a French man,
was come thither some days before, with some other of the same Nation, most of
them experienced men, and men of commands who coming from Mantua, and passing
one after another in disguise through the State of Genoa, saw that the Enemy
approached Nizza, and made stout resistance, and Skirmishing with them, strove
to keep them from taking up their Quarters, from fortifying themselves, and
from making Battery; these did for some days hinder the Enemies proceedings;
but not being able to disturb them totally, the enemy at last planted
batteries on three sides; and because a good Half Moon was erected against the
weakest part of the Wall, they made their approaches that way to take it;
thinking that when they should have done so, they might the more easily take
the ^own; and whilst they advanced with their Spades, they attempted to take it
by an assault by night: but finding the defendants more ready to receive them
then they had imagined, and more stout resistance, they were forced to retreat
with some loss: being retired, they endeavored to get nearer, and having got
to within the Ditches, they dug a mine; which when they should have
perfected, they resolved to give fire unto it, and to fall immediately to
assault: the mine being set on fire before hand by the cunning of those that
were within, and who made it play, wrought no effect, and yet the assault was
given, which was so manfully withstood, as the assailants were forced again to
retreat, with more loss then formerly, many of their valiantest Soldiers being
therein slain: yet this days action was not altogether in vain, for the
assailants having taken station in the Ditch of the Half Moon, they went about
to destroy it by fire; which being discovered by the defendants, who had spent
all their Powder, and saw there was no hope of holding out longer, they came to
Articles; which being agreed upon much to their honor and advantage, they
surrendered the Town after having stoutly defended it for above a fortnight:
About 500 of the assailants died before it: Count Serbellone was hurt there in
the arm and thigh with a Musket shot, and Count Trotti received a slight wound
in the face: all the Towns of the lower Montferrat followed this surrender,
except Ponzone, which relying upon the strength of its situation held out for
Nevers. The Duke of Savoy being gone, as has been said, at the same time to
Montcalvo took the Town with ease; and having played upon the Castle with
battery and mines, he after a while took it also; and being invited by the
strength and opportunity of the situation, it lying between Asti and Trino, be
kept it for himself, contrary to the Articles of Division, and contrary to the
Governors opinion, who thought he would have disposed of it, as he had done of
Pontestura; and placing a Garrison of Piedmonteses in it, he said he would
accord the business with the King, and give him equivalent Towns for it. This
action of Montcalvo, as also the fortifying of Trino, was rather winked at,
then well taken, by the Governor, and other Spanish Agents: but the same
reasons which induced them to Capitulate with the Duke, to keep him by that
means from being averse unto them in the business of Casalle, when he was not
possessed of any Towns in Montferrat, forced them to see through their fingers
now, when by suffering him to possess himself of so great a part of that State,
they had put him into more power and greatness; and when he by fortifying Alba,
Trino and Montcalvo, had made himself more able to defend himself, and to
offend others. Moreover, great preparation of Arms and Men being known to be
upon the Confines of France, it became them not only not to distaste him, lest
joining with the French he might plot novelties, tending to more prejudice then
that of Casalle; but they were forced to furnish him with much moneys and men,
for which he very much pressed, to make him oppose, and resist the French
Forces; to the danger whereof since he was first exposed, he had just reason to
fear, that his Dominions would be made the seat of war: the demands were
thought just, and necessary to be granted; for the Duke of Nevers seeing
himself in effect destitute of help from France, that Crown being wholly busied
before Rochel, he had by mortgaging his Land in France, raised about 12000
Foot, and 1500 Horse; to which, by Order from the King, Marshall Cricky,
Governor of Dolpheny, was to join with the ordinary Gens d' Arms of his
Government, which might make about 5000 Foot, and 500 Horse: The Marquess of
Montenegro also, many of his men being run away for want of p^y, desired a
recruit of Soldiers, to defend that Frontier against the new Duke, whose
numbers were now grown to be about 8000 Foot and 500 Horse, wherewith, when he
heard that the French were come into Italy, he threatened to join in the freeing
of Casalle, and in the recovery of wh^t had been lost.

The Governor and Spanish Agents were doubtlesly troubled at these accidents,
who being before Casalle (a place not likely soon to be taken) with few men,
little money, and less credit, knew not what to do to satisfy the Dukes just
and necessary demands, and to withstand so great a deluge of dangers which
threatened Italy, and chiefly their own Concernments: But they were most of all
troubled by their fear of the Duke of Savoy's truth and constancy, and by their
jealousy, that having now got a good part of Montferrat, he either out of a
desire of preserving it, or of advancing to greater things, or to avoid new
Wars in his own Dominions, might bethink himself of somewhat else to the
prejudice of the Union which he had contracted but a little before with the
King; especially since it made not much for his own interest that Casalle
should fall into the Spaniards ^ands: They knew what private intelligence he
held continually in the Court of France; they knew how he was threatened on the
one side, and what great offers were made him on the other side by that Court
against the Genoeses, great inci^ements to work upon any whatsoever constant
heart, and to make the best composed judgments waver, much more the Duke, who
was generally held to be a friend to Novelties, mighty desirous of revenge upon
the Genoeses, and naturally given to do what made most for the advancement of
his own affairs. Claudio Marini the French Ambassador was suspected conscious
of some secret mystery, he being still detained in Turin, though under the
color of Hostage, till the Dukes Resident should return from France; and
though the said Duke seemed outwardly very much to study the welfare of the
King of Spain's Proceedings, and professed great constancy to the new
contracted Amity, and behaved himself with great observancy toward that Court
and the Agents thereof; yet this so great and so extraordinary affection of a
Prince who but a little before was an Enemy had in it more of seeming then
sincerity. These suspicions were increased by the doubt, that nor the
Governor, nor other Spanish Agents had real good intentions for the Duke of
Savoy, it not being very likely that when they should be Masters of Casalle
they would make him greater by maintaining him in his new acquisitions; for the
Articles of division agreed upon between the Duke and the Governor in the
Kings name were never accepted of in the Court of Spain by the King, nor
approved of in Germany by the Emperor, who could not without blushing proceed
rigourously against the one, and wink at the actions of the other; and
therefore signified to the Duke that he should restore what he had taken, and
to the Spaniards, that they should cease from besieging Casalle: So it was to
be believed by the speedy and strong fortifying of Trino, Alba, and Montcalvo,
that the Duke of Savoy had the same opinion of the Spaniards toward him, as
the Spaniards had of him toward the Kings Affairs; and that therefore this ill
composed Union, though it appeared outwardly to be very affectionate and
sincere, was nothing in reality but a desire of obtaining by reciprocal deceit
their several ends; the one their intent upon Casalle, the other a good part of
Montferrat; which when they should have compassed, then to hinder underhand
each others ends and interests. Nor was the Duke (since he was possessed of
what he pretended unto) displeased at these jealousies of the Spaniards, since
his joining with them in this present conjunction of time made more for them
then ever, and made them be the readier to give him all satisfaction: He
therefore failed not to feed them with some demonstrations, which though they
were but slight, were of no slight consequence; just as it fell out, when
speaking with the Governor he appeared in a Cassock so made, as turn it which
way you will, it suited with the person; an Emblem which tacitly threatening
change, alluded to the condition of his own affairs, which being turned on all
sides did naturally fit all States: but the detention of Montcalvo, and the
fortifying the Towns he had got, contrary to agreement, contrary to the
president of Pontestura; his great pretentions, his daily immoderate demands,
and the great storm which seemed to threaten him from France, made him be daily
more and more suspected: insomuch as in the Camp and throughout the State of
Millain, he was ill spoken off, as if he were already fallen from the King of
Spain, and reunited to the King of France: which favor he was to obtain by
the detention of what he had taken, and by the River of Genoa, and a good part
of the State of Millain: that therefore it was too dangerous to continue
friends with him, and to assist him against the French, with whom he was
already closed; as if to furnish him with moneys were to impoverish themselves,
and to afford him the better convenience to arm himself to their prejudice; and
that to grant him men were no better then to submit the cream, and the best of
those few who were left to defend the State of Millain, not only to the danger
of the Enemy, but to the Dukes uncertain faith: to dismember the Kings Forces,
and to expose the State of Millain to the manifest danger of Foreigners with
whom the Duke was Confederate: and yet so great was the necessity of keeping
him to side with them, as contrary to so many and so manifest appearances, and
contrary to so great probability of suspicion, the Spanish Agents were so firm,
and constant in their dissimulation, as appearing to confide very much in him,
they did not only in this their so great need deprive themselves of 5000 of
their best Foot, and send them to Piedmont to oppose the French, who were
already gotten near the Alps; but by public Proclamations, and upon pain of
severe punishment, prohibited the speaking ill of the Duke, and consenting to
any demand he made, though never so great, though contrary to their chief ends
and interests: which was yet more clearly seen in the great ruptures which
happened at this time in the City of Genoa; some of the Popularity whereof
conspired against the public Government moved thereunto, partly by private
injuries received from some of the young Nobility, partly for that they
appeared to be excluded from the administration of the Commonwealth; and to
this purpose having held intelligence with the Duke of Savoy, he promised to
assist them with men to execute their designs: moneys under several pretenses
were disperss'd abroad amongst some of the meaner sort of people, who being
naturally seditious, they thought might be easily brought to join in the
Conspiracy; and moneys were also sent to many of the neighboring Villages,
making some of them acquainted with the secret; and telling other some how that
they meant to make use of their service, in a private resentment which they
intended to make; and they had likewise got over unto them some Outlaws,
people of a lewd life, and those who for their service in war had got pardon
for enormious faults; and hoping, to boot with these to get the universality of
the people to side with them, when the business should be begun, they resolved
to kill the Senate and greatest part of the Nobility, and to make a new form of
Government: but the Plot being discovered, some of the Delinquents were taken;
against which whilst process was making, the Duke of Savoy, discovering himself
to be the Author of the Conspiracy, pleaded their impunity, pretending that the
conspiracy being contrived with his knowledge and intelligence, in resentment
of what had happened at Busso; that the Truce ensuing afterward, the execution
was suspended by his command; and that he had therefore promised the
Conspirators, that they should enjoy the benefit of the Truce, as being therein
comprehended, in case the conspiracy should in the interim be discovered: he
pressed the Governor and the Marquess di San' Croce very much in their
behalfs, and engaged himself so far in the impunity of the Conspirators, as
causing the Genoese gentlemen to be closely imprisoned, who were formerly his
prisoners, and whom he had set at Liberty after the Truce, but upon their
Paroll of not going away; he resolutely promised they should all be put to
death, in case they should proceed in Genoa to punish the Conspirators; and on
the contrary, if their fault were pardoned, he offered peace to the
Commonwealth, upon very advantageous conditions for her. The Governor and the
other Agents knew they were in a great straight; for the Duke building very
much upon the Truce made by their appointment, pretended these as mediators,
were to force the Commonwealth to observe it, and not to break it by punishing
the Conspirators; and those Agents, whether they approved of this pretention or
not, were unwilling to alienate and distaste the Duke, by denying his request,
or by consenting, to cause new troubles between the Duke and the Commonwealth,
by which the King would be constrained to declare in favor of the one or the
other of them, with great danger to the present Occurrences: yet in this so
detestable example, the new reconciliation and fear of alienating the Duke
prevailed over the merit of the ancient, and uninterrupted friendship of the
Commonwealth; and the Dukes satisfaction was preferred before any respect of
public honor, or of the Kings dignity; wherefore the Governor and other
Agents were very servent in the point of freeing the Conspirators, and used all
their endeavors in obtaining their pardon; insomuch as they presented Letters
written by the King to the Commonwealth for the Conspirators impunity; which by
the circumstance of time appeared to be framed upon Blanks. which upon like
occasions are trusted with chief Agents; and the Governor sent Don Alvaro di
Lusara to Genoa, to treat herein with the Commonwealth; propounding unto her
Senators, how easily they might obtain a safe and good peace from the Duke by
pardoning the offenders; and on the contrary, how much their punishment would
irritate him, and would occasion new wars and troubles, worse then the former.
The Dukes pretentions appeared to be false; for the Conspirators forbore not to
prosecute the business, after the Truce, which had it not been prevented, would
have been effected within a few days; and though it did clearly appear that
they treated with the Duke in Turin, yet did they never alledg the Truce for
their defense, nor any order from the Duke to supersede, nor any promise of
pardon from him if they would desist: so as it appeared clearly that all were
but false pretenses, which he strove to maintain by his own authority, by the
favor of the Spanish Agents, and by threats: the Commonwealth being
scandalized at so exorbitant pretenses, and at the Spanish Agents so strange
pressures; the Council, which by reason of the paucity of the number is called
^l minore, but wherein the chief affairs off State are discus'd, being called,
and Lusada's Proposals being therein taken into debate, one rose up, and spoke
thus:

If I could persuade my self that, for our greater misfortune, we had any
Julius Caesar amongst us, who should dare to open his mouth for the impunity of
these new Catalines, I am confident that all we, like so many Catos or Ciceros,
would rise up against so perfidious and pernicious an adviser; and that we
should resent the first mentioning of so abominable a plea, with more then
sharp invectives: but since (God be praised) I see you all so set upon the just
punishment of so execrable a Paricide, I will pass by all becoming declamations
upon this occasion, as superfluous, and will confine my discourse to the
Question, which falls properly under our present consideration: to wit, to what
answer me are to give (...) those demands which are made us in favor of these
wicked ones, and to the instigation of their fantorer and so great promoter of
the conspiracy, the Duke of Savoy, in the name and by the authority of the King
of Spains Officers: demands more detestable then the Conspiracy it self, as
being so strange, so unusual, and so without example: what would it be to
pardon these guilty persons, but to sow the fruitful seed of continual
Conspiracy amongst those people who do perpetually disturb our State and
Government; but to grant them a powerful Chi^ftain for future sedition? but to
authorize and make our enemy Duke, the Protector of our people, which is the
thing he so much now affects? so as afterward all rules of respect would be
broken, tho gate would be thrown open to insolency, the fear of punishment
taken away, the Majesty of this Government suppressed, the Authority of this
Order trod under foot, and the peoples obedience lost; and will any endure to
hear of peace upon these conditions? will there be any one found so little
zealous of the public good; so wicked an enemy to the Commonwealth, as will
not rather choose to run any misfortune, how great soever, suffer any death,
then consent to peace upon so ruinous conditions? the bare dignity and
reputation of the Commonwealth is not now the thing in question, though we were
to lose a thousand lives for it, if we had so many, but of the summa totalis of
the public safety, but of the very soul of liberty, but of the vital spirits
of the present Government; which after having received such a wound, what would
it become but a Carcass full of horror, breathing nothing out but ruin,
sedition and death: it is good sometimes to pard^n Conspiracies, but it must be
by Princes who are newly got into Principality, we read of Augustus Caesar,
that having found revenge and punishment to be rather a spur, then curb to new
Conspiracies, he approved of his Wives counsel, which was, to pardon; and he
found it to be a wholesome antidote, and a more proportiable preservative for
the malignant and dangerous disease of those times; for the good name he got of
being merciful and gracious did radicate the hatred which the people, being
grown perverse through fear, did bear him, and planted in the place thereof
cordial affection toward a benign Prince; who before by frequent punishment,
was abhorred, and whose death they plotted: what good will it do to use pardon
in these tempestuous times, when it shall be thought that it is not clemency,
nor sparing of humane blood; but fear of the Dukes threatenings, the fear of
greater evils, which has extorted it from us? so all the merit of benignity,
all the fame of clemency, will be attributed to the Duke our enemy: he shall be
the pious deliverer, he the affectionate Protector of the oppressed: not only
the guilty, but all the malcontents shall thank him only: we poor souls shall,
on the contrary side, be accounted bloody oppressors, we shall be hated by the
people, laughed at by strangers, and generally detested by all men: and
therefore, if to pardon so enormous a fault, will in other respects be
accounted a great error in us, how much will that error be multiplied when it
shall be known to be done at the importunity of the Duke, and of the Kings
Agents? therefore the more we are thereunto pressed, the more backward ought we
to be in consenting, the more obdurate in denying it: assuring our selves, that
(undoubtedly) we can undergo no misfortune, and that no greater disaster then
this can befall us: good God! did we not fear the insolent threats of the Duke,
for a petty Feefarm, wherein the main of our affairs were little or not at all
concerned, when he was upon good terms with the French, without whose help he
would never have dared to assault us? and shall we now succumb to so unjust
demands in a thing wherein our vital spirits are concerned, after that same
Duke has tried, how hard it is to justle with our mountains, when we see him
inveloped in the wars of Montferrat, irreconcilably fallen out with the King of
France, and so unsincerely united to the Crown of Spain? but some peradventure
may doubt, that the Crown of Spain being incensed at our denial, may join with
the Duke, and appear against us on his behalf. Truly, he that shall doubt this,
will, in my opinion, show how little he understands the affairs of the world,
and that he knows not how ^asily the hatred and anger of Princes are laid
aside, when they are not concerned in point of State Affairs: John Bernavelt,
the greatest man amongst the States of Holland, a man of excellent advice, the
Oracle of the united Provinces, grown old in State Affairs, having past all the
Employment as well within the Commonwealth as abroad, who had been employed, by
way of Embassy, in all the weightiest affairs, to the Northren Kings and
Potentates; this man, not many years ago, being troubled by the emulation of
Count Maurice, and the authority of the more powerful prosecutor prevailing
over the worth and merit of so gallant a man, he was put to death: so great was
the fame of his worth, such was the good opinion of his actions, as the Princes
of those parts did compassionate his misfortune: and the King of France
interceded for his pardon, not with his name subscribed to blanks, but by an
extraordinary Ambassador: all men know of what power that King is with the
united Provinces, and how well that Crown has deserved of them; and yet the
Kings intercessions not being listened to, he lost his head: what ruin do you
hear, Gentlemen, that this repulse brought with it to the Hollanders? you may
peradventure think that a French-like fury, more terrible then the raging of
the Sea, might devour those Provinces? nothing less; the King was not all
troubled at it, he broke not with the Commonwealth which had been a friend to
his Crown; nay, he did not so much as withdraw his wonted favors and succors
from them: how unequal is the comparison, if you consider the quality of the
Deliquents, the enormity of the fault, or the occasion of the demand? and shall
we doubt to findless moderation in the Court of Spain, in a cause incomparably
better, then the Hollanders did in France? shall we think that the King of
Spain will ever subscribe to so wicked and exorbitant demands of the Duke of
Savoy, and of his Agents in Italy? or that he will join with Savoy against us,
to revenge himself upon us for our denial? how far do these conceits differ
from the ways of that Court? how contrary to the weighty concerns of that
Crown? how repugnant to the Faith and Magnanimity that his Majesty professes,
and observes to his Friends, and which (upon all occasions,) but particularly
in these last wars he has professed to us, and effectually maintained? the
senseless fear of the King if Spains anger being removed, what are we to
apprehend, if we consent not to these so unjust demands? our Citizens lives
peradventure, who are Prisoners with the Duke? where are the Bruto 's, where
the Torquato 's, who for the preservation of Military Discipline, spared not
their own Sons lives? I call you generous, noble, and truly Roman minds to
witness, and your Curtii and Decii also, who did willingly sacrifice your own
lives for your Country, and for the safety of the Roman Legions; for Gods sake,
if you be called upon, do but only appear, to the confusion of such, if any
such there be amongst us, who can be wrought upon to any sinister resolution
either by neernesse of blood, or tenderness of affection, or by the vain
danger of the Confederates; but why talk I of the doubt, or danger of our
Prisoners lives? who will ever believe so brute and barbarous an action in a
Christian Prince, which would appear infamous and bestial in a Scythian,
Thracian or Cannibal: I pray you say, if this Prince who has insidiated our
lives by so horrid a Conspiracy, should bring the business to be doubtful and
dangerous; what should we do? shall we suffer the public safety to run certain
ruin, for saving the lives of a few, though never so deserving Citizens? nor
would they themselves (so much do I confide in their worth) give way thereunto;
nay, were they permitted, upon their promise given to be true prisoners, to
appear before us; I assure my self, that like so many Attili Regoli they would
supplicate us, that preferring the public honor, before their private
safeties, we should show that constancy which the duty we ow to our selves, and
Country, obliges us unto; and that having gotten their request, they would
with a generous and constant mind return to receive the punishment which should
be provided for them; and on the contrnry, if by their pardon obtained, they
should find this Commonwealth so shamefully deformed with such a scar, and
miserably perishing, and like to die of such a wound, they would detest their
own lives, and would hate those to death, who should so shamefully have
betrayed the Public, for their private safety: they would, in fine, (if the
heavens should have so ordered their destiny) not value that life, which when
at home and amongst their friends, a Catarrhe, Fever, or any slight accident
might by an obscure death b^reave them of; whereas now they shall live
gloriously for ever, not only for having served their Country with their lives
and fortunes in these wars, but for having been sacrificed like innocent
V^ctimes for the public safety.

This opinion was not only attentively listened unto, but approved by an
unanimous consent of all the hearers: insomuch as any one repugnant voice or
suffrage being produced, not any one of the prisoners kindred, whereof many
were present at this Debate, gave their Votes to the contrary; wherefore in
pursuance of the Sentence pronounced against the Prisoners, (not allowing them
any minute of delay more then what is usually appointed by the Law;) four of
the Conspirators were beheaded; who had been found guilty by former process: at
which the Duke being highly incensed, he gave Order that four of his Prisoners
should lose their heads; appearing resolute to have it done, and the Heads man
was even now ready to do his office: but at last, being either overcome by the
entreaties of some of his followers, or frighted with the unworthiness and
atrocity of the action, or that (peradventure) he did never really intend it,
he commanded forbearance; and the Governor and other Officers, no less
incensed, then the Duke, against the Commonwealth, seemed to be mightily
scandalized; not so much for that adhering to the Duke they desired to make him
know, that they joined with him in being unsatisfied; as for having upon this
occasion sufficiently engaged the Kings Authority, they thought it was not a
little prejudiced by this the Commonwealths so absolute resolution: insomuch as
though two of those Conspirators who were already beheaded were sent by the
Governor to the Commonwealth, before the Duke appeared to favor the
Conspiracy; yet some other of them being come unto his hands, he set them at
liberty: not making any the least account of the Commonwealths entreaties, as
he had wont to do upon lesser occasions: others to the end that if they should
be cited they might have occasion to avoid judgment, were secured in the State
of Millain; and the Duke entertaining other of the Conspirators with
extraordinary favor, advanced them, and protected them in his Court; and did
further suffer them to publish seditious Papers in Print, whereby to incite the
Genceses to rebellion: assuring them that the Duke would declare himself in
behalf of their liberty; and which was of more importance, he by means of the
great power he held with the Spanish Agents, endeavored to raise enmity
between them and the Genoeses, telling them for their better encouragement,
that he held many intelligences in Genoa, by which he might easily turn the
affairs of that Commonwealth upside down; and giving an inkling that the French
would join with those that should revolt, he strove to make them join with him
in the same enterprise, to the end, that they might totally exclude the French
from out of Italy; and to keep him from being constrained to recall them once
more thither, that he might work revenge upon the Genoeses. These the Dukes
endeavors did doubtlesly much perplex the Spanish Agents, who by reason of the
present business of Cassalle had daily more necessity of keeping the Duke firm
unto them; and Genoa appearing to be the stumbling block against the which all
their corrivals were with all their Forces to give, men were very doubtful what
resolutions the Court of Spain would put on touching these Occurrences; it not
being comprehended by their actions, nor penetrated into by their discourse, to
what side they inclined: so considerable were the gainsayings both of accidents
and reasons, on either side: yet the firm belief, that the addition the Duke
had got by the new acquisition of part of Montferrat might cause jealousy in
the Court of Spain, overcame all other considerations: so as it was not
probable, that the Spaniards would add scandal to scandal, and increase
jealousies in Italy, and contaminate the glory which they but a little before
had gotten in the defense and preservation of the Commonwealth, by aggrandizing
the Duke of Savoy, and by oppressing a Commonwealth which had always been so
singularly affected to Spain, and from whence that Crown had received such
advantages: yet so naturally are men desirous of novelty, and inclined to
sinister interpretations, as many thought that the Court of Spain did not only
lend an ear to the Dukes practices, but consented thereunto: it is true that
these men doubted whether that Court proceeded really and sincerely herein, or
cunningly, only to keep the Duke well affected to the enterprise of Cassalle,
and to divert him from the practices which he seemed to be resolute in, and
might easily effect by assistance from France, to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth: these sinister reports which were publicly divulged, together
with news of divisions and factions in prejudice to the Genoeses negotiated by
the Duke, were occasioned by diverse demonstrations of that Court: which having
notice of what had happened, and of the Dukes complements and exclamations,
accompanied by the sinister informations of their Agents in Italy touching the
conspiracy, touching the danger of alterations in that City, and concerning the
inconveniences which might result to the Kings interest, if the affairs of
Genoa should be molested; and some memorials of the Conspirators in Torino, and
of some other popular men in Genoa, concurring herewithall; they made so
sinister an impression of the State and Government of the Commonwealth, as the
King, and generally all his Officers, either to secure the affairs of the
Crown, or to keep the Duke true unto them, and for his better satisfaction,
seemed little satisfied with relations to the contrary, made by Lucca
Pallavicino; who upon this occasion, was sent once more Ambassador in
extraordinary to that Court; and they complained much of the haste used in
executing the Conspirators; and seeming to value the Dukes satisfaction more
then the reasons alleged by the Commonwealth, they broke out into words of
anger and resentment; which made the Genoese interpret sinisterly of them, and
of their intentions, as if they had been disaffected, and much alienated from
the Commonwealth: to this was added, that the Count di Monterei, President of
the Counsel of Italy, and Cousin to Olivares, being destined Ambassador to the
Pope, was ordered by the King to be gone presently for Italy, and that he
should tarry some months in Genoa; it being generally thought that he had many
private Commissions given him, and of great importance to the affairs of Genoa:
but the Genoeses were yet fuller of jealousies and fears, by reason of the news
that in these turbulent times came to that Court, of a Victory gotten by the
Duke against the French, at the foot of the Alps, who came to succor the Duke
of Nevers, and to free Cassalle; these were said to be about 12000 Foot, and
1500 Horse, led on by the Marquess d'Uxel, with whom Marshal Cricky could not
join, either out of some private emulation and distaste which he had to the
Marquess, or else being detained by the Dukes men, under Prince Thomaso in
Savoy. The Marquess attempted the Pass called dell' Agnello, by which falling
into the Vale of Uraita, in the Jurisdiction of Dolpheny, you come to Castle
Delphino; a passage large enough, and therefore commodious for Horse, and
whereby, without meeting with any obstacle, you may come to the plain of
Saluzzo and of Piedmont: But the Duke, who had already fortified and munited
all the Passes of the Alps, had not left this unfortified; for having built a
Fort at Castle St Pietro, near the mouth of the Valley toward Piedmont, he
encumbered that passage, so as it was impossible to advance further before that
Fort was taken; and Artillery being requisite to the taking thereof, it proved
a business of much length, by reason of the difficulty of carriages, to boot
with the uncertainty of the event: and yet the Marquess being desirous to
advance, marched on; and having first taken three Redoubts which the Duke had
set up upon the Mountains, he fell into the Valley of Uraita, which takes its
name from the River which descending from the Alps runs throughout it, and
comes within six miles of Castle St Pietro; whether D'Uxell being come, and
seeing that the Duke advanced with his men, he placed his men in order upon a
little rise. The Duke had with him about 12000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, those
being therein comprehended who were sent unto him by the Governor, under the
Camp-master Gill de l' Arena, which were 5000 Foot; and immediately sending
Prince Victorio, who was best acquainted with the Country, with good part of
his men, to possess himself of the skirts of the Mountain which shape the Vale,
he staid with the rest, and with the Kings Auxiliary Forces, to defend the
plain; where making a Squadron in ^ace of the French, he kept a quarter of a
mile off, observing their movings: The Marquess seeing that he had to do with
the Enemy upon the Plain, and upon the skirts of the Mountains, sent a good
Band of men against those that defended the Mountains, and with the rest
charged the Dukes right wing, where the Neapolitans were, who, assisted by the
Piemontese Horse, made stout resistance, insomuch as the Assailants not being
able to stand before them, were forced to give back: A thousand of them, seeing
it was impossible for them to force their way, waded through the River, and
getting upon a little hill put themselves there in order: The others, advancing
by the skirts of the Mountains, assaulted the Dukes men, who seeming to give
back, drew them into an ambush which they had prepared; falling wherinto, those
of the Ambush fell upon them with such violence, as being forced to retreat,
they were afterward put to flight, with a great loss of men: Those who were
sent at first against them on the hill ran a fortune not much unlike to this;
for the Prince observing the wind, which blew full in their face, caused some
little Cottages to be set on fire, the smoke whereof affording him to send men
into some ambushes without being discerned, the French men light upon them, and
were severely dealt with, and slain; and being also struck with stones which
were tumbled down from the higher places, they began to run. The Conflict
lasted from morning to night; and the Dukes men were so well disposed of and
divided, as not any one of them stood idle. The F^ench seemed that night as if
they would retire; but, as the effects showed, they resolved to try their
fortune once more; which the Prince having learnt by one that was run away, he
presently sent for fresh supplies of men to the Duke, which whilst they were
expected, the greatest part of the French ^id themselves that night behind
certain Trees, and the rest upon break of day appeared in a large but very thin
and ill-composed Squadron, showing themselves to the Prince, to the end that
allured by the hopes of Victory, he might assault them, and so fall into an
ambush which they had prepared for him that very night: The Prince who expected
a re-inforcement, stirred not, so as those who were in the ambush came out, and
entered into the Squadron, seeming as if they would fight with more Forces then
they had done the day before; but the Prince still keeping in expectation of
succor from his Father, moved not; till finding not long after, that the
Enemies Squadron was much diminished by the retreating of many of their men, he
assaulted those that remained, who not being able to resist, were put to
flight, and pursued with much slaughter even to the Confines of France; whither
being come, he with held, out of observance of the Kings Confines, h^ving
gotten much baggage, and many Arms, which the French threw away as they fled.
After this Victory the Duke and Prince marched presently toward Pinarolo, lest
the French being beaten from hence might attempt that pass; from whence hearing
that they went toward Savoy, where Prince Thomaso was, the Duke sent most of
his men thither; but it was superfluous; for the French were so confused and
dissipated by the discomfiture, as hardly any four of them were together in
this retreat.

The Duke won as much reputation, by this happy success, with the Spaniards, as
he ever had purchased the contrary before: He was publicly acknowledged to be
the Kings right hand, the bulwark of his Affairs in Italy; by this action all
offenses were cancelled, and no reward was equivalent to so great merit; the
King himself, hearing the news, said in public, That he would have accounted
it a great happiness to have been found with a Pike in his hand by the Duke his
Uncles ^ide: And the Conde Duca, chief Author of the reconciliation; boasted
not a little, that the King and Court began now to taste the fruit of his
counsels and negotiations: But the more favor the Dukes merits found in the
Court, the more jealous were the Genoeses, who saw their own declination joined
to the exaltation of their Enemy: An as the Dukes satisfaction seemed to
consist in the Affairs of Genoa, and the reward equal to his vast expectation,
and to his implacable hatred to the Genoeses, which every day grew greater in
him; so such a great conjunction of will, and so general a disposition as was
found to be in that Court to gratify him, made it be much apprehended, that
some great mischief would redound thereby, to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth: This suspicion was increased by the Conde Duca his not caring
for the Genoeses; the affronts given to the Ambassadors of that Commonwealth;
and the rigorous proceedings with others of that Nation; the upbraiding of the
Conspiracy, and of other accidents which had happened at Genoa, which accidents
might by the connection of Affairs redound to the prejudice of Italy, did very
much perplex the Statists of that Court.

To these things wherein the public Interests were concerned other sinister
demonstrations were added, which touched the Fortunes and Interests of private
men; the rigorous Decrees of the preceding year, the difficulty in exacting the
Revenues, the introducing of other Nations to contract with the King, to the
shame and exclusion of the Genoeses, and the continual extorting of moneys from
those Genoeses who remained yet in Court, enforcing them to contribute great
sums of moneys for the urgent occasions of the Crown; by which accidents the
face of that Court being totally changed toward the Genoeses both in public
and in private from what it had used to be, they put the Commonwealth into
some anxiety of their own safety: And these Novelties and Commotions being
known in Italy, they first filled all the Princes of Italy with admiration, and
then with suspicion, what the sequel of so great and unexpected an alteration
would prove. These suspicions had also an influence upon other Nations, which
being intent upon all occasions, did not pretermit their wonted artifices to
make the rent greater; to the end that they might thereby reap such advantage
as might not conduce a little to the conduct of their Affairs and Interests:
And amongst others, a Spanish Courier being intercepted in the Seas of
Provence, who was sent to their Officers of Italy, the French gave out, that
they had found very strange Negotiation in those Dispatches which past between
that Court and the Duke, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth; which
Dispatch^s being sent from the Court of Paris into Italy to the Duke of Nevers,
and by him participated to the Pope, they were by both of them made known to
the Commonwealth; to the end that growing apparently to distrust they might
ioyn with them in the common Cause; which might procure the lessening of the
Spanish Affairs, and the advancement of the Common Cause of Italy: And to this
purpose they offered with arms thrown abroad to receive them into their
protection, and professed readiness to defend her. The Commonwealth being so
ascertained of these advices and accidents could not but proceed with much
circumspection; to the end that on the one side too much distrust might not
drive them from that friendship and ancient conjunction wherein at all times,
and particularly upon these late occurrences, they had always found so much
truth in intention, such constant effects, and such readiness in execution; nor
on the other side, that too much confidence might not make them run upon those
dangers and prejudices whereof they had been advertised by such a concurrence
of probable accidents, with such demonstration of affection and good will: Not
that she ever doubted of the Kings good intentions, or suffered her self to be
persuaded that he had conspired with the Duke to her oppression; all that she
feared was, that the Duke being now free from fears of the French Arms, and
secured from any opposition he might meet with from Spain by his new
conjunction and good correspondency with that Court, he might bethink himself
of re-assaulting the State of Genoa, and might occasion the like damages to
those of the preceding year in that River; and that the Spaniards, either not
to incense him in this present conjunction of Affairs, or by some secret
Intelligence, or in resentment of the small account they made of the Kings
Intercession in the punishment of the Conspirators, should not be so much moved
thereat as formerly, and foregoing his former care of them, might suffer the
Dukes Forces to take their course, and might less interest himself in their
defense: But because, though they should miss of assistance from Spain, yet
neither would the French foment the Duke; the Commonwealth therefore thinking
themselves to be upon equal terms with the Duke, if he should not be assisted
by the French, resolved to provide new Forces which might more immediately
depend upon her; and obtain from the Pope, who seemed to favor them more in
this then in the former Occurrences, a thousand Foot, and as many more from the
Duke of Bavaria; with which, and with many others that they had taken into pay,
and with their own Militia, the Genoeses reinforced the most important places
of their State, in their own defense, and to resist her imminent storm which
the clouds and winds of the present season did threaten: but the coming of
Count Monterei to Genoa, upon whom all their eyes were fixed, by reason of the
news which was spread abroad, that he was come to cause some commotions,
instead of apprehended foul weather, brought so clear skies to the
Commonwealth, as (the clouds of sinister impression being dispersed) the
rumors which were given out appeared to be vain: he tarried two months in the
City with much satisfaction, and spoke not any thing tending to the
administration of public Government; nor did the Duke, by reason of his
coming, or by any demonstrations from Court, do any thing of novelty: nay, the
Count being to go into Lombardy to treat of common Affairs with the Duke
offered his service to the Commonwealth, touching the compounding of
differences which were then on foot; and his offer being accepted of by the
Commonwealth, he was very zealous and affectionate in their interests: but the
Duke was so exasperated and incensed for the punishment of the Conspirators, as
he could do no good by his intercession; therefore returning to Genoa, he
represented unto the Senate how much the execution of two other of the
Conspirators, who were not yet condemned, would prejudice the Negotiation and
conclusion of peace, which was very hotly treated of in the two Kings Courts;
and interceded for the stay of execution, which he obtained; and parting
afterward in Embassy for Rome, he left the affairs of Genoa, as concerning
the King of Spain, in a much better disposition then he found them.

The Siege of Casalle continued this mean while in very bad order, especially
after the 5000 men were sent to relieve Piedmont; for Victuals were daily
brought in, and all kinds of refreshments, insomuch as the co^n that was
brought in during the Siege was cast up to amount to above 18000 Quarters, a
good part whereof came out of Piedmont by the Dukes tacit permission, as it
was said, and commonly suspected; who (as by many conjectures was thought,) was
not at all troubled that that place should be preserved: no less negligence was
used in the Vintage time for what concerned Grapes and Wine, which were brought
in great abundance into that City. About the end of August, the people that was
sent in succor of the Duke, arrived, by whose coming the Camp was enlarged;
and Don Philippo Son to Marquess Spinola, who was chosen by the King to be
General of the Horse, came thither; which occasioned the pitching upon two
resolutions; the one, the enterprise of the Hills; the other, that of Punzone,
a strong Town upon the top of a Hill, in the middle way as you come by Sea from
Savona to Acqui; which Town having yet a Mantuan Garrison in it, indamaged the
neighboring Towns which did render most obedience to the Governor, and which
might further or impede the succors which, being ready prepared in Piedmont,
(was feared) might be brought by Sea into Montferrat; Count Luigi Trotti, and
Mark Antonio Brancaccio were deputed to this enterprise with their two
Brigades: there were in it about 500 Soldiers in Garrison, together with about
150 Foot, part Towns men, part belonging to the neighboring Towns; who to
avoid the troubles of war, were come thither, as to a strong place; there were
also about a hundred French got thither, (for the most part) people of account,
who were come from Mantua; who having abandoned the service of that Prince
returned as Travelers into France, through the State of Genoa, without any
let: these having fortified the highest places, and cut Trenches round about
the Town, did likewise munite a certain Church at the foot of the Hill, just
opposite to where Brancaccio was quartered with his Neapolitans; by whom being
assaulted, and not able to resist, they were forced to abandon that station,
and to retreat toward the top of the Hill; and the Neapolitans possessing
themselves of the Church, wa^ed for Trotti, who came thither the next day with
two pieces of Artillery: the Batteries were immediately raised, and for two
days they skirmished with those on the Hills, in several parts; and the
assailants being gotten by night to underneath the Trenches, they appeared on
break of day ready for an assault, which being courageously fought, the
defendants being astonished, partly by the novelty of the assault, partly
suffering by the Artillery (which giving upon the Trenches drove the dust in
their eyes,) and finding themselves to be too few to defend so great a circuit
of Fortification, and therefore fearing that the enemy might enter, by some
part unprovided of defense, they retreated into the Castle, and the Town fell
into the hands of the assailants: who sacked it immediately, and that night got
the Castle upon Articles, that the Officers might march out with Arms and
Baggage, and the Soldiers with their Swords: but they had hardly marched two
miles when, contrary to conditions, they were barbarously stripped by the
Neapolitans and others even to their shirts, and many to their skins; and those
that stripped them got (as it was said) much money, which the French who came
from Mantua were furnished with by the Duke, not only for their private
occasions, but for defense: returning from the taking of Punsone, they betook
themselves, at last, to the taking of the Hills; which they began at the Town
of St. George, situated upon them, where the oppugners made a Magazine of Arms,
and many Fortifications, not only to defend themselves from the Garrison which
was there, of 300 Foot, but to resist the insulting of those of Cassalle, who
sallying out very strong from the City did continually annoy them on the backs,
whilst they were most intent upon the Siege; and yet the Garrison surrendered
upon honorable conditions, of being permitted to return to Cassalle.

From hence they went to Rossiglione, a strong place both by nature and art:
the defendants resisted stoutly: but Don Philippo Spinalo, who ordered the
busienss, having presented Battery, and played upon it with his great Guns for
four whole days, at last he levelled his great Cannon against the Gate; and the
defendants apprehending Mines, which they saw were begun to be dig'd, they grew
distrustful to be able to defend it, and surrendered it, with safety to their
persons. The Governor being hereby master of the Hills, began to block up all
passes and avenues, by which the City might be come unto on that side: he then
drew a long and a deep Ditch from the Poe to a rivulet called Gattola, which
falling from the Hills, a little beneath Casalle, runs toward Frascineso, and
disgorgeth it self into the Poe; and many Fortifications were made upon both
sides of the Ditch, as also on the outward side of the Poe; whereby Casalle was
straightly besieged; and being enclosed between the fortified Hills, the
Ditches and the Poe, it was impossible to be relieved: a resolution which if it
had been taken at first, the business had been already ended; but being thus
long retarded, it did little or no good; for much provision was already brought
in, and the compass of Campagnia environed by the Governors Works was large,
full of Meadow-ground, Trees and Shrubs; so as the besieged had wherewith to
maintain themselves for all the ensuing Winter, and to wait for succor, that
Campagnia yielding great store of Wood and Roots, Hay and Straw, for the
maintenance of Horse and Castle, and Fuel for Ovens: the which they might the
more easily do, for that the Governor; quitting his former Quarters, went to
Winter between the Hills and Gatt^la; leaving all that Campagnia uninjured, he
made a Bastion upon a little rise, at the foot of the Hills; upon which placing
four pieces of Artillery, he played upon the Castle, and part of the Wall which
(together with the Citadel,) invirons the City on the Hills side: but being so
far off, it did but little harm; in this manner he continued all the next
Winter: the besieged drew out the Siege at length, with great good order and
vigilance, and sparing their Victuals; and the besiegers, with patience and
industry, and much hardship, endeavored to streighten the City, and bring it
to surrender. In this interim several Skirmishes happened, worthy to be
particularly related, if (as they were valiantly fought,) they had conduced any
thing to the main business: in one of them the Marquess of Bevorone, the head
of the French, being shot with a Musket Shot in the throat, died; which was a
great loss to the besieged; for he was the man who underwent almost the whole
burden of the defense: but the b^siegers were no less straightened in all
things then the besieged, not only for that lying (for the most part) in the
open air, they were subject to the sufferings of rain, frost, the distempers of
weather, but by reason of the great want of Victuals. This years harvest was
generally poorer then that of the preceding year; and (which made the scarcity
the greater) those who had corn in Millain, out of avarice, hid it, that they
might sell it at a dearer rate the next year; and the Duke of Guise, to keep
Victuals from being sent from Genoa to the Camp, and to the State of Millain,
did prohibit the exportation of corn from Provence; and detained many boats
which were sent from Genoa into those parts to fetch Grain; to the end, that
they might not carry any Corn to Genoa, and from thence to the Camp before
Cassalle; and the Duke of Nevers blocking up the Poe with two Forts upon the
Mantuan side, hindered the carriage of Provisions into Puglia, and the other
Maritime parts: so as they were forced to send new Commissions to Naples,
Sicily and Sardinia, which being brought by the way of Genoa to Millain, and so
to the Camp, might ease the present necessity: but the Orders being given out
late, and the far distance of place, (added to the scarcity of conduct
requiring much delay) the remedy suited not with the urgent necessity;
wherefore the common people of Millain, impatient of delay, and seeing the
Bakers shops shut up, began to mutiny; which made the Governor leave the
ordering of the Camp to Don Philippo Spinola, and go to Millain to appease
them, which, by punishing some, and by sudden prevention, he soon did: but
great was the scarcity of Victuals in the Camp; insomuch as, though Provision
of bread was scarce enough in Casalle; yet bread was cheaper there then in the
Camp; so as the besiegers being rather become in condition of besieged, they
suffered more want; and by an unusual, and peradventure unheard of example,
they were thereby likely to have abandoned the Siege: many Soldiers died of
hunger, and mutinies were much feared; which had certainly insued, had not
force awed the murmurers; some of which not being able to wait for assured
death by famine, chose rather to endeavor their preservation by the doubtful
event of running from the Camp: so as the Army did daily diminish; and it was
impossible to raise more men, as well for want of moneys as of victuals, which
affrightned whatsoever necessary provision or resolution, there being no means
found whereby to provide for the Foreign Soldiery; and the very Soldiers,
who came from the State of Millain, were in danger of mutinying: thus weakly
and with so many necessities did the business of Cassalle proceed; and Cesars
Edicts and Citation proceeded not more fortunately; for the Count of Nassaw
being come (as has been said) into Italy, with title of Cesarian Commissary,
and having sent out Monitors twice to the Duke of Nevers, and threatened him
with the Imperial Proclamation of banishment, unless he would obey Cesars will,
by f^eely yielding up the possession of those States; and Nevers having at
first desired, in vain, that his business might be put over to the Law; and
given out writings, and published the opinions of Civilians in Print, whereby
he strove to prove there was no reason why he should be forced to forgo his
Dominions, without the cause given why; and afterward having complained very
much, why the like commands had not been sent to the Duke of Savoy, and to the
Governor of Millain, who had actually and by violence possessed themselves of
part of his Dominions, and still proceeded to possess themselves of the rest;
they came to the third Summons, wherein Caesar declared that if Nevers would put
what he possessed into his hands, the Duke of Savoy and the Governor of
Millain should do the like with what they had taken of his. Nevers seemed to
accept of this offer; and to this purpose he sent his Son the Duke of Retell to
Cesars Court, that he might expedite the dispatch of the business by favor of
the Empress, who was Sister to the three last Dukes of Mantua, and did wish
well to Nevers his cause, to whom she was nearly allied in blood: but being
come thither, he found that Caesar, perceiving that neither the Duke nor
Spaniards would be brought to make any restitution, and it was hard for him to
compel them to it, had mitigated the Edict; and accommodating himself to the
times had made a new Proposal, by which the Duke of Savoy and the Spaniards
were permitted in Cesars name to keep what they had taken, and the Duke of
Nevers was to possess the City and entire Dukedom of Mantua; so as the Dutch,
who were to be sent by the Emperor into Italy, might have the City, Castle and
Citadel of Casalle, assigned over unto them, till cause to the contrary was
known. Retell, not being able to get better conditions, and not being received,
nor acknowledged by the Emperor as Prince of Mantua, by reason of the
Spaniards earnest desire to the contrary, lest by such a Declaration his
pretentions might not seem to be tacitly granted, and the Kings cause in
Montferrat might in the eyes of the world seem to be damnified, he departed but
ill satisfied from that Court; and the new Proposals were not accepted of by
his Father, whose fear of the Emperors Edicts were lessened by the weakness of
the Spanish Army; and the King of France his prosperous proceedings made him
believe more in the favor and forces of that Kingdom, then in the Imperial
D^crees or Decisions.

In these Negotiations, and Transactions, the year 1628 ended; and the King of
France having at last compassed his ends upon Rochel, whereinto he entered
victorious, and triumphing on All Saints day; he prepared to pass over the
Mountains with gallant Forces, to assist the Duke of Nevers; for the Hugonots
of France having received a great blow by the loss of Rochel, and the Affairs
of France being almost perfectly settled, nothing was heard of in that Kingdom
but preparations for Italy: which being divided into two Armies, the one was to
pass through Dolpheny and Syonois, to the relief of Montferrat; and the King
prepared to pass over the Mountains personally therein; and the other was to
advance by the County of Nizza, and by the River of Genoa, toward Casalle: the
Spaniards, nor the Duke of Savoy could not believe so strange a resolution;
they thought it was impossible that the King having his Kingdom yet full of
troubles, and exhausted of moneys, his Army being weary, and wasted before
Rochel, could pass over the Alps in the midst of Winter, with great forces, and
carry over Victuals, Artillery, and other necessaries for so great an action,
the Alps being yet loaded with Snow: Especially when he should know that he
would be opposed by the Duke of Savoy, who being joined in Forces and
Intelligence with the Spaniards, was to resist him strongly at the Passes,
which he kept well garrisoned and munited: hoping therefore that the fame of
these great preparations would prove but talk, they continued the Siege: the
scarcity of Victuals increased this their confidence, which scarcity being so
great an impediment to their Forces who were masters and peaceful possessors of
the State of Millain and of Piedmont, it would assuredly prove a much greater
hindrance to the French if they should come into Italy, and have occasion to
keep there; for a great conduct of Victuals being requisite to feed so great an
Army, it would be impossible for the French to compass it, and consequently,
the greater their numbers were which should pass the Alps, the easilier and the
sooner they would be overcome merely by Famine: they therefore thought that
this sole consideration should not only retarde, but retain the fury of the
French Forces, at least for this year; and that in the mean while the
enterprise of Cassalle, undisturbed by any Foreign assistance, would be
happily effected. The Court of Spain confiding in these difficulties did not
only not make any necessary preparations for defense, but forbore to send the
Duke the succors which they had promised, for the maintaining of Piedmont, and
to oppose the French Forces: they forbear also to endeavor diversion, by the
Pirenean Mountains, and by Burgony, and by secretly fomenting the Rebels in
France, so to keep that King in work and busied with his home affairs, and
consequently from meddling with those of Foreigners: the pretermission of which
provisions did not only facilitate the resolution taken by the French, but did
incite them to it; For the King being firm to his resolution, valued not any of
the difficulties or contrary considerations, being confident to overcome them,
and to make his way by the Sword. The fame of the mighty preparations of this
Kingdom increasing greater then those of any of the preceding Kings, the
Spaniards and the Duke, began at last to fear not only the success, but
whatsoever might be the result of so great and so near an Army. The Duke and
Governor were likewise much troubled for not having for a long time heard from
the Court of Spain; for the Spaniards being jealous of France, through which
the expresses used to pass, and the Sea not being open in Winter, people could
not without much difficulty pass from Spain into Italy; and such had the ill
fortune been, as three several Posts that had been sent from Spain, being
driven by violent winds upon the Coast of Provence, were detained, and had
their Letters intercepted: so as the deliberations of Italy depending much upon
the results of that Court, the Duke and Governor knew not in such a perplexity
of business what to do: nor was it only the scarcity of moneys and want of
advertisment, which kept them from making any provision, but neither had they
time to make new Levies of men for the necessary defense of the State of
Millain, and for the Provisions for the Army before Cassalle, and for the
Forces which were toward the Cremonese, and which were already much
diminished: it was therefore thought the best expedient to beat up Drums in the
State of Millain for Voluatiers, which might be sent to the Camp before
Casalle, and afford commodity of drawing out the best Soldiery from thence, to
bring them into the Field to oppose the enemy: which provision, though it
proved not altogether vain, (for many being driven away by famine, and hoping
to get away by inrolling themselves, and to get Ammunition-bread, which though
very bad, was made desirable by reason of the great scarcity;) yet this being
but a very slender provision to resist the great storm which threatened them,
the affairs of that State and of Piedmont were reduced into great danger and
necessity; and that the more, for that they heard the numbers of the Venetians
were increased upon the Confines of Bergamo and Bressia; and that Nevers was
ready to march out at the first news of the Frenches advancing, with about 8000
Foot, and 1200 Horse; and if either jointly, or separately they should assault
the State of Millain, it was feared they might divert the Governors Forces
from opposing the French; and it was app^ehended, that the Duke of Nevers, as
he had threatened the preceding year, would pass into Montferrat and join with
the King; for these respects the Governor went to Lod^, and was forced to keep
there, and to make a Magazine of Arms there against the Venetians, and ordered
Francisco Pa^aglia, who succeeded Montenegro, that abandoning the Fort of
Piaden^, which was built the year before upon the Territories of Mantua, and
all the rest of the Territories of Cremona, he should bring the remainder of
those men to defend Cremona only: he desired likewise, and obtained, a thousand
men from the Duke of Parma; and 12 Galleys being come at that time from Naples
to Genoa, with 2000 Foot, he could not make use of them, for it was necessary
to keep them at Sea, to oppose them to the French Army, being ready prepared in
Provence, which (was said) together with the ships that were expected at
Marcelles from Rochel, would pass by Nizza into the River of Genoa; and that
landing their men at Mentone near Monaco he would pass into Piedmont, or into
the Seas near Savona, and would by that way take a shorter and more easy
course to relieve Casalle: to this weak condition were the ^fairs of the State
of Millain reduced, against the Forces of so powerful an enemy; and it being
impossible in so great streights to mind the relief of Piedmont, the Governor
drew out 4000 of the best Foot that were before Casalle, to send them into
those parts under the Conduct of Don Ieronymo Agostini; and being afraid that
the Venetians, who were joined in Arms and Intelligence with the French, might
assault the State of Millain, he used means to the Duke of Tuscany, that he
would intercede, and endeavor to make that Commonwealth forbear troubling the
King of Spains Dominions in these urgent occasions; on the other side, the Duke
of Savoy, finding the weakness of his defense and succor, and seeing that his
Dominions were likely first to endure the brunt, before those of the King of
Spain, had first sent the Count of Verrua to the King of France, and afterward
his Son the Prince, to keep the Army from advancing, by making some composition
with that King: suspending therefore his resolution till he saw what the event
of these endeavors would be, he made Don Ieronymo Agostini to forbear acting
any thing with the Governors Auxiliaries in the Territories of Asti: but the
King being resolved to advance, referred the Prince of Piedmont to Cardinal
Richlieu, with whom he treated upon several ways of composition; but not
agreeing upon any one, they concluded a suspension of Arms for five days, till
the Duke his Father might be advertised of what had past. The Duke seeing the
King so resolved, began with great diligence to fortify Susa, by which way he
perceived the King would march with his Army: the French had had experience how
hard it was to separate the Genoeses from joining with Spain, by way of force;
wherefore thinking now to make use of the present jealousies which were risen
(as has been said) and cunningly fomented, between the Commonwealth of Genoa,
and the Crown of Spain, they applied themselves to increase these jealousies,
which they began by Demonstrations and endeavors to the contrary, in good will
and favor to the Genoeses, to try whether they could effect or no; wherefore
the King being to send a Messenger to the Princes of Italy, to acquaint them
with the ends and intentions of his coming; he dispatched away Monsieur di
Land, commanding him that when he should be come to Genoa, he should not only
free those Senators from any apprehension of danger which they might apprehend
by his coming; but that he should promise them in his name all assistance
against any who should go about to infringe their public liberty: which being
done, that he should immediately go to Mantua, and from thence to Venice, to
acquaint that Duke and that Commonwealth with his coming: which he assured them
should, at the furthest, be by the 25th of March: wherefore the Duke of Nevers
marching into the Field on the day appointed, assaulted Cassalle the greater,
the last Town of the Dukedom of Millain lying toward Mantua; and taking it
after some little resistance made by the Townsmen, he sacked it, and (staying
there a while) brought the neighboring Towns under contribution: he afterward
went to Sabioneta a strong Castle, which holds in Fee of the Emperor, but took
it not, being stoutly resisted by a Garrison of the Parmiggiani, who were sent
thither at the Emperors request by the Duke of Parma, The King of France, in
this interim, having sent precise Orders to the Duke of Guise, Lieutenant
General of the Army of Provence, and to the Marquess of Coure, Guise's Marshal
and Lieutenant, to march along into Italy coasting by the Sea side, he went
himself in person by the Alps, toward Piedmont, with the Van, which consisted
of about 12000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, the greatest part of them being of the
French Nobles; and having overcome the passage of Mongeveura, he fell, on the
sixth of March, into the Valley of Susa; where the Duke of Savoy having cut a
great Trench upon the way by which the King was to pass, half a mile beyond
Susa, he had placed the Camp-master Bellone there to defend it with his
Brigade; and behind Bellone stood the Duke prepared, with the main body of his
men; amongst which were the Governor of Millains men, under Don Ieronymo
Agostini, who was fetched but a little before from l' Astigiana; and the King
having possessed himself of the tops of the Mountains, which were all covered
over with snow, commanded some companies of the Fore-lorne-hope to assault the
Dukes Trench; who not meeting with much resistance, (for Bellone's men were raw
and unexperienced Soldiers) took it at the first assault: afterward
increasing in numbers by other people, who came in into them, they assaulted
the station where the Duke was with the main body of his Army; here the
conflict was somewhat greater; but such was the continual confluence of French,
who continually came in, as the defendants not being able to resist their fury,
were forced to give back, and to retreat toward Auvigliana, nine miles toward
Turin, leaving Susa in the Kings possession; which being taken, was by the
Kings express command preserved from sacking and from all other violence: many
of both sides died in this conflict, nine Colors of Bellone's Brigade were
taken by the King, and about 80 Prisoners; amongst which many Captains, who
were presently by the King set at liberty: the Duke ran great hazard in his own
person, and Don Ieronymo Augustini was unhors'd.

At the same time the Provence Army, consisting of about 15000 Foot, having
brought some Artillery in Barques from Marselles, came near to Nizza, or Nice;
and having sent a Trumpet to Don Felice, the Dukes natural Son, and Governor
of that City, to demand free passage through that County, he was answered, It
was not in his power to grant it without leave from his Father; he therefore
had time allowed him to know his Fathers pleasure; and the mean while the Army
passed over the Varo, a little River, which descending from the Alps, and
falling into the Sea two miles beyond that City, divides Italy from France in
that part. At the same time that the Army having passed over the Varo, spread
it self along upon the Shore of Nice, the Neopolitane Galleys coming from
Genoa, with some other Galleys of Doria's store, played upon the French
Squadrons as they marched toward Nice; to avoid which danger the French went
more inward into the land, and being free from the shot of the Enemy, which
could not reach them, the Galleys retreated toward Villa Franca, where they
landed about a thousand Foot, who taking some Stations near the French, had
some Skirmishes with them, at a great distance off, and of no great importance;
till news being come to Nice of the Agreement made between the King and Duke of
Savoy at Susa, they forbear all hostility; and the Galleys taking in their
Soldiers, returned to Genoa.

The Duke finding, after the unfortunate success at Susa, what a tempest
over-hung his Dominions, and the State of Millain, thought it better to stop so
great a ruin by Agreement, then to hazard the total business with so weak and
unseasonable opposition; he therefore sent the Princess, his Sons wife, and
Sister to the King, to Susa, that by her near relation in blood, and by the
grace and favor which she received from the King, she might appease her
Brothers anger; and sending the Prince after her, he by their means came to a
Treaty of Agreement; which being at last set down, was after much debate
stipulated by the Cardinal of Richelieu on the Kings behalf, and by the Prince
in his Fathers Name, in form following.

That the Duke should give free passage to the Kings people whenever it
should be requisite for the relief of Cassalle, and Montferrat; and should also
furnish them for their moneys with Victuals and Munition, for the maintaining
of the Kings Army, and of Cassalle: That he should promise that the Governor
of Millain should rise within four days from before Cassalle, and should
withdraw his men from Montferrat, freeing that City and that State from the
King of Spains Garrisons, and should leave the possession thereof free to the
Duke of Mantua; together with an express promise from the Governor, in the
King of Spain 's Name, That for the future he should not molest the States of
Mantua, nor Montferrat; and that the King of Spain should ratify this
Agreement within six weeks: That the Duke of Savoy should put 15000 Quarters of
Victuals into Cassalle, and should restore all the Towns that he had taken in
Montferrat, except Trino, and so many other Towns as should be worth 15000
Crowns yearly Rent, answerable, as he said, to what Nevers had promised him
before the present War; and, That this should be by him acknowledged to be in
full satisfaction of all that he, the Duke of Savoy, could pretend unto in
Montferrat; That he should assign over Susa, and the Castle of St Francesco, to
the King, for pawn of performing what was agreed upon; in which Forts the King
should put a Garrison of Swissers, which should swear to restore them to the
Duke when these Articles should be by him observed: That notwithstanding; it
should be lawful for the Duke to keep all the Towns he had taken in Montferrat,
till such time as those Forts, together with the Town of Susa, should be
restored unto him: That the King should promise (as he did) not to molest the
King of Spain 's Dominions, nor those of his Confederates; That he should take
the Duke of Savoy into his protection, in case he should be assaulted upon this
or any other account, by any whatsoever Potentate: That in case the King of
Spain should refuse to ratify these Conventions, or should not observe them
after they were ratified, the Duke should join with the King of France, to
force the King of Spain to ratify and observe them. Moreover, there was one
thing more Articled, which contained a League and Confederacy between the King
of France, Duke of Savoy, the Pope, Venetians, and the Duke of Nevers, in
defense of the quiet possession of each others Dominions.

The first Article being agreed upon, it was immediately sent away to the Duke
of Savoy; who calling to Council Don Ieronymo Augustino, and Count Iovan
Serbellone, the King of Spain's and the Governors Officers, consulted with
them, whether they ought to be accepted of, or no? And the urgency of the
present condition prevailing with all of them, over the utility and honor of
the common Forces, it was resolved they should be accepted of: But the Duke not
herewithal satisfied, would send the Commendatore Iovan Thomaso Pesero, his
first Secretary of State, to the Governor, to know his pleasure more
precisely, who, though with an ill will, yielding to necessity, consented to it.

Thus the first Articles being subscribed by the Duke, the Siege of Cassalle
was raised, and the Kings Forces retreated to Montferrat; which State was also
freed from the Spanish Forces at the very appearance of the Kings Person. The
Duke sent forthwith about 1500 Quarters of Corn into Cassalle, as part of a
greater quantity by him promised; and gave passage to 3000 Foot, and 250 Horse,
which were sent under Monsieur di Toras, into the lower Palatinate. As for the
other Article, touching the League, the Duke made many excuses to keep from
under-writing it; and being afterward free from the imminent danger, utterly
denied to do it: He went soon after himself to kiss the Kings Hand, and was
upon the way met by the King half a mile from Susa, who pretended he was going
to hunt; they both of them turned back; the meeting was full of reverence and
submission on the Duke's part, who was received with much honor by the King;
the Duke striving by all seeming artifice, wherewith he was naturally very well
endued, not only to appease the King, but to win upon his genius, and to
captivate his good will.

Thus by the Dukes dexterity and cunning many thought that the greatest force
of France that had for many years past the Alps was stopped; which finding Italy
unprovided of defense might easily have overrun it, to the universal ruin,
and particularly to the danger of the State of Millain. But the Duke his having
after his opposition found the King rather gracious and favorable then angry
and incensed; his having received honors, rewards, satisfaction, and
recompense, instead of revenge and resentment; his having by these agreements
provided well enough for himself, and suffered the interests of the Crown of
Spain to be prejudiced, afforded much talk and murmuring against him, not only
by the Princes of Italy, who were displeased with his being reconciled to the
King of Spain, which was contrary to the common Interest, but even in the Court
of Spain by those that envied the Conde Duca's favor with the King; who
finding it to continue, strove to make it appear, that the Dukes reconciliation
to the King of Spain, wherein he was assisted, and which was effected by the
Conde Duca, was a cheat to the King, and pernicious to the Interest of the
Crown: They said that it was he, the Duke of Savoy, who (as might be gathered
by many conjectures) had made the way plain for the King of France to enter
Italy, by his secret Intelligence held with the Court of France: That it was
he, who having covenanted for, and secured unto himself the retention of a good
part of Montferrat, had beforehand promised not to oppose him in that
Enterprise, having therein no respect to the Interest of Spain, or to the
honor of the Spanish Forces, by which he had got such a part of Montferrat,
and with which he was but a little before confederated: That this was the faith
of this Prince, this the fruit of that reconciliation: For otherwise, how would
the King of France have dared to hazard his total reputation and glory which
he had won in so many home actions, and particularly in his late Victory at
Rochell, in so cold a season, against so many difficulties of steep and craggy
Mountains; and as yet covered over with snow; and all this only for the freeing
of a Town that was not in his Kingdom, nor did not any ways belong to him? To
this end, they said that the Duke opposed his worst armed men, to withstand the
first violence of the most resolute and formidable of the French; which was the
cause why there was so little fighting, and why the strong Pass of Susa was
rather abandoned then stoutly defended: That the Governor, nor other Spanish
Agents that were in Turin, had not consented to those Articles, otherwise then
as they were enforced by the Dukes peremptory will; who consulting with them in
very positive and resolute terms, bereft them of the freedom of Election; and
that protesting that these Agreements were the only remedy against the imminent
ruin of the State, he tacitly threatened, that unless they would consent
thereunto, they would force him to accept thereof without them, and by joining
with the French, to provide the best he could for the safety of his own In
erest; so as they consented to what he would, to keep the Kings Affairs from
falling into a worse condition. And so far did these murmurings prevail, as the
very French being more desirous to make the Duke be suspected in the Court of
Spain then zealous of their Kings glory, did by their outward demonstrations
confirm what was said in his discredit. But it was not probable that the Duke
by this Agreement should so much to his own disadvantage part with what he was
to expect from the friendship of Spain; especially when he was known to be
naturally very desirous of making new acquisitions, and very tenacious of what
he had. The loss of Susa did yet more gainsay these objections, it being a
place of great importance by reason of its situation, and of greater profit
then any other Town of Piedmont, for the Customs which the Fairs that are held
there do yield, and which are had for the Transportation of Merchandise which
pass to and fro between France and Italy; which that he should willingly grant
unto the King, and commit so great a fault, was too far from being believed by
any that was but indifferently wise; for what Reason would admit, that by the
loss of that advantageous place, which was one of the gates of Piedmont, and of
Italy, he should willingly make himself subject to the King of France, and be
less valued by the Italians and Spaniards. To this may be added, That when in
the preceding years the Duke was assaulted by the powerful Armies of Spain, and
was consequently in great need of being sustained by the French, yet would he
never grant them so much as any one Tower in Piedmont; and how was it likely
that upon this present occasion he should agree to yield them a place of such
importance, before he was assaulted? The Fortification also made at Avigliana,
whilst they were treating of agreement; the Artillery which were brought
thither after the Capitulation, the King looking on; his having always for his
own defense entertained Spanish Auxiliaries, as they were actions of much
diffidence, not to say contumacy, toward the King, and therefore much to be
resented by the French; so they seem forceable arguments against that
intelligence and collusion which would fain have been proved to have been
between him and the French: And yet, as men incline naturally to sinister
interpretations, though the Court of Spain hearing these bad tidings, and
maturely considering the state of affairs did approve of the Dukes actions, and
rejecting vain rumors caused three Pays to be paid unto him beforehand by
their Factors in Genoa, of 25000 Crowns a piece, which were granted him for the
expenses of these present occasions; yet the contrary impression not being to
be removed, most thought that that Court had dissembled more according to
necessity and to the convenience of the present occurrences, then done upon any
real and intimate belief; as if it were not consistent with the Kings
Interests, by unseasonable distrust and resentment totally to alienate the Duke
from them, but by the contrary appearing well satisfied, not only to keep him
their friend at such a pinch, but to oblige him still more by new benefits to
keep still the more united and better inclined to the affairs of the Crown.
This is evidently apparent in so great variety of opinions, and may be
affirmed, that the Duke thinking upon new agreements, which by the Mediation of
his Son the Prince were to be accorded, demanded 4000 Foot, and a certain
number of Horse, of the Governor, and in his absence of Don Philippo Spinola,
which at the beginning of this War were promised him, in case he were assaulted
in Piedmont by the Arms of France; which demand being made when the Army before
Casalle was in greater want of men then ever it had been, he wished they might
not be granted him, that by that denial he might have a fair pretense to forego
friendship with Spain, and to abandon the Cause, which till then he held in
common with that Crown: And that when Spinola had punctually satisfied his
demand, and sent the men, contrary to the Dukes expectation, he was troubled at
their coming; which made him not only make them keep upon the Confines, but by
hard usage endeavored to make them return back: but when he saw his Counsels
prevented by the King of France his speed, he speedily summoned them in to his
defense against the Kings Army which he saw came suddenly upon him, and by
their help made what defense so short a time, and the imminent necessity could
permit him to make; for though there was no collusion in the conflict at Susa;
yet the unseasonable demand made by the Spanish Agents, the little satisfaction
he seemed to receive by their coming, the preceding Negotiations, and the
Conclusion of the subsequent Agreement; show that the Duke was much more
inclined to embrace friendship with France upon new terms, then (according to
the observance of his Ancestors) to keep union with the Crown of Spain: But it
may be said that the then so dangerous condition of Affairs forced the Duke to
put on this resolution; and it being usual with Princes to make all change
lawful, not only when their State is in danger, but where they may better, or
increase their condition, there was not any one that blamed the Dukes Counsels,
nor his Actions.

How ever it was, the King of France his name was generally exalted to the
skies throughout all Italy, in several Writings and Composures; they said he
deservedly merited the title of Just, for having assisted an oppressed Prince;
the title of powerful, for that he had opposed himself in Arms to the
oppressors; of generous Protector, because without any private end or interest,
nay with such inconveniency to his own affairs, with so much trouble and hazard
of his own person, he could not tolerate the oppression of a Prince who was his
friend. Some praised the speed of his advancing, others the undaunted
execution, others his miraculous happy success: they wondered how so many
difficulties of the season, Alps, sterility, and opposition, yielded to his
fortunate Arms and Genius: how he had had the courage, being tired both himself
and Army in hardships undergone before Rochel, to pass armed over the Alps in
the midst of Winter, and to come into Italy, to free her from imminent slavery,
and to assist his Petitioner in his greatest extremity: they could not
comprehend how at his only presence so many Forces, such preparations of Arms,
and so many Plots against a Client of his Crown, should vanish just like a
shadow before the Sun: some called him the Protector of the oppressed; others,
the avenger of the liberty of Italy; and expecting greater proceedings from
such a beginning, they promised unto themselves great alterations: almost all
the Princes of Italy sent Ambassadors to him; partly to congratulate his so
happy success, and to thank him for having freed them from the imminent slavery
they apprehended, if Casalle should be taken; partly to purchase his favor, in
case, as it was much feared, he had any further intentions then the freeing of
Cassalle, and that he might not prejudice their Dominions: some, and
particularly the Venetians, to incite him (as it was said) to advance further
with his Arms, offering to join their Forces and Intelligence with him, against
the Spaniards, with whom they were very ill satisfied in what concerned the
Valtoline, and this new commotion against Montferrat: but the King did soon
free all men from such suspicions; and by his sudden and unexpected resolution
broke off the thread of his so prosperous Fortune; for on the last of April he
returned into France, leaving the Cardinal and chief Officers of the Court in
Susa; not tarrying till the business of Montferrat should be ratified from
Spain, but leaving the things unconcluded and unperfect, for which he had with
so great fervor and preparation entered Italy. The Cardinal and the rest soon
followed after the King; leaving Marshal Cricky in Susa, supreme Governor of
the affairs of Italy with 6000 Foot, and 500 Horse, The occasion of this so
sudden and so unexpected departure was variously interpreted; some allotting it
to the Kings vivacity of spirit, some to his moderation; as if content with
having freed his Friend, with having secured peace to Italy, and to so many
Princes, (who apprehended the contrary) he had with a Prince-like magnanimity
let the world see, not only how just his thoughts were, but how moderate and
content, upon such an occasion, and so great an opportunity of affairs; and how
far he was from dreaming of novelties, or of disturbing the public peace: but
these specious pretenses not being able to prevail with those who could have
desired more constancy and resolution in the King, and much less with those who
desirous of novelty had conceived great hopes by the Kings coming, the French
gave out, that the Duke of Roan, head of the Hugonots in France, seeing his
party ruined by the loss of Rochel, and that he could not get ready help to
sustain himself from Spain, whither he had dispatched Messengers of purpose, by
reason of the great scarcity of moneys, began to cry Peccavi, and would render
obedience to the King: which because it was likely to put a final end to the
troubles of France, was of so great moment to the Kings affairs, as that, all
other enterprises set aside; it forced him to return to secure them: which
though by the soon ensuing accidents appeared might be true, yet not being then
believed, it was not sufficient to maintain the reputation of the French
Forces, which being but a little before formidable to Italy, by reason of so
prosperous success, began after the Kings departure to decline; and the rather
for that it was soon known, that it was a new tumult of the Hugonots, who had
fortified themselves in the Mountains of Auvergnia, and not Roans surrender,
which had forced the King to return thither to suppress them. This the Kings so
sudden departure afforded also occasion of belief (and this was afterward
judged to be the truest cause) that the King was come into Italy with far
smaller Forces then fame gave out; which not being fit for new enterprises, he
had done more wisely to content himself with the glory which he had won, then
to hazard the loss thereof by falling upon new enterprises. But be it what it
would that occasioned the Kings departure, it sufficiently lessened the
reputation of the Kings Forces; and, on the contrary, the Spaniards, who seemed
to be totally quel'd, began out of these respects and other favorable
accidents, to hold up their heads. The Duke of Savoy, though he appeared
publicly to stand to the Articles of Susa, yet not being pleased with the loss
of that place, and with the restitution of most that he had got, was negligent
in furnishing the Citadel of Casalle with the rest of the Victuals promised;
and being much troubled that the Pass upon the Alps had been forced from him,
and that he was thereby fallen from that reputation by which he covered to be
thought to hold the Keys of Italy in his hand, and that it was he alone who
could either keep out the French, or let them in, as he listed; desired to
regain his former reputation: to which purpose he used all his best skill: he
fomented the Rebellion of the Hugonots in France, and wavering in his
friendship with the French, see^ed better inclined to the Spaniards, by whom he
was to get the greatest part of Montferrat. At this time the Plate-feet
returned to Spain with above ten Millions of money; and the King, urged by
necessity, detained above a Million and a half of moneys more then what came to
his share, which belonged to private Merchants; an Argument which proved
clearly that he was far from accepting the Articles of Susa; and desirous to
repair so great a blow given to his reputation, and to the safety of his
Domimons: nor did his Agents in Italy desire it less then he; for the Duke of
Alva, as soon as he had heard what had happened in Piedmont, and of the lofs and
Capitulations of Susa, he sent Thomaso Caracciola from Naples with a Galley to
Genoa, to the end that going thence to Millain, he might hearten the Governor
with an offer of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and of 700000 Ducates, which were
ready at his service in that Kingdom. But the Emperors sudden resolution made
all men chiefly wonder; who having till now proceeded rather by exhortations,
citations, and in a judiciary way, with the Duke of Nevers, then by Arms or
Military expeditions, and who moreover had appeared averse to the Governors
late action; as soon as he heard of the King of France his coming into Italy,
and of the Articles of Susa, and of the Duke of Nevers his contumacy, who with
so little respect to the Imperial Majesty, Sovereign Lord of the Dukedom of
Millain, was entered thereinto in hostile manner, and had committed acts of
hostility in Casalle maggiore, he thought himself so highly injured in his
dignity and right of the Sacred Empire, as he immediately ordered Count Merodes
to go into Italy with 36000 Foot, and 8000 Horse, of those who were quartered
in Alsatia, Tyrvolo, and the parts thereabouts, under Colalto, Caprain of the
Cesasian Forces in Alsatia; which Order Merodes readily obeyed; and having
taken Stainc, which was but badly provided, he came unexpectedly to Coira and
Mainfold, two of the chiefest of the Grisons Country; which being unprovided
for so sudden an assault, were easily forced to receive him in: falling from
hence with his Van, which consisted of 10000 Foot, into Chiavenna and the
Valtoline, he drew near the State of Millain, intending to pass on farther, as
the Governor should direct him. The Governor, fearing the French Forces, and
not being willing to innovate any thing contrary to the Articles agreed upon,
did not only make 3000 Foot, which were sent him readily from Naples, stay in
the Haven at Genoa, but made the Dutch tarry in Chiavenna and in the Valtoline,
till he should receive new Orders from Spain; and in the mean while furnished
them with Victuals, and other things necessary. The Court of Spain was much
troubled at the business of Susa; but encouraged by so many good chances, she
resolved not to sit down by such an affront; and neither refusing nor allowing
the Articles of Susa, took a middle way; wherein the King declared, that if
Susa might be restored, and Montferrat put into its former condition, and the
French Forces should forgo Italy, he would not molest Montferrat by Arms: the
condition was hard, for besides the uncertainty of performance, it did almost
deprive the King of all the advantage of his Victory; wherefore the King of
Spain thinking it would not be accepted, knew it would be requisite for him to
provide some sufficient person to repair the affairs of Italy; therefore
instead of Don Gonzalo, with whom that Court was very ill satisfied, he chose
the Marquess Spinola; who being come some months before from Flanders to
Madrid, kept still there about some private, and public business; and
furnishing him with almost two Millions, part in ready money, part in very good
assignments, and conferring upon him all supreme Authority and free Arbitrament
as could be conferred upon any one, to make war or conclude peace; he sent him
to be Governor of Millain, to the end that he might either compound the
present affairs upon honorable conditions; or repairing the late disorders by
Arms, he might restore the Affairs of the Crown to their former Dignity and
Safety.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK XI.
The Contents.
THe Articles of Susa not being observed forces the King of France to prepare
a new Army for Italy. Marquess Spinola, the new Governor of Millain, sends men
into Montferrat: of all which he makes himself master, except Cassalle; whether
the French, abandoning the rest of Montferrat, withdraw themselves. The
Cesarian Army falls into Italy, under Count Collalto: and entering the
Territories of Mantua, possess themselves of almost all the Towns of that
Dukedom; and sitting down about the Suburbs of Mantua, take some of them: they
afterward fall to oppugn Porto, but quit it by reason of the excessive cold
weather. The Duke of Savoy professing neutrality, Negotiates with both parties,
and endeavors to sell his friendship as dear as he can. The French Army falls
into Piedmon^, conducted by Cardinal Richelieu; who being kept very scarce of
Victuals, Quarters, and other Necessaries, by the Duke of Savoy, breaks with
him, and going to Pinarola, takes it, and some of the adjacent Towns. Marquess
Spinola and Collalto come with Forces to assist the Duke, whither also comes
Cardinal Barbarino, the Popes Legate, to treat of peace: which not being to be
made, Collalto returns to Mantua; and Spinola sits down before Cassalle. The
Legate returns to Bolognia, and Cardinal Richelieu to France; by whose
departure the French Army is weakened; being reinforced it endeavors to
relieve C^ssalle, but being opposed by the Duke cannot do it; wherefore being
forced to keep beyond the Poe, it meets with various fortunes, and takes so
Castles. The Siege of Cassalle proceeds with much difficulty. The ^ge of Mantua
is brought to (...) ^lend; for, not being relieved by the V^ns, who were routed
by the Dutch at Vallegio, and being consumed by the Plague, it is at last taken
and sacked. The Duke of Savoy dies at Savigliano.

THe busines^-of Mo^ferrat, which by reason of the Duke of Nevers ^is ^eaknes,
b^ the far ^stance and ^ifficulty of succor, and by ^eason of the power and
greatness of the S^anish Forces, being joined to those of Germany and Piedmont,
was at first thought a thing which might easily be effected, of no moment, and
which would cause but little alteration; when it had brought the Arms of France
and Germany into Italy, be^un to be held the seed of future evils, and of
greater perturbations ^en any that had preceded; for the King of France being
with such manifest Demonstrations engaged in the defense and protection of his
Friend and Client; and fortune having so smiled upon him at the first, it was
not to be doubted, that he would forbear the pros^tion thereof, but that ^e
would employ all the Forces of ^is Kingdom^ making good the Art^les of Susa,
which had been a^eed unto, so ^uch to ^is glory. O^ the other si^e, the
Emperor ^inking that (...) Honor, and the Majesty of the ^acred Empire would
be too much concerned, if he should suffer his Decrees and Commandments to be
overborn by the contumacy and disobedience of a vassal, assisted by Foreign
Forces; and that the French should arrogate that Jurisdiction and Imperial
Authority to themselves which did absolutely depend upon him; it was not likely
neither that he should ever appease himself, till he should see his Imperial
Authority restored to its former condition and reputation, by the suppressing
of his contumacious vassal, and by the abolishment of the Articles of Susa. The
almost equal fortune of these two Princes terrified the whole world: who after
signal Victories, had just at this time, happily and miraculously settled the
Domestic Affairs, and brought them into security and obedience, by the former
total suppression of the Rebels of his Kingdom, and the other by re-uniting the
Princes of Germany, by the peace of Lubeck, made between him and the King of
Denmark, and the rest of the German Princes who had confederated themselves
together in behalf of the Prince Elector Palatine: so as both of them being
free from intestine troubles, they were at leisure to bend the whole Forces of
their Dominions upon this sole enterprise; and what added wonder to all the
mischances was, that it seemed that the same fortune having thrown open the
Gates of Italy unto them at the same time, and made the way plain for them to
come thither, did not only lead them by the hand, but drive them on by a
favorable gale; There was not any of so mean an understanding, who did not
foresee, nor of so inhumane sense, who did not deplore the unfortunate sat of
Italy, which being destined the miserable seat of War, was exposed to all
those evils and calamities which would flow out into her bosom from those two
Nations; Nor was it to be believed, that the Spaniards who were the chief
occasion of these present commotions, and who were engaged in this enterprise,
not only in point of Honor, but of interest, would by giving way to the Duke
of Nevers his Solicitors suffer so great an affront as he had received by the
Articles of Susa; but that, on the contrary, being as the soul of so great an
enterprise, he was to make it good with all the force and power of his Crown:
but the danger was yet greater of Italie's being inslaved by the Austrean
Arms, if getting the better of the Duke of Nevers, they should become Masters
of his Dominions; and as the thought hereof did much perplex the very souls of
the Italian Princes, so was it necessary for them to betake themselves to the
best remedies for this threatening evil; it was known what foundation they might
lay upon the favor and assistance of France of the unfortunate success of
their union with that King of late years upon the occasion of the Valtoline,
and by the peace of Monzone, concluded so little to their satisfaction; and yet
not having any better resolution to put on at the present, made it appear not
only necessary unto them, but the great concernments of that King in these
present occurrences: and the better occasion he had to persevere therein by the
now quiet and entire obedience of his Kingdom made it seem more assured, since
the occasions being removed, the impediments must needs also be taken away,
which might cross him in the business of Italy; the chief point concerning
that total of the present Affairs; seemed to depend upon the Duke of Savoy's
resolution, who if he should observe the Articles of Susa, and keep firm to the
common cause, would secure the preservation of Casalle, and therewith the
liberty of Italy; And if he should not observe them, but join with the Austrean
Forces, the common cause and the liberty of Italy would be much endangered, and
Casalle, Montferrat, and Mantua, would be apparently lost; the Duke was not
ignorant how requisite his friendship was to both parties; and that he might
make his best advantage thereby, he held them both in hand, making them
sometimes hope well in him, sometimes to suspect how he might be inclined; when
he but indifferently succored the Citadel of Casalle, he excused himself to
the Spaniards, upon the necessity of keeping his promise, upon the fear he
stood in of the French which were very strong in Piedmont, and upon the slender
supplies sent thither, which not being sufficient long to supply the Soldiery
that were there, would not much import the main business when it should be
taken; He sometimes said that victuals were privately stolen in thither, by
means either of the Subjects, or of the French; that it was impossible for him
to block up the Avenues so, but that relief would be brought in contrary to his
will and orders; On the other side, he strove to satisfy the French of his
will, and of his constancy in observing his promise, by his continuing to send
in provisions, and by promising to do so still: that which was conjectured
might be his chiefest aim, was, that he sent but small supplies into Casalle,
to the end that if it should be lost, and should fall into the Spaniards hands,
it might not prove too prejudicial to him; and that supplying it, though but
sl^nderly, it might be known that it lay in his power, either to suffer that
place to be lost, (whereon he knew that all men's eyes were set,) or else to
preserve it: so as he might be looked upon by all men, as the absolute
Arbitrator in so chief a business. Others were of opinion, that keeping both
the parties doubtful of what the sequel might be, he might have occasion to
treat of demolishing the Citadel, lest it might fall unto the contrary party,
which might prove much to his prejudice: he also (that he might depend less
upon the French, and that the Spaniards might conceive the better of him)
fortified and munited Avigliana very strongly, placing 8000. men there in
Garrison, to the end that it might be a good Bulwark against the French, which
might exclude them from Casalle, and might make their having of Susa very
little advantageous to them; so as he might still be held to be the same thing
which he coveted to be, before the business of Susa, and pretend that it lay in
his power to keep out, or to let in the French, and so he might make himself
the more necessary to each of the parties: and consequently meet with the
better dealing in his demands and pretensions, which he reduced to their
accustomed vastness; to the getting of a good part of Montferrat, and to the
state of Genova: which having once aspired unto, he thought that as he did
desire it, so of reason it did belong unto him, to boot with the great sums of
money which he demanded from the Spaniards for the maintenance of the War, and
of the French for victuals and the passage of their men; As for Montferrat,
arbitrators were already chosen on the King of France his behalf, on his own,
and on Nevers his behalf, to rate his Lands which were allotted him by the
Articles of Susa, instead of 14000 Ducates; but the Arbitrators when they met
differed upon the Rates, so as the arbitrament could not as then be ended; the
Duke pretended that the Lands should be valued according as they were
anciently, when he first made his pretenosins, and not according to their
present estimation; and the one being incomparably greater then the other, it
swallowed up as much of Montferrat as he was to have had by the division made
with the Spaniards; and thinking that the French, by reason of the necessity of
his joining with them, ought to satisfy him herein in as full a measure as the
Spaniards had done, he was very obstinate in his pretenses; On the contrary
side, Nevers having exclaimed much against that part of the Articles of Susa,
whereby he lost so much of Montferrat, and the Agents deputed by him reclaiming
yet more against so high, and so unexpected pretenses; The French (who was in
the middle between them) thought that if it should be consented unto, their
Kings Protection would seem to incline rather to the oppressing, then to the
maintaining of his Client: Wherefore they opposed the Duke of Savoy, whereat
the Duke being very much distasted, and imputing it to the small good will the
Court of France had to determine this happiness; to the end, (as he said) to
keep the longer from restoring Susa, he exceedingly complained, and was more
reserved in obse^ving the things agreed upon: but much greater obstacles
appeared in the other point, which concerned the state of Genoa; for some
distasts and diffidence having past, as you have heard, between that
Commonwealth and the Crown of Spain, which upon some fresh accidents were
renewed, the Court of France made account to get more advantage thereby.

The King, before his march, had sent (as you have heard) Monsieur di Land
into Italy; who being come to Genoa, did not only secure the Commonwealth from
any hostile acts, but offered all favor and assistance to them in the Kings
Name, against whosoever should go about to insidiate their Liberties. The
Commonwealth doubting lest after the Victory and Articles of Susa some nearer
conjunction might be made between the Duke and the King, to her prejudice, she
thought her self bound to answer the fair respects the King had used to her;
wherefore Augustine Palavicino, who was afterward chosen Doge, was sent
Ambassador from the Commonwealth unto the King, to thank him for the good will
he seemed to bear unto them, and to desire him to continue the like favorable
inclination toward them still; and to pass the usual terms of Complement with
him: The Commonwealth was the more inclined to send this Embasie, for that Don
Gonzallo, when he saw the Enterprise of Montferrat given over, thought the
affairs of Italy to be in a desperate condition; he wished the Commonwealth to
provide for themselves the best they could; And yet the fear of the French
Forces ceasing by the King of France his return, the Court of Spain, which
could have desired that constancy and resolution in the Commonwealth which she
found not in their Agent, seemed displeased with this Embasie; which being the
first that was sent by any of the Italian Princes, seemed as if the
Commonwealth would at the very first stormy blast have first of all wavered in
her ancient Friendship. Monsieur di Sabran's going to Genoa, (who was sent
thither by the King of France, in appearance to treat of the safety of coveying
Victuals, which he was to send from Provence to Montferrat; but in effect to
tarry there as his resident) increased this their displeasure. It was an
ancient custom of the Commonwealth, to entertain no Ambassador in Ordinary,
save only from Spain; and if at any time the Genoese had been desired by the
Pope, or by the King of France, to give residence to their Ambassador, they
had always appeared backward in it, out of self-interest. Sabran being upon
this occasion received at first, and having his expenses discharged, as the
Kings Agent, after some months kept open house in Genoa, intending to reside
there; at which the Spaniards began to murmr; for their King pretended and
demanded of the Commonwealth, That they should not entertain any one in their
City who was an Agent for the King of France. The Commonwealth did in part
admit, and in part not admit of the Kings demands: for as for their receiving
him as Ambassador, or Agent from the King of France, being loath to alter their
ancient institutions, they ordered, That he should not be received as such,
either publicly or privately; but as for excluding him from living in the
City, if he would tarry there as a private man, they would not do so; it being
too much contrary to the common liberty of Nations to inhibit any one to live
in a free City, which for the greatness of Traffic was open to all Nations,
and in particular to the French: And as to exclude him only from being a
servant to the King of France, was too apparent an affront to that Crown; so to
do it at the King of Spain's demand, would not be without a blemish to their
reputation, and without prejudice to the liberty of the Commonwealth, as if
they had done it by the King of Spain's command: And yet the Court of Spain
holding for certain, that whatsoever business Sabran did negotiate in Genoa as
a private man, thought that the Commonwealth did by this declaration satisfy
the King of France in effect, and him but in show; and he thought himself
highly offended; as if to undertake new Intelligence with the King of France,
chiefly in a time when the Italians in general, and particularly those of
Genoa, were molested by France, was a beginning to fall off from their ancient
union and good correspondency with him: And the less satisfied the Court of
Spain seemed to be by these proceedings, the more did the Court of France hope
to lay new foundations of entertaining new Intelligence with the Genoeses; and
was so far from thinking of offending them, as she offered all the favor and
Forces of France to defend the Liberties of that Commonwealth against any
whomsoever: The Duke of Savoy finding therefore, that his plots against the
Genoeses were not well listened unto by the French, complained, That the
Commonwealths Interest was preferred before his, and before the promises made
him in Susa: Being therefore angry that these his drifts did not succeed
prosperously in that Court, he endeavored by no favorable demonstrations to
the French, to withdraw from favoring the Interests of the Commonwealth; and
finding that their proceedings were not well received in the Court of Spain, he
thought they might produce some good effects to him; he therefore professed
more constancy to that Court: But neither did his designs prove succesful
there; for that King nor Court would not upon any slight occasions, to please
the Duke, take off their favor from the Commonwealth; and they abhorred any
innovation which might tend to the prejudice of their good correspondency and
intelligence held with the Genoese: as also because Marquess Spinola being
come, with thoughts as high as was his Authority, into Italy, and endeavoring
by all the means he could to restore the Kings grandezza to its ancient
condition, would not imitate his Predecessor, who, with little honor to the
Kings Affairs, had seconded the Dukes will too much; being therefore rigid in
his resolutions, and seeming to depend only upon himself in the Administration
of the Kings business, he did profess not only not to be governed by the Duke,
but thought to bring him over to his mode; and suspecting the Dukes intentions
and actions, he was very cautious and reserved in believing him, or in doing
any thing whereby he might be forced to submit to his will, and quit his own
power; and even in the usual payment of moneys, which were granted him to make
preparations for the imminent War, as also in sending him men to defend
Piedmont, he was very reserved, notwithstanding the Dukes many pressures:
Wherefore the Duke finding that neither of the Courts did much favor his
designs, he suspended his resolutions; and carrying himself the best he could
to both of them, he waited till occasion and time might make his conjunction
and actions more desirable then they were at the present, that he might sell
them at the dearer rate, according as the urgency of occasions might make them
more requisite.

The Court of Spain being wholly intent upon the business of Cassalle, that
they might divert France, resolved to assault the French on the confines of
Catalognia, and that the Emperor should send his Army to the Confines of that
Kingdom, on the side of Lorrein; and to his purpose the King of Spain had sent
the Duke of Feria with 1000 Horse and 4000 Foot to Barcellona, with order to
raise more Foot there, and to enter with them into Languedock, and Provence;
and the Emperor had commanded the Duke of Fritland, the Captain General of his
Forces, to prepare to enter France with stout Forces on the side of Germany:
And there was no doubt but that the King of France, being held work by these
assaults, as he had been the preceding year by the business of Rochel, could
not have sent much aid into Italy to back the Duke of Nevers in his Affairs; so
as it was likely that the Enterprises of Montferrat and Mantua being attempted
by the Spanish, Dutch, and by the Savoyards, could not but succeed well.
Notwithstanding Spinola, who was come into the State of Millain about the end
of August, with ample Authority, as has been said, to treat both of Peace and
War, bethought himself of many things which withdrew him from thinking upon the
uncertain events of the present War, to mind the surer counsels of Peace: He
saw that the State of Millain, which was the chief foundation and prop of the
War, was so exhausted as it could not long sustein the weight of a new War;
That Mantua and Cassalle being very strong, the former made so by the waters,
and natural situation, the other by Art and Fortifications, the besieging of
them would prove a business of length, and of doubtful event: That the
enterprise was hateful in the sight of men, suspicious to the Princes of Italy,
and generally detested by the whole world: That the French were resolved to
defend those Dominions, and ready to pass over the Alps again: That small
Forces were able to withstand what there was but little hopes of getting,
though with great expense, and preparatioon of Arms. The Duke of Savoy's
various and uncertain genius did confound him, on whose Friendship and Union
nothing could be surely grounded, but a continual profusion of Moneys to feed
him with, whilst the danger was far off; That when they should draw nearer, his
Friendship would be more dangerous then advantageous, as might appear by the
last years example, which he could not but think upon. But that which in
appearance should have encouraged him most, did most trouble him: The more
powerful the Germane Army was, the more formidable did it appear to him, and
the more dangerous for the Kings Affairs; for though if they should join with
him they would undoubtedly prove a great assistance to him in that enterprise,
yet did he rather fear than confide in them, by reason of the pride, arrogance,
and greediness of that Nation, which is naturally unsatiable, impatient of
military discipline, and inclined to mutiny, which might occasion sad accidents
in the heat of War. To this was added the intolerable expense required to
maintain that Army; which being to be paid by the King, the Royal Treasury
being emptied by so many and so long Wars, was not able to supply them: But
(what exceeded all other respects) the Dutch Forces being to wage War in Italy,
not as Auxiliaries, or as brought in by the Spaniards; but as Principals, and
in the Emperors Name; it was to be feared, that they would not only not leave
the first place in Authority to the Spaniards, whose intentions they did
effectually serve; but that by reason of the Sovereignty that the Emperor
holds in Italy, by reason of the quality and quantity of Forces, by reason of
their greater disposition to War, and through their Commanders ambition, they
would be masters, and would force the Spaniards to fight after their mode; so
as he thought them dangerous in War, but more dangerous in Victory, if (Mantua
or Cassalle being taken) they should fix their footing in Italy, and settle the
seat of the Cesarean Majesty there; from whence the I^alian Princes (being for
the most part Feudatories of the Empire) were to take Law, and to depend
thereon, as upon their Sovereign Lord: which consideration, by reason of the
consequences it might draw after it, in prejudice to the Spanish Authority,
afforded no less occasion of fear, then if the French Power should by the Duke
of Nevers's means be radicated in Italy.

Out of these respects Spinola growing more inclined to Peace then War,
Monsignior Scappi, Bishop of Pacenza, being s^nt by the Pope to visit him,
Spinola entered upon some Treaties of Accommodation with him, and with Count
Iacomo Mandello, who was sent to him by Nevers, offering each of them, That he
would procure that Nevers might be invested in his Dominions, upon condition
that he would receive and Quarter part of the Emperors Forces in the Dukedom
of Mantua, and part of Spinola's Forces in Montferrat, in sign of his respect
to both their Majesty's; to the end that making amends by this his ready
obedience, and public submission for his former contumacy, they might with
honor receive him into favor, and gratify him, the one with the Investiture,
and the other with the Protection which he desired: Nevers would not accept of
this, either out of fear of nonperformance, or out of his relying upon the
French Forces, and those of other Princes who were joined with him, on whose
pleasure he professed he did in all things depend; so as he was first to acquaint
France, and the Venetian Senate, with his offer, without whose approbation and
consent he could not resolve any thing in this point; but being advised to the
contrary by the Venetians, who could not endure that the Dutch Army should come
near their Confines, and an answer not coming from France, the Dutch not having
whereof to subsist amidst the barren Rhetian Alps, where they had tarried all
this while, Spinola was forced, contrary to his inclination, to permit them to
enter Italy: They came in number 22000 Foot, and 3500 Horse, commanded by
Ramboldo, one of the Counts of Collalto in Friuli, General of the Cesarean
Forces in Italy; a Commander of good esteem and Authority, who had been long
versed in the Wars of Germany and Hungary: They fell down into the Valley of
Chiavenna, by the Lake of Como; being come to Lecco, they passed into the
Territories of Cremona, and proved prejudicial to Lombardy and Piedmont, by
their cruelty, rapine, plunder, and contribution, which they forced from
thence; and fatal to a good part of Italy, by reason of the Plague, which they
brought with them, and which burst forth in great violence throughout all
Lombardie and Piedmont; and then entering the Venetian Territories, and
Romagnia, it came into Venice and Tuscany, causing so great a mortality both of
men and cattle as the better half of these Provinces did not escape the fury
thereof: Collalto being come into Italy spoke with Spinola in Millain; by whom
being honorably received, after a long debate about what was to be done, they
agreed upon this: That dividing the Armies and the Enterprises, Collalto (with
his Dutch) should undertake the business of Mantua, and Spinola (with the King
of Spains men) that of Casalle and Montferrat.

Having thus distributed the carrying on of the war, each of them betook
themselves to what fell unto their share and the King of France joining with
the Venetians in Nevers his defense left the Venetians to relieve the State of
Mantua, and took the care of Montferrat upon himself. Spinola's Army, (many
Captains and Officers being cashiered) came to 16000 Foot, and 4000 Horse,
wherein were comprehended the Spaniards, Dutch, Neapolitans and Lombards, under
their several Camp-masters; amongst which was the Duke of Lerma, Nephew to him
who was so great a Favorite to King Philip the Third, and was come to commence
his Militia under Spinola. Spinola, to give a beginning to the business on his
side sent his Son Don Philip to Valenza upon the Poe, with part of his Army,
which was distributed in several Towns upon the Confines of Montferrat; where
gathering Victuals and Munition he gave out that he would go to besiege
Casalle; whereupon the French, abandoning the Towns of Montferrat, retreated in
great ^aste with their men to defend that place; and Don Philippo, invited by
that occasion, sent Don Ferrante di Ghirava his Lieutenantgeneral with 4000
Foot to beyond the Tanaro, to whom Nizza, Acqui and Ponsone came in; and all
the neighboring Towns returned to be governed by the Spaniards: then bringing
his men into Alessandria, he went to take in Sansalvadore, Lu, Fubine, Vignale,
and the other Towns of that State, which lie between Alessandria and Casalle;
leaving Rossigliano, St. Georgio and Pontestura, unattempted: which being as so
many Bulwarks to secure Casalle, were not only not abandoned by the French, as
the other Towns were, but were begirt about with Trenches, and furnished with
good Garrisons; and yet Spinola, for all his shows to the contrary, forbear to
attempt Casalle, being detained, partly by the very cold weather which came on;
partly supposing that the French would employ all their Forces to defend it, he
feared to begin with that as would be a great obstacle to the Treaty of peace,
which he so much desired. Moreover, he doubted much the Duke of Savoy, who
(were it either that he was loath that that place should fall into the Spaniards
hand, or that he was angry at Spinola's proceedings with him) began to oppose
his ends, and cross his designs; or that minding the preservation of that
place, he aimed at being himself the Arbitrator of affairs, and to sell the
possession thereof at the dearer rate; wherefore he began to declare expressly,
that by the last agreement at Susa he could not but grant both passage and
Victuals to the French that went to relieve it; wherefore Spinola being
contented with the Towns that he had taken, and with having regained those
Towns, in the face of the French, which his Predecessor was forced to quit, at
the King of France his appearance in Italy, he quartered his men in those Towns
which he had taken, where they lay idle all the ensuing Winter. The Cesarian
Army made better proceeding in the Territories of Mantua; where the Duke of
Nevers not minding the defense of the chief City so much as that of the other
Towns of the State, had indiscreetly distributed the greatest part of his men
within those Towns, which would all of them have been hardly sufficient to
Garrison the chief City: so as the Cesarian Army, led on by the Serjeant-majors
Mathias Galasso and Aldringer (for Collalto, who was sick at Lodi, could not go
along with them) having taken Loglio and Volengo, the chief Towns in the
Mantuan Territories, went immediately to Caneto, somewhat a greater Town, where
were 2000 Foot, amongst which two Companies of Venetians, under Angelo Cornaro,
a Gentleman of Venice, to defend it: Nevers relied much upon that Garrison,
which being very great, ^e hoped would hold the Enemy play: but it proved
otherwise; for at the first appearance of the Enemy they yielded up the Town,
without one stroke striking: the example whereof, as it is commonly seen, being
followed by the other Towns, Gazzuolo, Cicognaro, and Governolo, which lies in
the mouth of the Mincio, where it falls into the Poe, fell also into the hands
of the Dutch; who being by this easiness of the Mantuan Soldiers become
masters of almost all the Country thereabout, after having miserably plundered
it, had convenience to approach the City, which was in great confusion to see
her men make so little resistance. The City being unfurnished of the better
part of her men would have run danger of being stormed, had not the Venetians,
who were aware of the danger, sent a thousand Foot thither immediately, under
Colonel Durante, with some moneys: the City of Mantua stands almost in the
midst of a Lake, made by the little River Mincio, which comes from the Lake of
Garda: the Island whereupon it stands is joined to the Continent by some Banks
and Bridges, whereof some are greater, some less, according to the distance of
place: at the end of the greatest Bridge, stand the Suburbs of St George,
weakly walled and without any Platform: to which when the Enemy drew near with
their Cannon, Frederico Gonzaga, who had the defense thereof committed to him,
began to treat of compounding, in the Dukes name, with Aldringer; letting him
know that Nevers being desirous to appear an obedient Vassal, and to witness
his respect and observance to the Emperor, would not refuse to receive him,
and to allow him quarter in that Borough. Aldringer, who knew the place to be
untenable, would not accept it upon those terms, since he saw that in all
likelihood it could not escape his hands; whereupon Gonzaga not being able to
do any more yielded it unto him, retaining only the Hold, which is only a Ga^e
a little fortified, which leads from the Lake to the City. The Dutch being
entered into St George, a Truce for a few days was treated of, and concluded;
during which time Nevers b^ing desirous to assuage the Enemies fury by some act
of submission, offered Collalto (who though not yet perfectly recovered, caused
himself to be brought from Lodi into the Mantuan Territories, and lay in St
Benedicts Monastery) ^he same Hold; so as he would receive it only as a willing
and honorable surrender: but Aldringer replying that he offered a thing which
could not hold out two hours assault, the business proceeded no further, the
rather for that a new accident which happened broke off both the Truce and all
the Treaties; for at the same time that Aldringer advanced to St Georg's
Borough with the Van, the Rear being led on by Frederick, one of the House of
Saxony, went to quarter in Ciregg^e, a Borough upon the Bank of the Lake,
wherein was no Garrison or any other defense: but upon a bank which leads from
the Borough to Mantua a Rampire was begun to be made in form of a Half Moon,
which opposed those who would pass that way into the City: some of the Dutch
coming to this Rampire, which was basely abandoned by the Venetians who
defended it, they without any opposition became masters thereof; and might
easily make themselves masters of the Island of Te, which was disjoined from
the City only by a large Ditch: This caused great confusion in Mantua;
wherefore thinking themselves to be assaulted during the time of Truce, the
Town sent Colonel Durante immediately to defend that part: fire was also given
to the Cannon from the City against the Borough or Suburbs of St George; and
those who guarded the Hold, hearing the noise, shot off their Muskets against
the Magazine of Arms which was beneath, where many of the Captains and Officers
of the Camp were sporting themselves, trusting in the Truce; and amongst them
Colonel Coloredo was sorely wounded. The Dutch being hereat moved, who knew not
what was done at le Gireggie, nor the occasion thereof, assumed their Arms, and
fell immediately upon those of the Hold, which they soon made themselves
masters of, with the death of many of the defendants; and then passing forwards
took the Bridge, till they came to the Drawbridge; which being timely hoisted
up by the Mantuans kept the Dutch from entering the City: so as not able to get
further they began to fortify, and to turn their Cannon upon the City, and to
play upon it: whilst things went thus, Mantua was again relieved with another
1000 Foot, with ten pieces of Artillery, and with 100 carriages of Victuals and
Ammunion, beside some moneys. A succor which was sent by the Venetians to
Goito, and from thence to Mantua: the Dutch perceived how fit a place Goito was
to send relief, being seated upon the Mincio before it falls into the Poe; so
as being to take it, that they might streighten the City the more, they sent
the Baron Galasso to view it: there was in it a good Garrison, and it was
sufficiently munited; so as the cold season being considered, it might have
held out till the Spring: but when Galasso came near it with some few men, he
by some tokens found how base and fearful the defendants were; wherefore hoping
for good success, and having seen some of those Barques which serve to bring in
the Vintage, in some of the neighboring Cottages, he made use of them, and of
some ropes, to pass over the Mincio, and to get near the Town: which whilst he
successfully did, those within began to parley; and two pieces of Cannon which
Galasso had sent for before he had past the River, being come from the Camp,
they agreed to surrender the Town; which accordingly was done, and proved no
little prejudice to the City, being thereby deprived of so important a place
for succor.

Goito being taken, and the Dutch finding that the Battery of S. Georgi^
against the City, by reason of the far distance, did no good, they ^ell to
expugne Porto, which is another Town nearer the City, reduced into a Fort, with
Walls, Bulwarks and Ditches, and partly secured by the neerness of the Lake,
from whence you go to the City by the Millbridge, and by a bank at the head of
the Bridge: Being gotten by their approaches to the Ditch, they would have
drained it, and then have come to Battery, and to Assault; which if they could
once have done, they had great hopes, by reason of the Defendants cowa^dize
(whereof they had had so many proofs;) and the Artillery being already
prepared, they were ready to begin Battery. But the Winter coming on, and the
weather growing very cold, the business began to appear to be longer and harder
then it was thought it would have been, especially, since the City, being
secured every where else, might make use of all her men to defend this place.
To this was added the great scarcity of victuals and straw, which grew daily
greater in the Army; and the plague, whereof many in the camp dyed: Wherefore
altering their minds, they resolved for that Winter to mind only the keeping
of what they had got; and distributing their Army in the neighboring Towns, to
keep Mantua besieged at a distance, and to possess themselves of the Avenues
and Passes which were fittest for relief; and they quartered their Horse so as
they might scour the Country, and keep back relief. Collalto went to winter in
Reggio, where he quartered one Regiment, the Duke of Modena not knowing how to
refuse them, as being Feudatory to the Empire, as neither could the other
Feudatories of the Empire do, some allowing Quarter, some Contribution, in what
quality or quantity Collalto pleased to take it. The Army being in their
Quarters, the besieged sallied out in great numbers, and molested the stations
held by the Enemy, not without some advantage to themselves, and prejudice to
the Enemy. Nevers going out himself in person with the Prince his Son, and a
good Band of men, fell upon Mormitolo, a place some five miles off, where about
one hundred Dutch were quartered, who yielded unto him upon discretion: He
afterward went to Castiglione, which he likewise took; whereby making way for
relief from Verona, the Venetians had convenience to convey victuals into the
City: they met with contrary fortune at Rivolta, on the left bank of Mincio,
where it falls into the Lake; which Town rising in Insurrections by the
fomentation of the Venetians was recovered by the Dutch, who went thither, with
the death of all the Townsmen, who refusing to surrender the Town were, even
to the very Infants, put to the Sword: and though the Dutch Horse foraged the
Country, yet some succors were brought in from the State of Venice, which
being done by stealth were not sufficient by much for the need the City was in;
which being begirt by the Enemy wanted food, and was also hardly handled by the
Plague, which was very great here, as also in all the neighboring Towns and
Cities; insomuch as getting into the City of Venice, people died so fast, as
the care thereof was almost quite given over by those that had the looking to
it: the like happened in Millain, Bullognia, and in all the Cities of Lombardy,
Romagnia, and Tuscany: but whilst the Cesarian Army wintered in the State of
Mantua, and Spinola's Forces in Montferrat, provisions for war, as also
Negotiations for peace ceased not: in both which not only the Commanders in the
Armies, but the Princes of Italy labored. The Pope, seeing the Dutch forces so
near the Church-Dominions, sent about 18000 Foot into the parts about
Bullognia, under his Brother Don Carlo, and 2000 horse; and solicited the
building of Fort Urbano, which he had resolved upon two years before, and was
begun at Castle Franco, upon the way that leads from Modena to Bullognia, and
was a good and fitting Bulwark to Romagnia, and the Church-Territories on that
side: but that he might likewise by his authority and endeavors stop the evils
which threatened Italy, he made Cardinal Antonio, his Brothers second Son,
Legate; who being also come into Bullognia, where his Father governed the
Ecclesiastic Forces, he sent Monsieur Iovan Iacomo Panciruolo to Mantua, to
treat of some suspension of Arms, between the Duke of Nevers and Collalto, to
the end, that in the interim they might the more commodiously and with the
better hopes treat of peace. But this was but in vain; for Collalto growing
proud with success, made still higher demands; and the Duke, who had nothing
more to grant but Mantua and Casalle, had not wherewithal to satisfy his
demands and pretensions; so as there was no middle way left for them to meet
in, and the less, for that the siege of Mantua being given over with so little
honor to the Cesarean Forces; and Casalle not as yet attempted by Spinola, the
new Dukes hopes were not a little comforted, nor his confidence a little
increased, of being sustained by them who fomented him, and were his
well-wishers. For whilst these two places held good, all the other Town taken
by the enemy, either in the state of Mantua, or Montferrat, made but little for
the main concernment of the War: and it being very probable that the Armies
being afflicted by the Pestilence by the Winter inconveniences, and by those of
the Campagina, they would in time lessen; and it was to be hoped, that being
much diminished of themselves they would be reduced to such a condition, as not
being able to withstand the French Forces which were to pass over the Alps
very strong the next Spring, they would be easily driven from their quarters, a
consideration which did must afflict Spinola; For having two Armies on his
back, which he was to furnish with expenses and provisions, he feared he must
be forced to squander out moneys to no purpose this Winter, and have need of it
himself afterward, when there should be occasion to lay it out with profit;
Wherefore growing very sparing thereof, he was less careful in satisfying the
Duke of Savoy's demands and necessities, though he had other greater respects
to keep him from furnishing him with moneys, which he proceeding from distrust,
did daily increase by reason of his continual treating with the French;
Sometimes by means of the victuals which ^as bound to furnish the Army with,
which was to pass over the Mountains; Sometimes by doing the like to those of
Casalle; Sometimes by the conduct-monies which were agreed to be given them,
when they should be come into Piedmont; Sometimes by the negotiations which
daily past, touching the Dukes joining his Forces with the French, whereof
there were pregnant suspicions, by many demonstrations made by the Duke, on
purpose to make Spinola jealous; Wherefore these actions being really repugnant
to that good correspondency and inclination which the Duke profestto the Kings
affairs, when he demanded moneys of Spinola: and it seeming somewhat hard to
Spinola that he should feed one with moneys who continually fomented the enemy,
and who held continually so close intelligence with them, he demanded from the
Duke some cautionary Towns in Piedmont, if he would be furnished with moneys,
for security of his professed good will, and inclination to the King of Spaine's
affairs. The demand did very much trouble not only the Duke, but all the
Princes of Italy; for it increased the jealousies of the Italian Princes, if
Spinola should get yet further footing in Piedmont, to boot with what the
Spaniards pretended to in Montferrat, and the Duke in whom the Italian Princes
did confide, that he would not forgo the common cause, as well in respect of
his own, as of the common interest; Having complained to the King of Spain of
the demands made by Spinola, he obtained Orders from the Court to Spinola, that
he should desist from such demands; and Spinola, that the Duke might not be too
much exasperated, received some check for his too much severity.

Great Preparations for War were not only made in Italy, but also elsewhere.
The King of France raised a mighty Army, to come stronger then formerly into
Piedmont: and the Emperor and the King of Spain, to keep the French from
opposing the Duke, and from forcing him to join with the^, prepared to assault
France, the one on the side of Spain, the other on the side of Germany: But
both these proved rather Rumors then Reallities; the want of money was the
cause why on the King of Spain's side, he having hardly sufficient to supply
the Wars within Italy, Flanders, and Germany, so as he had not where withal
to begin and maintain a new War with France; And also the scarcity of
Soldiers, wherein Spain was much wanting, her men being exhausted by War in
several Nations, in the Ocean, Mediterranean, and by often Transmigrations from
Spain to America, and to the East Indies; To this was added the driving out of
the Moors, in the time of Philip the Third, wherein more then two millions of
Souls were said to be sent out of Spain: a people who though they were
generally trained up in servile Arts, and particularly in cultivating the
ground, and in feeding Cattle; yet these, by supplying the meaner imploiments,
afforded convenience for the Natives, being unimployed in those services, to
betake themselves to military affairs; So as the Natives, after expulsion of
the Moors, being to reassume Husbandry, and the feeding of flocks, (wherein
Spain does abound) a very great scarcity of men began to be found in all the
King of Spaine's Dominions, especially of such as were Military, to be sent out
to make new acquisitions, or to maintain what they had gotten; Out of these
respects, and because the Catalonians were not inclined to make War with the
French upon those Confines, to keep from losing Traffic which passes with
interchangeable profit between them and France, the Duke of Feria could raise
no Soldiers; and not thinking it fit to begin War with so weak Forces, the
diversion did not only sail on that side, but occasioned the like failing on
the Germans side. But many greater, and more important accidents, kept the
Emperor from falling foul with France at this time: which since, for their
weight, and for the great concernment therein of Italy, they deserve a
particular description; It will not be amiss to make a little digression; and
whilst there is little done in Italy, by reason of the excessive cold Winter,
to make it not a distinct and particular relation of them, at least to give you
a brief view of them, to the end that reserving them to the times wherein they
happened, they may not break off the Narration of the chief Affairs of Italy.

The Austrian Authority, the greater it was grown by the continued succession
of so many Emperors, the more odious and insufferable it grew to the German
Princes: and the so many victories obtained by this present Emperor had made
him so formidable, as the German Princes joined in nothing more then in finding
out some means whereby to lessen, and moderate the power of that House, so as
they might vindicate their ancient and former Liberty; which after so great an
increase of power they had almost lost; finding themselves now treated by this
present Emperor, not as Princes, and, as it were, Confederates of the Empire,
but little better then Subjects. To the desire of political liberty so much
wished for by the Catholic Princes, liberty of Religion was added by the
Heretics; for the present Emperor, being more religious then many of his
Predecessors, had in several manners curbed their licentiousness, and
restrained that liberty of Conscience which they had enjoyed for above a
hundred years: so as they were doubly inclined to novelty. The dissatisfaction
of both these parties was occasioned, yet more, by the great Army consisting of
above 100000 fighting men, which the Emperor kept quartered in several parts
of Germany; but more particularly in their Territories, who being worst
satisfied with the present affairs, he knew to be worst affected toward him,
more contumacious toward the house of Austria, and readiest to rise; and this
he did, not so much in resentment of their malign intentions, as to keep them
the more curbed in, and to take from them the means of plotting innovations:
the common people were not therefore only burdened with quartering Soldiers,
but the Princes also with Contributions, and by not being able to get their
usual Tributes and Rents from their Tenants, who were afflicted and exhausted
by unusual free quarter. To these mischiefs was added the juries done by the
Cesarian Soldiers and Commanders; and chiefly by the haughty proceedings of
the Duke of Fritland, Captain General of the Imperial forces: who having the
Supreme Power and Authority given him over all the Armies, and in the
management of the war, kept all Germany and the Princes of the Empire under his
command. This man was by Nation a Bohemian, of private birth, and but of mean
fortune, but who by his valor had raised himself to this greatness: to his
pride of nature, to his fierce and terrible genius, great valor, great daring,
and an extraordinary judgment in Military Affairs was annexed; wherein he was
confirmed by his signal Victories gotten against the Emperors Enemies and
Rebels: whereby he had rendered the Authority and Majesty of the present Emperor
to as high a pitch as ever any of his Predecessors had been: so as his name
grew not only odious to the Hans Towns, but even to the Princes Electors; to
whom bearing no ^espect, he contrary to their ancient Institutions quartered
Soldiers upon them, as well as upon the more petty Princes. The Emperors new
Decree (who confiding upon his power, and drawn by zeal to Religion, commanded
that to the Catholic Churches should be restored the ancient possession of all
those goods whereof they were bereft at the beginning of the Heresies; which
goods having been possessed by many Princes and Lords for above one hundred
years, were partly alineated, partly converted to their own uses) increased
their indignation, and brought some of them almost to the point of despair, and
all Germany was much offended thereat; and because there were many Princes
concerned in this Edict, who adhered to the house of Austria (amongst which the
Duke of Saxony) they began all of them jointly to plot mischief against the
Emperor, endeavoring to lessen his power, and to free themselves from such
oppression; and the Emperor, likewise, did extremely desire that his Son, whom
he had made King of Hungary, should be chosen King of the Romans; and not being
able to compass it without the Electors free suffrages, the business in these
commotions met with many disturbances; especially for that all men hated that
the Imperial diadem should continue in one Family, whereby their liberties
became not only inslaved, but many Families and Persons, (who thought
themselves as well deserving as the Austrians) were excluded from this
Grandezza: it therefore became the Emperor to sweeten them, that he might
incline them to choose his Son: he therefore summoned a Diet in Ratisbone, to
settle (as he termed it) the affairs of Germany. The Electors chief intention
was to disarm him, to the end that his Forces being weakened, he might not use
the like authority as formerly; they therefore desired that Wallestein, Duke of
Fritland might be no longer General, and that the Army might be dissolved: they
accused Wallestein of barbarous cruelty toward the people, of insufferable
pride toward the Princes, of insatiable extortion, and of unheard of
fierceness in making Towns desolate, and in subjugating Provinces; for the
dissolving of the Army, they alleged that, Germany being reduced to a quiet
and safe condition by the peace made at Lubeck, the Army was not only
superfluous, but grievous to the people, and prejudicial to Germany, which
ought now to be eased of so great a burden, a^ permitted to enjoy the fruit of
peace. The Emperor did not incline to these so weighty and important demands,
knowing very well whereunto they tended, nor yet the Spanish Agents who were
resident in that Court; who were much concerned in maintaining the Emperors
authority, and the Austrian name, wherein their King was interessed: but the
King of Sweden, a powerful Northern King, having about this time past the
Baltic Sea, and being come into the lower Germany with an Army of 20000 Foot
and 2000 Horse; the Electors made Protestation, that they would never
contribute to the charge of that new war, unless they were satisfied in their
demands. The Empeour and Spanish Agents being badly advised, gave way thereunto
at last: but it was not long ere he repented himself soundly; for though Arms
were laid down by by the peace of Lubeck, yet discontents and hatred were not
laid aside, nor yet the ardent desire of more absolute liberty, and the
conditions of that peace being advantageous for the Austrian Empire, did rather
serve to incite the malcontents to novelties, then keep them within the
limits of that peace: the disarming of the Emperor was no better then to put
Arms into the Swedes hands; and into those of the malcontent Princes, and
such as were mortal Enemies to the Austrian name. The Electors, having obtained
their desire, were backwards in choosing the King of the Romans; which though it
were not openly desired by the Emperor, yet being negotiated privately, began
to be found so hard a business, as the Emperor thought it not fit to demand it
openly; and the Electors made use of several pretenses to put off the Election:
nor now that the Emperor was disarmed, did they let slip the occasion of
showing their resentments, and of endeavoring some better condition of
liberty. The Protestants began to lay plots against the Austrian power, and by
little and little began to hold intelligence with the King of Sweden; who
having by their adherence gotten greater forces in a short time took many
Cities, subdued many Provinces, and having gotten many famous Victories,
overran Germany within the space of a few months, not without great danger to
the Austrian authority, and to the Catholic Religion: nor content with such a
continued course of Victory, he drew near Italy, and made her fear the renewing
of those miseries which she had formerly felt by the Goths, and the other
Northren Nations. The affairs of the Empire and of the Catholic Religion were
never so perplexed in Germany, nor brought to so near a ruin, as after the
coming in of this Northern King: all the Heretics and malcontents adhered to
him, who in his Military Ensigns writ himself the Defender of the Faith, and
Protector of the German Liberty. The Duke of Pomerania, first of all, and
afterward the Elector of Brandenburge, and lastly, the Elector of Saxony
joined openly with him against the Emperor; and after them many other lesser
Princes, and almost all the Hans Towns of the Empire, joined with him, as with
their deliverer; and the Emperor having laid down his Arms could hardly raise
a new Army to withstand so apparent ruin: almost all the Soldiers that he had
cashiered took pay under the Swede, allured by the fame of his valor, by the
Victories he had got, by his grateful genius to the Soldiery, who was received
and followed with unspeakable applause, as if the heavens had sent him to be
their Deliverer. The Armies of the Catholic League and of the Emperor, which
were joined together, were defeated in a great Battle before Lypsick; and
Tilly, chief Captain of that League, a famous Commander for many Victories
which he had gotten against the Protestant League, and against the King of
Denmark, and who now succeeded dismissed Wallestein, was therein hurt: so as
the Emperor seeing no other way to withstand the ruinous condition of the
Empire, nor how to defend the Austrian Dominions, was forced to recall
Wallestein from Bohemia, whither after his being dismissed he had withdrawn
himself to lead a private life; and restoring him upon what condition he could
desire to his former dignity, he opposed him to the Swede, who like a swift
torrent overrun all Germany. The Emperors Army commanded by Fritland, and the
Swedish Forces led on by their King, came to a pitched Field near Lutsen, a
City in Misnia; wherein the King being victorious had prescribed Laws to
Germany, had he not been slain by some Musketeers, whilst with his wonted
valor he pursued Victory: he died in the latter end of the year 1632, thirty
months after he had set his foot in Germany.

But to reassume the thread of my Discourse, the Diet at Ratisbone freed France
from being insulted over by the Germans; for Fritland, who had order, as has
been said, to fall upon France, expecting what would be the issue of that Diet,
instead of turning with his Forces upon France, would be himself present at
Ratisbone, to obviate the violence which he foresaw would fall upon him: but
not being able to decline it, and the Emperor being forced not only to depose
him, but to cashier his Army, and foreseeing another war threatened from the
North, France escaped being assaulted also on that side; and the Electors, who
held intelligence with the King of France, favoring Nevers his Cause, as the
most just, approved not of the Emperors actions; but complained, that contrary
to the Laws and Institutions of the Empire, he had sent Armies into Italy,
without participating the business with them: wherefore the resolutions and
provisions of that Court growing colder, the King of France had better
convenience to mind the wars of Italy, and to send strong succors to Nevers:
he destined the Cardinal of Richelieu to be the Captain General of the Forces
which he sent into Piedmont, with full power to manage war and peace. The Army
(those being comprehended who were in Susa and Montferrat) consisted of 22000
Foot and 2000 Horse; and the Cardinal had three Marshals of France for his
assistants, Cricky, la Force, and Scomberge. The King had already bargained
with the Duke of Savoy for provision of Victuals, and Ammunition for war,
together with conduct moneys for the passage of his Army, and had agreed with
the same Duke that he should assist in the enterprise with 15000 men; and as
for Victuals, he had agreed to deliver unto him 15000 sacks or quarters in
Nizza di Provenza, which the Duke was to present unto the Army in Piedmont,
three crowns of gold being allowed for the conduct of every sack or quarter: so
as the Cardinal being very hot upon the business, and thinking to find all
things ready for the enterprise in Piedmont, parted from Paris in the time of
Christmas; and coming to Lions in the beginning of the year 1630, tarried there
some days to receive the people, who had orders to come thither from several
parts of the Kingdom: he by his appearing so strong, and with such resolution,
in Piedmont, to terrify the Duke so as to make him not only forward to observe
all that had been agreed upon, but willing to yield to whatsoever he should
require; he nourished this opinion, not only out of the extraordinary
confidence which the French have naturally in their own Forces, but also by
reason of the Dukes Ambassadors endeavors, who was at Paris to delay this
expedition; for when he saw all things ready for the voyage, he went to the
King, and to the Ca^dinal, and confidently assured them, that he had received
news from the Duke, by a Post that was newly come, of a suspension of Arms made
in Italy, for two months, and agreed unto by the Venetians, between Nevers and
the Cesarian and Spanish Commanders: according whereunto Collalto had withdrawn
his men from Mantua, and Spinola from Montferrat, and that the general peace
would be shortly concluded: but the vanity of this advertisement was soon
discovered, and was reputed as tricks used by the Duke, who out of his
excessive fear of the French Forces strove to keep them as long as he could
from Piedmont: wherefore the Cardinal hastened his journey the more, and being
come to Lions sent very precise Orders away to the Duke with advertisement of
his coming, to the end, that he might be ready to receive him with Victuals,
and other Provisions, and to join his Forces with the Kings in this enterprise;
in whose behalf he required him, absolutely to declare himself: but the Duke
seeing the Cardinal engaged upon his promises, thought it a very opportune
occasion for his purposes; for the Cardinal passing the Mountains with a great
Army, without Victuals or other Provisions, he knew that the prosperity, or
ruin of the enterprise, lay in his power; for if answerable to his promise he
should furnish him with all things, and should join his Forces with the Kings,
Casalle would be happily relieved: on the contrary if he should not furnish
him, and instead of joining with him, should bring the Spanish and the Dutch
Armies into Piedmont, and should with them oppose the French Army, all the
Cardinals plots and threats would prove nothing; thinking therefore to reap
good by the necessity whe^einto he saw the Cardinal was ready to precipitate,
he sent his Son the Prince unto him, to put new conditions to him, and to
propound unto him the old flim-flam of the enterprises of Genoa and Millain;
and on the other side, that in case the Cardinal should should not grant those
his desires, he might have means to oppose him, or that out of fear of his
stout resistance he might force the Cardinal to give way unto his will; he at
the same time sent the Abbot Scaglia to Spinola, and to Collalto, to invite
them to advance with their Forces, and jointly to oppose the French, who coming
into Italy upon the assurance of his joining with them, and of finding those
Victuals and Provisions, which he would never furnish them withal, they should
be forced, when they should see such an Army before them, either to retreat
shamefully, or being blocked up in Susa, to perish miserably for want of
Victuals, and other conveniences; or if they should give Battle, to be
undoubtedly overthrown: he likewise, to incite them the more to advance, told
them that France was at this time in great troubles, by the departure of the
Kings only Brother, the Duke of Orleans, from that Court and Kingdom, by the
Prince of Conde's retiring from the Court; by the dissatisfaction of many
Princes and Lords; who not being able to end^e, that even in the conduct of the
Kings Arms (which in all reason belonged unto them) a Cardinal, of Priestly
profession, should be preferred before them, (one unexperienced in Arms, whose
ambition grasped at all things, and who through the Kings favor would usurp
those employments, which were due to them by the merits of their ancestors, and
by the dangers they had run, and blood which they had shed in war;) would by
all means endeavor that he should not come off with honor in this enterprise:
he acquainted them with the Insurrection of several Provinces of the Kingdom;
for that the people could not bear with such great Contributions as were laid
upon them, to maintain a war out of the Kingdom; and making it plain unto them
by these so many Demonstrations, how easy, and sure, the result of the
business would be if they would oppose it, he pressed them not to let slip so
happy an occasion of doing their Kings business: but both these expeditions
proved vain; for the Duke being become suspected to both parties by his double
dealing, had wearied them all: nor could he carry his neutrality so cunningly,
but that his ends were discerned, which were conceived to be nothing else, nor
to tend to any thing, but to be the Arbitrator between two great Kings Armies,
and to be he who should cast the balance as he should like best, be
Superintendent in all businesses, give the Law to all, treat of his own affairs
with most advantage, better himself by the perils and labors of them both, and
secure the advancement of his own fortune, and the increase of his reputation,
by the equal counterpoise of each of them: by which way of proceeding being
become not only suspected, but hated by both parties, who thought themselves
injured by this his juggling, they abhorred to have him their Arbitrator, grew
more confirmed in their distrust, and more resolved that he should depend upon
their resolutions, and not they be wheeled about by his words and cunning. Thus
keeping the superiority, they would treat with him upon such advantage of power
and authority as did become their Kings Grandezza, and the Majesty of their
Masters Arms: so as so many Negotiations and pieces of cunning being
discovered, instead of the advantage that was thereby hoped, he reaped loss and
danger: Spinola had found out his continual treating with the French under one
pretense or another: he knew what Victuals and Ammunition he had promised, and
what moneys he had received for them: he saw him continue to provide for
Cassalle, prepare conduct moneys for the passage of their men, and make many
shows of being in favor with that Court, or of not being able to be otherwise;
he grew very jealous also of the Prince his going into France, which though it
proved to no purpose, yet it was very probable that he was sent thither to
treat of some great concernment: so as Spinola was so far from crediting the
Dukes Proposals, and from believing that he would appear against the French; as
the same change which his Agents promised in his behalf lessened his belief,
and made him proceed with more circumspection, fearing, and notwithout reason,
that the Duke would promise as much to the French against him, by whom he had
already been so severely dealt with; and that, either out of resentment, or for
the imminent danger of the French, ^r for the high conditions the Cardinal
would give him, he would do the same Metamorphosis against him, as he now
promised to do in prejudice to the French; and being loath to hazard the main
point upon such uncertainty, he waited for better counsel and safer resolves,
as the event should fall out: but the Cardinal did no less abhor the Dukes ways
then did Spinola; since they tended to bring him to follow his will, to wage
war as he listed, to ^n the Kings Forces, which were destined to protect an
oppressed Prince, to the profecution of his vast ends and his revenge, and that
against other Princes, against whom they were not intended; and in fine, to
change the Kings designs and enterprises with those of his own, and (as if he
were his servant) to be ready to do what the Duke listed, if he would have his
friendship: holding therefore these pretentions to be too high, and the price
of such an union too exorbitant, he would not listen to new Treaties, but
threatened to force him to perform Agreement; wherefore he would not so much as
speak with the Prince, who being come to Savoy desired to Negotiate with him,
but referred the Treaty till he should be come to Piedmont; and for the better
proof of his resolution, endeavoring to make the Duke the more afraid, he went
from Lions toward the Alps, leaving the Marshal dela Force there to gather the
Army together, and to bring it to Piedmont.

The Duke had fortified Auvigliana (as has been said) and had well munited it,
and was gone thither with the body of his Army to defend it; his Army consisted
of 12000 Foot, and about 3000 Horse: and knowing that the Cardinal must needs
drive him from thence if he would relieve Casalle, and that he could not sit
down before Auvigliana for want of victuals, nor relieve Casalle, he feared not
his threats; for not having wherewithal to feed his Army, nor wherewith to
succor Casalle, he must either agree with him, or waste himself idly in Susa,
or return with shame into France; and therefore the nearer he saw the Cardinal
come with a numerous Army, the more advantage he thought he had of treating, or
certainty of victory; and consequently he continued the stiffer in his
pretenses, and propounded the more difficulties in what he was much pressed unto
by the French, and by Marshal Crickey; So as the Cardinal being come from Lions
into Ambrano, and hearing there, much contrary to what he expected, that the
Duke continued in his obdurateness, and that it was impossible to alter him,
he for a while forbore the course which, when he parted from Lions, he thought
would be so dreadful to the Duke; For finding that to go against the Dukes
will, to relieve Casalle, (which was the chief cause of that expedition) was no
better then to hazard himself and his Army upon manifest ruin, as also the
Kings Honor, and the whole enterprise, he began to find by experience, how
unreasonable it was, upon these terms, and in the present conjuncture of
affairs, to justle with him when he was backed by the Spanish and Dutch Forces;
Wherefore allaying his heat, he began to treat more moderately with him, and
endeavored to make him pliable with satisfactory proposalls, that he might
bring him to join with the Kings Forces in that enterprise, and interest
himself really in relieving Casalle; but his lenitives proved as vain as did
his threats; For although the Duke had all his demands, (how strange, and how
extraordinary soever) granted him, yet still pretending greater things, and
turning back from what he had agreed unto, he used delays, to the end that
thereby the difficulties and necessities of the French Army might the mean
while grow greater, insomuch as the Cardinal being come to Susa, where he spoke
with the Prince, who was come to Bossolano to visit him, he did not only not
come to any conclusion, but did not so much as begin to treat; For the Prince,
who when he went to Savoy to negotiate with him could not so much as be allowed
audience, being willing to resent that usage, the ceremonial part being past,
would not propound any thing, pretending that it was the Cardinal who was to
make the first proposals, and make an overture to the business. The reasons of
this obdurancy, and so great aversion in the Duke, may, many of them, be
gathered from the then present circumstances and occasions: For to the many
injuries received from the French and from the Cardinal, and to the abusive
peace of Montsone, was added the Cardinals proud carriage toward the Prince,
not admitting him, when he came to treat, so much as to come within his
presence, whereof the Duke had wont to complain much; and conceiving thereby,
and by other proceedings, that the Cardinal was not only very averse to his
interests, but bent to ruin him, he thought that no offers nor agreements
would be observed unto him: nay, the greater the things were which the present
necessity might force him to, he thought the effecting of them would be the
harder afterward, and the more odious; Wherefore fearing that he might be
deceived, he would not change the present time for the future: the Kings coming
to Susa, and the conventions which he was forced to give way unto there,
touched him to the quick; and as ^e thought himself fallen from that opinion,
wherein he desired to be held, of being able to keep the French out of Italy,
or bring them in as he listed: so he imagined there was no better, nor no more
opportune remedy to he I so sore a wound, then to oppose their passage now, and
by the total ruin of the enterprise and of their Army, to leave a perpetual
example to the French, how necessary it was for them to esteem him as the only
Porter of the Alps; and for the Spaniards to put a value upon him, and to treat
him with advantageous conditions, as the Bulwark of Italy, and of the state of
Millain; this was the highest pitch of his Grandezza, this the very sense of
his soul; and having fixed his eye upon this, as upon a mark to shoot at, he
thought that if he should hit it, all occasions that could be from the French
came short of it; it was also thought that he feared lest when the Cardinal
should see himself in great power and safety by his joining with him, he might
afterward make peace with the Spaniard, excluding his interests; just as it
happened at the peace of Monsone; so as hating to join expressly with either
party, whereby he was to make himself subject to one of them, and an enemy to
the other, he was constant to his neutrality, whereby he was superior to them
both; yet he broke not with any of them: but cloaking his actions with
neutrality, he fenced himself with tergiversations. Neither would the French,
who needed him exceedingly, break with him; but dissembling all the hard usage
they met with, endeavored to win him over to declare for them; and they (so
well knew they the advantage of his joining with them) abusing their patience,
left nothing undone which might not prejudice them, though little to their
honor; the Cardinal agreed for provision of victuals, with some of the Dukes
subjects, and bargained with some others for the conducting of such as were in
Nizza, to ease his present necessities. The Duke made them all be imprisoned;
but not being able without apparent contumacy to deny the conduct of such as
were in Nizza, since he had already received moneys for their conduct, he would
appoint the conductors himself; who depending wholly upon him brought more or
less, according as he pleased. But the Army not being able to continue longer
thus, and the Cardinal being either to break with him, or unworthily waste his
Army, or return with shame to France, before he would break, he would make the
last trial; He promised that he would assault some place in the state of
Millain, provided that the Duke would furnish Casalle with victuals, the Duke
either did not, or did not seem to refuse the proposals; Whereupon the Cardinal
made his Van advance, consisting of 7000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, under Marshal
Cricky; and going himself out of Susa with the body of the Army came to
Cazalletto, a place near Avigliana; and the Duke sent good store of victuals to
Casalle: which finding that the Van being come to Rivas, a Town in Montferrat,
did not prosecute the voyage, he made them stay; pre^ending that the Van alone
could not do any thing of moment against the state of Millain, so as it was
necessary that the rest of the Army should follow: The Cardinal was mightily
troubled to be thus used, perceiving that those very tricks were used to him,
which he used to others; For as this marching of the Van was feignedly
pe^formed by the Cardinal, to make the Duke put victuals into Casalle; so the
Dukes sending of victuals appeared to be counterfeit, to the end that he might
make the Cardinal come out of Susa with his Army, where he had as yet some
provisions wherewith to subsist, to the end that he might bring him to before
the Spanish and the Cesarean Armies without victuals, and be but badly backed by
the remainder of his Army which tarried behind; So as he might either be
overcome by Famine without fighting, or (if he should fight) he might be
miserably destroyed: And the more to witness the Dukes bad intentions, it was
added, that notwithstanding that he had good store of moneys disburst unto him
per le Tappe, and other quarterings, he would not permit that the Army should
pass by the usual way that it was to march, and which leads from Susa to
Avigliana, where the way was more commodious, broader, and where there was
better quartering, but made it pass by the way of Condove and Cassalette,
which lies on the left hand, very improper for the Foot, much more for the
Horse, and for the carriage of the Artillery; where there was no order nor
provision for quarter, and where they were to suffer both hunger and cold:
insomuch as the Army which tarried here some days had perished, had not some
remainder of victuals which were yet left in Susa been brought thither; But
this not being able to maintain them long, and the Duke pressing them to
advance, the Cardinal thought it not fit to pursue that voyage, and leave
Avigliana behind him, where the Duke was with all his men: Wherefore he
answered, that if the Duke would have him advance, he must furnish him with
victuals, and declare openly for the King, and remove the impediment of
Avigliana, which (in the condition it was in) would not suffer him to advance;
The Duke replied, that the great scarcity of victuals must excuse him from
sending in provisions, that he could not declare against the Emperor who was
his Sovereign Lord, from whom he held so many Territories in fee; and as for
Avigliana, that he was not bound, as the Rebels of France, to demolish his
Towns to pave the way for the Kings Army; but (that to free himself of all
jealousies) he was ready to take some of his men out of Avigliana; to which
purpose he drew from thence about 7000 foot, but he placed them in the guard of
the Bridges and Passes, by which when the French should be past LaDora, they
might assault him; which the Cardinal perceiving, he resolved to use force, and
to go against the Duke when he should be past Dora, who tarried with some of
his men in Rivoli: and to this purpose was Cricky sent for back from Rivas,
where he continued still, with the Van; the Duke was aware of this, and did not
fear it; for having munited Avigliana and Torino well, the places whereupon he
thought the French were likeliest to fall, he hoped he might hold them play
there, till such time as the Cesarian Army, and Spinola's might advance; and
finding them encamped before those places might easily rout them, in case they
should not long before be made to quit the enterprise for want of victuals. But
a new and unthought of accident altered the state of affairs; the Duke going
that very night from Rivoli, went to Torino, and abandoning the Bridges and
Passes of the River, which the French were to assault the next morning, he
afforded them convenience to pass over the River without any impediment; This
so sudden and unexpected change was attributed to some knowledge that the Duke
had got of some treaties held by the Cardinal in Torino, where there were then
many French, and amongst them two of Cricky's Sons; who as soon as they heard
the Duke was entered the City retired to the Army; whereat the Duke being
mightily offended, he made the chief of the French that remained in the Town be
imprisoned, as accomplices of plots and treaties, and published a manifesto in
print; wherein he complained bitterly of the Cardinal, that whilst he was
entered his Dominions as a friend, and whilst he had furnished him with victuals
and other things, to the great prejudice of his own people, (from whose mouths
he had pulled it) he had endeavored to oppress him with plots and treaties
within his own doors, only for not having joined his Forces with the French,
against his Sovereign Lord the Emperor, and against the King of Spain, to whom
he had no reason to profess himself an Enemy; wherefore declaring himself
openly for the Emperor and King of Spain against the French, he made new and
more urgent dispatches to Spinola and to Collalto, to make them advance with
all possible speed to relieve Piedmont; promising them full and assured victory
over the Enemy, who were straightened by so many necessities: of which victory
the happy end of the enterprises of Mantua and Casalle would be the undoubted
result. The Cardinal was in great confusion at this the Dukes sudden and
unexpected resolution, his Army being in great danger to be lost for to send
men to Casalle, and no victuals would rather be a trouble then an ease to the
Town; to keep idle where he was was impossible, for want of victuals; and
dangerous, lest the Enemy might come upon them; to sit down before Avigliana or
Torino, would be a desperate and ruinous business; So (as in so great
confusion and difficulty) he knew no better course to take, then to send a
Messenger to the Duke; who treating with him, and with the Princess Royal of
Piedmont, might mitigate the Dukes severity, and bring him to more moderate
counsels; But neither did this do any good; for the Duke being angry with the
Cardinal, minded nothing but revenge, and the total ruin of that Army, and
utterly to overthrow the Cardinals fortune; who out of private Emulation, and
big with Hatred and Ambition, brought the Kings Forces to triumph over his, and
thought to make his Name remarkable to the Princes of the present age, and
immortal to future times; He therefore neither admitted of the Messenger, nor
would he suffer him to speak with the Princess Royal, nor with the
Ambassadors of other Princes, who were resident in his Court. Wherefore the
Cardinal, forced by necessity, changed the defensive war which was intended in
favor to Nevers, into war offensive against the Duke of Savoy, by whom he held
himself to be so unworthily dealt with; he therefore sacked Rivoli and the
neighboring Towns: but thinking this too weak a resentment, and unworthy his
Grandezza, he turned upon Pinarollo, whither having sent Cricky with the Van,
he followed him the next day with the rest of his Army; a resolution which was
certainly necessary in so desperate a condition, but very uncertain and
dangerous; for if that place had been so well provided as the importancy
thereof, and the present condition of affairs required, and consequently the
Cesarean and Spanish Armies had had time to succor it, the French must
necessarily either have come to a battle upon disadvantage, or have foregone
the Enterprise with much danger and confusion, and have shamefully returned to
Susa, where, if assaulted, they could hardly have held out, but must have been
enforced to receive such Laws as the Conquerours should please to prescribe
them, to the entire loss of that Glory which they had won upon that very place
the year before: But Fortune, which uses to change in points of extremity,
raised the Cardinals condition to the highest pitch of felicity, which appeared
to be ruined; and precipitated the Dukes Affairs almost into utter destruction,
which seemed to be placed on the height of happiness: For the Duke somewhat
doubting that place, where he knew there was no other defense but the Garrison
which was usually kept there in time of Peace, sent thither a great recruit of
men the very day that the Army removed from Rivoli; but it being given out in
the Army, that it went to Turin; and those that went with the Artillery
thinking that they were to continue their march according to their former
Orders, before the consultations had against Pinarollo were discovered, drove
on to Turin; and the Duke, who by reason of the said consultations doubted lest
he might be assaulted, recalled that recruit of men which he but a little
before had sent to Pinarollo, and kept them to defend the chief City; so as
Pinarollo being deprived of that recruit, and the Duke not being of himself
able to march into the field to defend it, could not hold out long against the
French; for the Van being come thither on the 20th of March, and having placed
their battery upon the ditch, the City yielded without making any resistance:
They had somewhat more to do to take the Castle, which held out somewhat longer
for the Duke.

This success did totally alter the face of Affairs; the Cardinal having time
to breathe amidst so great streights, to boot with having made way for the
bringing of victuals and provisions from France, brought the neighboring Towns
of Piedmont to Contribution, which abounded in Victuals; and by keeping that
and Susa in his possession, might not only advance to further acquisitions, but
secure the restitution of Cassalle, if it should be taken by the Spaniards: and
now that he had so good pledges in his hands, he might treat of Peace upon
better conditions, the relief of Cassalle not being so necessary as before. On
the contrary, the Duke being by the loss of this place fallen from his
advantageous condition, could no longer keep the French Army from Victuals, nor
make it depend upon his will, as formerly, in respect of relieving Cassalle;
nor could he keep the Spaniards any longer from being jealous of his joining
with the French; but on the contrary, it behoved him not only to depend upon
the Cardinal, and be subject to his will, who being Master of Pinarollo might
prejudice Piedmont in several manners; but also upon Spinola's pleasure, by the
necessity he was in of being assisted by his Forces against the French, who
were got into the bowels of his State; so as being of a sudden saln from being
the Arbitrator of Peace and War (as he held himself to be) to be subject to the
pleasures of both parties, it behoved him wholly to forego those high conceits
by which he thought to give Law to all, and to submit himself to be disposed of
by those who could readily and powerfully either defend or indammage him.

Spinola, who being wholly bent upon Peace, would never supply the Duke either
with men or moneys, being awakened by the coming and the progress of the French
Army, began to be of another mind, and to make more haste in providing for War;
he therefore sent into Germany and Naples, to hasten the coming of the men that
were ready there, and into Spain for more moneys; and minding chiefly the
safety of the State of Millain, he began to build a great Fort near Sartiranna,
and another upon the Poe, over against Valenza, and a third at Villata; he
threw one Bridge over at Villata, and another between Valenza and the new Fort;
so he thought that that part of the State which was near the great Garrison of
Cassalle was safe enough; and hearing that the French were gone to Pinarolo, he
sent Don Martin d' Aragona to assist the Duke with the Van, consisting of 4000
Foot, and 600 Horse; and he himself expecting the Legate in Alessandria, who
came to treat of Peace, tarried there to assemble the rest of the Army, and
therewithal himself in person to defend Piedmont; but were it either that the
ways being broken down by continual rain hindered the speed of his march, or
that thinking it impossible to come time enough to relieve the Castle of
Pinarolo, he thought that the Castle, since it was to be lost, might be lost
before his Kings Forces appeared; or else, (as many were of opinion) that
Spinola was not yet very sure of the Dukes Friendship, and that therefore he
was not displeased with that loss, which forced the Duke to join with the King
of Spain's party, out of necessity of being assisted in recovering what he had
lost; the Affairs belonging to that expedition went not on so fast or with such
fervor as was outwardly professed.

When the Legate was come to Alessandria, he spoke with Spinola, and with the
Marquess of San Croce, who was come from Genoa to be present at that
Conference; he found a great inclination to Peace in them, and was therewith
well pleased; for Spinola and San Croce offered to do any thing so as the
French would restore the Towns in Piedmont, and would return into France: they
promised to restore Nevers into peaceful possession of Mantua and Montferrat,
and to invest him duly thereinto; to restore the Forts and Places taken from
the Grisons; that the Emperors Army should return to Germany; and the
disbanding of the Spanish Army which was in Italy.

The Cardinal parted from Alessandria with these Proposals, and went toward
Piedmont to treat with the Duke of Savoy, and with the Cardinal of From, in
whom he found not such a willingness to Peace; first, the Cardinal alleging,
That it became not the honor of the King of France his Forces to enter into a
Treaty, whilst the enterprise which they had in hand, of the Castle of
Pinarollo, was not finished; and he would not enter into discourse with the
Legate, who tarried fifteen days in Turrin to that end; at the end whereof the
Castle being surrendered, the Cardinal fell to begirt the Town with Bulwarks
Royal, and fortified the Castle, making that Town impregnable; which (as it was
then judged, and was afterward better confirmed by success) the French never
intended to restore, but to make it a Rendezvous for Arms in Italy, which might
serve as a curb to Piedmont, and to the Dukes of Savoy, keep the State of
Millain in a perpetual jealousy, and might serve for an excellent door to the
King of France for greater enterprises, which he might design unto himself, if
he should have occasion to send his Armies over the Alps. Bricherasco was taken
soon after, being near Pinarollo, at the foot of the Alps, well fortified and
munited: not long after the surrender of the Castle of Pinarollo, Colalto and
Spinela came to Piedmont, and with Spinola came San Croce and the Duke of
Lerma; and after them some of the Cesarian and some of the Spanish Army: a
Consultation was held in Carmagnuola touching the whole affair: The Duke of
Savoy's opinion was, that foregoing the enterprises of Mantua and Casalle for
the present, they should go with all their joint Forces to the recovery of
Pinarollo and Susa, and that they should endeavor to drive the French beyond
the Mountains; for when Italy should be freed of them, both Mantua and Casalle,
as not being able to hold out without them, would fall of themselves,
especially since Casalle not having victuals, would soon surrender; and the
Duke promised on the faith of a Prince, that it should not be relieved with
victuals; and to the end, that each Commander of each Army, as well the
Emperors, as the King of Spains, might willingly agree to this, he offered to
leave Piedmont free to be disposed of by them, to the end, that they might
manage their war there as they listed; and that he, contenting himself with
12000 Foot and 1500 Horse, would go with them into Savoy, and from thence into
Dolpheny; where mastering the ways which lead to Italy, he would hinder
Commerce between France and the Army which was busied in defending Pinarollo,
in such sort, as that Army not being able to be recruited either with Men,
Victuals or Money from France, should either be forced to perish there, or
abandoning Italy and Piedmont, should return to France; and the French being
thus kept from making opposition, Casalle and Mantua would easily be reduced:
all of them except Spinola, did in part approve, and in part disapprove of the
Dukes Proposal: all of them agreed that for the present they should forego the
enterprises of Mantua and Casalle, and that they should march with their joint
Forces to recover the Dukes Towns, and to drive the French out of Italy; but
the other part of the Dukes advice was not generally agreed unto, for what
concerned carrying the war with part of the Forces beyond the Mountains; for
this opinion appeared to be as dangerous, as the other of joining in the
recovery of the Towns of Piedmont was useful and requisite: but Spinola, were
it either that he knew the mind of the Spanish Court, or out of the apparent
advantage which would be had by the getting of Casalle, or that ^e thought it
but vain to go about recovering the places which were lost, whilst the way for
relief was open behind them, or that he was jealous that the Duke might change
his mind if the French should offer to restore his Towns, held it better not to
expose the main Forces, the safety of affairs, and of the Kings Dominions, and
his own reputation, upon the Dukes bare word, which he did not much rely upon,
upon the uncertainty of Success, lest the Kings men might be worsted by the
French, and that they should find difficulty in retreating, in case that any
agreement should be made between the Duke and the French; wherefore opposing
the opinion of the whole Council, wherein the chief Commanders of the Army did
intervene, and also opposing San' Croce, he was of opinion, that Colalto should
tarry with the most of his men to oppose the French, and that he himself should
with the remainder attend the expugning of Casalle: from which resolution
neither the Dukes entreaty, nor the contrary opinion of the whole Council, nor
any other inconvenience which was urged might be prejudicial to the common
affairs, could divert him: he therefore sent his Son Don Philip with 5000 Foot
and 500 Horse to the recovery of Pontestura, San' Georgio, and Lusignano, all
of them being near Casalle, which (as has been said) were held and garrisoned
by the French; and he himself staid in Turin, to assist, in the Treaty of
peace, which after the loss of Pinarollo was reassumed by the Legate.

The Duke of Savey was not a little incensed at this constant resolution of
Spinola; and that not so much for that he saw himself deprived of his
assistance and of a good part of the Spanish Army, as for sear that if Casalle
should be taken, the Spaniards would be less fervent in defending him, and in
recovering his lost Towns: A consideration which had he not been blinded by his
own interest, he might suppose might oblige Spinola as much to endeavor the
taking of Casalle anticipately, as it was probable that the Duke, whose
Interests the taking of Casalle did oppose, when he should have recovered his
Towns in Piedmont, should use his best means to keep Casalle from being taken,
as he had done formerly. Colalto was likewise much troubled at this resolution
of Spinola's, being wrought upon by the Duke of Savoy's persuasions, and as
some will say, by his great donatives; for he, favoring the Dukes Cause, as if
the Common Cause were concerned therein, desired it might be taken into
consideration in the first place; so as to boot with the emulation which was
already grown between them, not only diversity of opinions, but distastes arose
upon this occasion, from whence much prejudice did r^dound to the main affair;
which being distracted by the several interests, and emulations of private men,
was subject to great hazards, just like a Ship which is agitated by contrary
winds: so as Collalto not willing to be left alone to prosecute the business
of Piedmont, withdrew to the Army before Mantua; saying publicly, that if
others would prefer their Prince his particular cause, before what was the
common concernment, he was likewise obliged to prefer the business of Mantua,
wherein the Emperor was particularly interessed, before that of Casalle or
Piedmont. The Legate being this mean while gone to Pinarollo, had acquainted
Cardinal Richelieu with what had been agreed unto in Alessandria by Spinola,
and San' Croce: he found him willing to yield to all save to what concerned the
restitution of Pinarollo; which he said it was necessary for him to keep, as
well out of the pretenses which the King of France laid thereunto, as for the
security of Nevers his affairs, and of the peace which was to be concluded,
which having been violated many times (as he said) on the Spanish side, he
might justly fear it might meet again with some troubles, when he should be
past back over the Mountains: but it was rather thought that he refused to
restore Pinarolio, out of private ambition; for he was very proud of having
gotten a place of such importance for the Kings affairs; and as France was much
grieved when Pinarollo was restored to the Father of this present Prince, by
Henry the Third, King of France, so being now as much pleased with the recovery
thereof, the Cardinal would not, together with the advantage of the
acquisition, lose the perpetual glory of having done so great a benefit to the
Crown or France: but this being a point of such importance for the conclusion
or exclusion of peace, in which things belonging to others are usually
restored, the retaining thereof was now discussed, only as being contrary to
the title pretended unto by the Kings Forces; wherein Richelieu mitigated the
Proposal, and reduced the retention thereof to the space of two years, offering
the Duke Montcalvo, and some other Towns in Montferrat in pawn for the
restoring of it: but this being held to be yet too hard a condition, wherein
the observance of the agreement was reduced to the Arbitrament of the French,
who when Casalle and Mantua should be freed, it was hard to say what they would
have done; it was finally proposed, that the Dutch should keep the Towns taken
from the Grisons, and the French those of the Dukes, till such time as the
affairs of Italy should be adjusted within fifteen days; which when they should
be adjusted and composed, whatsoever was retained should be by both sides
restored. Spinola listened to this Proposal, which he thought to be more
moderate, insomuch as discoursing thereof in the presence of the Duke of Savoy,
and of the other Commanders, he said that he would readily agree thereunto, if
the time of restitution might be prolonged for the space of two months; the
Duke who was already very much unsatisfied with Spinola, could not give way to
such a length of time; but letting his anger burst out which till then he had
kept in, he exclaimed very much upon him, as did Colalto also; and it being
discovered that there was speech of a meeting between the Cardinal and Spinola,
and that intelligence was held between them, the jealousy grew greater; both
of them being found to be no well-wishers to the Duke. This suspicion was much
fomented by the friendship which was contracted between them, when Spinola in
his passage from Flanders to Spain, went to the Camp before Rochel, to kiss the
Kings hand; where being received with unusual favors by the Cardinal, the
Cardinal was much commended by a relation which Spinola made to the King of the
well ordering of that Siege, and by his assuring him of happy and speedy
success, if the same course should be still taken; and to all this it was
added, that a dispatch which was at this very time sent to Spinola being
intercepted, Richelieu sent it to him close sealed as it was, and unbroken up,
which being known by the Duke, afforded him much cause of jealousy. Thus the
Treaty of peace being broken, preparation was made for war; and the Duke
resenting Spinola's usage, sent the Abbot Scaglia to complain unto the King of
Spinola's strange and rigorous proceedings, tending not only to the prejudice
of him the Duke, but to the dis-service of the Kings affairs, and of the common
cause, which could receive no advantage by the Dukes dis-satisfaction; and he
made his Daughter in Law complain of the Cardinal in the Court of France, but
particularly to the Queen Mother; who though she had been very well pleased
formerly with the Cardinals greatness, began to be jealous of him now, by
reason of his too great authority, and of the credit which he had won with the
King; so as it was in several manners ill spoken of; some accusing him of too
great hatred to the Duke; that being ordered to deal friendly with him, his
only endeavors in this expedition had been to incense him, and by his ill
usage to alienate him from the Kings interest: some accused him of want of
experience in Military affairs; some of injustice and violence, who had turned
those Forces which were destined to defend an injured Prince, to oppress
another who was so near allied to the King, a Friend and Confederate of the
Crown, to the great scandal of the Kings Forces, to the danger of the
enterprise, and of that Army, wherein were so many Lords and Commanders;
wherefore finding himself complained of, and apprehending the Kings
displeasure, whereinto he might run by his absence, he left the management of
affairs in Piedmont with the Marshals dela Force and Scomberg, and returned
with Cricky into France; whither when he was come, and had given an account of
his action, and of what streights the Duke had put him in, he had much adoto
clear himself from the faults which were laid to his charge by his illwillers.

Thus went the Duke about to prejudice the Cardinals fortune by his endeavors,
which he could never overthrow by his Forces, nor by his so many Plots and
Stratagems. Whilst the business of peace was debated in Turin, Don Philippo
Spinola was got near Pontestura, and had begirt it on all sides; and began his
Batteries: the French had begun some unperfect Fortifications, and those of
Casalle, that the longer that place held out, the longer might they themselves
be preserved; they thought good to lessen their own Garrison and Provisions,
and employ them in the defense of Pontestura, hoping that by gain of time they
might the better mind their own Fortifications: but the effects proved
otherwise, for on the fourth day the defendants began to parley, and on the
fifth, agreed to surrender the Town, upon all the conditions they could desire,
except that they were not to enter into Casalle, nor tarry in Italy, and they
were bound to leave all their victuals and provisions behind them. Thus Don
Philip became master of this place, and made the French go to Finale, and from
thence to Marcelles, with little reputation: from hence he went to St. George
his Castle, which was not above a mile and a half from Casalle, where there
were but twelve French men in Garrison, besides the Townsmen, who were very
well armed and prepared for defense: here they met with more resistance, for
the defendants refusing to surrender, Don Philip began his Mines, which he
began to make upon the Flank of a Tower; but they did no good, by reason of
artificial fireworks, which being thrown from off the Walls, burnt the
pent-houses which sheltered the workmen; so they were forced to work further
off, in a better covered place; where being safer, they slew some of the
defendants, amongst which the Captain of the French; whereupon the rest fearing
to be served so likewise, surrendered upon the same Articles that Pontestura had
done, but not with the like infamy.

Rossigliano remained yet untaken, where there were about 300 French and
Montferrians; this place being cut off from Casalle by the loss of St. Georgio,
it was thought it would be loss of time to attempt it, since it could not
prejudice Casalle: but Spinola, to whom Don Philip writ, sending word that they
should proceed on, they went thither; the place was strong enough and seated
high; Marquess Moncausier the chief of the French Garrison was Governor, a
young sprightly man, desirous of fame, and to make amends by his valor for the
obloquie that was laid by all men upon the French for having defended
Pontestura so poorly: so the business proved somewhat longer and more
difficult: the defendants upon the enemies appearance came forth, and after
some skirmishing retreated into the Town; to which the enemy drew near, making
their approaches on three sides, and on two sides their Batteries: but all
their attempts, which were many, were manfully withstood, and the Siege was
held out for 15 days: but at last, a mine being made in the third approach, to
boot with their batteries, they were forced to yield upon the same conditions
as Pontestura had done, only Moncausier, with some others, were permitted to go
into Casalle; which being blocked up by the loss of these places, and kept from
all succor and victuals, and fearing to be shortly assaulted by Spinola's
whole Army, it was not likely to hold out long: yet the French that were in it
were not dismayed, but hearing that a company of the Dukes Horse were quartered
in Morano, beyond the Poe, they went out by night, and passing over the River
in Boats, they fell upon them at unawares, killed many of them, and brought many
of them prisoners into Casalle. Spinola seeing the peace not effected, left
about 6000 Foot in Piedmont, under the Camp-masters, Don Martined' Aragona,
Antoni^dal Taffo, Nicola Doria, and Baron Shamburgs, and 1000 Horse under
Ierardo Gambacorti, Governor of the Neopolitan Horse, with Orders to them all
to obey the Prince of Piedmont, and he himself went to the Siege of Casalle;
and taking his leave of the Duke, he excused the necessity of this his
resolution, upon the account of the great Garrison of French which was in
Casalle, which keeping the State of Millain, and part of Piedmont in jealousy,
no reason of war would permit that that Rendezvous for the enemies Arms should
be suffered, by reason of the great inconveniences which might result from
thence; all their joint Forces being in Piedmont; and being confident, out of
his experience in taking in of Towns, and by the opinion of his Captains, that
the Town could not hold out for above 40 days: he promised the Duke that when
it should be taken, he would return with all his Forces to assist him: Colalto
also parted from Piedmont, leaving between three or four thousand Dutch there
under the Baron Gallaaso, who were put in Garrison in Avigliana. Spinola begun
the taking of Casalle about the end of May, not being resolved whether he
should attempt it by Storm or by Siege: though they hoped the Siege would not
prove long, by reason of the small quantity of victuals that were in it; yet
calculating that the number of defendants were lessened, by the sending of men
into the Towns which were taken but a little before, it was judged that
storming would prove the safer and the shorter way; the rather for that the
Forces of the French Army being sufficiently diminished, the fear of their
opposition was proportionably lessened: wherefore it was thought better to
dispute the business by force of Arms, then streightning it by Famine to depend
upon the success of a Siege, which through uncertain and false calculations
proves more uncertain and more falacious: but were it either that his felicity
followed him not, but was fixed to the Belgic soil, or that the several ends
and emulations of the Chieftains who managed that war did turmoil his genius,
or that his death, which shortly happened, cut off the thread of his excellent
fortune, he was forced to succumb in this. The Duke di Mena, Nevers his second
Son, commanded in Casalle; a young man, and but little experienced in Arms; so
as his person served for little more then for the authority and reputation of
the Government and conduct of Affa^rs, and to keep concord amongst the
Captains, and Military obedience: in the Citadel was only a Garrison of
Montferrians, under the same Marquess of Rivara, who had withstood the former
oppugnation: the French, being 2000 Foot and 300 Horse, defended the City and
the Citadel, who were commanded by Marshal di Toras, one who had won the same
of much valor, and the opinion of being excellent at the keeping of Towns, by
his singular and valiant defending of the Isle of Rees, which lies over against
Rochel, against a treble assault of the English Fleet: the chief
Fortifications, when Toras came thither, were only toward the Poe and toward
the Plain, where it was assaulted by Don Gonzallo: it was but little or not at
all fortified toward the Hill; and Toras searing to be assaulted on that side,
was very industrious in fortifying it: the Citadel had no outworks nor
Fortifications, save two Halfmoons; the one of which sheltered the Gate whereby
relief was brought; the other that which was toward the City. Toras made
another very great one, doubly begirt, between the two bulwarks of the Citadel,
where he apprehended to be assaulted. Neither were these provisions made in
vain; for Spinola thinking this the fittest place, began four approaches from
thence; the first whereof was committed to the care of the Camp master
Filomarini his Neapolitans, and was directed against that part of the City
which is called de Treventi, and lay under some Fortifications which were built
upon a rise without the City; and the wall of the City, together with that of
the Castle, making an angle inwards, which the Assailants were to play upon,
the onset on that side was the more hard and dangerous: the other approaches
led straight upon the two Bulwarks of the Citadel, betwixt which Toras had made
his Half moon: to the first whereof, which was more inward, and nearer the Gate
which leads to Turin, were two approaches made, the first by the Spaniards
commanded by the Duke of Lerma, the other by the Dutch who were commanded by
Shamburgs Lieutenant: the fourth approach, which was against the Bulwark, from
whence the Campagnia is first discovered, fell to the Lombards share, under the
two Camp-masters, Trotti and Sforza. Thus the Trenches being begun to be
opened, every one endeavored to come speedily to what was intended; this mean
while Don Ieronymo Augustini, being left in V^llata to guard that Frontier, by
Spinola's Order drew near the Poe, over against Casalle; and that he might
streighten the Town the more on that side, he took up his Quarters there,
wherein he was not well fortified when he began to attempt the nearest Island,
upon which those of the City had made some Fortifications, for it was of great
consequence for the safety of the City and of the Mills which were not far from
thence; foo^ding over the River with his Horses fastened together,
notwithstanding that he was played upon by Musket Shot from the Walls and from
the Forts, he advanced so far as he became master of the Island, with the death
of 300 French, part whereof were slain, part drowned in the Poe, which is very
deep, and runs very swift between the Island and the City: This being the first
action attempted by those without upon such disadvantage, and yet with such
courage and vigor, and proving so fortunate to the assailants, and so
prejudicial to the assaulted, did much discourage the Cassalians, who were not
accustomed all the preceding year to so fierce and bloody sport; and the
baseness of the French, here, being added to that which they showed in
defending Pontestura, they began to fear the worst, and to confide but little
in the Soldiers of that Nation, upon whom they had formerly built so much: But
Toras had occasion soon enough to signalize himself and his Soldiers, in an
other action which he attempted with no less Judgment and Valor then
Fortune, whereby he won Reputation to himself and to his men, and revived the
almost extinct credit of the French in the Montferrians; he was aware that the
Lombards that were working upon the fourth approach had not as yet finished a
redoubt, and that those who were to guard it were negligent, believing that
those who were within, having already lost their Reputation, would not dare to
assault them, he sallied forth with about 400 of his best and most experienced
Foot, and with 50 Horse; and falling upon them at unawares, cut them all in
pieces; And not tarrying here, he past on to the second redoubt, which being
abandoned by three Ensigns, who with some of their companies had the keeping
thereof, he easily mastered it; Then passing forward to the third, with like
Valor and like hope, he failed in his intent by the resistance he met with
there, and by reason of the Horse which came in, led on by Count Soragna; so as
being forced to give back, he retreated to underneath the shelter of the
Citadel, with more prejudice to the Enemy then to his own men, having slain
three Captains and many Officers, and having wounded Count Soragna mortally,
who died soon after, and killed above fourscore Soldiers, and wounded many
more. This action did much encourage the defendants, and made the enemy more
cautious, and delayed the making of the approaches; the which the more they
advanced, were more subject to danger, to loss of men and delay; the
defendants failed not to sally out both by day and night, with sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser loss to each side. Whilst they wrought thus with
more toil and danger before Casalle, business cooled in Piedmont; when the
Cardinal and Cricky went away, the managing of the power was left (as you have
heard) to the Marshals De La Force and Scomburg; and Scomburg, who went
afterward to France, was succeeded by the Duke of Momorancy; who distributing
their men in Pinorollo, and in Brischerasco, stood more upon defense then
offense; For many of their Commanders and Officers were gone from France, many
of their Soldiers had done so likewise, or were run away, and the Plague had
played his part amongst them, and the Duke having sent about 10000 Foot into
Savoy, under Prince Thomaso, to defend Savoy, fearing lest it might be invaded
and possessed by the King, made of the rest of his Soldiery a body of 15000
Foot, and 3000 Horse, made up of his own men, and of the King of Spain's men
which were left him by Spinola; which together with the Dutch were still
increased, by the continual recruits which were sent in by Spinola and
Collalto: And going into the field he encamped at Pancareli, a Town beyond the
Poe, toward the Alps, 15 miles from Pinarollo; and fortifying it with
Trenches, he stood observing what the French would do, that he might oppose
them. The French had their eyes upon Vigone, which though it were an open Town,
yet of much concernment for the Corn that was in it; they went thither very
strong and assaulted it; But the Prince of Piedmont coming in with some
companies of Carabines and Musketeers, they were repulsed. Wherefore they
turned to Cercenasco, a Castle not far from thence, very convenient for their
falling down into Carignano, where there is a wooden Bridge over the Poe, which
the French desired to be Masters of, it lying conveniently for them to pass
unto Casalle, they took it, and left some to defend it: But the Duke being
desirous to recover it came before it with many men, when the French were
retired to Pinarollo, and at the same time sent Marquis Villa with 1000 Foot,
and 100 Horse, to attempt Bricherasco, formerly taken, as has been said, by
the French, and fortified. The event of these enterprises were different, for
Cercenasco yielded to the Duke within three days, and the Marquess though he
fell upon the Fortifications by night, and was gotten a good way into them, yet
was he forced quickly to retreat, through his men's faults, who being wholly
intent upon booty, afforded those of the Garrison convenience to make head and
to assault them, and to repulse them whilst they were in disorder busy about
booty: The French not content to have beaten them back went with all their
Forces to recover Cercenasco, which they could not endure to loose.

The Duke who was ready with almost all his men to receive them, though he was
inferior to them in Horse, those which were sent to Bricherasco not being yet
returned, Momorancy was desirous to give battle, which if it had been done,
would have been upon much disadvantage to the Duke; but La Force would not give
way thereunto; Wherefore they retreated to their quarters about Pinarollo, and
the Plague increasing very much in both Armies, they kept in their quarters,
for many days, in the face of one another, as if they had been in tacit
League, not doing any thing of moment. The King of France proceeded more hotly
beyond the Mountains, who entering into Savoy with 8000 Foot, and 2000 Horse,
had reduced all Savoy into his power, unless it were Mommiliano, for Prince
Thomaso made no opposition, he resolved to begirt Mommiliano on all sides, and
to besiege it a distance; for it was a strong and almost invincible place: For
being enclosed on all sides by his Forces, and impossible to be relieved, it
must of necessity fall into his hands for want of victuals; So as needing not
many men for that enterprise, he sent part of his Forces to recruit his Army in
Italy, which had need enough of help: And Prince Thomaso being sent for back by
his Father, carried his men with him from Savoy to defend Piedmont. Thus both
Armies b^ing reinforced, they prepared for greater enterprises, the French to
relieve Casalle the Duke to withstand them. This recruit was sent under
Momorancy, who was returned from Piedmont into France, after the business of
Cercenaseo; it consisted of 10000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and ^ell down by the
valley of Susa: Momorancy intending to join with the Forces that were in
Pinarollo, and crossing Piedmont to draw near Casalle, toward which Marshal De
La Force leaving a sufficient Garrison in Pinarollo, and in the other places,
went by the way of the Mountains to Giavenna near Susa, waiting there for
Momorancy* who did not much value Avigliana, there being almost no Garrison
there, for the Duke had sent for the greatest part thereof to Pancaler:
Wherefore he easily took it, he likewise believed he should easily pass
through the Canevese to Casalle, Spinola and the Duke were much troubled at the
coming of this recruit, but much more with the news of the Kings coming with a
greater force; who having possessed himself (as you have heard) of Savoy, was
come near the Alps, and was at the same time seen upon the Mountain St
Barnado; So as the Duke perceiving that the King was offended with him, knew
not how to fence himself against this third coming of the French; and Spinola,
who was engaged before Casalle but with a few men, fearing lest, little to his
honor, he might be forced as his Predecssor had been, to abandon that
enterprise; (which contrary to the opinion of all) he had of himself
undertaken, knew not what to do; Yet b^ing much pressed by the Duke, he sent 6000
Dutch to the Mountain, who were brought at the King of Spain's charge, but very
then, from Germany, and six Troops under Pagan Doria, Duke of Avigliana, in the
Kingdom of Naples, and Brother to Prince Doria a young man, and who the year
before had entered into the Militia under Don Gonsallo, and was in the first
business of Casalle; and Spinola, to the end that if the King should come he
might not be enforced to raise the siege, or fight, took the Soldiers from
working in the approaches, and employed them in making a crooked and high
trench, wherewith he environed the whole Camp. And seeing that by this new
work, and by the men which he had sent the Duke, the siege would be slackned:
and having in vain desired a thousand of his Dutch from Collalto, he sent to
the Commonwealth of Genoa for a thousand men, which he would take into his
pay; But neither was this granted him; for hearing of preparations of Arms in
the Provence, the Commonwealth would not disfurnish her self; and this the
rather for that having formerly sent men to before Casalle, she could not
receive them back when she needed them, without manifest danger of infecting
the State, the Plague being very hot in the Camp before Casalle: So Spinola was
forced to make use of those men to defend his own Camp, which he had begun to
oppose others with; and the Duke of Savoy fearing Avigliana, sent Count Verr^a
from Pancaleri with 3000 Foot, and Gambacorti with 400 Hose, to possess
themselves of the abandoned Trenches and Fortifications, that shut up the
valley which leads from Susa to Avigliana. As they went thither, they found the
Enemy very near; but having possessed themselves of the Trenches first, the
Prince came in with a great body of men, who reinforcing those stations with
2000 Foot, encamped himself with the rest at Riano, within two miles of
Avigliana: both parties kept within their quarters, facing one another two
days, some slight skirmishes passing between them; the third day the French
finding it impossible to advance and storm those quarters, resolved to give
over their going that way to Casalle, and endeavored to retreat jointly by the
Mountain to Pinarollo, and passing over the Mountain Giavenna, to join with La
Force, who was yet there with his men, the way by the Mountain Giavenna was
very narrow and hard to pass; so as two Brigadoes being already past over, the
rest remained yet in the plain, in danger of being routed if they should be
assaulted, for that they could not well be succored by those that were already
past. The Prince thought it not fit to let slip this occasion, but without
tarrying for more of his men, who were not above a mile off, would fall upon
them with those that he had ready, hoping that they would suffice to get the
victory; He had with him about 5000 Dutch, two of the Princes Troops of Horse,
and Doria's six Companies which were new men unexperienced, and were not above
300 Horse; The French reere which remained in the plain, was 3000 Foot, and
about 400 Horse, the choicest of all the Army, and Momorancy, and Marshal
Di^iate, with some others of the most experienced Commanders, remained in the
reere, for the greater security thereof. The^e was a great Mere or standing
water between them, which men past over by two banks: the one whereof was on
the back, the other on the flank of the French. Shamburg and Sults advanced by
the latter, with half the Dutch, in a close Ba^aglione, and with the Prince his
Troops of Horse, by the other the Prince himself in person, with the rest of
the Dutch commanded by Gallasso, and with Doria's Horse. The skirmish being
begun, Momorancy divided his Horse into two squadrons, and took a little
compass upon the left hand toward a neighboring Town called St Ambrosio,
which led to the way of the Hill: The Prince conceiving that the French fled,
and would climb the Mountain by that way and get into a place of safety, or
recover Susa, ordered Doria to fall upon them with his Horse, and Gallaso that
he should send 200 Muketiers to back Doria's Horse; The Muketiers went not,
either for the confusion into which Gallasso fell, or for that he would not
lessen his squadron: so as Doria fought Momorancy without his Musketeers, and
fought very stoutly, with an equal number of Horse, but upon great
disadvantage, for that both he and his Horse were new men unexperienced, and
guided for the most part by Leiutenants; whereas the French were veterane
Soldiers, choice men, and commanded by Momorancy, a Commander of approved and
tried Valor: so as two of Doria's Troops running away at the very first
encounter, the rest were presently defeated, and Doria having received many
wounds was taken Prisoner, together with Captain Robustelli, who was shot with
two pistol bullets. Rainero Guasco, Captain of the Carabines, who fell on
first, escaped, but was sorely wounded: The Dutch that were on that side, when
they saw the Horse run, threw away their Arms, and fled outright without
fighting, though the Prince did all he could to stop them: The other Battaglion
which marched on the other side, fought valianly, and slew many of the Enemy,
chasing them for a while; and had they been assisted by the other squadron,
they would assuredly have got the victory; But seeing their companions run
away, they also retreated to their quarters at Avigliana, and left the French
free to pursue their journey: So as though all the rest of the Princes Army
were now come in, yet the French having already mounted the Hills, and it being
therefore impossible to pursue them, he forbore to do it. There dyed on the
Prince his side about 500, and about 400 were taken Prisoners and wounded; 400
were wounded and slain of the French; and the Prince lost 10 Dutch Colors, and
one Corner of Horse: Being come to Pinarollo, they found it as hard to get to
Casalle by that way; for the Duke, to whom many of those were returned from
Avigliana who were sent thither at the coming of the French, coming into the
field, coasted continually along by them on the Plain within 3 miles, to keep
them from victuals as much as he could; for being hindered from getting any by
the way of the Valley, they could get but very little by the way of the
Mountains, and from Dolpheny or France very few were sent them; so as what by
Famine, what by Pestilence, they were much lessened: Wherefore desirous to get
out of these streights, and to come into a more fruitful Country, (for they
saw it was impossible for them to get to Casalle without passing over the Poe,
and it was as impossible for them to pass the Poe, being therein opposed by the
Duke) they turned toward the Marquisate of Saluzzo, where they knew they might
have store of victuals, where they might have convenience to refresh their
wearied Army, and which had suffered much by Famine and Sickness; and where
they knew they might pass over the Poe, which takes its beginning from thence,
almost dry-foot, and without any opposition. They therefore came to Ravell, a
Town in that Marquisate, where passing over the River they went directly to
Saluzzo: The Town yielded immediately, and sent them the Keys of the Gates,
that they might get the better conditions: When they were come in, they found
very good Quarter, and refreshments of all sorts. They came afterward before
the Castle, whither the Duke had sent 300 Foot but a little before under
Cavalier Balbiano, which was within three days surrendered to them; whereat the
Duke was much grieved, not being able to endure that that Town should be taken
from him before his eyes, and his Army looking on. The Duke also past over the
Poe afterward, and went with his Army to Savigliano, fearing to lose that
place also, which though it were weak and open was yet of concernment; for not
being above 15 miles off, and seated diametrically opposite to Saluzzo, as
Pancareli to Pinarollo, so was Savigliano a fit place from whence to observe
the moving of the Army which was lodged in Saluzzo. The Duke was sufficiently
ne^led at the loss of so many Towns, and at the receiving of so many blows on
both sides of the Mountains; and being desirous to vent his anger in a battle,
he sought all occasions to do it; for examining well his own and his Enemies
Forces, though he came somewhat short of them in Foot, yet was he stronger in
Horse, which was no little advantage for the Victory upon the Plain.

Spinola heard of the Dukes intention, who fearing the success, and the
prejudice which in such a case might redound to the Enterprise of Casalle, he
strove by reasons and by persuasions, and with protesting that he would recall
the Kings men, to remove from that resolution: He bad him consider, that the
men which he had sent him to defend Piedmont were the Garrison of the State of
Millain, and the safety of the Kings Dominions; that they were granted him, to
the end that he might by them encamp, and face the French till he might recover
his Towns, and to block up the way to all relief, and not that he should
adventure them in a battle: That therefore he should forbear till the business
of Casalle were fully perfected; and that then he himself would concur with all
his men in recovery of the Towns that were lost, and in the entire freeing of
Piedmont from the French. The affairs of Piedmont and of Casalle were reduced
to this condition; and to this point was the Duke of Savoy brought; so as to
boot with seeing part of his Territories lost, part of them encumbered by the
Spanish Army, he was put to wage War in his own Dominions, not as a Prince or
Ruler of the Militia, but as a Captain at the will of others; and to back the
taking of Casalle, contrary to his own Interest, with the evident loss of so
much of his State, and with the danger of his own person; when having long
disputed with himself touching the business of Casalle, he had designed
(whilst he should be the Arbitrator of Affairs, as he thought to have been) to
handle the business so as without him no peace should be made. These were the
acquisitions hoped for by the present War, this the arbitrament pretended unto
between the two Crowns at the beginning of the War. These distastes, and some
other high carriages in Spinola did daily add to the Dukes disgusts, who was
wonted to wage War according as he listed, and being impatient to be governed
by the Spanish Agents, to show his resentment against which he had not forborne
to draw upon him the anger of that Crown; nor had he stuck to provoke the anger
of France, that he might resent the Cardinal Richelieu's strange and severe
Proceedings against him and his Son; and therefore it was conceived by many
conjectures, that stomaching these rigorous dealings, he was inclined to close
with the French; and his chief Captains and Officers were often heard to say,
that their Prince had lost too much in serving the Crown of Spain; and that he
ought to think how he might recover himself; that Piedmont was ruined, as not
being able to maintain so many Armies; that the loss of Casalle made not for
the Dukes Interest; and that therefore it was necessary to close with the
French, who had offered him great and advantageous conditions, if Casalle might
be preserved: to this was added, that amidst all these molestations of the two
Crowns, it was sufficient for the Duke to keep his Towns, and to Munite them
well with Garrisons; and that his betaking himself to the Field was only to
please Spinola; and Massarine being at this time come from France with new
Proposals, the Prince was heard to say, that the French began to do reason: so
as the King of Spain's Commanders, whose ears were continually filled with
these reproaches, began to mistrust the Duke, and to fear lest he might make an
Agreement, not unlike to that of Susa: but the news which was divulged
throughout the Camp and all Italy, of Wallesteins approaching, and that he
would shortly appear in Italy with a powerful Army; the taking of Mantua, which
soon after happened; and chiefly the Dukes death, which succeeded not long after,
freed the Spaniards from these suspicions; whereof they might have been secure
enough by the aversion which had been formerly between Richelieu and the Duke:
but as for Wallesteins coming, though he had earnestly desired to en^er armed
into Italy, and to wage War there like another Totila, and had much importuned
the Court of Spain to that purpose, without whose consent the Emperor would
not give way thereunto, and offered his best service to the King of Spain, for
the preservation and increase of his Majesty's Power and Authority, against the
Potentates of Italy, hoping to be as succesful therein as he had been to the
Emperor and House of Austria in Germany; yet the King and Court foreseeing the
ruin which this man's fierce nature threatened to Italy, and abhorring to have
their Authority increased by laying Italy waste, and by so much shedding of
Italian blood; but fearing much more that his Authority would rather be
suffocated then sublevated, by introducing so many Forces into Italy, they
would never yield thereunto: And the Duke of Savoy, who by secret Intelligence
(as it was thought) held with Wallestine, and for the emulation and contentions
which he foresaw would arise between him and Spinola, and who hoped to have
occasion to put in practice his plots which he had contrived with Wallestine,
being prevented by death, failed the witnessing his being displeased with the
present Affairs.

At the same time the business of Mantua proceeded more fortunately for the
Imperialists; who, after having had the better in some Action^, had the fortune
to surprise the City, and to make themselves Masters of it. The Cesarian Army
had lien idle almost all that Winter in those parts, being only intent in
keeping Victuals and provisions from b^ing brought thither; but the Spring
coming on, it afflicted the besieged in several manners, and brought them into
great streights. Nevers was aware that the Dutch having abandoned Rodigo, had
fortified themselves in Goito, a place not far from Rodigo; and cosidering,
that if he could take that place and fortify it, it would be a very fit place
to exclude Commerce between Goito and the Dutch Quarters, which were in
Gozzoldo, and that consequently Goito not being to be relieved, he might easily
recover it: He sent five hundred of his best Soldiers thither, who, entering
Rodigo without any opposition, began to fortify it; but this business proved
prejudicial to the Mantuans; for Galasso going thither with a good strength of
men, and having first furnished Goito with vi^uals, and le^ part of the Kings
men in Rivolta, he came with 200 Horse, and about 800 of his best Foot
Soldiers, to Rodigo, and having first possessed himself of all the parts
thereabouts, he tried whether the Defendants would surrender or no, who coming
to parley, and finding it impossible to defend the place, and despairing to be
relieved, (for some Barques coming from Mantua with Soldiers, and some Troops
of Horse which were to have assisted them, were with much loss repulsed by
those that were left in Rivolta) they were forced to surrender upon sad
conditions, all o^ them being to remain Prisoners at the discretion of the
Enemy; except the Captain, who was permitted to return to Mantua.

The Mantuans had the like fortune, who in great numbers were led on by the two
Marquesses Alfonso Guerriero and Carlo de Rossi, to the recovery of Hostiglia,
a great Town upon the banks of Poe, where a Company of Dutch were quartered;
for Aldringer, who had notice thereon, ^ollowed them, and being come to
Governolo, though he heard they were stronger then he had supposed, went on
with some Forces to assist his Party; and finding some trenches at la Chiu^ di
Serravalle, from whence, and from a Tower not far off, some of his party were
much Prejudiced, he, from some of the neighboring houses which he took annoyed
those that were in the Trenches with his Musket shot; and having sent some of
his men to cut off the way from the Defendants, they, fearing to be enclosed,
forsook the Trench, and fled toward Hostiglia, and elsewhere; but being pursued
by the Dutch, many of them were slain; which being known by them who were
before Hostiglia, they likewise gave over the Siege, and fled away with like
fortune: For being pursued by those who were in Hostiglia, and by some other
Dutch, who, crossing the Poe, came from Rovere to aid them, 300 of them were
slain, and Guerriero and Rossi were wounded; and the Quarters about Hostiglia
were not only freed from danger, but better secured by new Fortifications and
Garrisons: He went from thence to Serravalle, wherein, and in some houses
thereabouts, were many Soldiers; and because it was hard to take it, nor could
it be done without loss of men; by reason of its so strong situation, which
encouraged the Defendants to hold out, it was resolved to set it on fire,
whereby many of the Defendants perished; and those who escaped the fire fell
into the hands of the Dutch, and were forthwith slain.

The Duke of Mantua having lost many of his men by these misfortunes, and by
the Pestilence, which increased much in Mantua; and the affairs of that City
being daily reduced to greater streights, the Siege still continuing, though at
a distance, the Defendants began to distrust their safety; and those likewise
did distrust it to whom the loss of that City would prove as prejudicial. The
Venetians, to whom it belonged to sustain it more then any others, had at first
been very forward in employing all their Forces to defend it; but their
succors proving as yet not answerable to the others necessities, or their
promises, they had afforded sinister, discourses of their intentions: Some
allotted the slenderness of their supplies to the difficulty of introducing
them; others, to their backwardness; many, to that they did not desire to
declare themselves openly, and contrary to the Emperor, of whose greatness
they were still jealous, and had great reason to apprehend it; and many, to
more hidden and malign ends, of reducing that Duke into a necessity of throwing
himself into their Arms, and of yielding up that City to the Commonwealth, if,
not being able to hold it, he should be necessitated to yield it to the Enemy.
Nevers complained much hereof; and the Ambassador of France, then Resident in
Venice, no less then he; and threatened, That if the Commonwealth should proceed
so cooly on her part, his King also, who was less concerned in the Affairs of
Italy then they, would do the like in Cassalle and Montferrat, and would leave
them both to the pleasure of the Spaniard. The Commonwealth being either moved
by these speeches, or by the danger that Mantua was in, in whose inte^ests she
so deeply shared, resolved at last to send stronger succors: She had about
3000 French paid by her, who were brought from Provence to Venice by Sea, part
under Monsieur de la Valletta, part under the Duke of Candale; to boot with
many others of several Nations, to the number of 8000: Zaccharia Sagred^
Commissary-General in terra firma, commanded in Chief; the Duke of Candale
commanded the Foot; and Don Lewis de Este the Horse; and Ieronymo Trevisano was
Field-Commissary: Vallegio, a strong Town in the Territories of Verona, toward
the confines of Mantua, five miles below Peschiera, was made the Rendezvoz for
Arms, in pursuit of the Commonwealths resolution, which was, That Mantua should
by all means be relieved.

The Commanders of the Army, before the effecting of this design, would make
Castiglione and Mormirolo, which were Towns nearer Mantua, secure, that they
might the more easily relieve it, and secure the coming of Market-people, and
the fruits of the field to that City; and thought they had sent Forces to
possess themselves thereof, yet considering afterward, that to boot with the
extraordinary expenses which they must be at in fortifying those places, the
business would not succeed according to their intentions, they bethought
themselves better, and upon new resolutions, to take Villa-Buona, Marengo, and
St Britio, places nearer Val^ggio, not far from Coito: The business of
Villa-buona, by Orders from Candale, was undertaken by Colonel Vimarcato, who
was sent thither with his Brigade; and that of Marengo by la Valletta, who, by
order from the General, entered it with a good strength of men; the sending of a
Garrison to St Britio was deferred till another time: They began to fortify
both these Places; and two Troops of Horse, and some Corsicks, were sent to
Villa buona, to boot with Vimarcato's Brigade, which were already there: But
Galasso, who minded what the Venetians did, did not slight this their action;
but putting the body of an Army together, consisting of 10000, what Horse, what
Foot, marched with it to Villa buona, and advancing some Companies of Croats,
they encountered with some Capelletti, who being come from Villa-buona went to
discover the Country, and were followed by some Light Horse: La Valletta,
together with many Volunteers and Lancepresad^es, went to order the skirmish,
if any should happen, which being briskly begun, was but ill sustained by the
Capelletti; for the body of the Dutch advancing, which followed the Croats, the
Venetians wheeled about, and were pursued to their Trenches, where the
Soldiers that guarded them, being afraid, began to run; but being rallied by
their Captains, and made to take their former stations, they did a while
withstand the Dutch, who strove thrice, but in vain, to gain the T^enches, and
to drive away the defendants; in which interim, the Dutch had raised a Battery
of six Cannons, which playing upon the Trenches and Half-moons, and indamaging
them much, the defendants were forced to forsake them, and to retreat in great
confusion and disorder; for the Soldiers who with much ado had been made
formerly to stand by their Captains threats, seeing some Pike men give back,
were surprised with sudden fear, and fairly ran away toward Villagio, leaving
their stations to the enemy; whereof some of them following, and some having
overtaken them with their Horse, they were environed, and much bloody slaughter
was made amongst them: true it is, that news of the F^ght at Villa-buona being
come to Valleggio, two Companies were presently sent thither, the one of
Croats, the other of Capelle ti, and Commiss^ry Antonius came soon after with
some other Troops of Croats and ^apelletti; these being come to a place which
they call Capitello, ^ound that they ran away from Villa-buona; and the
Captains thinking that they were but few that followed them, halted, and
putting t^emselves in order, resolved by their opposing to back and secure
those who running down right away thought to save themselves in Valleggio: but
finding not long after that the Dutch were many more in number then they
imagined, they altered their minds, and retreated also to underneath the
shelter of the Cannon at Valleggio: whither when the Dutch approached, a new
and greater Fight was begun; wherein all the Vene^an Horse drew into the Field
and fought; but not being able to withstand the Dutch, and being gauled by
Musketeers, which the Dutch had placed in some little houses hard by, they
likewise ran away to underneath the Ditches of Valleggio, where being defended
by the Cannon, which held the enemy a while at a distance, they secured
themselves; the rest who were in Vallegg^o not daring to come out to defend
their own men, nor to enter into the Fight, nor to defend the Towns which were
taken whilst they looked on, and were plundered, with great slaughter of the
Inhabitants: the Dutch were quartered a little way off, and stood all night
within sight of Valleggio, inviting the enemy to fight, who withdrawing their
men into their houses, dreamed not of coming forth, but looking to be assaulted
in their own Quarters placed their Soldiers to defend their Rampires: but the
Captains fearing they should not be able to make the place good, by reason of
the cowardice and fear which they discovered in their Soldiers countenances,
they resolved to abandon the Town; which whilst they endeavored to do without
confusion, and in good order, and had given fitting directions to that purpose;
the Soldiers had hardly notice thereof, when being surprised with greater fear
then formerly, they began to run away in greater fear and disorder then they
had done the day before: no commands of their Captains being able to stay them,
they all fled to Peschiera and Gallasso, who had expected all night, and till
four hours after Sunrising the next morning, that they should sally out, began
to distrust: he had precise Orders from the Emperor, not to enter or indamage
the State of Venice; wherefore not thinking to assault the enemy in that
station, lest he thereby should disobey the Emperors command, he thought to
turn upon Mormirvolo, whither he heard that 3000 of the Commonwealths Soldiers
were gone: but finding by the firing of the Ammunition in Valleggio, that the
enemy had abandoned the Town, he altered his mind, and returned upon Valleggio;
whither being come, and finding it forsaken, he fell immediately ^o pursue the
enemy, and advanced a little toward Peschiera: before he was come half way, he
got to the Rear, which was led on by Candale, wherein most French were; and
after that Candale had fought, and made some resistance, at last, being
forsaken by his men, part whereof yielded, part fled, he was forced to retreat
with the rest; some of which got to Peschiera, part to Castle nuovo, and others
to Garda, strong Towns of the Venetians, and were no further pursued by the
Dutch: about 4000 Venetian Soldiers died in this conflict; Gallasso sent 26
Colors (four of which bore the French Lillies) and three Coronets of
Curassiers to Colalto, who lay sick in Marignano, upon the grea^er Lake: the
Prisoners were many, amongst which Valletta: the number of those that were
slain and wounded on the Dutch side amounted not to 400, amongst which the
Serjeant-major to Frederick, of Saxony; great was the reputation of the Dutch,
after this success, answerable to the great depression into which the Venetians
fell; upon which almost all the hopes of the Mantuans depending, were totally
lost; and there not being any in the field who could defend that City, her
condition was thought to be sad; her safety being reduced to this point,
whether the besieged or besiegers could longer suffer or resist the hardships
of the Siege; for the former had no hopes of relief, nor courage to ^ree
themselves; nor had the others hopes of taking the City, or of ending their
enterterprise, by reason of the Cities strong situation; Famine, Pestilence and
Military actions had reduced the defendants to so small a number, as they had
not enough to supply the Guards of the City; there was no good intelligence
between the Duke of Mantua and the Venetian Resident. The Duke required many
things, and the Resident limiting many of the demands, and of the needs that
the City was in, related them to the Commonwealth much lesser then they were;
so as the Commonwealth did not sufficiently provide for the urgent extremities
of the City: it was therefore necessary to give over much of the defense; which
the enemy perceiving, and minding their business, they watched all occasions to
make themselves masters of the ill guarded and worse provided City, and to end
their enterprise by surprisal, wherein they had good success; for having caused
six Barques to be brought upon Carts from the greater Casalle, a Town in the
State of Millain, to St. Georgio, they put them into the Lake, and put some
fourscore Soldiers into them; which making a little before Sunrising toward
the Gate of the Castle which answers upon S^. George, where little fear being
had by reason of the water, there was but little or no guard kept; and an
assault being furiously given at the same time on the opposite part of the
City, the Soldiers in the Barques clapped a Pe^ard to the Castle Gate, which
being ill kept and worse defended, was soon beaten down and mastered; where
whilst they were fortifying St. George his Bridge, which (as it has been said)
was cut in sunder in the midst, was crossed over by great Planks, brought to
that purpuse, over which the Dutch Horse passed, and entered by the Gate which
was opened, and possessed but a little before, meeting with no resistance: the
Dukes Palace was presently taken, which was near that Gate, and as rich
formerly in Jewels and Household Stuff, as any other Princes Palace in Italy;
though for some late years the continual wars had wasted much of her precious
things: what was left was sacked, together with the whole City: the Princess
got into the Fort di Porto, whither the Princess Mary was forced to fly with
her tender Babe; the assault given lasted till the 14th hour; but the
defendants yielding at the last, who heard that the Dutch were entered on the
other side, were pursued by the assailants, to the Church of St. Agnese; and
those who could get into the same Porto; which when they saw the City lost,
they strove to make good by some works which they made toward the City; but
wanting both Counsel and Provisions, and the defendants being dismayed, they
listened willingly to Articles of Agreement, which were quickly propounded by
the Dutch, who were desirous to complete the enterprise: which Articles being
agreed upon, the Fort was delivered up to the Imperialists. The Duke and his
Son, with some of their followers, as also the Marquess di Coure, who as Agent
for the King of France had ^arried always in Mantua, were suffered to come
forth; and being waited upon by some Troops of Horse, they according to
Articles retreated to Ferrara: The City was miserably sacked, Military cruelty,
ava^ice and lust had room enough to vent themselves: it would be tedious to
relate the monstrous effects and execrable examples which were the^e acted; as
also to describe the miseries* afflictions and indignities which the miserable
Mantuans underwent* we will therefore pass by them, as being matter for a
Tragical Poem rather, then for an Historical relation: it was really a
miserable thing, and much to be compassionated, and of great consideration,
that that City which was by reason of its situation thought impregnable, and by
experience ^ad proved to be so for so many ages (for it is not known that it
was ever taken before) should fall into the hands of the oppugners within less
then one year. This loss was very ill resented by the Princes of Italy, who had
not much endeavored to defend it, by reason of the multiplicity of Foreigners
that were then in Italy: nay, it became odious to to the Spaniards, who had so
much endeavored it, and been at such expense in fomenting it; by reason of the
concurrence of authority and precedence of place: the news thereof coming to
Casalle and Piedmont, did equally afflict both the Duke of Savoy and Spinola:
the latter not so much for his Kings Interests, for which it made not that the
Dutch should get so much footing in Italy, as for the emulation he bore to
Collatto; who proving more successful in what he took in hand, then he had
done: he much maligned that fortune should be so favorable to him in a much
harder business then that of Casalle; and the Duke of Savoy, for that judging
that the fury of the Foreigners would turn upon Piedmont, he foresaw that his
State, by becoming the seat o^ the war, would be exposed to the like calamities
and barbaris^s by the same Nations; and that he being every where environed by
armed Foreigners who had no dependency upon him, he should become the mark
whe^eat not only his enemies blows should aim, but even the like to his friends
injuries, and supercharyes: he was also troubled to foresee the certain loss of
Casalle, wherein he was forced to cooperate; which if it should fall into the
Spaniards hands, were it nothing else, how much would it lessen the Liberty of
^is Principality: being therefore born down by so many afflictions of mind, by
his bodily labor in war, by the miseries of his Country, and by the death of
so many of his Subjects, what by Sword, what by Pestilence; seeing Savoy lost,
and so many Towns in Piedmont; and, that which tormented him most, being struck
with consternation, to see all his artificial cunning wherewith he for many
years had balanced the Arms of France and Spain, and had not only maintained
his own fortune, but made himself almost Arbitrator between those two Nations,
outdone, and deluded by Agents of both those Crowns; and also seeing his
reputation so decayed, whereby he thought he had raised his head above the
clouds, and did even touch heaven with his finger; and despairing ever to
attain again to his former condition and grandezza, he fell mortally sick; and
not being able long to resist the violence of that sickness, he died in the
space of three days, in the Sixty ninth year of his Age, on the 26th of July,
in Savigliano; leaving his State much lessened and (...).

It is said that his Father, Duke Emanuel Philibertus, a wise and prudent
Prince; one who was also well read in the wars of his time, between the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Francis the First of France, had always
admonished him, but chiefly when he lay upon his deathbed, that he should by
all means end^vour to keep peace betw^en the two Crowns; it being ^he
foundation and sec^y of hi^ (...): and that he should meddle the least that was
poss^ble in any wars, ^r contentions which should happen between them: an
advice which was not well observed; though by reason of the troubles which
afterward insued in France, it proved not unfortunate, but (...) his Son
occasion of becoming grea^er and more glorious: ye^ when France had ceased (as
at the present) from intesti^e tumults, an^ was reduced under the exact
obedience of a King, and of a solid and well regulated Government; he found how
wi^e he might have been if he had observed it. The public and private actions
of this Prince would really afford abundant scope for long and good Discourse,
on ^e one, an^ on the other side: ^d perhaps it* would no^ be much a^ to enter
^on it; since the d^course thereof falling (...) w^ the conc^ion of this Book,
it would not much inte^upt the thread o^* an Histori^ Narration, and would much
satisfy their curiosity who shall receive satisfaction in reading these
present memorials; and yet it will be more wisely done, to leave it undone; for
as the private actions of this Prince might well become the Pen of a private
Writer, who should undertake to write his Life and Actions particularly; so do
they almost mis-become the Writer of a general History: the public and
principal Actions of this Prince, wherein he did very much signalize himself,
being written in this Book, without either adulation or rancour; the wise and
unbia^ed Reader, who is to judge thereof, may of himself observe them, and
thereout gather that, which as it would be super^uous to mention in this place;
so the Author has not thought ^it to describe them, or to observe them
distinctly and particularly.

The End of the Eleventh Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
Book XII.
The Contents.
CHarles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, is succeeded by his Son Victorio Amadeo; who
finding that the French had taken Carignano, goes from Savigliano to recover
it, wherein failing, he comes to a confl^ct, wherein the French have the
better. The French go from Carignano to Avigliana, which they take. Collalto
having taken Mantua, comes into Piedmont with fresh Forces. Peace is treated of
in Italy, and in Germany; and not being able to be concluded in Italy, a Truce
is ende^voured; which being refused by Spinola, he dies soon after; and after
his death, is accep^ed of by the Duke of Savoy, by (...), and by the Marquess
of San' Croce, who succedes Spinola in the Government of Millain, and in being
General. The Truce being expired, the French come with new Forces from France
to relieve Casalle; and being come to the Trenches of Spinola's Camp, just as
they were beginning Battle, peace is concluded in conformity to the peace
formerly made in Germany; in execution whereof, the interessed Princes Agents
meet in Chirasco, and there adjust the differences between the Dukes of Savoy
and M^ntua; a great part of Montferrat is assigned over to the Duke of Savoy;
and the manner of restoring the State^ of M^ntua and Montferrat is agreed upon:
as also the like of the Towns of Piedmont and of the ^isons Towns; after the
effectual restitution whereof, the King of France demands Pinarollo of the Duke
of Savoy, together with the whole Valley of Perosa, and obtains it. The
proceedings of the King of France and of Swedland in Germany, against the
Emperor, are treated of, and the Negotiation and Conclusion of Peace between
the Commonwealth of Genoa and the Duke of Savoy: together with the miraculous
Fabric of the new Walls made at Genoa, and the strange preservation of that
City from the Plague, wherewith the whole State of Genoa was infected, and more
then half Italy. This twelfth Book and the whole present History is concluded
with the Marriage between the King of Hungary, Son to the Emperor, and the
Infanta Mary, Sister to the King of Spain; and with the Duke of Urbin's death,
and the dev^lving of that State to the Apostolic See.

THe death of the Duke of Savoy proved not so great an alteration to the main
of Affairs, by his being succeeded by his Son, who was now almost 40 years old;
bred up in his Fathers School, a great Prince, and gallant Commander: so as
being instructed by so excellent a Master in the Art both of War and Peace,
none doubted but that he would equal his Father in both; and being knowing and
partaker of the Affair^ of State, and of all his Fathers Councils, ends, and
resolutions, having for many years being versed in public affairs, as well
Civil as Military; the Principality seemed not to be any thing changed by this
new succession, but to be continued in the successor; and his contrary
conditions to Duke Emanuel afforded better hopes of peace and concord; for
instead of the hatred born by the Agents of both the Crowns to the deceased
Duke; in his Son the strict bond of Affinity with the King of France was to be
considered, and of Consa^guinity with the King of Spain: so as it was to be
believed, that the former would not easily consent to the depression of his
Sisters Husband, which drew along with it inseparably the like of his Sister:
nor that the other would refuse any thing which might make for the good of a
Prince annexed to him both in blood and Interest; and yet as Councils of State
which give motion to all things, and whereby Princes govern themselves, do not
contract Parentage, it was ere long known, how weak curbs Kindred or
Conjunction in Blood are, to hold back the force of Domination, and the desire
of enlarging Confines, and of bettering the condition of Principality.

The French having passed over the Poe, and refreshed themselves in Saluzzo,
could not go to the relief of Casalle by that way, neither by reason of the
enemies Army which was quartered in Savigliano; wherefore they resolved to
repass back again over the Poe, and to return to Pinarollo by the same way that
they came; and in their March backwa^d they encamped under Ravil; but finding
it to be too strong they tarried not long there, but returned to Pinarollo; and
finding the Towns of Piedmont, for the most part desolate and void of
Inhabitants, by the Plague; and that the new Dukes Army was quartered in
Savigliano, beyond the Poe, they fell down upon Vigone, Villa franca, and Villa
nuova, and upon other Towns which lay lower; and taking them without any
resistance, they came to Pancaleri; where they took up the same Quarters, and
lodged in the same Fortifications, wherein the Duke had encamped a little
before against them: they then had a mind to take Carignano, which lay a little
lower within two Musket Shot of the Poe, where the wooden Bridge was,
endeavoring to pass by that way to Casalle; they therefore sent some of their
Horse, under Mounsieur De la Tremoville, to Corignano, where taking a strong
house which served for a Castle, they advanced to the Bridge. Duke Victorio
being aware of their ends, came out of Savigliano, and marching with his Army
on the hither bank, he made two companies of Carabines advance, that they might
come the sooner to the Bridge, which got thither just at the same time that the
French were come near, the outer-more head of the Bridge; and lighting off
Horse back they placed themselves to defend it: And the French leaving a
Commander with a Troop of Horse in Carignano, retreated to Pancaleri: The
Spanish Horse came the same night to the Bridge, which the Carabines defended,
and the next day the Duke coming thither with his Army, quartered upon the bank
opposite to Carignano, keeping the Bridge in his possession, which being broken
off in the midst, met together by a draw ^ridge, which being pulled up on the
Dukes side, fell down on the other side toward Carignano, so as the Duke might
open the way to his men, and keep it shut from the Enemy. About 4000 Dutch were
to come to Avigliana under Count Verrua; by which recruit the Duke became
stronger, he would not refuse to fight the enemy, but resolved to quarter on
the other side of the Poe, that he might be nearer them; to the which purpose
he sent 500 hundred Foot, and a piece of Cannon, under the Camp-Master Luigi
Ponse a Spaniard, to recover Carignano; after the which he sent Gerardo
Gambacorti with 4^0 Horse, to the end that coming to the Capuchins place they
might shelter the 500 foot busied in the taking of Carignano, and might also
back the Dutch who were to come to Avigliano without any convoy of Horse, to
the Camp. Ponse went with his men to force Carignano; and whilst he was hottest
in the business, Gambacorti who found that the succor was come, he left a
company of Curassiers at the Capuchins plain, and advanced with the three other
companies of Carabines, ^towards Pancaleri; where meeting with the Enemies Van
led on by Marquis Diffiate, he began a stout skirmish, at the beginning whereof
Gambacorti sent to the Duke to advance with the whole Army, or that whilst he
fought the enemy, he might retreat with the Cannon, and men which fought before
Carignano. But the Duke who had received n^w advertisment from Verrua, would
come neither that day, nor by that way; but answered, that he would not advance
with the Army, but wished him to entertain the Enemy, till the Cannon were
withdrawn; The conflict lasted four hours, wherein the French increasing in
number, cha^'d Gambacorti to the Port-cullis of Carignano, where by reason of
the narrowness of the place he could hardly have retreated without disorder,
had he not been seasonably succored by Martin d' Aragona, who was sent to him
by the Duke with 400 Spanish Musketeers; so as being encouraged by this new
recruit, the French were easily repressed; who thinking that the Enemies whole
Army had past over the River, together with the recruit, were slacker in their
pursuit, and afforded conven^ence to Gambacorti, and to Don Martin of Aragon,
to retreat back in good order by the Bridge, all the Cannon and Foot which were
gone to the taking of Carignano being drawn off before them. The numbers that
dyed in this conflict were equal on both sides; the Duke of Tremuglia received
a sore wound in the knee, by a Musket Shot, and a Captain of Horse was also
sorely wounded; the French quartered in Carignano, and the Duke on the opposite
shore, observing one another ways, and expecting another occasion for action,
which it was not long ere it presented it self very singularly for the French.
For the Duke being impatient to tarry on this side the Poe, and not being
contented with his being fenced by the water, had a desire to go to the
opposite shore, and to fortify the head of the Bridge toward Carignano; the
business being argued, met with variety of opinions; as for the new
Fortification, it was considered, that by making it the Enemies army would be
in a manner besieged, for it would be forced by the Garrison of that
Fortification to live closer and more united, and would consequently find
greater scarcity of Victuals and Forage: And in case it should go to Turin, as
it was feared it would, or would attempt going to Casalle by the Canevese, they
might the easilier keep behind them, hinder their designe^, and oppose all
their attempts. On the contrary it was said, that the fitter, and more
opportune the fortification should be, the harder and more dangerous it would
be to begin it, and bring it to perfection, by reason of the Enemies being
quartered so near in Carignano; who, were it only for Reputations sake, could
not possibly suffer that fortification to be made under their no^es. Moreover,
that the intended work being divided, and separated by the water from the Army,
it would be hard to succor it; that therefore being content to keep the Bridge
in their power, which afforded them sufficient convenience to keep behind any
motion of the Enemy, they should make use of the safety that the River afforded
them, against whatsoever the French should do. The contrary opinion prevailed
for fortifying, which was thus devised; that a half Moon should be made on the
head of the Bridge toward Carignano, which should be flanked on both sides,
which were to be made on a little Island which the Poe makes nee^ the banks;
the care of the half Moon was committed to the Spaniards, and the trench on the
right hand to the Dutch, and that on the left to the Italians; and they were
all ordered, that if the Enemy should assault them before they were fortified,
they should retreat by the Bridge without making any resistance; if after they
were fortified, that they should* defend themselves. They wrought two days
quietly in their works, without being troubled by the French, who did but laugh
at them; but considering the consequence better afterward, and knowing what
prejudice it would occasion when it should be perfected, especially if they
should be enforced to remove from where they were; They sent for a good
strength of men from Pancaleri, and sallied on the sudden forcibly from
Carignano, to distribute them whilst the work was imperfect; 1200 of the best
and bravest French gave the first furious assault, the Dutch making but bad
resistance, those very same who behaved themselves so bravely in the conflict
at Avigliana, began to quit their stations and fled, without almost striking a
stroke; so as the half Moon which lay open on that side, after a long and
valiant resistance, was lost, together with many men. Whereupon, the other
Trench made by the Italians, who were not able to withstand the brunt, was also
abandoned; nor could the Duke send any to succor them though he endeavored
it: For the Bridge being too narrow to pass over many a-brest, the succor was
too slender for such an assault; nay, the confusion of those that came in to
succor was prejudicial to themselves: for thronging together upon the Bridge,
many of them fell into the water and were drowned; those that dyed and were
drowned, on the Dukes side, were 500 foot; those of quality that were slain,
were Don Alphonso Swasso, Leiutenant to the Camp-Master General, and some Foot
Captains; Don Martin d'Aragona, after given great trial of his Valor, was
sore wounded and taken prisoner, Camp-Master Nicolo Doria, being shot by a
Musket, dyed soon after, 200 of the French were slain, and yet both sides were
equally afraid, for each party cut the Bridge in two on their side; The French
feared another better regulated assault, being very weak, and having lost many
men; and hearing that the whole body of the Dutch who were before Mantua, was
come to the Enemies Camp: And the Duke that the French passing over the Bridge
in the heat of victory, might cause great disturbance in the Camp, which was
full of fear and confusion. Thus both of them being divided by the River, both
of them were Masters of the Field; the French, on that side the Poe which was
toward the Alps, the Duke, on that side which lay toward Casalle; the Armies
increased almost at the same time; for Collalto having taken Mantua came into
Piedmont with 8000 Foot, and 1500 Hose, under Marshal Scomberg, who being to
pass through the valley of Susa, Marshal De la Force, and Momorancy, after
having tarried ten or twelve days in Carignano, and having well refreshed
their men with the victuals which they found there, went toward that valley to
encounter them; and the Duke, when they weregon, quitted his quarters, and took
up new between Turin and Moncaleri: and having sent 2000 Foot to defend Turin,
he betook himself to defend the stone Bridge, which was built over the Poe,
near Moncaleri, quartering 2000 Foot upon the Hill which overlooked the Bridge
on Moncaleri's side. When the French Army was come to Viola, it heard that
Scomberg being come with new Forces from France had taken Avigliana, whereinto
he entered without any opposition, finding it infected with the Plague and void
of inhabitants, as many other Towns in Piedmont were; he came before the
Castle, which trusting to the strength of its situation, stood upon defense,
though the Plague was got amongst the garrison, and though the Castle was only
fortified after the ancient manner; the Duke would have advanced to relieve the
Castle, but he was persuaded to the contrary by Collalto, who was not naturally
given to love danger* Collalto foresaw, that by going to relieve the Castle
they might perchance come to a battle, wherein the Dukes men being discouraged
by the unfortunate success of the two last actions, would not have behaved
themselves better then before, and ruin depending upon the loss, he thought it
would not be wisely done, to adventure the main conce^nment upon a battle. So
the Castle wanting relief, and more straightened for want of water, then by the
Enemy, it fell into the hands of the French. This acquisition opened the way
for the French into the Carevesa and from thence to Cassalle; and it was not
unlikely but that they might easily pass over the Poe over against that City,
where being under the shelter of the Cannon of that pl^ce, and joining with the
garrison which was there, they might easily pass the foord, and consequently
relieve Casalle: which the Duke apprehending, he sent Gambacorti with 400 Horse
into the Canevese, to the end, that passing over la Dora, they might master
that way; and Marquess Spinola, fearing the danger, munited the bank of Poe
with a double Trench, the one against the River, the other against the City and
Citadel, before which they wrought continually, bringing on their approaches;
insomuch as the Spaniards, to whose share the taking of the Bulwark of San'
Croce fell, were advanced so far as they were ready to fall into the Ditch, and
attempted the Wall; and when by the strong oppugning and by the scarcity of
Victuals, the Town was not likely to hold out long, the Siege, defense and
succor, were delaied by a Treaty of Truce, which being formerly begun, was not
long after perfected; and that the original and progress of this Treaty of
Truce, and of another Negotiation of Peace which was at this time very hotly
handled, and not long after concluded in the Diet at Ratisbone, may be the
better known, it will be necessary to take the business a little higher.

The Electors not being content to have made the Emperor lay down his Arms, by
cashiering Wallestein, the Duke of Fritland, and by dissolving that Army which
was so formidable to all Germany: they demanded that some order might be taken
about the settling of the affairs of Italy, especially those of Mantua and
Montferrat: they honested this their demand with the justice of Nevers his
cause, who, as they said, was not to be put out of possession of his Dominions
unheard: they said likewise, that it was a great prejudice to the jurisdiction
of the Empire, that the Spaniards, under the name and authority of the
Emperor, should bereave a Vassal of the Empire of those States; to make
themselves masters thereof; for if they should fall into their hands, it would
be hard to exercise the Cesarean authority against them, and they would hardly
be brought to acknowledge that they held them as in Fee from the Empire: they
likewise complained that Armies were sent into Italy without their knowledge or
consent; alleging that this was contrary to the ancient institutions of the
Sacred Empire, which they publicly said were broken and violated, as well in
this, as in many other things: they tacitly reproved him for having by the
Cesarean Arms and Authority assisted the rather violent then just ends of the
Spanish Agents, against a Vassal who was ready to acknowledge that he held
those States from Caesar, and did with all submission desire to be invested
thereinto: they exaggerated the strange consequences which would result to
Germany from these commotions; for the King of France, and Prince of Italy,
being desirous for their own safety sake to maintain those States, and that
Duke, though they could not directly oppose the Cesarean and Spanish Forces in
his defense, did notwithstanding hold intelligence together, and did assist the
German Princes underhand, who were desirous of novelties, that they might
alienate themselves from the Emperor, and incite the people against him; and
that they did also administer aid to the King of Swedland, to the end, that the
Emperors Forces being held play in Germany, might not foment the Spaniards in
Italy: they persisted the more confidently in these their complaints, for that
they saw the Emperor unarmed* and themselves favored, and set on by the King
of France, with whom they held strict and secret Intelligence. That King had
sent Monsieur Leon, Ambassador to the Diet, to justify in appearance his
assisting a Vassal of the Sacred Empire, against the Spaniards, who under the
color of the Sacred Empire, strove to oppress him, and to possess themselves
of his Dominions, to make way for the Monarchy of Italy, which they so much
coveted: but in effect to solicit the Electors and Princes of Germany, who
were ill satisfied with the present condition of affairs, and to encourage them
to join in beating down the Austrian greatness, and to favor the Duke of
Nevers his cause; which the Pope did also favor, who was very desirous to keep
those States in the House of Gonsaga, to the end, that by excluding the
Spaniards from thence, Italy might not hazard the loss of Liberty: but he
chiefly favored the emulation which all the German Princes bore to the
Spaniards; by reason of the excessive authority which the King of Spains Agents
arroga^ed unto them selves in Cesar's Court; wherein pretending to be above
all, they seemed as if they would govern the affairs of Germany as they listed;
and the Emperor as well for his conjunction in interest, as for his necessity
of being supplied with moneys, was forced to adhere unto them: which the
Germans not being able to tolerate, they did oppose their ends and interests:
so as under color of the justice of Nevers his cause, and of preserving the
rights of the German Empire, they crossed the Emperor in this very cause, and
would maintain it against the Spanish Agents, who endeavored to suffocate it
by power in Cesars Court, as they did to oppress it by Arms in Italy: wherefore
they reiterated their former Protestations, not to join in the defense of the
war made by the King of Swedland, whose actions increasing in fame and
reputation, began to make men bethink themselves. The Duke of Savoy also and
Collalto fomented the speedy conclusion of the peace, who both of them writ to
that Diet, and told the Emperor and the Electors, that Piedmont could no
longer maintain the war; whose affairs running manifest ruin, the Duke was
forced either to succumb to the King of France, or to agree with him: if either
of which should happen, all things would necessarily be ruined. The Emperor,
who had no Forces on foot, and saw such an aversion in the Electors, and in so
many other Princes to the wars of Italy, being scandalized at the unjust
proceedings against Nevers; the Emperor being also touched in conscience, and
desirous of his Sons election, for which he had already given way to much
greater things, easily consented to all their desires: many things were
therefore treated of, many things pretended, and near concluding, in favor to
the Duke of Nevers, and to the great prejudice of the Spanish pretensions. Don
Carlo Doria, Duke of Turcis, was then Ambassador in extraordinary from the
King of Spain, in Ratisbone: being sent to that Diet to further the Election of
the King of the Romans, in the person of the King of Hungary, Son to the
Emperor, married at this time to Mary, Sister to the King of Spain: but this
Election not being to be treated of in this Diet, because it was not in imated
therein, as was necessary by the Laws of the Empire; and for that the Electors
of Saxony and of Brandenburg, (disgusted by the Emperor, and almost quite
alienated from him) were neither come thither, nor had sent their Proctories
thither: And after Orders taken in the Diet for the Affairs of Germany, and of
the Empire, the Negotiations were reduced to the Affairs of Italy, and
particularly, to the Duke of Nevers his Cause.

Doria, who saw upon what disadvantagious terms the Peace was treated on for
the King of Spain, and how far the French prevailed by the help and
Intelligence held by the Electors; and that the Emperor being forced by the
leudness of the Times, and of his own Interests, could not govern his
pretensions as he would have done, but was forced to incline toward giving
them satisfaction, even much to the prejudice of his own Affairs; he earnestly
desired, and obtained it, That he not being sent to Treat of Peace in the Kings
Name, might be permitted to acquaint the King upon what Conditions the
Agreement was negotiated, before it was concluded. Thus having gotten a
suspension for two months, they forbear to conclude what they were already
agreed upon.

Whilst the peace was treated on in Ratisbone, it was not abandoned by the
Nuntio Panciru^lo in Italy, wherein all parties were well inclined unto it: the
King of France, Duke of Savoy, and Collalto, for the same reasons for which
they did solicit it in Germany, and the two last, because they liked not the
business of Casalle. The Duke, by reason of the great prejudice which would
result to him, if it should succeed happily; and Collalto, out of the emulation
he bore to Spinola, and his hatred to the Spaniards; which respects, on the
contrary, made Spinola very much desire it, lest that the bad correspondency
with the Duke, and Collalto's emulation, might ruin it, to his great
discredit, Collalto having appeared so averse unto it, as that he would not
grant him one bare thousand men, though he cashiered them after Mantua was
taken, and Spinola needed them much before Casalle: so as Spinola being
enforced by so many difficulties and diffidences, had promised the Nuntio to
quit the enterprise, if the French would forego the Dukes Towns which they had
taken, and would retreat to beyond the Mountains: which Agreement being
accepted by the King of France, would have been effected, had not his authority
been restrained by new Orders from Spain; for Abbot Scaglia, who was sent, as
has been said, by the late Duke into Spain, had acquainted that Court with
Spinola's aversion to the Duke; with the bad intelligence which passed between
him and Collalto, and what sad consequences might thereupon ensue to the
prejudice of the common cause: he had also accused Spinola of being too
apparently inclined to making peace, upon any whatsoever conditions, such as
would not only be dishonorable for their Forces, but apparently dangerous for
the common affairs; and that it could not be known whence this should proceed,
unless it were from his bad inclination toward the Duke, with whom he had
proceeded so seve^ely: so as nothing but ruinous effects to the common affairs
could be expected from so great a discrepancy of humors, ends and wills; since
the Duke not being able any longer to endure it would be forced to use any
means for his own honor and safety: to these powerful reasons, he added no
less prevailing proofs: amongst others, the rough draught of certain
Capitul^tions of Peace, written by Spinola's Secretary, whereby though the King
of France was obliged to free the Duke of Savoys Dominions, and to withdraw his
Forces into France, yet was there no caution mentioned for the observance
thereof; so as it was in the Kings will and choice whether or no he would
observe what he was bound unto by the Articles, though all things should be
punctually observed by the rest: nor was this all: he covenanted by the same
Capitulations that all the Potentates of Italy and Germany, the Electors by
name, should favor the States of Mantua and Montferrat, in case they should be
molested by any; and the Duke obliged himself to afford passage and victuals to
the French Armies, if they should be sent to succor those States: a League, or
rather a Conspiracy, of all these Princes against the Emperor and King of
Spain, if at any time the Emperor should upon any just cause proceed against
his Vassal, or if the King of Spain should assist the Emperor; and yet, said
Scaglia, Spinola winking at so great indignities and prejudices, would
willingly have accepted and subscribed it, had it not been abhorred by the Duke
and by Collalto, with the unanimous consent of all the Captains, as being too
insolent and too unworthy of the Cesarean authority, and repulsed as too
prejudicial to Piedmont, and to the State of Millain. These and other reasons
prevailed sufficiently with the Conde Duca, who was more inclined to the Duke
of Savoy, then to Spinola: so as there needed not many persuasions, to induce
him to limit Spinola's authority in the point of making peace: so as when
Mazarine going into France to Negotiate with the King, returned to Italy, with
the conclusion agreed upon by the King, he found all broken off and in disorder
by new Directions: in this interim the old Duke being dead, a suspension of
Arms was treated of by the new Duke, between himself and the Commanders of
Caesar, and the King of Spains party, on one side, and the French Commanders on
the other side, as well in Italy as out of it: by which all hostility and
innovation of the Fortifications, hostile acts, and taking of Towns was
inhibited: that the City and Castle of Casalle should be assigned over to
Spinola, and that he should furnish the Citadel, being paid for it, with
Victuals during the time of Truce; that if the peace should be concluded in
Ratisbone, it should be observed on all sides; if not concluded by the 15th of
October, that the Truce should cease, and that it should be lawful for the
French afterward to endeavor the relief of the Citadel, and for the others to
defend it; and that each of them might use their Arms, and do all hostile acts,
as before the Truce; that if the Citadel should not be succored during the
whole month of October, it should be delivered over to Spinola, who was to
have Hostages given him, for the performance thereof: that if it should be
succored, Spinola should re-deliver the Castle and Citadel. The French
Commanders durst not accept of this Truce, without express order from the King;
though Toras informed them often what want they had of Victuals, Moneys and
Men, many whereof were dead of the Plague: protesting that he could not keep it
longer then September: this Proposal being sent to Paris, it was easily agreed
to; for there they desired time for the delivery of Casalle, to the end, that
thereby they might make the peace which was in treaty at Ratisbone, upon bette^
conditions; or might have time to relieve it, if peace should not be concluded:
Whereupon Monsieur di Bresse was immediately sent to Italy, with express Orders
to the French Commanders and to the Duke du Main, who, as has been said, was
in Casalle, that they should accept of it: but some time being this mean while
past, Casalle was not in the former condition; for the besiegers, as has been
formerly said, were gotten into the Ditch, and the Neapolitans, who besieged
the City, were fallen upon the Walls; and the Plague having consumed many of
the defendants, it might probably be supposed that for want of men the like
might befall that place, as had happened to Mantua; it being likewise known that
those within the Town were in great scarcity of Victuals; wherefore Spinola,
making his advantage thereof, would no longer listen to any suspension, to any
Truce or peace; especially as concerning making the Citadel longer-liv'd, by
furnishing it with Victuals, and not innovating any thing during the Truce, nor
making new defenses against such succors as should come when the Truce should
be expired.

Spinola was at this time much wearied both in body and mind, by the labors he
had taken, and by the agitation of spirit which he had suffered in these
present Occurrences: the lessening of his power had wounded him sorely:
wherefore falling sick, and his malady both of body and mind increasing, he
soon became unfit for managing so important an enterprise, or indeed for any
other enterprise: it was therefore requisite to send for the Marquess of San'
Croce, who was then at Genoa, and for the Lord Chancellor and those of the
Cabinet Council, from Millain, who being come to the Camp, opened the Kings
Orders, which provided for a successor in case Spinola, should die; and
therein they found San' Croce nominated; to whom Spinola relinquished the
Government of all things. Spinola went from the Camp, and retired to Castle
nuovo di Scrivia, in the Tortonese, to be cured of his sickness; but being
ancient, and his sickness increasing, he dyed on the 25th of September, two
months after the late Duke of Savoy. The Affairs of War and Government went
less in reputation by Spinola's death: the Duke of Savoy, wearied with the
troubles of a long war, which he saw was still maintained in his Country, and
not being pleased that the Spaniards should suffer him to lose his State, so
they might get Casalle, listened willingly to the offers of France; which
promised to restore him to the entire possession of all that had been taken
from him, and, moreover, satisfaction and recompense for his pretenses to
Montferrat; for the King of France finding what difficulty and danger there
would be in relieving Casalle, by reason of the Dukes opposition, labored to
win him over from the contrary party; and if the Duke could be safely
re-possess'd of his own by peace wherefore should he wait for the recove^y
thereof by the uncertain and ruinous events of war? moreover, by favoring the
business of Casalle, he made fetters for his own slavery; since then by
preserving that place, he might recover his own State, and have satisfaction
for all his pretenses, what reason had he to endeavor the getting of it, with
so much loss to his Subjects, and prejucice to his own Dominions: but these
practices met with these difficulties: the Duke would not part from the
Cesarean and Spanish side, without being effectually restored to all that had
been taken from him; and the King would keep it as a pledge for the restitution
of Mantua already lost, and of Cassalle, if for want of relief it should chance
to be lost. Yet this treaty being on foot made the Duke more remiss in his
joining with Spain, and desirous to handle the business so as that the
Spaniards should desire a general peace, whereby he was sure to be restored to
his former condition, and that Cassalle should not fall into the Spaniards
hands: yet he wisely cloked these his ends with several artifices. He answer^d
the French, who promising speedy possession of all that he had lost, earnestly
pressed him to declare for their King, that ^e could not in honor pass so
suddenly from the friendship of the King of Spain, to enmity with him; and that
it would be too great an indignity that the same Sun, which at his rising saw
him a Friend to that King; should at his setting find him his Enemy. That
there should some time be allowed between the one and the other; as Summer
turns not suddenly to Winter, without the interposing of Autumn; nor Winter to
Summer, without the like interposal of the Spring; he offer^d notwithstanding,
to declare himself neutral for a while, till business might be brought to some
reasonable composition, and that in case the Spaniards should fail of doing
what became them, he would be ready to declare for France, and to oppose those
who would oppose reason. These were the points discus'd in these present
negotiations; but neither was Collalto right to the King of Spain's cause; for
though now that his rival Spinola was removed, it appeared that he might more
favor the enterprise of Cassalle, had it been for nothing else but that the
easiness of the success wherein he had cooperated, might double the glory
which he pretended to by the taking of Mantua; yet through the hate which he
bore to the name of Spain, he held better intelligence with the new Duke then
with the Spaniards; and persisting in his first resolution of minding the
defense of Piedmont, and the opposing of the French more then the taking of
Cassalle, he would not afford any help thereunto.

This his ill will proceeded not from the aversion of the Cesarean Officers to
those of Spain, but from ill offices done him by the Spanish Agents to the
Emperor; for thinking that he bore no good will unto the King, they had used
all the means they could to remove him from his charge, and that he might be
sent for back into Germany; and eertainly it had been done, had it not been for
his Wife, whose favor with the Emperor defended him against the endeavors of
the Spaniards. The Duke being therefore inclined to the French, for the
recovery of his State, or to the preservation of Cassalle, for his own
indemnity; and knowing that the loss of that Town would mar the general
peace, which was the only thing which could put him into his former condition:
and Collalto being totally inclined to favor the Dukes interest, and Sancta
Croce not being of so warlike a disposition as was Spinola, but being rather
mild and remiss, and much addicted to civil negotiations, much less to the
troubles and dangers of war; it was necessary that those that looked asquint
upon the taking of Cassalle, having more field-^oom allowed by the weakness of
the present Government, should openly vent their dissatisfaction, and show the
greater resentment. The first action of want of respect toward Sancta Croce,
and of great prejudice to the main affair, was the Truce and suspension of
Arms, which Spinola refused, and which was now accepted of by the Duke in
favor to the French, and by Collalto in favor to the Duke, which had it been
never so little a while delayed, the City and Citadel of Cassalle would
certainly have been surrendered. This suspension being by them accepted, and
subscribed without Sancta Croce his knowledge, nay contrary to his will, was
presently sent to Sancta Croce to be by him subscribed. This appeared to Sancta
Croce, and to the other Commanders, to be an action, as indeed it was, so proud
and arrogant, as if the Duke and Collalto did thereby arrogate unto themselves
the supreme arbitracy of things, even about Sancta Croce's self; Yet wanting
Courage to contradict it, or to resent it, he unwillingly gave way unto it; and
the fear of the Dukes and Collalto's alienation prevailing over his dignity, he
subscribed the Truce and suspension of Arms; For had he done otherwise, the
common cause being by them abandoned, or indeed crossed, might be reduced in^o
great streights. The Truce being thus by common consent accepted, the King of
Spain's Forces quit Piedmont, and retreated to the State of Millain, Collalto
staying behind with the Cesarean Forces. Those who were before Cassalle,
retired likewise into the State of Millain, to refresh themselves, after the
labor which they had taken in the siege, except 2000 who entered the City and
the Castle, which by the Articles of Truce were assigned over to Sancta Croce,
and some few Foot, who stayed to guard the Artillery and quarters. Sancta Croce
spoke with the Duke, and with Collalto, in Pontestura, after that the Truce was
subscribed. They seemed to be both of them willing to refer all things
belonging to the management of the war to him, and by respectful and reverent
behavior, sought to mitigate his anger, and to excuse what they had done; it
was not known whether they did this really to make satisfaction for what they
had done, or to draw money from him, which they very much pressed for; for they
were known to be in truth otherwise minded. Yet so weak of counsel was he, as
he did not only take all in good part) but sought to buy their good wills with
ready moneies; (whereof though he himself were in great streights, he disburs'd
200000 Ducates, part whereof the Duke received, part Collalto. And because by
the Articles of Truce all making of Fortifications was forbidden, Sancta Croce
employed himself in making provision of faggots, and of other materials, upon
any occasion which might happen when the Truce should be expired; which
notwithstanding he proceeded in but slowly, by reason of the great hopes he had
of peace, which being joined to h^s abhorrence of war and expenses, all
provisions seemed superfluous.

These hopes accompanied and nourished with great desire, had also made the
Court of France negligent in making new recruits for Italy, had not Cardinal
Richelieu, contrary to the opinion of the whole Council, labored to persuade
the King to the contrary: Showing him that in case Peace should not be
concluded in the time prefixed for Truce, it would be necessary that the Citadel
should be surrendered; which being come into the Spaniards hands, the state of
affairs would be reduced to such a condition, as it would be bootlesse to hope
for any sa^sfaction or peace; and that so the great expe^ience, the so great
labor and troub^e which they had been at for the maintaining of Cassalle,
would together with the reputation and honor of the Arms of France be lost;
the King being persuaded by these reasons gave order for the levying of as many
Soldiers as could be, whereof a body of 1200 being raised was sent to
Pinarollo, under Marshal Marigliack, which was a good recruit to the French
Camp, it being much diminished. The 15 of October. drew near, and no news being
heard of Peace, they treated of proroguing the Truce, whereof Sancta Croce, who
naturally abhorred the thought of War, and the Commanders and Council no less
then he were desirous, by reason of the confusion and difference of opinions
and humors which was amongst them, and for the distrust they had of the Duke
and of Collalto, which made them despair of good success; but the French, whose
numbers were increased, fearing that they might dissolve by delay, and building
very much upon the necessities and weakness of the Enemy, refused it; as did
also the Duke and Collalto, being displeased that the first suspension granted
by them was ill resented. Wherefore because the world thought, and the
Spaniards seemed assured, that what they had done was a that time very
seasonable, they were now very backward; to the end that the good of the former
suspension might appear by the contrary effects, and that so Sancta Croce, and
the rest who had blamed it, might learn at their own cost to listen better in
the future to their Counsels. But the condition of affairs being much altered
from what it was when the Truce was made, made the present refusal be approved;
the French were then weak, and despaired of relieving the Town, by reason of
the stout opposition; the City and Citadel were reduced to the utmost extremity
for want of victuals, and by the advancing of the siege: it was now clean
contrary; the French were very strong in Piedmont, they met with little or no
opposition, the City and Citadel were that mean while maintained with victuals
by the Spaniards, and they had some provisions laid in for the future; The
fiege was much lessened, their courage cooled, preparations slackned, and, in
fine, the affairs of the Camp were much worse in Counsel, Courage, and Union,
and the reputation thereof was much diminished. The Truce being expired, and
nothing that was done in Ratisbone being known in Italy, the French betook
themselves to relieve the Town, but without victuals, or any other provisions
for sustenance of the Citadel which they were to relieve; their whole Forces
consisted of about 15000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, to boot with some 4000 which
were left in Piedmont, under Monsieur Di Tauanes, to entertain or to give
pretense to the Duke, and to the Dutch who remained in Piedmont after the
Truce, to keep from joining with Sancta Croce, if he should oppose the succor;
and to infuse more terror into the Enemy, they used many tricks and inventions
to make their preparations appear greater, and the number of their men more, as
well of those who remained in Piedmont, as those who went to the relief; There
were three Marshals chose, who were to manage the whole business, Sforza,
Scomberg, and Marigliack, and these were to command every day by turns; the
Duke demanded men from Sancta Croce to oppose them, but did not obtain them,
were it either out of distrust, or that knowing all the Dutch were in Piedmont,
would have the remainder for his own safety sake keep before Cassalle.
Wherefore seeing that neither the Dutch nor the Duke moved, the French Army
past over the Poe a little below Saluzzo without any opposition, and came to
Scarnafixo, where they mustered on the fifth of October. and marched on the next
day, having with them only six small pieces of Artillery. The Duke of Momorancy
being gone to France after the Truce was concluded, was not present in this
action. The marching of this Army, and the so constant resolution to relieve
the Town, afforded much discourse touching the Duke and Collalto, whether they
held private intelligence with the French or no; it being thought, that
otherwise it was impossible three Marshals should take a journey of fourscore
miles in an Enemies Country, where they had no strong Holds for the safety of
their march, or upon any occasion, for their retreat; and therefore subject to
be assaulted not without manifest danger, and forced to fight in any
disadvantagious place with a fresh, nimble Army, stronger then theirs: An^ say
they had been sure to meet with no opposition, or had had a safe Conduct sent
them by the Enemy; yet they might have supposed that they should meet with
greater difficulties and dangers when they should be at the end of their march,
and be come within sight of the Enemies Camp: For the Enemy being very well
entrenched, munited with Artillery, and being possessed of the City and Castle
of Casalle, they must necessarily either assault them upon too much
disadvantage within their Quarters, or besiege them there; either of which
would certainly have been a desperate business; but it was a no less dangerous
and ill advised Enterprise to attempt the relief of a famished place without
victuals, which had more need of speedy food for nourishment then of men to
defend them: Whereinto if they should have gotten, who sees not they must have
surrendered the Town the sooner, being to be the sooner famished by the entrance
of so many men, and would have stood in more need of victuals. The Army being
parted from Scarnafixo marched to Raconiggi, from thence to Somariva del Bosco,
then to Cerexola, that they might from thence come into the County of Asti,
getting victuals from the neighboring Towns: Whilst they advanced apace, and
in good order, without any opposition, the others were not idle before Casalle;
for having notice of the Enemies coming, they began to make Trenches, as well
against the Citadel as against the coming of succor, but more diligently on
the side of the Hills, by which way they thought they would march, it being the
higher and more advantageous; they therefore placed many pieces of Artillery
there; they likewise sent for those men back who were at the beginning of the
Truce sent into the Territories of Millain; and upon dispute whether or no they
should meet the Enemy if they advanced, it was resolved to wait for them in the
Trenches, that they might not lose tha^ advantage by going to meet them which
they were sure to have by waiting for them. Whilst these Preparations were
making came news of the peace which was made between the Emperor and the King
of France his Agents at Ratisbone, by which many things were stipulated: Those
wherein Italy was concerned, were,

That upon the Duke of Nevers his humbling himself to the Emperor he should be
re-invested into possession of his two Dukedoms, and received into protection
by the Emperor: That upon notice of the peace all hostility should cease in
Italy: That Trino should be given to the Duke of Savoy, together with as many
Towns of Montferrat as might be worth 18000 Crowns yearly vent. The Emperor
being desirous to better the Treaty at Susa, w^e i^ either for that it did in
some sort belong to him, so as he thought no account was made of that Treaty,
it being made without his Authority, or were it to recompense the Duke for the
losses he had suffered in the present Wars, wherein he had been ever constant
to the Imperial Party, he ordered so many Towns of the Duchy of Mantua to the
Duke of Guastalla as were worth 6000 Growns per annum, to the Duchess of
Lorain what the Arbitrators should adjudge unto her within a certain prefixed
time: That the Dutch, restoring Mantua with the For^s, and the Town of Caneto,
should depart Italy: That the S^iards should give over the Siege of Casalle,
and should withdraw from Piedmont ^o the State of Millain: That the French
should pass back over the Alps, quitting all the Towns of Piedmont and
Montferrat, except Pinarollo, Bricheras, Susa, and Avigliana: That the Duke of
Savoy detaining Trino should withdraw his men into Piedmont: That Casalle and
all the Forts and Towns of Montferrat should be restored, except such as should
be assigned over to the Duke of Savoy: That Nevers should have leave to furnish
such Towns as did belong unto him with Garrisons, as his Predecessors had done.
These things being done, that the Emperor should cause the City and Forts of
Mantua, and the Town of Caneto, to be assigned over to the new Duke; and that
at the same time the King of France should restore the four Towns held by him
in Piedmont to the Duke of Savoy; and that the new Fortifications which were
made in them since they were taken should be demolished: When this should be
done, that the Emperor would a^andon all the Towns and places which he had
taken in the Grisons Country, the Valtoline being therein comprehended; and
would slight the Fortifications, upon condition that they should not be made
use of by any: That the Emperor and King of France should give Hostages to the
Pope, for the observance of what was agreed upon.

This was the contents of the agreement, and conditions of the peace of
Ratisbone, for what belonged to the affairs of Italy: And many other things
relating to the affairs of Germany were likewise stipulated, which because they
concern not our History, we will pass over.

It was evidently seen what use the French Agent made in this peace of the
Emperors necessity, and of the desire he had to have his Son chosen; and how
much the Electors were swayed by the interest of the Crown of France, being
desirous to allay the great ends of the Spaniards, and to moderate the
Emperors Authority and Inclination toward them; confiding-upon the tacit
Intelligence held by them and the other Germane Princes with the King of
France, and upon the helps which they hoped for from him in these present
occurrences. The Court of Spain was not well satisfied with this peace,
thinking that the Emperor without any respect had unto the Crown of Spain, the
Interests o^ Affairs thereof, and without any care of the Common Cause, had
wholly applied himself to satisfy the desires of the Enemies thereof, granting
them more then they could have demanded or hoped for; and not being able ^o
endure that they could not with the Forces of so many Kingdoms ob^ain the
demolishing of the Citadel of Casalle, they complained that the expense o^ so
many moneys, such Forces, and so many men, had not only not produced the fruits
by them desired, but had irreconcileably alienated from them an Italian Prince,
Lord of two States confining upon that of Millain; had not got Savoy; had
scandalized the world; raised jealousies in the Princes of Italy; and which
most troubled them, had more confirmed, and almost established and radicated
the power of France, not only in Italy, but in Germany: So as the Italian
Agents, not knowing whether they ought to accept of this peace or no,
especially since they were sure it was not accepted nor approved of by Don
Carlo Doria, the Ambassador for Spain in that Diet, they forthwith sent to
Spain to know that Kings pleasure; and expecting Orders from that Crown, they
continued the Siege before Casalle, and kept out the French succor. Collalto
was sick at this time in Vercelles, and having accepted and published the
Capitulations without participating them to Sta Croce, Iulio Massarini, the
Popes Agent, went immediately with them to the French Army, to the end that
acquainting them that all things were agreed upon, they might proceed no
further: He found it in Canale, a Town in the Territories of Asti; and desiring
to know the pleasure of the Commanders, he received a very doubtful answer. The
French alleged, That the command to relieve Cassalle was immediately from the
King; whereas the Agreement made at Ratisbone came not from the King, but was
made only by the Kings Agents: And therefore not knowing what to do in this
case, they seemed much perplexed and irresolute: The truth was, that being
uncertain whether they would be accepted or not accepted by the Spaniards, by
reason of the disadvantagious Conditions for them, whom they found not any way
obliged thereunto; and finding that the time prefixed for putting what was
agreed on in execution, touching the Duke of Nevers his Interests, which was
the chief point of the present War, was somewhat long; they had reason to
doubt, That should they supersede never so little, their Army might be
dissolved before the time of executing the Articles; and it was to be
apprehended, That when the Spaniard should be free from fear of their Forces,
they might know the advantage, and make use of the occasion; by continuing to
besiege the Citadel, now that they were sure not to be molested; which if they
should once be Masters of, there was no hope, no means left, to see the Peace
performed. They therefore resolved to advance to relieve the Town, without
losing any time, thinking, that if they should succeed therein they could not
miss of some advantageous Composition, whereby the State of Affairs might be
compounded with more reputat on and safety. The small opinion they had of the
Spanish Army, and their firm belief, that neither the Duke nor Dutch would join
there with before Casalle, did the more encourage them, and made them hotter
upon the Enterprise. Mazarine wrote from the French Camp to the Duke, That in
respect of the Peace made at Ratisbone, the French would proceed no further:
And the Duke showed this Letter to Galasso, who was head of the Dutch that
remained in Piedmont: And that they might have no occasion to remove, he,
contrary to what he had formerly refused, immediately allotted them excellent
Quarters. And though the Duke appeared to have done all this for the safety of
Piedmont, against the French, who were yet there under Tavanes, yet the
jealousy increasing daily, that he held intelligence with the French, hoping
to be by them restored to his State, he was suspected to dissemble therein: Nor
was Mazarine exempt from like suspicion, who, though as Agent from the Pope, he
seemed to be a friend and mediator between all parties, yet the Pope himself
appeared to be inwardly more inclined to the preserving than to the taking of
Cassalle; and his trusting to the French too much, when he writ to the Duke
that they should advance no further, not suiting with the wariness and sagacity
of a Mediator, made the Spaniards suspect the more that he did not proceed
sincerely with them. But the streights that the Spanish Commanders were in
forced them to swallow down any thing, and with less speculativ^
considerations, to dissemble also, and to mind the Kings business, which they
saw was in too apparent danger; and their perceiving that both Friends, and
Enemies, and Mediators, and all, both internal and external accidents, did
conspire and cooperate the ruin of the Enterprise, did weaken their Counsels,
and confound their Resolutions. At the first news that was heard, that the
Enemy, being entered into the Territories of Asti, did advance, Ieronymo
Gambacorti was forthwith sent against them with a thousand Horse, with whom the
Dutch Horse which were quartered in Acqui were ordered to join; and the Duke of
Savoy was also to send them 3000 Foot from Piedmont side, to the end that with
this body of men they might, if not directly, at least indirectly, oppose the
French, by molesting them on the Rere, on the flanks, and by keeping them from
Victuals: But neither did the Dutch Horse nor the Dukes men appear; the Horse
being past over the Tannaro at Govone was entered into Piedmont, and was joined
to the others of their Nation; and the Dukes men went not past St Damiano: And
the Duke trusting perhaps to Mazarine his Advertisement, did not only not think
of making any opposition, but endeavored to keep the Dutch in Piedmont; so as
Gambacorti's Expedition wrought no effect at all; only that watching the
Enemies ways, and finding that they advanced, he speedily gave notice thereof
to the Camp, that they might be prepared to receive them; whereupon it was
necessary to have recourse to Collalto, and to get him to send for all the
Dutch from Piedmont, to join with the Kings Forces against the French: But
Collalto shrinking up his shoulders, and persisting in his opinion, would have
the Dutch stay to defend Piedmont; and the Peace made at Ratisbone, which he
had proclaimed, whereby all hostile acts were forbidden him, did honest his
denial: Wherefore the Camp being full of confusion and terror, by reason of
the uncertainty of the coming of the Dutch, and the certainty that the French
did advance, quaked for fear. All men laid this hard dealing of Collalto to a
tacit Intelligence with the Duke, and (by the Dukes means) with the French:
But provision came seasonably from Germany against this so bitter and necessary
accident. Don Carlo Doria, seeing it was impossible ^or him to hinder the
conclusion of Peace at Ratisbone, which he judged to be so prejudicial to the
Kings honor, and to the safety of his Affairs, and that he could not stave it
off till the Citadel of Cassalle should be taken, obtained Letters from the
Emperor to Collalto, wherein he was ordered, That since by the Articles of
Peace he could not have to do in that business in his behalf, and since it was
not known whether the King of France would accept of the Peace or no,
especially not being obliged to do it, That in ca^e the French should not allow
thereof, he should obey San Croce, and assist him with all his Forces.

Thus the Cause and Title being altered, the War which was made before in
Cesar's Name, was made in the Name of the King of Spain; and the Emperors
Forces, which were Principals at first, became accessory to the King of
Spain's; and the Kings, which were accessory, became upon this occasion
Principal. Collalto, who before refused to send a thousand men to Casalle, and
suffered all things to run to ruin, having received new Orders from the
Emperor, summoned all his men into the field. Galasso was come thither the
night before the French appeared, with some of them; the rest came the night
after. Gambacorti, after he had coasted along the French Army to the Confines
of the State of Millain, retreated to the Camp: And the French parting from the
Territories of Asti, went to Annone, where finding the Gates shut, they agreed
for passage with the Townsmen, without giving or receiving any molestation.
They came from Annone, by the Valley of Grana, to Occimiano, where staying that
night, and the day following, they had notice, That the Spanish Camp was well
fortified with Trenches and Artillery toward the Hills, and that therefore
they might with less danger assault them on the Plain, where the Fortifications
and Trenches were weaker, and imperfect: Wherefore they resolved to advance by
the way of the Plain. Advancing thus on that side where they were least
expected, they took Frassinetto, together with the neighboring Bridge over the
Poe, by which Victuals and forage were brought to the Camp from Allessandrino
and Occimiano, and whereby the Spanish Army was debarred Commerce with
Allessandrino; and there not being many Carriages nor Barques in the Camp,
wherewith to throw over another Bridge, they began to want Victuals; and the
penury grew the greater by the coming of the Dutch; nor had they draught Horses
for the Train of Artillery, so as it was hard for them to bring them from the
Hills, where they were already planted, to the Trenches toward the Plain,
where there were not above eight little Pieces. All of them were so troubled
with doubt, whether the Dutch would come to the Camp, or no; and with fear,
That if they should not come all would be ruined; as their coming was not
sufficient to cancel their fear, nor to curb their confusion: They wanted old
and experienced Camp-Masters, and Sergeants, to put their men in Battle Array:
Galasso was the only man who, by order from San Croce, took that care upon him,
and who discharged it like a Soldier. The French seeing that, contrary to
their opinion, the Dutch were come unto the Camp, found the disadvantage of
their own Forces; they were not only much inferior to the Enemy in number,
(20000 Foot and 5000 Horse being computed to be in the Spanish Camp) and for
that the Spaniards Horse were better then theirs, and in better order, but for
that though their Trenches were imperfect toward the Plain, yet were they so
high as they were able to withstand the first on set, wherein the French are
usually the best: But the good order wherein the Spanish Army stood did chiefly
amaze them, which was thus; A great number of Pikemen and Musketeers stood on
the front of the Trenches, behind which were two ranks of Battaglions in order,
but at such a distance from the Trench as the Horse which were on the Wings of
the Squadrons, and had their out-lets, might manage themselves in the space
which was between the Trench and the Squadrons, and might commodiously go out
and annoy the Enemies on the Flank who should assault the Trenches, or overrun
the Country as occasion should require. It was, notwithstanding, impossible to
Spuntare a Francesi, who advanced in a double Front, divided into three Bodies,
each one led on by a Marshal, with the Horse on their sides, and preceded by
some forlorn hopes; and yet the diffidence, irresolution, and the fear of what
might happen, in San Croce, kept things equally balanced; these desired
Agreement rather then Battle; and the others, though they more needed
Agreement, yet seemed they less desirous of it; and the seeing the Enemy so
forward to accord, made them the more backward; and God knows whether the
Mediators dealt sincerely in the business, or no: Mazarine went several times
between the one Camp and the other, but in vain, the French being still
resolute to relieve the City, and to fight; at last, being got near the
Trenches, their Horse on the left Wing were set upon by some few Horse led on
by Octavio Picolomini, who was advanced with them rather to discover then to
fight; so as all men thought they would have joined Battle; for some of the
French Horse went to encounter them, and they came to the giving of fire; but
Mazarine coming at the same time from the French Camp, cried aloud, Halt, Halt;
whereupon all hostile Acts ceasing, they came to this Agreement.

That Toras should come out of the Citadel with all the French, where the Duke
du Main should tarry with 1000 Montferrians; and, That they should swear to
keep the Town in the Emperors Name; That the Spaniards should do the like for
what concerned the Castle, and the City, and the Towns which they were
possessed of in Montferrat; That the French Army should retreat into France,
and the Spanish into the State of Millain; That for all things else the Peace
of Ratisbone should be observed.

This being thus settled, San Croce, together with the Duke of Lerma, and Don
Philip, son to the late Marquess Spinola, came out of the Trench, and the Duke
of Nocera, and Count John Serbellone, and about 30 other Lords; the three
Marshals came out of the French Army, with the like number of Lords and
Commanders; and here in the same place which was intended for Battle, they
mutually embraced each other; and Peace was established on the 26 of October,
the year, 1629. which was readily put in execution for what was then to be
done: A ra^e and perhaps unhea^d of ex^mple, That two Armies, of two such enemy
Nations, being so nee^, nay, after the Skirmish was begun, should not only
abstain from fighting, but should lovingly embrace one another with those hands
which were ready to be imbrued in one another blood. All men praised the
courage and counsel of the French, and their happy success, who, though far
inferior in Forces, could, notwithstanding, make such excellent use of the
Enemies fear, as to make them agree and condescend unto what was contrary to
all reason. And all men, on the contrary, wondered that the Spanish Army should
be so void both of cou^age and counsel, as not knowing how to make use of so
many advan^ages, but totally yield^ng to the Enemies pre^ensions, they should
so easily grant unto them that main point whereupon the whole success of the
present War did consist, and which being still maintained, would have
established the foundation of the grandezza of all the Kings Affairs, and would
have kept his Dominions in perpetual security; and which being quitted,
occasioned the loss of regal authority and of that preeminency and safety of
the Kings States, for the maintenance whereof Arms had with so much scandal
been taken up; and which was the greater wonder, that they should abandon their
own and their Kings pretensions, then when they were upon the point of
obtaining them; for it was most certain that the French Army was weary with so
long a march, was less in number then what it appeared to be, worse in order
for Arms, Horse, and all things appertaining to war, then upon the present
occasion was requisite; so as if the Spaniards had been more resolute and bold
in their proceedings, the French would either not have dared to have hazarded a
Battle, wherein they were to fight against well-armed Trenches; or if they
should have fought, they must necessarily have been defeated: but San' Croce,
who was not any ways experienced in matter of war, apprehended, and was afraid
of all things.

The two Armies being retired from Casalle, the Duke de Main remained with the
Montferrians master of the City, Citadel and Castle of Casalle, under the
Cesarean Commissary; who though he was above all others, and had the chief
command in outward appearance; yet being only to command such things as du
Main would obey, he was superior rather in shadow and ceremony, then in
substance: so little good was got by what was agreed upon. San' Croce went to
Sartiranna, and brought his men back into the State of Millain: the French
divided their men into two parts; the one part whereof marched under Monsieur
d' Arpasone through the Territories of Asti: the other, wherein were the three
Marishals, through the Canevese; the restitution of the Towns in Montferrat
remained for the full and perfect execution of the Agreement: but Letters being
come this mean while to San' Croce from Spain, with particular Orders what he
was to do with the Citadel, which was undoubtedly held in that Court, that it
would be lost, as not being to be succored; San' Croce doubted that the new
agreement would not be well resented there; and as in great resolutions the
thing chosen is almost always repented, the difficulties of what was found
fault with being always imagined to be past; and the consideration of what
convenience might have resulted from the thing rejected entering in the place
thereof: so San' Croce having forgotten the dangers and difficulties of war,
and being fuller fraught with the conveniences and advantage of Victory, being
also stricken with the Letters from Court, began to repent what had been done:
wherefore he made several excuses to keep from restoring the Towns of
Montferrat: which the Nuntio and Mazarin perceiving, they entered their
protestations against the danger which might ensue by the re-entrance of the
French into Casalle, they not being yet gone far from thence, and who might
bring things into greater confusion then they were before: the success differed
not from the supposal; for the Marshals sent Monsieur di Grange immediately
thither with 2000 Foot; who observing the time when the Cesarean Commissary was
gone out, entered by the gate of the Citadel, and shut it upon the Commissaries
face, who returned; at which the Spanish and Dutch Commanders were much amazed,
and very angry; and to boot with their many complaints of it, the Dutch pursued
those French which marched through the Canavese; and the Duke of Lerma, and
Duke Nocera, marched after those that were gone by Astigiana, with intention to
fight them, and to vindicate the affront: but the former having passed the Dora
Baltea, and broken the Bridge, and the others being already come to Villa
nuova, it proved all in vain: upon consultation of this new accident, several
things were propounded; amongst the rest, that since for certain there was but
little Victuals in Casalle nor in the Citadel, and that the French who were
entered thereinto had brought none with them, the Victuals which were already
there would soon be spent: so as falling to the Siege again, and the Winter
coming on, it was probable that the French, whose weakness was better known
after the Town was gotten, then it was before, would not be able to relieve it;
that it would be sufficient to employ the Dutch in the Siege, and that the
Kings men might be withdrawn to Winter in the State of Millain, and so be ready
to succor the Dutch if they should be assaulted by the French; and that if the
Dutch should tarry, or perish in that Siege, it would be of more advantage,
then prejudice, in regard of the jeajousie that the State of Millain had of
them. It was therefore concluded that, since the place could not hold out long,
it must necessarily soon fall into their hands; and that the French men's
cunning would redound to their own apparent loss and prejudice: yet the
weariness of war having corrupted the Commanders taste of Victory, it was
carried, that affairs should again be composed; whereunto the French, who were
gotten into the Citadel, were not averse, for the danger of the the Siege, they
being victual'd but for a few days: so as by the intercession of the Nuntio and
Mazarine, they came to this agreement, that the French should quit Casalle,
that the Spaniards should bring in a thousand sacks of Corn into the Town, and
should restore such places as were to be restored; to see which agreement
performed, the Marshal sent Monsieur (...) Fresh into Casalle, who was very
near breaking it again; for upon the entering of the Corn, and going out of the
French, Fresche hearing that the Spaniards, who had already quitted
Rossigliano, St Georgio, and other places, were not yet gone out of Villa
nuova, took occasion not to go out, but recalled the French who were already
gone: but la Grange being against it, who would observe the agreement, and
would not suffer his men to re-enter; the Spaniards being incensed at this
second action, made their Soldiers return into Pontestura and Rossigliano, and
their men dr^w near Occimiano, la Villata, and other Towns near to Casalle,
seeming as if they would reassume the Siege: but the Nuntio Pancirolo and
Mazarine interceded again, and they and Grange laying the fault upon Fresche,
the same agreement was again made, and was duly kept. The French went out of
Casalle, and the Spaniards out of the Towns whereinto they were re-entred; and
San' Croce ordered Carlo Guasco, Governor of the lower Montferrat, that he
should remove the Ammunition out of Nizza, quit the Town, and assign it over
into the hands of those, to whom it should be ordained by the Cesarean
Commissary. Affairs being thus accommodated, the Dutch went to quarter some of
them in the Valtoline, some in the Mantuan Territories, and some under Gallasso
in the lower Montferrat, forcing Contribution from all the Feudatories of the
Empire in Italy, and quarter; raising great sums of money from them: they put
for the like with the Genoese, desiring quarter of the Commonwealth for part of
their men: but the Genoeses refused, and prepared Forces to repulse them, being
more afraid of the Plague which they might bring with them, then their Arms;
therefore by the interposition of the Governor of Millain the Dutch were
satisfied with some drinking money given to their Captains; another accident
happened, which afforded new cause of complaint, for the not observance of
agreements. The Duke du Main was in the Citadel with some few Soldiers; for
Montferrat being partly encumbered by the Dutch who were quartered there, partly
possessed by the Duke of Savoy, could not furnish men enough for the Garrison,
it being also much impoverished of people by the Plague: fearing therefore some
bad accident, especially since the Emperors, nor King of Spains Forces were
not yet disbanded; he acquainted the Marshals with the danger, who were
quartered with their men, according to Articles, in the Towns of Piedmont: the
Marshals dismissed 400 Swissers, who were of the Kings Guard, and who were
under them, and went by their tacit Commission into Casalle, and were there
received: but the Spaniards exclaiming against it, to appease the rumors, they
were soon sent out: the resignation of the Towns of Montferrat remained for the
entire execution of the peace of Ratisbone, which resignation was much
solicited by the Duke of Savoy, out of a desire that he had to end the
differences, and his pretenses to Montferrat, that thereby he might have Savoy,
and his Towns in Piedmont, which were still detained by the French, restored;
who not being able to quarter their men commodiously therein, disposed of them,
contrary to Articles, in many of the neighboring Towns: at this time Collalto
died, who was the third Captain General of this present war: he died of the
disease whereof he had been almost always afflicted, and much more by reason of
the distaste he had received; for at last, by the much pressure of the Spanish
Agents, he was sent for back into Germany by the Emperor, to give an account
of his actions, and of his unfavourable proceedings in the business of Casalle,
and in the King of Spains affairs; he having done little else in all his
Government, but disturbed and hindered Spinola's and San' Croce's designs, in
keeping that Siege from success; and this not so much to vent his emulation, as
by the unfortunate success thereof to signalize his glory the more in taking
Mantua: wherein notwithstanding he had employed little more then his name and
authority; having been almost always sick, and for the most part but o^ the
Duchy of Mantua: the business being still managed by Gallasso and Aldringer.
To this was added that that City being rather taken by stealth then by force of
Arms, and that stealth succeeding, when the City by reason of the great
mortality of Soldiers and Inhabitants was like an expiring carcass, it
lessened much the glory of the Victory; and take away the difference of
success, their glory will assuredly be greater, that suffered before Casalle,
then theirs who had the Victory at Mantua.

Collalto being dead, who had full and free authority from the Emperor to make
peace, and to set a value upon the Towns of Montferrat which were to be
restored, they sent into Germany, expecting new Commands, and new Deputations
from the Emperors Court: they were likewise to expect the same from France;
for it was known that that King sent Monsieur di Servien, Secretary of State,
into Italy with full authority. Caesar soon conferred the Command upon Gallasso:
but the Secretaries not appearing after many days expectation, made it be much
suspected what the Kings mind was touching the observance of the peace; to
which he professed publicly he did not hold himself bound; and therefore men
knew not what to think touching the restitution of the Towns in Montferrat: the
reason alleged by the King of France why he held himself not bound, was, that
he having made another League with the King of Swedland, in favor of the German
Princes, against the Emperor, much about the same time that the peace of
Ratisbone was in treaty, or was as good as concluded; and the Articles of
Ratisbone repugning this League and Union, as also the King of France his
protection of the German Princes, that King not willing to part from the
League, nor from the protection therein contained, pretended that his
Ambassador who under-writ the Articles of Ratisbone had neither Commission nor
Command to oblige him the King touching the affairs of Germany, but only for
those of Italy: so as being questionlesly free from those of Germany, he
alleged he could not be bound to observe those of Italy, by reason of the
correspondent connection that the one had with the other: he therefore
protested, that if he should agree to that peace for what concerned the affairs
of Italy, he would not do it, as bound thereunto by the Articles of Ratisbone,
but out of his mere well-wishing to the peace and quiet of Italy. The Spaniards
suspected also, that the delay made by the French Deputy proceeded from some
end the King might have to keep the Spanish and Dutch Forces idle in Italy:
which, the peace being once agreed upon, were destined, the Spanish for the
relief of Flanders, against which the Hollanders made great warlike
preparations; and the Dutch, to succor Germany, where the King of Swedlands
proceedings prospering ^dingly, they very much pressed for assistance and
succor: so to hinder the hazardous affairs of the Emperor and of the King of
Spain, in both these places, from being relieved by those succors; for nothing
being to be treated of in Italy without the French Deputy, the Spanish and
Dutch Forces were necessarily to remain in Italy till that business should be
perfectly ended: only in favor to the Duke of Savoy, the Agents who were in
Italy chose Cherasco, a Town in Piedmont for the place of conference, where the
Duke kept his Court, it being a place least infected with the Plague; wherea^
the Duke of Nevers complained very much, as of a thing tha^ would redound very
much to his prejudice; for that the deciding of ^o weighty and important a
business being to be made in the face, and before the eyes of his so great
contradictor, the balance would not be so rightly guided as it ought: at last,
the French Deputy appeared in Italy; who being kept some days in Susa by the
Marshals, came to Cherasco about the midst of Febr. in the year 1631: where
Monsieur Pancirolo, Mazarine, Gallasso, Toras, the Spanish Ambassador for
Piedmont, and Marshal Scomberg, were present:

The Negotiation being begun, the first thing that was handled was that which
concerned the Duke of Savoy 's pretensions to as many Towns of Monserrat as
were to be assigned over to him, to the value of 18000 crowns annual revenue.
And the Duke persisting that the Towns revenues should be rated according to
the ancient Rent, and not as they went now; contrary to what the Mantuan Agents
pretended, as an expedient for this and all other differences and pretensions,
the annual Rent of 18000 crowns was by the Deputies reduced to 15000, according
as the King of France had declared by the Articles of Susa; For payment whereof
fourscore and four Towns were assigned to the Duke of Savoy, amongst which
Alba and Trino; But because it appeared that the revenue of these Towns came to
much more then 15000 crowns, the Duke of Savoy was enjoined to pay for the
overplus 500000 crowns to Nevers, and to quit the Infanta Margarit 's portion,
which Nevers, as heir to Duke Francis, did owe; In lieu of which portion, the
Duke of Savoy, and (in his name) the Deputies and Arbitrators did assign to the
said Margarite La Motto, Riva, and Costanza, three of those Towns which were at
the present assigned to the Duke of Savoy, it being lawful for him to redeem
them at any time upon payment of the portion. And by this assignation all the
Duke of Savoy 's claims and pretensions to Monferrat were understood to be
fully satisfied. As for the performance of the other points, it was agreed,
that within two months space Nevers should be put into possession of all his
Dominions, except what was assigned to the Duke of Savoy, that between the
eight, and the twentieth day of April, all the Dutch and the French should
foregoe Italy, that the first should return to Germany, the others to France;
leaving those who were in the Mantuan Towns, which were reserved to the
Emperor, and those in the Town of Piedmont, which were reserved for the King
of France. That the Duke of Savoy should also withdraw all his men into
Piedmont, not removing those who were in the Towns assigned now unto him: That
within 25 days the Duke of Nevers should be invested into his two Dukedoms, in
the same manner as his Predecessors had been. That this being done, the Forts
which have been erected upon occasion of these present Wars, in the States and
Towns which had been taken, should be demollished by the 23 of May, on which
day Mantua and the Forts thereunto belonging, and Caneto, should be consigned
to Nevers; and the Towns in Piedmont, which were held by the French, should
also on the same day be delivered to the Duke of Savoy, and presently after all
the Grisons, Towns, and places which were held by the Emperor, as well in
Rhetia, as in the Votuline, should be set free. But the difficulty consisting
in the sure performance of what was n^w agreed upon, each party doubting that
the Towns of Mantua and Piedmont being to be restored on the 23 of May, it
might so fall out that neither of the parties, either out of their own
wilfulness, or for fear of being deceived, would make restitution; or that if
the one party should do it, the other party might not do so, which would
redound much to the prejudice of the things agreed upon, as also of the
satisfaction of all, and of the public peace: it was therefore concluded, that
within the 15 days prefixed for the demollishing of the Forts, Hostages should
be delivered up to the Pope by the Emperor, and by the King of France, to be
detained by the Pope, till all things were performed.

The Pope refused to receive Hostages for restitution of the Towns in Rhetia,
for that it did not suit with Religion, nor with the Majest^ of the Popedom, to
cooperate in making Towns be restored to Heretics, which were possessed by
Catholics; and the French not being to be satisfied in this point without
caution, it was agreed upon by an Article apart, between the Duke of Savoy and
the French Agents, to which Gallasso seemed to give his consent; That the Duke
at the same time should restore his Towns to him, should put into Susa and
Avigliana a Garrison of Swissers, confederates with the King, and Valleggiany;
who were to be chosen and paid by him the Duke, and who should swear to
restore them to the Duke, after the due observance of what was agreeed upon at
Cherasco. Though this capitulation seemed to be the Emperors intention, and
that of the two Kings, who would have had freed Italy of the Dutch, and French,
at one and the same time; that without disadvantage of either party all places
retained should be restored: yet because, for assurance of this agreement, it
was resolved in the 16 Article of the Peace at Ratisbone, that hostages should
be given, who were to be named by the I^alian Agents, who were likewise to
choose to what Prince they should be given; and moreover the said Agents were
allowed liberty to do any thing else therein, which should seem best and safest
to them; and they choosing the Pope, who refused to receive Hostages; This
accommodation was found to satisfy the French, who received some prejudice in
the point which concerned the Grisons; but the more the French were therewith
satisfied, the more unsatisfied were the Sp^niards, and by their means the
Emperor. The judgment given at Chirasco was also suspected by reason of the
exorbitant assignment made unto the Duke of Savoy, of so many great and noble
Towns in Montferrat, which to boot that by the common present calculation they
came to 100000 ducates annual revenue, it was too prejudicial to the Duke of
Nevers, and weakened the rest of his State so much, as not being able to undergo
the burden of maintaining Cassalle, nor to supply it with sufficient victuals;
the Arbitrators who were aware of it, ordered that the Duke of Savoy should
permit Nevers to extract 10000 sacks of corn yearly, at the price of the
Market; which extraction, to boot with the limitation of time prefixed, reduced
the maintenance and nourishment of that Town to be at the Duke of Savoy's
pleasure; who by denying it, might besiege it, and bring it into great
streights. It therefore seemed strange, that the Agents of the King of France,
who had by his Arms professed himself to be Nevers his Protector, should consent
to what was so prejudicial to their Kings Client; and the restoring of 500000
ducates, together with the freeing of Nevers from payment of the Infanta
Margarits portion, being nothing else but a forcing of Nevers to alienate so
great a part of his S^ate at so mean a price as those two sums came to, made
more for Nevers his prejudice, and consequently made the Arbitrament more
exorbitant, and the conditions more unjust.

At this time the Duke of Feria was again made Governor of Millain, in the
place of Sancta Croce, with whom the Court o^ Spain was very ill satisfied by
reason of his ill government of the Kings business: And though Feria did not
like the thus dismembring of Montferrat, especially since the Duke of Savoy
being possessed thereof by the King of France his means, he was in appearance
likely to depend more upon him then upon the King of Spain, who would never
condescend that he should be Master of one foot of ground in Montferrat; yet
Feria, and the other Spanish Agents, dissembling their inward resentment of
this point, as not appertaining to their King; they exclaimed mainly, and
protested against what concerned the Garrison of Susa and Avigliana; and Feria
writ to the Emperor and to the King of Spain, that they should not allow of
the Articles of Chirasco, nor to the restitution of Mantua; he also complained
of Gallasso in the Emperors Court, as if adhering too much to Collalto, he had
inclined more to the Duke of Savoy then to the King of Spain: And it was bruted
abroad, that Gallasso having received great sums of money from the Duke, had
joined with the French, in being so favorable to the Duke of Savoy, in the
assigning of the Towns. And, as if affairs had been in a worse case then ever,
Feria staid the Brigadoes which were sent for Flanders, and the Dutch, who
according to the Articles of Chirasco were ready to depart; notwithstanding
that the Emperors affairs being ill handled by the Swedes at this time did
very much require succor. The business being thus interrupted, and all parties
being much incensed by this backwardness in Feria, it was thought he the more
desired to embroil business, that he might have occasion to exercise his
warlike ^alent, then to appease them; wherefore as a friend to novelty he was
commonly noted to be of an unquiet spirit: And this was observed even in the
Court of Spain, which was held to be very ill satisfied with the peace of
Ratisbone, and worse with the agreement of Gasalle; it was therefore thought
that Feria coveted to repair his Predecessors fault, and to signalize the
beginning of his Government by actions contrary to his. But a Decree made by
the Emperor after the peace of Ratisbone did much trouble all men's minds, by
which he conferred all the authority of the Sacred Empire which could be
conferred, in amplest manner, upon the King of Spain, against contumacious and
rebellious Subjects: A Decree commonly practiced in Germany against disobedient
Princes, by which that Prince who is warranted to make War is permitted to
possess himself of the disobedient Prince his Dominions, no restitution being
to be made till he have paid the whole charge of the War: By virtue of this
Decree, all Princes and Officers who are Subjects of the Empire are bound to
pay obedience to him who has this Commission, as they should do to the
Emperor, and also to deliver up unto him all Towns and Forts, and without
making any reply, to turn their Arms and Forces whithersoever that King
commands.

This Decree was occasioned by what had happened before Casalle, after peace was
made, by the King of France his protesting that he held himself not bound to
observe the Articles of that peace, and by the agreement of Chirasco which gave
little satisfaction; for the Emperor finding that the French were not content
with the peace, but that the King of France, at the same time that that peace
was made, had made a new League with the Swedish King, clean contrary to the
Articles of Ratisbone, and that he furnished him with mone^s for the W^r of
Germany; and knowing that he could not possibly repair the affairs of the
Empire both in Germany and Italy at one and the same time, he thought fit to
leave the care of the affairs of Italy to the King of Spain, the greatest
Prince and Feudatory of the Emp^e: And the Duke of Feria being substituted by
the King in this Commission, Gallasso who managed the War, and Aldringer who
had Mantua in possession, as also all the (...) Princes, Feudatories to the
Empire, were to obey him, and to assist him, as they would have done the
Emperors self; and Aldringer was bound to deliver Mantua unto him, and all the
Towns which he held in that Dukedom; for that Nevers, who having incurred the
penalty of High Treason, by reason of his contumacy and disobedience, had no
right to that peace, but was relapsed into his former fault; and the Duke of
Feria by virtue of that Decree might proceed against him with all the Forces of
the Empire. For fear that this should be put in execution, the Venetians, the
French, and all Princes who cared for the affairs of Italy, apprehended that
all things would be ruined, if Mantua should be assigned over to the Duke of
Feria; they were therefore necessitated to endeavor by all means that the
peace might be observed and ratified in the first place, and afterward reform
the Articles of Chirasco, in satisfaction to the Emperor and Spaniards. Thus
the agreement of Chirasco being of force, it was instituted touching the
restitution of the Towns and places belonging to the Grisons, whereof the doubt
remained, that the French, instead of the Garrison which by the agreement they
were to put into Susa, might keep Bricherasco; but that Gallasso should be
constituted in Mantua, and Toras in Turin, for hostages; the one for the
restitution of Bricherasco, the other for the Towns and places belonging to the
Grisons: And because this new agreement was made on the 19th of June, the time
of the former agreement being already expired, others were made like unto the
former. In this second agreement the Duke of Feria was likewise limited more
precisely touching the Garrison of Millain, and the number of the men were
lessened which he was to keep there for Garrisons, contrary to what in the
preceding peace, and particularly in this last of Chirasco, was observed; for
whereas in the former it was said, that the Kings Forces should not so tarry in
the State of Millain as to cause jealousy in the Neighbors, in this last they
obliged the Governor precisely, to send 6000 Foot and 1000 Horse out of Italy
and Rhetia, of the extraordinary Forces which were in the State; and that if
after the restitution of the places there should yet remain a greater number of
Horse or Foot then is usually kept in that State, they should be dismissed, or
should be so disposed of as no more should remain there then was usually kept
in Garrison in the time of peace. This agreement was perfectly observed: At the
time appointed the Duke of Mantua was re-invested and restored to the City and
State of Mantua, freed of all the Dutch, who shall for the future be no more
called the Duke of Nevers, but Duke of Mantua: The Towns of Piedmont were also
restored to the Duke of Savoy; and lastly, for full and entire performance of
what was cove^anted, the Hostages were set at liberty; so as Italy was likely
to return into her former serene peace.

But new clouds soon appe^ring amidst this clear weather drew all men's eyes
upon them; and seeming big of thunder, lightning and storms, made it be feared
they would break out into some dangerous tempest. The King of France some few
days after the Towns and Hostages were with satisfaction to all parties
restored, demanded some things of the Duke of Savoy: which being directly
contrary, not only to the Covenants, but to the fundamental points of the peace
of Ratisbone, and of the Agreements made at Cherasco, did disturb the Affairs
in several manners, perplexed the minds of the Italians, and gave the Spaniards
more cause of complaint, and greater reason to think themselves injured then
before: he demanded the assignment over unto him of Susa and of Avigliana, or
Pinarollo and Perosa, or of Dimone and Cunio, or lastly, Savigliano, together
withal the Towns that are upon the passage to Castle Delphino: the reason of
these his demands, he said, was, that he might have a way open to come into
Italy, upon any novelty that might be attempted by the Spaniards, to the
prejudice of his Confederates, and to secure himself of the Dukes friendship;
whom he once more saw inclined to join with the Spaniards against him. The
occasion of these demands were alleged to be, for that together with the
ardent desire which the Spaniards, as ^e said, seemed to have, to exclude the
new Duke of Mantua out of Italy, that they might unjustly usurp the States
which did by right of succession devolve upon him; and besides, that they for
the same purpose had gone against the Articles of Susa; and with their own
Forces, and those of the Dutch, called into Italy by them, and paid by their
moneys, had assaulted his Dominions and taken Mantua from him; they now
endeavored to come to a third assault, when by reason of the restitution of
the Towns of Piedmont, and the French their retiring into France, they were
themselves alone in Italy, armed in the Field, the Duke being weak and unable
to resist them, for want of moneys and men, who were consumed by War and by the
Pestilence, wherewith his States had been so sorely afflicted. The King
justified these his doubts and jealousies; for that though the Duke of Feria
had given his word to Galasso, that he would cashier the extraordinary Forces
out of the State of Millain, and reduce the Soldiers to the number that were
usually kept in Garrison in time of peace, according to the last Article of
Cherasco; he, on the contrary, had retained most of the Foot, to boot with
Scomburgs Regiment, and the Neapolitan Horse, which he had not only not
dismis'd as he was obliged to do; but had raised others by the Marquess
Rangone, and drawn them near the Confines of Millain; and that many Captains
and Officers, under color of Reformadoes, were sent by him to Naples, to raise
more men, and bring them into the State of Millain; that il Signore Merodes, a
Captain of the Emperors in Alsatia had increased his ^roops with the men that
were sent into Flanders, and that joining with Archduke Leopold he threatened
innovation against the Grisons; and that in the mean while, Merodes and his
Lieutenant did by several ways molest those people, and pick new occasions to
break the peace: that the Duke of Feria being desired by the Nuntio Panciruolo,
and pressed thereunto by the F^ench, to cashier those men, so to remove all
occasions of new jealousies, he openly den^ed to do it; and this for nothing
else, but for that, as he sa^d, the new Duke of Mantua had put new Garrisons of
French Soldiers into Casalle, contrary to Covenants; and for that the Grisons,
contrary to the Articles of Ratisbone, had fortified the passes of Stainc, and
of other places; and that therefore it was necessary to provide against these
inconveniences by way of anticipation, lest other more great might follow
thereupon: that the Spaniards, who were now more powerful in the Emperors
Court then the Dutch themselves, had labored very much, even since the Treaty
of peace, that the Emperor would deliver the City of Mantua into their hands;
and that not being able to obtain it, they had treated with the Imperial
Officers who had the Government of that City, to deliver it up unto them; and
that they had proceeded so far therein, as they failed but a little of having
it done, had they not been hindered by such Officers as were faithful to the
Emperor, and who would not consent to so great a piece of treachery: he also
said that the Emperor bare no good will to the new Duke, nor was pleased with
the peace that he himself made; for that the next day after the investment was
granted, he by a secret Article, procured by the Spanish Agents, had declared
the investment should be null and of no effect, if at any time the Articles of
Ratisbone should not be observed; and, as if this were directly contrary to the
same Articles, wherein he in express words covenanted that the investment
should be granted in the same manner as it had been formerly granted to the
former Dukes, the King alleged that that Declaration was procured only to
serve for a pretense that the Spaniards might once more assault that Duke, and
bereave him of his Dukedom upon any slight occasion: since they and the
Emperor, who were parties in this business, were made judges of the breach
thereof, and accusers of those that should break it: he further argued that the
Spaniards fomented the civil dissentions of his Royal Court, and were of
intelligence with his Brother and Mother, who were at this time fled from the
Court of France, and were gone into Flanders: to the end, that he and his
Kingdom being troubled with intestine dissentions, might not apply themselves
to the Affairs of Italy, and so they might assault the Duke the third time with
greater Forces: nor herewithall contented, that they endeavored to draw the
Duke of Savoy to join with them in their Plots contrived against the quiet of
his Kingdom, as was discovered by Letters of the Spanish Ambassadors Resident
with the Duke of Savoy, which were intercepted; and as might be better
comprehended by the Abbot Scaglia's going into England: which Abbot being
Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy in Madrid, at the same time when the Towns
of Savoy and Piedmont were restored, was sent at the King of Spains charges
into England to treat of new Leagues against France: he further urged the
Cardinal of Savoy his going into Flanders, at the same time that the
Queen Mother was to be there, and the imprisonment of the Baron S. Romano, who
after having treated in Millain with Feria, and afterward with the Spanish
Ambassador in Turin, was gone into Languedock with the Dukes Passport, and
with Order to raise men for the Kings Brother: moreover, Orders given for the
going of 500 Spaniards, and 2000 Italians, at the same time, to Barcelona, to
put those designs in execution which might by all men be imagined. Monsieur di
Servien, who was the Kings Ambassador in Turin, hav^ng delivered the Duke a
long Discourse in writing upon these and other lighter complaints, he at last
required an answer from him to these the Kings demands, within three days, to
the end, that the King might know how to dispose of his Forces that were yet in
the Provinces which confine upon Italy; putting him also in mind, that he the
Duke having gotten so great a part of Montferrat by the Kings means, and being
consequently the only man that had got advantage by the late war, he was bound,
both for convenience and gratitude, to do some thing for the safety of the
Affairs of Italy, and for the satisfaction and reputation of the Kings Forces.
The Duke immediately acquainted the Governor of Millain with the Kings
demands, and with the threats which might apparently be seen, in case he should
deny them: adding, that he the Duke not having wherewith to resist, must be
forced to choose the lesser evil, and to comply with the Kings will, unless he
were furnished with 10000 effectual Foot, and 1000 Horse for the defense of
Savoy, and with 6000 Foot and 1000 Horse for the defense of Piedmont; and if
they were paid what was their due; he should submit to the Kings will. The
Governor not being able to furnish him with so many men at the present,
offered to send him as many as he was able now, and that he might be su^e that
for the future he would procure him what assistance he could for the
preservation of his Dominions. The Duke, not content with these uncertain
generalities, agreed with the French Ambassador to assign over Pinarollo and
Per^sa, and San' Brigata to those very Swissers to whom Susa was assigned the
year before, upon Oath that they should hold them for the King, for six months
space; and that time being ended, that they should re-assign them over again to
him the Duke, unless by his own consent the time of assignment to the King
should be prorogued; that the King might put a Governor into them, who should
take the same Oath. The Duke obliged himself also, and promised not to
cooperate with them who should go about to trouble the peace of France, during
the Kings Mothers, and his Brothers absence; and to give free passage for the
French to enter Italy, if they should be brought thither by any novelty against
the Duke of Mantua. There was not any one who did not resent this so sudden and
unexpected demand, and who did not wonder, and were not amazed at the Dukes so
ready yielding thereunto: so as none were so void of reason, as not to think
that it was agreed upon long before between him and the King; especially by the
many accidents and circumstances which went to the approving thereof. The
Cardinal of Savoy went to Paris a little before the French restored the Towns
of Piedmont, and Prince Thomas^ with his Wife and Children, on whom, the Duke
having no Children, the succession of Savoy fell: the occasion of the Cardinals
going thither was given out to be, for his own respect, that he might go from
thence to Flanders to visit his Aunt the Archdutchess; and for others to be
present at some solemn Festivals which were to be had in that Court. When the
Cardinal was come to Paris, he did not pursue his journey, but tarried there
with his Brother, till such time as Pinarollo was assigned over into the Kings
Officers hands; which being done, they all returned to Piedmont: the going of
these Princes to that Court, and their tarrying there till the assigning over
of Pinarollo, made all men think that they were sent thither, and kept as
Hostages of the secret Agreement between the King and Duke, contrary to the
Articles of Ratisbone: the secr^t Capitulation of the first Agreement of
Cherasco, against which the Duke of Feria did so much exclaim, seemed to say as
much. Servien's long delay in coming into Italy touching a business of so great
importance, and wherein haste was required by all part^es, though it was then
attributed to some other cause, was afterward ^eld for cer^ain, that it was
done to give time for this resolution which was not as then ripe, nor digested:
the notable prejudice suffered by the Duke of Mantua, so openly taken into
protection by the King of France, and consented unto by the same Kings Agents,
in favor to the Duke of Savoy, who had been a professed enemy to the Kings
interest, and who besides h^ving cost that Crown so great an expense of men and
moneys, had also made him lose whole Arm^es, and his reputation, in the
enterprise of Casalle; was commonly judged to be the price and the reward of
this secret Treaty between the Duke and the King of France, touching the
concession of Pinarollo: which may appear to be clearly comprehended by the
very writing delivered to the Duke, by the Ambassador Servien, wherein after
the ^acite threats in case of denial, he endeavored to persuade the Duke to
give way unto the demands, by way of gratitude for the great obligation which
he had to the King, by whose favor ^e had gotten so great a part of
Montferrat. The Kings suffering himself for so frivolous and slight occasions,
which by treaty might easily be compounded, to be brought to resolve upon a
thing of so great moment, when France which required peace and restoration,
broke forth into combustion of Civil War by the flight of his Mother and
Brother, made all men believe that without assurance of having it readily
granted, he would not have adventured to make such a demand: which if it had
been denied, obliged him to undertake greater wars then those which, after so
much expense of moneys and blood, he was to thank fortune for his coming off
with honor, with Forces already wearied, and little better then beaten, and
upon a less just title then the former. On the other side, the great respect,
not to say fear, which the Duke when he was already restored to all his
Dominions, showed to have of those Forces, which when he was in a worse
condition he had so boldly resisted; his so much distrust of aid from Spain, by
which being assisted, he nor his Father fe^red not to provoke the French
Forces; his having by his so high and almost impossible demands rather
rejected, then desired those succors from the Duke of Feria, which he might
have received, and was bound to accept of, rather then to quit so many places
of importance.

The Duke not being moved at so unjust demands, which rather then to have
granted he was upon all accounts to have run any whatsoever Fortune his having
yielded to the worst demand, and more pr^judicial to himself of the four; his
no show of resentment after such an assignation, but his pretending a reward
for it from the Crown of Spain, as if he had once more thereby secured the
State of Millain, confirmed the general prejudiciate opinion, that this demand
was no news unto him, but a thing long before agreed upon; this general opinion
was af^erwards better confirmed by the sale made by the Duke the next year of
the same Towns to the King, and of their Territory, wherein many other Towns
were con^ained; and by this sale it was comprehended, that it was not his
alleged zeal to the public peace, nor the security of his Client and Friends,
but his desire to have a gate always open into Italy, which caused the King to
make such high and strange demands, and so contrary to the Covenants of
Ratisbone and Chirasco, agreed unto by his Agents in his name, and ratified by
the King himself, in the effectual restitution of the Town of Piedmont; the
500000 Ducates which the Duke of Savoy was to restore to the Duke of Mantua,
for the overplus of the Towns in Montferrat, assigned to him by the Arbitrament
of Chirasco, the which the King being obliged to make good to that Duke, he
afterward profes'd that he kept them against the same Duke of Mantua, for the
charges he had been at in making war for the defense and maintaining of his
dominions, was considered in the price of so many important Towns. The Duke
granted, and afterward sold unto the King those Towns upon which the liberty
and subjection of Piedmont did depend, and wherein his sovereignty did consist,
and his not being only a great and free Prince and master of himself, but an
Arbitrator of great affairs between two mighty Kings; and their worth being
inestimable, the Towns of Montferrat which were assigned, were sold at a very
under rate. For if Duke Charles Emanuel did grant all the Country of Bresse to
the King of France, a large Country and of great revenue, only that he might
keep Saluzzo, and thereby remain ^ree and absolute master of Piedmont, the
French being excepted; what comparison is to be made between Pinarollo, and all
the valley of Perosa, in consideration of the Marquesate of Saluzzo, especially
the great opportunity and consequence of Pinarollo's situation being
considered; and what proportion can the Towns assigned in Montferrat beat with
Bressa which was granted, so great a Country and so full of numerous Towns? Yet
the now Dukes action was excused by the necessity he was in to comply with the
Kings pleasure, who being possessed not only of the Towns lately granted in
Piedmont, but of all Savoy, and so many other Towns of Piedmont; and having no
hopes ever to regain them by force, it behoved him to do as the times required,
and of two evils, to choose the least; since affairs were brought to such a
condition, as he was rather to thank the King for what was in the Kings power
to deny him, then to forego what not being able to regain, was really rather to
be esteemed the Kings, then his; and which being denied gave occasion not only
to retain that, but all the other Towns that the King was possessed of. Cardinal
Richelieu being proud of so advantageous an acquisition, cove^ed that it might
never be canceled out of the memory of man, but remain in perpetual witness of
what he had done for the Crowns advantage; he also had contracted a particular
and intense hatred against the Duke upon many accounts, but more particularly
for having been brought to great extremities, both by the last Duke, and by
this; when he went the preceding year with an Army into Piedmont: so as Revenge
being added to the propagating of the King^ affairs, he thirsted to see the
House of Savoy reduced to such a weak condition and subjection, as the Dukes
thereof should never be able to hold up their heads, or to gainsay the Kings
pleasure; nor ever to put such tricks upon any of the Kings Officers or
Commanders as they had done upon him; and so to leave the impression of his
resentment for ever engraven in the depression of that Principality; and not
finding any better means how to effect it, he informed the Duke that he had no
other way to regain what he had lost, then to lose Pinarollo, and the valley of
Perosa: For the King, who professed himself not bound to observe the peace of
Ratisbone, was not to receive any prejud^ce by not accepting thereof, save only
that Mantua should not be restored to the Duke of Nevers; a loss wherein his
Kingdom was but little concerned, that City being so far distant from the
confines of France; Whereas by keeping Savoy and Pinarollo, with all the Towns
he had in Piedmont in his possession, he got incomparable more advantage, which
might largely make amends for the loss of Mantua, as well for what concerned
himself, as for what concerned the Duke of Mantua, to whom he might procure
whole Montferrat in lieu thereof, together with Savoy in fee, and so better
both his own and his Clients condition: For if Nevers should be Lord of Savoy,
he would become a greater Prince by the vicinity of his French Dominions
thereunto; and the King by retaining the sovereignty of Savoy, and possessing
Montferrat, and the Towns he had taken in Piedmont, he would extend the skirts
of his Dominions, and his authority equally on both sides of the Alps, with
much advancement of Majesty and Reputation, by the great adherence that he
would thereby get in Italy, and with much prejudice to Piedmont, which being
surrounded by the Kings Forces, would in many respects be subject to the Crown
of France; and therefore the King being to receive such advantage by not
accepting the peace, he would not by accepting it deprive himself thereof,
unless he might be sure to retain Pinarollo, and the valley of Perosa. To these
so hard and so severe conditions it may be believed, that fair promises were
added of allowing the Duke of Savoy a good part of Montferrat, if he would give
way to the Kings will: Wherefore the Duke being forced by necessity, and
incited by appearing advantage, could not but consent to what was demanded.

Thus the King of France, under the color of maintaining the liberty of Italy,
and of the Italian Princes, and under pretense that the Spaniards should not
curb the Duke of Mantua, did himself first curb the Duke of Savoy, and made a
Prince almost his Subject, who was not only an Italian, but one so nearly
allied unto him: but neither was the Duke of Mantua, when he was restored to
his State, in free and full liberty of Principality; for besides the so great
dismembring and lessening of his restored State, he being to receive a French
Garrison in Mantua and in Casalle (for that it was impossible for him to keep
those places well Garrisoned) became so dependant upon the Kings pleasure and
will, as the Kings professed protection to him, did almost impose as much
subjection upon him, as the Spaniards could have done: it being likely that the
Court of Spain, which, as has been said, was at first so near granting him
free and unconditional possession, would have consented thereunto much more
willingly, if the new Duke should but have permitted them to put a Garrison
into Casalle: in which case the King of Spain would, moreover, have been bound
to protect him and Montferrat, just as he had done the Dukes his Predecessors,
which ^e had so constantly done, with such profusion of his Subjects blood, and
of his own moneys, as without ever pretending any recompense, he kept their
State untouched against the Duke of Savoy, a Prince so nearly allied in blood
unto him; and the subjection of the Duke of Mantua* in respect of Montferrat,
did double the subjection of Piedmont; for as Pinarollo being assigned over
unto the French* opened a gate of free entrance into Piedmont whereby to be
oppressed: so was Casalle anot^er gate, which kept the Spaniards from coming to
succor Piedmont when it should be infested by the French; and neither of these
Princes being any ways able to resist the French, if once they were masters of
these places, it was clear enough seen into what condition the Liberty of their
Principalities was reduced. The Grisons fell upon no less inconveniences; for
under color that the places that were restored might not be again seized on by
the Austrians, the King kept means how to enter there, by putting French
Garrisons into them: The King of France his authority did hereby so increase in
Italy, if not in Propriety and Dominion of State, a^ least in such adherence,
as they not being able to do withal, he might make use of his adherents
States, as of those that were Patrimonial to his Crown: but the more the Duke
was to be excused for his being necessitated to yield Pinarollo to the King,
the less was his loss therein compassionated; for he and his Father, whilst he
was alive, had made that Principality hateful to the Italian Princes, by their
joining with the Austrian Forces, whilst they were thought to aspire after the
oppressing of Italy by oppressing the Duke of Nevers: where^ore the Italian
Princes rejoiced, that as those Dukes had co-operated to enslave Italy, they
had reaped the fruit and reward of deserting the Common Cause, and were
themselves taken in that snare of subjection, in which, so they might have part
of Montferrat, they cared not though others, together with themselves, had been
taken; and the same Italian Princes were not displeased to find that there was
a means found to fix the staggering of their conceits, wherewith they had
tormented others; and would not suffer any secure foundation to be laid ^or ^he
common concernments: they were likewise much more c^ntented, for that the more
they saw the Duke waver in the favor of the French, they thought the commmon
affairs the safer; and they were the surer that the Spaniards having lost all
hope of winning that Prince over to them, and knowing that the French, by the
Territories of Piedmont and Montferrat, did almost confine upon the State of
Millain, they would be forced to be the better con^ent, and would ^ay aside
much of their haughty conceits and pretentions, by which they aspired to give
Laws to all men, and to suffocate the Liberty and Sovereignty of the Princes of
Italy; and though the double and clandestine dealing between the King and Duke
were contrary to the peace of Ratisbone, and to the Treaties of Cherasco, yet
winking at so great a gainsaying, they allowed of the Kings justification; and,
on the contrary, the Declaration made by the Emperor touching the investment
of the Duke of Mantua the day before, was judged to be clandestine; and yet he
who shall justly consider the cause which moved the Emperor to make that
Declaration will find that he was not to be blamed for it; nor had any, and
much less the King of France, reason to complain of the Articles which were
granted before; for the Articles of Ratisbone being reciprocal between the
Emperor and the King, it was clear that the one party observing them when the
other did not, it was lawful for the observer to withdraw from what he had on
his side done: but the original fault of the first moving against the Duke of
Mantua conveighing sinister influences into all actions which did depend upon
that moving, did little justify any action which might any ways prejudice the
Dukes interest; and the Italians minds being incumbered by fear that the former
wars of the Valtoline, and then those against Mantua and Montferrat, aimed at
the inslaving of Italy, they allowed no place to any more subtle
interpretations or considerations, to define what was just and honest; since
justice and honesty seemed to have taken up the highest seat in the balance,
which did secure the Liberty of Italy; and whatsoever co-operated to lessening
the Spanish greatness, being held good for the common liberty and safety, was
esteemed just and honest; according to that saying, salus populi suprema lex
esto: for this respect the Duke of Feria's suspicion was not thought just, who
seeing the French brought into Mantua and Casalle, and the Grisons parts
gartison'd with French, pretended that it was against the Article of Peace, the
events soon showed that the pretense was not vain, since it was seen that those
places fell into the hands of the French: so as their actions were applauded,
and the Spaniards suspicions blamed; some of the I^alian Princes joyed to see
that the French were became, as it were, Arbitrators of Italy; and little less
then masters of Mantua, Montferrat, and Piedmont, and Concha, if for no other
cause, at least for that they thought them, by reason and opportunity, to be of
equal power and authority to the Spaniards, and peradventure superior to them,
by reason of the adhe^ence which those Princes would rather have with him, then
with the King Spain; for they desired to keep the Spanish Forces curbed by
those of France; the Spaniards being grown jealous and hateful to them: this
was the success of the ill advised, ill governed, and worse justifiable Spanish
Forces; this was the fruit they reaped of their so much stirring, to no other
end, but that they could not tolerate that a Prince who depended upon France
should have any possessions in Italy: nor were the King of France his Forces
less fortunate out of Italy; for to boot with the Garrisons put into the
Grisons Country, whereby they depended no less upon his arbitrament then did
the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, he did at the same time assault Lorrain with a
powerful Army, being offended with that Duke, who had received and fomented the
Duke of Orleans, who, as has been said, was fled from the Court; and the Duke
of Lorrain having no means to defend himself, the Emperou^ and all Germany
being sufficiently molested, and a great part of Germany possessed by the
Swedes, he was forced to humble himself to the King, and to sue for peace,
which was not granted him without parting with some of his chiefest Towns; and
being thus received into protection, he obliged himself not only to give free
passage to the King through Lorrain, whenever he would go with an Army into
Germany, but to join with him in that war, and assist him with a certain number
of men, whilst he went to defend the liberty of the German Princes, the ancient
Friends and Con^ederates of his Crown: wherefore when the King drew near
Germany with his Army, the Ecclesiastic Electors, and many other German Lords
and Princes, put themselves under the protection of the Crown of France,
pretending fear of the Swedish Forces, but in effect to have a Protector of
their greater liberty to which they aspired against the Austrian authority.
Much about the time that the Peace of Ratisbone was concluded, a League (as
has been said) was made between the King of France and the King of Swedland,
in defense of all common Friends, and of all the German Princes in their
oppressed Liberties, and to restore Germany, and the Princes thereof, to the
same condition they were in before the war began: in which League the King of
France obliged himself, to pay 400000 Crowns a year unto the Swede for
maintenance of his Army: which was as much as to set up a Standard in
maintenance of the German Rebellion, unto which all malcontents might have
recourse: nor did the design prove vain; for after the famous Victory of the
Swede and Duke of Saxony, before Lypsick, as has been elsewhere said, wherein
the Emperors Army and that of the League was discomfited, and almost all
slain, and wherein Tilly was also sorely wounded; the Protestant Princes openly
adhered unto the Swede, and joined with him against the Emperor; and those who
in respect of the Catholic Religion could not openly adhere unto an Heretic
Prince, who was manifestly bent to take ^he Empire from the house of Austria,
and to overthrow the Catholic Religion; and who were unsatisfied with the
Austrian Dominion; taking pretense from their fearing the Swede, had recourse
to the King of France, by whom being taken into protection, they covenanted
neutrality between the Swede and the Emperor, and to permit the King of France
to pass armed through their Territories; by means of which protection they were
secured from the Swedish Forces; and the Emperor who was by this means bereft
of the adherence and help of almost all the German Princes, and also openly
assaulted by the Swede, and his adherents, and molested underhand by the King
of France, was brought to so low a condition, as not being well able to
withstand so many enemies, the affairs of the Empire were in a very sad
condition; to this was added, that the Duke of Bavaria, who was head of the
Catholic League, and the greatest maintainer of the Catholic Religion, and
who next to the Elector of Saxony was the greatest support of the Empire and of
the house of Austria, especially after Saxony his revolt, was also, though very
secretly, confederated with the King of France; which King by Articles of
Confederacy was bound to maintain the upper Palatinate, and the Electoral
Dignity, for ever, in this Duke, and in the house of Bavaria; which State and
Dignity being forfeited by the Prince Elector Palatines Rebellion, were for
some years before conferred by the Emperor upon this Duke of Bavaria: the
occasion which moved this Prince to this resolution was commonly attributed to
jealousy of the peace made at this time at Madrid, between the Kings of Spain
and England; for knowing that the King of Spain was displeased at the
con^erring of the Electoral State and Dignity upon him, and that the authority
and power of the house of Bavaria should be so increased, and that he had
opposed the Emperor in conferring it upon him; and knowing that the King of
England, whose Sister was Wife to the Palatine, labored hard that the Palatine
or his Son might be restored to their former condition, he thought he had just
occasion to doubt, that the Peace made between the two Kings, who were for
several respects desirous to deprive him of it, might tacitly contain some
Agreement between them, to his p^ejudice. And on the other side, having soon
after that Peace was concluded sent the Abbot Scaglia into England, in
appearance to treat of Truce and Peace in the Kings Name with the Hollanders,
but in effect to treat o^ a League against him, as he complained, and as the
King of France had heard; therefore both Bavaria, and the King of France easily
joined in this Convention, for their own safeties sake, and that they might
make plots not inferior to those that were plotted against him. And that they
might the better alienate the Bavarian from the Emperor, the Kings of France
and of Sweden promised him the Imperial Crown, whereof (when the Emperor
should be beaten) no Germane Prince seemed to be more capable then he, as being
the most powerful of all the Catholic Princes, and who had most care of the
Catholic Religion; and for that he, as one of the Electors, had a Vote in
choosing the Emperor; and his Brother, who was Elector, and Archbishop of
Collen, another Vote; with whom the Archbishop and Elector of Triers would
join, who was the first that had joined in League with the King of France, and
had received a French Garrison into that State, particularly, into the Fort of
Hermenestein, a strong Fort, and of great consequence, being situated where
the Mose falls into the Rheyne: The Votes of the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburg, who were declared Enemies to the House of Austria, and who
depended upon the Swedish King, would likewise have concurred in the same
Election, when the Bavarian should be by that King promoted to the Empire, as
he ^ad promised.

The Duke being therefore ^ed with these hopes, and apprehending that the
Austrians would deprive him of the Palatinate, and Electoral Dignity, and that
they would restore^it to the Palatine, totte^'d in his intelligence with the
Emperor, and met with a new accident, which gave him more and better reason to
alienate himself from the Emperor. The Emperor being reduced to great
streights by the Swedish Forces, by the rising of so many people, and by his
being deserted by so many Germane Princes, had (as has been elsewhere said)
for the last remedy of the imminent danger the Empire was then in, which also
threatened him, sent for Wallestine Duke of Fritland, and had once more made him
general of all his Forces; for he was the only man on whom it was thought the
welfare of the Empire might sa^eliest depend. There had been such high
distastes between this Wallestine and Bavaria, as the Bavarian in the Diet of
Ratisbone had been the chief cause of his being laid aside; and, doubtlesly,
had the Bavarian openly declared against the Emperor, and had adhered to the
contrary Parties, the Affairs of the Empire would have been but badly
sustained: But were it either, that he received such assurances from the
Emperor as took from him all distrust, or, that his hopes of attaining the
Empire seemed but small, especially since both the Kings who offered and
promised it unto him were known to be ambitious of it themselves; or, that he
was at last wisely aware, that the two Kings did desire to separate him from
the House of Austria, only that they might weaken it, and so the more easily
suppress it, whereupon his ruin would assuredly succeed; he meddled not with
any novelty, but stood firm and constant in defense of the Catholic Religion,
and of the Imperial Majesty. To this was added, that the chief ends of the two
Kings, and of all the German P^nces, was to restore the Palatine to his former
state and dignity: whereof they were much more troubled then was the King of
Spain, to se^ Bavaria master. He therefore had no reason to trust them in what
was directly contrary to the end of the common Arms, and to the universal
desire and consent of whole Germany, which for the common concernment could not
see the Palatine deves^ed of his Dominion, and Bavaria endued the^ewith; and as
it might be supposed, that the two Kings, out of these respects, did promise
that unto him which they could not possibly effect; so it might also be
comprehended, that the same Bavaria seemed to make league and union with the
two Kings, so to keep the Austrians from depriving him of the State and Dignity
which they had conferred upon him; so uncertain and fallacious are the unions
and confede^acies of Princes.

In this wavering condition were the Affairs of Germany, whereof the King of
France seemed to be become no less Arbitrator, then of those of Italy; for the
Swede differed much from him in point of Authority, and profes'd to depend much
thereupon, notwithstanding all the victories he had gotten, and all the happy
course of his prosperity; and the King of France his being deeply engaged in
the affairs of Germany took him much off from the Wars of Italy; whereat,
though the Governor of Millain, and the Spanish Agents, were much troubled,
fearing his Forces which they saw were received into the Towns of Italy, yet
did not his Forces do any thing after the assignment of Pinarollo; all things
passing quietly on, unless it were the preparations, and several levies of men,
the Spaniards being obliged to keep greater Garrisons, upon occasion of
Pinarollo, Cassalle, and Mantua.

The new Duke of Mantua, though peacefully possessed of his States, was not at
all happy in enjoying them; for, not to mention the troubles which he past
thorough, the moneys spent, and the dangers which he ran in arriving at the
succession thereof; his Dominions were so lessened, so dismembered, so consumed
and wasted both in men and moneys, as his need of assistance from other
Princes, to maintain them, was greater then the authority or Grandeur that he
got by them; and having engaged his Lands in France, in defending and
maintaining his Dominions in Italy; he lost the advantage of both his chiefest
Towns, being possessed by others, he had little more then the bare name of
Principality left him: Nor was he in a more free and absolute condition of
Prince, then when he was a Subject in France, and vassal to that Crown; so as,
he who would justly consider this Prince his condition, must think that his
happiness, in so great possessions, redounded to his greater misfortune, and
that it had been better for him to have wanted them. To so many calamities and
miseries was added the death of his two only Sons; the Eldest, who was Prince
of Mantua, dyed in Goito six days before that Town was ^estored. So as the
succession of his Family fell upon a young Infant, and Son to Princess Maria,
who after Duke Vincenzo's death was married, as has been said, to the Duke of
Retell, the present Dukes eldest Son, who had he lived must h^ve been Prince of
Mantua; the other, who was Duke De Mena, or Du M^yne, dyed some few months
after in Mantua.

To complete the quiet and felicity of Italy, the composure of the differences
between the Commonwealth of Genoa, and Duke of Savoy yet remained; which being
several times treated of, given over, and reassumed, could never be brought
to perfection. For after that by Marquess Rambollie^'s departure from Madrid
the business was left unperfect; Dom Ramires de Prado was sent by the King of
Spain to the Camp before Rochell, with commission from the King and
Commonwealth, to negotiate and to conclude that peace: Where, after much
discourse, they came to this conclusion; that Zuccarello should remain to the
Commonwealth, upon the payment 100000 Crowns to the Duke, but with conditon
that the Dukes right should be preserved to what soever more monyes he had
disbursed, when he first bought that Marquesate. Neither of the parties, nor
yet the King of Spain, were pleased with this peace. For the Commonwealth was
not only troubled at so excessive a sum, at which they themselves against
reason were assessed, but much more for that a gate was left open for the Duke
to make new pretentions, which might occasion new Wars. The Duke, on the
contrary, complained that his interests were valued at no higher a ^ate, and
moreover did not accept of the Peace, because the conspiracy of Genoa happening
at the same time; he took new occasion of complaint, and altercation, upon the
impunity which he pretended unto of the Conspirators, which was denied by the
Commonwealth: And pretending that their punishment was a breach of the Truce
agreed upon but a little before, he thought that so great an innovation not
being imbra^ed, nor salved up by the peace of Rochel, that capitulation was
void; which did not perfectly compose the ancient grievances, and ^eft the
greater and more modern complaints undecided. And he being at that time joined
with the Crown of Spain, upon occasion of the Wars of Montferrat, neither had
the King of France any authority to make him observe it; nor would the King of
Spain exasperate him, to the prejudice of the new conjunction: And therefore
easily laying aside the Commonwealths complaints, touching the prejudice which
she pretended to receive by that peace, he did not enforce the execution
thereof upon her. Thus this peace by the repugnancy of the parties, and by the
tacit consent of the Arbitrators, remained unperfected; and the continuing of
these differences seemed then to make for the King of Spain's advantage; for
the Commonwealth being necessitated to keep in Arms, and to entertain many to
defend her, the King had an Army maintained at the Commonwealths charge,
whereof he might make use according as the Wars of Montferrat should succeed;
this agreement then not being admitted of, and new occasions of distastes
happening, the Affairs between these two parties were in greater disorder then
ever, and the Spaniards were not well looked upon by the Commonwealth, for
having sided with the Duke in his complaints. In these difficulties did things
continue during Duke Emanuels life; when he was dead, the composure of all
differences was by his Son absolutely referred to the King of Spain; Wherefore
the Commonwealth willingly accepted of the bargain, but with very express and
precise exclusion of that point which concerned the impunity of the
Conspirators, of whom they would not suffer any mention to be made, it being so
exorbitant a thing, of so bad example; and so contrary to the dignity and
safety of Princes,

The Court of Spain was not well satisfied with this exclusion, as if (...) did
mi^ become the Majesty of the King, that the Commonwealth should proceed with
such limitations and reservations, when the Duke referred all things absolutely
to the King; at length, after many replies, the Commonwealth yielded, and put
her self freely upon the comprimise: And the business being long disputed in
that Court, between Francesco Lomellino the Commonwealths Emb^ssadour, and the
Dukes Ambassador Abbot Scaglia, and no resolution being made in that point,
first the Pope, and then the King of France, after the re-assigning of
Pinarollo, offered their endeavors and Authority to the Commonwealth, in the
composure of differences, acquainting her, that they would give her better
satisfaction then she could hope for from the Court of Spain: But the
Commonwealth, which had already referred all unto the King of Spain, thought
her self not in a condition to accept these offers; wherefore thanking both of
them for their favor showed towar^s her; she excused her self for not being
able to accept of the Grace done unto her by his Holiness, and his Majesty,
without being faulty to his Majesty of Spain, since she could not alter nor
vary any thing from (...) she had once granted him. At last the Articles of
Peace were concluded in Madrid, and published about the end of November, 1631.
which in substance were;

That both Parties should be obliged to restore what had been taken; by which
it was declared, That the Commonwealth should restore the Towns and Places
which she had taken from the Duke, the Artillery, Gally, and all Prisoners,
and, That the Duke should do the like: That the Commonwealth should keep
Zuccarello, paying unto the Duke at four payments 170000 Crowns of Gold, in
f^ll for whatsoever he could pretend unto upon that account: That all things
held in Fee, or Rented, together with all Reprisals and Confiscations made
during the War, should be restored to the former owners: That all who had
served the contrary Parties in the late War should have general Pardon granted
them; namely, ten of the Conspirators, who were never to re-enter the
Commonwealth, under pain of the former punishment, and of not enjoying the
present Grace.

The Commonwealth accepted Il Lodo, though unwillingly, rather for that they
thought it not ^it to countervene what had been adjudged by an Arbitrator
chosen by themselves, then that they did not think themselves grieved by the
great sum of money, in which they thought themselves injuriously sentenced; and
much more, by the impunity of the Conspir^tors, to which they thought they
should not have been compelled, as was promised them when they resolved to come
to a free comp^imise: But the Duke, on the contrary, exclaimed against this
Decree, and refused to accept of it; wherewith the King thought himself as much
injured as he had been formerly displeased with the Commonwealth for limiting
the comprimise. The Duke complained, that the King had been too sparing in
limiting the Conspirators, as well in ^umber, as in the Conditions of their
Pardon, pretending, that all the Conspirators should have been freely pardoned,
without any limitation; he demanded, That the Galley might be restored in the
same equipage, and with the same Galley-slaves that were in her when she was
taken: That the Artillery should be brought into Gavio, where it was left; and,
That it might be lawful for him to send men to bring it from thence in a
military manner into Piedmont: That for the payment of the 170000 Crowns of
Gold, the quality of the Crown in Gold should be declared; and, That the
Commonwealth should be bound to ascertain the payments at the prefixed times;
and, That good security should be given for it in France, or in some other
Parts, wherein he might confide. The King being much displeased with this
stubbornness, would by no means be brought to any other Declaration, or
alteration of Ill Lod^, the rather for that he feared the Duke was thus
backward by the Court of France its suggestion; and it seemed that that Court
thought her self prejudiced by this Decree; for that these differences being to
be determined, according to the Peace of Monsone, by both the Kings, the King
of Spain had ended it himself, without participating therein with the King of
France, not making any account of the Peace of Monsone, nor yet of the Peace of
Rochel, which by common arbitriment was adjusted between the Commonwealth and
the Duke. It was therefore suspected, That the Duke, in favor to the French,
to whom by the assignation of Pinarollo he seemed to be joined, would never be
satisfied with any Declaration that the King could make, to the end that by
this Appeal he might be loose, and, with scorn to the Spanish Authority, put
the whole negotiation and decision into the arbitriment of the King of France.
This suspicion was increased by the King of France his offer to the
Commonwealth, That he would end this business with more satisfaction to her, if
she would put it to his arbitriment.

Affairs stood thus in suspense for some months, during which time the Duke
complained that so many of his Patrimonial Towns should be de^ain'd from him by
the Genoeses, and said, that he would have recovered them by force of Arms;
which if he should have done, his friends would not have been wanting in
assisting him, whereby the King of France was understood: He therefore caused
new rumors not only between him and the Genoeses, but even between the two
Crowns, which would necessarily be engaged in defense, the one of the one
party, the other of the other. The Cardinal Infanta, Brother to the King, being
come into Italy, he was empowered by the King, and by the Par^ies, with faculty
to decide these points; and the controverted points being formerly discussed
before the said Cardinal, by Iovan Michael Zoagli, Resident for the
Commonwealth, and by the Abbot de la Torre, Resident for the Duke in Millain,
the Cardinal declared, That as for them who had served either party with Sword
in hand in the wars, the Pardon should be understood to be free and general;
but as for those who had been guilty of any Commotion since the year 1625. it
should be in the King to declare, whether they should be comprehended in the
Pardon, or no: That the Galley should be restored in the condi^ion that it was
in at present: That the Artillery should be delivered by the Commonwealth in
Savona; and by the Duke in such places as should be nearest the Commonwealths
Territories: That the Crowns should be understood, according to the Spanish
valuation; and that no mention should be made of the Dukes putting in security.
The Duke accepted of this Declaration, but not the Commonwealth, in respect of
the first point, wherein power was reserved to the King, if it should so fall
out, whether offenders should be pardoned or no; as well because the
arbitrament seemed to exceed the Articles of Madrid, as also that they desired
the business might at once be wholly decided, and that no power should be left
in the King to meddle any further in the Commonwealths jurisdiction, by any
Declaration: especially since the general word Commotion might be understood to
reach to many other things, not at the present thought upon; in respect whereof
the Commonwealth held it not good to have any occasion of coming to dispute
with the King; whereupon the Cardinal made a new Declaration, wherein he
pronounced, that none of those who were Prisoners for any commotion or other
fault, unless such as were named in the peace of Madrid should be conceived to
be comprehended in the pardon, save only such as were Prisoners of War; and
that the King should make no further declaration touching any that were guilty
of faults; all things were hereupon ended, and put in execution; and an end was
put to this War made by the Duke, upon account of Zuccarello in appearance; but
in effect, by many Princes who envied the Spanish grandezza, that they might
lessen it by lessening the power of the Commonwealth of Genoa, so annexed and
so opportune to the power of Spain. The Commonwealth spent in this War above
ten millions of Crowns, which were raised, partly by Taxes from private
Citizens, partly by Gabels and new Impositions: true it is, that many
Fortifications were computed into these expenses; for, not to mention the
lesser, Porto Mauritio, Gavio and Savona, were fortified with Curtains and
Bulwarks Royal; but sta^ely and worthy of wonder is the compass of the new Wall
made about the City of Genoa its self, upon Mountains which do inviron it,
which beginning from Capo de la Lanterna, which is on the West, and going round
upon the back of the Mountains toward the North, terminates in the Valley of
Bisagno, and joins with Capo di Carignano, which is the utmost and most
Easterly point of the City; and turning from thence inward, along the Maritime
shore, joins with the ancient Walls, incompassing about eight miles; the whole
Work is almost of Freestone; and so is, for the most part, the very Castle it
self, which serves for Curtain and Bulwark; except in some places, where being
unequal, it is filled up with a strong Wall; which being pargeted with Lime and
Mortar, is not only strong, but very beautiful: this Fortification is exactly
helped by nature; for the Mountains upon which the new Walls are built, to boot
with their great height, are so steep and craggy on the out side, as the Walls
need fear no assault; the foundations so sound and firm, as they fear no
mining, and seated so far off, as they are no^ subject to battery; any
hostility would be obviated by the ver^ tumbling down of stones: the Country
thereabout is so barren, as no enemies A^my can keep long there; there wants
earth to make Approaches and Trenches; and yet, as if the nature of the
situation were niggardly unto them, and scanting of munition and strength; the
Walls are wrought with such A^t, Diligency and Industry, as Bulwarks are
erected at due distances; the Curtains proportionably extended, and the Ditches
^ound about from 50 to 100 foot broad, and 12 or 15 foot deep in stone; nor
does less diligence appear to be used on the inside, round about which there
goes a way, which is at least 60 foot broad, very convenient for carrying
Artillery, and for ordering defendants upon the Wall: the Bulwarks have
dis-inhabitated the Cottages upon those Moun^ains, and made Lodgings for
Soldiers, digging Cesterns in the very Rocks: so as there is nothing left
unprovided for, either by Art or Nature, which may make for the safety and
defense of this great Fabric. Art and Nature have been no less propitious and
favorable in the Valley of Bisagno, where the situation is plain, and where
there are no Rocks: the Plain lies between two little Hills, which thrusting
out like two wings; serve to the inward Works for two Flanks or great Bulwarks,
from whence the Artillery may clear all the parts below; for the current of the
River being for the most part gravelly, defends it; moreover, the Bullets of
the Artillery lighting from the two Hills upon the stony bed of the River would
scatter such store of gravel upon the assaulters, as it would be impossible for
them to advance: so as this part, which otherwise would be less defensible then
any other part, is as strong as the rest; nor has so large a circuit need of
many defendants for being almost unaccessible every where, the only Sentinels
which keep from Scaladoes, and stolen accesses by night, which are only to be
feared, are sufficient to guard it from any other misfortune: few and slender
Corpse de guarde, disposed in fitting places, will suffice to keep off any
unexpected attempt; for those mountainous and rocky places are not subject to
any long thought on assaults: there were diverse Inscriptions engraven on the
Gates; amongst which this, made by the Author of this present History, was
reputed none of the worst.

Quartum murorum ambitum aggeribus, fossa propugnaculis vallatum, stadiis 62
per juga montium, per ima vallium, per Maritimum littus deductum, Genoensium
Respublica Libertatis Munimentum excitavit.

Coeptum Opus, Anno 1630.

Perfectum, 1633.

The Commonwealth having thus by peace put an end to the troubles of War, might
with much reason hope for better time for the future: the Commonwealth was at
this time likewise free from another imminent which threatened her; the Plague
which, as has been Formerly said, raged in all that part of Italy which lies
between the Alps and the Apenine, even to the Adriatic, passed also into
Tuscany: so as the State of Genoa, being every where begirt by so pestilential
a disease, it seemed almost impossible she could escape it; and yet such
diligence was used, so good Orders given and observed for three years space, as
the State of Genoa was not at all touched therewith, except in some part of the
Western River, and beyond the Apennine. The Affairs of Italy being thus
peaceably settled, this present History might seem to end opportunely here; but
three things (which for not interrupting the History, have not yet been spoken
of, and which may fitly be brought in here) may not be pretermitted, without a
blemish to this Narration. The first whereof is, that the Infanta Maria, Sister
to the King of Spain, Wife to Ferdinando King of Hungary, and Son to the
Emperor, came from Spain into Italy, the year 1631, to pass into Germany; and
thinking it dangerous to go through Lombardy, by reason of the Plague which was
then very great there, ^he thought to come in her own Galleys through the
Adriatic to Trieste: but the Venetians not being willing upon any whatsoever
occasion to wave their pretensions; and the King of Spain not being able by
reason of so many Wars to assemble a powerful Fleet; and howsoever not thinking
it fit to expose his Sisters life to the hazard of a Naval fight; and the
Venetians on the other side, to conveigh her with their own Galleys to Trieste;
she therefore parted from Naples, where she had been all that Winter, and came
to Ancona, and there going into the Galleys of the Commonwealth she was brought
in great glory and splendour to Trieste* from whence she went to Cesars Court.

This same year 1631, Francisc^ Maria, the last Duke of Urbine, of the Family
of R^vere, died; who drew his ancient original from the State of Genoa, from
whence came Sixtus quartus, and Iuli^ (...), Popes of famous memory, by whose
means that Dukedom came into that Fa^ily: he died, aged 82 years, in Castle
Durante, not far from the City of Urbin^, whither he had retired himself to
live privately, that he might the better attend his souls health; for some
years before his death, he had not only sent ^or some Prelater from Rome, to
satisfy the Pope, who were to govern that State in his name, but, he had also
brought (...) Garrisons and Commanders into his Forts, who were to swear to
keep it in his name whilst he lived, and in the name of the Church when he
should be dead: he had that happiness dying, which did sufficiently make amends
for the loss of his State; for though that State could not come to his Niece
after his death, he saw her Mistress of a much greater, having married her to
Ferdinando the Second, great Duke of Tuscany; he likewise invested Iulio de la
Rovere, a Gentleman of Genoa, and a Venetian, being his nearest Kinsman, with
the Towns of Tomba. Ripa and Monteralto, seated in the jurisdiction of
Sinigaglia; to the end, the memory of the Dukedom might not be extinguished
after his death, but that some footsteps of his name and Principality might
remain in the Family of the Rovere in that (...). Thus did Pope Urban by
industry and negotiation get the possession of that Dukedom to devolve to the
Apostolic See, without e^ther Arms, or trouble, or any of those great
oppositions which he would have certainly met with, had they not been wisely
foreseen and diverted: by this Dukes death the Prefectura of Rome was also
vacated; a place of great preeminence, worth 12000 Crowns a year, which was
hereditary, and which beginning in Francisco Maria, Duke dela Rovere, continued
in Guido Ubaldo, and in this l^st Duke Francisco Maria; and the Pope conferred
it upon his Nephew Don Tadeo Barbarino, and upon his descendents.

The burning of Vesuvius, a great Mountain near Naples, was also memorable,
which happened about Christmas, and was so great and full of terror, as a
grea^er has not been known nor read of: Some earthquake preceded the night
before; and the Mountain breaking out into horrible thunder about break of day,
it threw out a great flame, mixed with much ashes, and great stones, which,
those that saw it say, were thrown above the first Region of the Air, and the
ashes were carried by the wind into the Archipelagus; the stones, which in
great number and quantity were vented out, fell down at Mel^, a hundred mile^
off: Great store of fiery rosin issued likewise out of the same Mountain, which
branching forth into seven Rivolets, not unlike a swif^ Torrent, fell into the
neighboring Sea, to the infinite prejudice of many people, and of some Towns,
which were thereby burnt. The same Mountain, on the opposite side belched out a
swift River of water, which, causing great inundations, occasioned no less
mischief then that of the fire, which burst out on the other side. The Sea,
were it either by reason of the Earthquake, or for some other hidden cause,
fled from the shore; in Naples the Ships lay on ground; and had not the Sea
suddenly returned to its former Channel, they would have incurred danger of
being broken. Near to Sorento the Sea flew a mile from the shore; and (which is
most miraculous) the rosin, which being fired fell from the Mountain into the
Sea, kept burning for above twelve miles, insomuch as when the fire ceased,
great store of Fishes, roasted by the fire, floated upon the superficies of the
Sea; but none would eat them; for that very ancient Writers witness, That the
like accidents having happened in the Seas of Sicily, the eating of such Fish
caused death.

It would be tedious to relate many other monstrosities which happened thereupon;
especialiy since many Learned men have written whose Volumns upon it, with many
Philosophical and Natural Observations, and Considerations, which are indeed
rare and curious, but not worth an Historical Narration.

The End of the Twelfth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK XIII.
The Contents.
THe Peace of Italy, obtained by the Articles of Ratisbone and Cherasco, gives
place for a digression of things which happened elsewhere. This present Book
tells you of the Duke of Orleans his going from Flanders into Languedock, and
how, being routed by the Kings Forces, he was taken Prisoner. The Infanta
Cardinal, Brother to the King of Spain, his Voyage from Barcellona into Italy.
The Duke of Feria his marching from the State of Millain with a great Army,
going for Germany, to make way for the Cardinal Infanta, who prepared to go for
Flanders: What the said Feria did in Flanders. From hence we pass to the
Narration of the Wars in Germany; to the King of Swedland's death, and the like
of Wallestine, with a brief Examination of his actions, intentions, and of his
end. The Emperors Army takes the Field, led on after Wallestine's death by the
King of Hungary, Son and General to the Emperor, with what he did till the
Cardinal Infanta entered Germany, who parting with a great Army from Millain
toward Flanders, jeyns with the Emperors Army, and fights the Army of the
League of Germans and Swe^es before Nordling, wherein the A^strians have the
better. The Infanta passes with his men into Flanders, w^ere, when he came, he
found a League made between the King of France and the United Provinces,
against the Spanish Empire in those parts, which occasions an open breach
between the ^wo Crowns; the occasion of which breach, with the reciprocal (...)
faults, and excuses made by both Parties are (...) related; and how after the
Battle which happened upon the Confines of France and Flanders, between the
Armies of the two Crowns, the War passed into Italy.

THe Peace of Ratisbone, had it been readily embraced, and punctually observed
by the King of France, it was probably hoped would have put an end to all the
troubles and commotions of Italy and Germany; but being openly refused by the
same King for what concerned Germany, and excused but in appearance only, and
in respect of the business of Pinarollo, for what concerned the Affairs of
Italy, it reduced the Affairs of the Empire and of Christendom into greater
troubles and perturbations then those which they were in before. Italy would
not therefore not only not receive that ease which was hoped for, for new and
greater troubles proceeding from the not observance thereof, greater prejudice
and commotions did likewise result from thence, which before we proceed to
speak off, it may not be only seasonable, but necessary to take the business a
little higher, and to touch succi^ctly, and by way of compendium, upon what
happened out of Italy, in France, Germany, and Flanders; To the end that the
knowledge thereon may make the way more easy for the narration of those things
which happened afterward in Italy, and which will be the proper subject of this
present History. Nor shall this anticipated Digression be any interruption to
the relation of the principal affairs of Italy, which though they were
somewhat molested after the assignment of Pinarollo, yet being somewhat more
quiet for a few years, they will afford a fit opportunity for a short and
succinct relation of the warlike actions which happened elsewhere in the time of
her troublesome peace. So as what shall be said of foreign successes will seem
a continued Story of the Wars and Commotions of Italy, and which shall
afterward be reassumed; and the foreign accidents which* happened during the
peace of Italy, being very remarkable for their weight and concernment; as they
deserve not to be passed over so the pleasure and advantage which may be gotten
by the knowledge of them will sufficiently satisfy for the pains and time
that shall be employed in the reading thereof.

The League which was made between the King of France and the Swede, not long
after the Peace of Ratisbone; and the same Kings taking the German Princes into
his protection, to the prejudice of the Emperors authority, obliged the King
of Spain to provide for, and carefully to watch over the maintaining of the
Austrian Empire in Gemany, against which all the Plots and Forces of the King
of France were seen to be prepared. For the Declination of the Catholic
Religion, which ran a hazard amidst so many troublesome Wars, did not only
depend thereupon, but even the declination of his own Dominions, and of the
chiefest concernments of his Crown. Moreover the assignment of Pinarollo, which
was rather forced from the Duke of Savoy, then voluntarily yielded after the
peace was made: and the Citadel at Cassalle being still possessed and
garrisoned by the French, though the King of Spain seemed to wink at them; yet
since they struck so sor^ at the very foundation of his affairs, and of his
Dominions in Italy; they necessarily invited him to resent, or to repair these
so high attempts against the Peace of Ratisbone, and the treaties of Chirasco,
agreed upon for the Peace of Italy.

The King of France his continual succouring and fomenting of the Hollanders
did likewise prepare things for a manifest breach of the common peace; yet both
these Kings shunned coming to an open declaring o^ War; but inwardly hatching
their reciprocal injuries, they prepared either to revenge received wrongs, or
to keep off those which were threatened. But the King of Spain was at the
present troubled most, to see that the King of France joining with the
Hollanders, and Protestant Princes of Germany, prepared to oppose his Brother
the Infanta Cardinal Ferdinando, his journey into Flanders, wherein the
Cardinal was first to advise, and then to succeed his Aunt Clara Eugenia, who
was now grown very old in the government of those Provinces: And the King
thinking that by reason of so many oppositions, it would be safer for him to go
by Italy and Germany then by Sea, he knew that it was necessary to make way for
him by powerful Armies; wherefore to boot with the great preparation of Arms
and Men, made to this purpose by the Duke of Feria in the State of Millain, it
was also thought necessary to molest France on the parts toward Spain, as well
in regard of this expedition, as for relieving Germany and Flanders opposed by
the French, that thereby the King of France being strongly assaulted on that
side, might not only be diverted from opposing the Cardinals journey, but also
from fomenting the Wars of Germany and Flanders; the Duke of Orleans, Brother
to the King of France, who was already gone, together with the Queen Mother,
from the Court into Flanders, was thought to be a proportionate means,
answerable to the assistance given by the King of France to the Rebel
Hollanders: Who by making head, and holding intelligence with many French Lords
that were displeased at Cardinal Richelieu his too great authority, and at the
Government of those times, plotted new broils in France; he holding
intelligence with the Duke of Momorancy, Governor of Languedock, and
peradventure with the Duke of Guise, Governor of Provence, obtained 2000
excellent Horse from the King of Spain; with which passing at unawares thorough
France, without any opposition, (for none durst take up Arms against the Kings
Brother without express command from the King) he came to Languedo^k; and by
the assistance of the King of Spain's Army in Catalognia, he thought to raise
commotions in the Kingdom, and to make a strong faction, whereby he thought to
allay the Cardinals authority, and to alter the Government quite; But being at
the very first overcome by the Kings Forces, and taken Prisoner together with
Momorancy, that fire was quenched almost before it was kindled, which would
otherwise have held France long in combustion, and consequently have kept the
King and Richelieu from plotting mischie^ against the House of Austria. Yet
this did not retard the Infanta's journey; who mounting into the Gallyes at
Barcellona, some months after Orleans his imprisonment, came from thence to
Genoa the year 1633. where being received with great pomp, he saw and admired
the great Fabric of the new Walls, passing from thence to Millain, he found
the Duke of Feria busy in raising an Army for his conduct, and so intended to
go speedily for Flanders.

War grew hotter in Germany after the battle of Lutzen, and after the King of
Sweden's death; for neither the Swedish Commanders, nor the German Princes who
were alienated from the Emperor, were any whit dismayed after the Kings death;
for the Swedes, as if their dead Kings Spirit were revived in them, continued
the War with the like Courage and Fortune, and the Princes and people of
Germany being desirous of their pretended Liberty, to the recovery whereof they
were with much satisfaction led on by the King, and almost put into possession,
being resolved not to fall from so exalted a beginning by the death of their
Leader, were wholly intent upon this, and joined in heart and in intelligence;
and avoiding all Strife and Emulation, they formed a Faction which maintaining
the dead Kings Quarrel might quell the Austrian Authority, and might bring them
to their desired Liberty.

Duke Bernard Waimer, descended from the ancient Dukes of Saxony, was chosen
somewhat tumultuously by the Swedish Army to be their Captain General, the next
day after the battle of Lutzen; he was a Captain of Courage and Authority, and
very highly esteemed in the Army for his experience and Valor; and moreover a
great Enemy to the Austrian Name, for that his great Grandfather had been
bereft by Charles the Fifth of the Electorall dignity, and of the Dukedom of
Saxony; and he himself as descending from him, was kept from it by the
subsequent Austrian Emperors. He mustered the Soldiers that remained after
the battle, and finding them to amount to the number of 16000 he went with them
to join with that part of the Duke of Saxony's Forces, which not being present
at the Bat^le was yet fresh and entire; and entering therewithal into Saxony,
he drove out the Cesarean Garrisons who were possessed thereof before, and did
not only recover the City of Lipswick, but all the rest of the Dukedom, not
meeting with any opposition; for Wallestein the Emperors General, being rather
conquered then Conqueror, had quitted the Field and his Cannon to the Enemy
after the battle, and was retreated with the remainder of his Army into
Bohemia; where (partly) minding the recruiting of his Army, (partly) detained
by the rigor of the Winter, he suffered the Enemies Army to go whither it
listed. But the German Princes having obtained the same assistance from the
Deputies of the Crown of Swethland, which was given them during the Kings life;
and seeing the League confirmed between the King of France and Crown of
Swethland; for the affairs of Germany they met in a Diet about the beginning of
the year 33, with the chief Officers and Captains of the Swedish Army, wherein
they agreed upon Nine Articles, for the maintaining of the common cause; and
for the maintenance of the War, which they resolved to continue in Germany with
like fervor. They made Oxenstern supreme Governor of the common affairs, who
was Chancellor of Swethland, and who coming into Germany with the King, never
parted from him; a man of excellent Wisdom and profound Counsel, very
valiant, and long experienced in Civil and Military Government; to whom they
gave a certain number of Deputies, chosen out of diverse Provinces of Germany,
which the Dutch call Circles, who were as so many Senators to assist in
Counsel with him. They then divided all the Forces of their joint union into
four parts, and made four Armies of them, which were to carry on the War in
four parts of Germany under four Commanders. Arnheim, the Duke of Saxony's
General, a stern Captain, and little short of Wallestein in Military Affairs,
was to enter Slesia with the first Army, of which Province the Duke of Saxony
meant to make himself Master. The second was given to the Duke of Lunenburg,
who was therewith to fall upon Westphalia. The third was assigned to Duke
Weymer, who falling from the General-ship, to which he was chosen by the Army
by this reformation, was to enter therewith into Franconia. Marshal Horn, and
Col. Bannier, were appointed to command the fourth, two of the most famous
Captains of the Swedish Army; and Suevia and Alsatia fell to their share. These
going into their several divisions, kindled a fire like so many Infernal Furies
in four parts of Germany; which bursting forth into a greater flame afterward
did lay it so waste and desolate, as the desolations made during the Kings life
were far inferior to them. For overrunning several Provinces, which were
sometimes taken by the Swedes, sometimes retaken by the Imperalists, these
Provinces served only for a Theater or Scene, whereon horrible spectacles of
sad events were represented: it would be tedious, and not suiting to our
purpose, to relate distinctly the encounters, losses, and victories, or the
ruin of the poor people, the surrendrings, sacking, and the firing of Cities
which were taken, and of making Provinces Widernesses; for the several actions
of every several Army, would administer subject enough for a particular Story.
We will therefore limit our selves to those which were most famous, and which
belong chiefly to the main of the Empire, and particularly, to such as may by
connection participate with the adventures of Italy, or which may have some
influence upon them: And so keeping to this, as to the main body of the Tree,
since we cannot embrace the rest, we will leave out the Boughs and Branches,
which will contribute but a little to the structure of this Digression; the
intention whereof is only (as has been said) to make the way plain for the
narration of what happened afterward in ^ly, by a succinct Narrative of what
happened out o^ her.

Horn and Banniere having done many things with good success in Alsatia and
Suevia, sat down before Brisack, a very strong Town upon the left side of the
Rheine, between Basil and S^asburg, a place of great consequence, not only by
reason of the neighboring Bridge, but for the situation thereof, which lay
very convenient for Italy, Burgondy, Alsatia, and Lorrain; and having made good
progress before it, they had brought it unto great streights: it therefore
behoved the Emperor and the King of Spain, for their joint interest, to have
an eye to it, and to endeavor, that the loss thereof might not redound to the
too great prejudice of the confining Provinces, and to both their affairs; and
particularly, that the loss thereof might not be too great an obstacle to the
Infanta's journey; who thinking to enter into Lorrain by Alsatia, and from
thence into Flanders, by the Dukedom of Luxemberg, which was his shortest and
safest way; could hardly prosecute this his intent, if that Town should be
taken by the enemy. The Emperor had no Forces in those parts, save what were
under Aldringer in Bavaria; the gross of his Army wa^s toward Bohemia under
Wallestein; and Aldringers Forces not being sufficient of themselves to relieve
Brisack, it was resolved that the Duke of Feria should in all haste join with
Aldringer, and go together with him to the relief of so important a place; and
thus as a forerunner make way for the Infanta's passage: the Swedish Commanders
had intelligence of this, and of what Forces were to come; and finding
themselves too weak for them, they thought they might easily hinder them by
making themselves masters of Constance, an Imperial City, seated upon that Lake
which the neighboring Rheine makes, and which taking its name from that City
is called the Lake of Constance; wherefore Horn leaving Banniere before
Brisack, with as many forces as were sufficient to maintain the Siege, went
with the rest to the taking of Constance, which if he should do, he might keep
the two Armies from meeting; and hearing that Feria advanced apace with a
powerful Army, he would not betake himself to the tediousness and uncertainty
of a Siege, but fell to take it by assault, before that by Feria's coming the
two Armies should join; but his design proved vain, as did also his fierce
assaults wherewith he thought to effect his intent; for the defense being
stronger then the assaults, by reason of the continual re-inforcement of
munition that entered the City daily, the business drew on in length, till such
time as Feria's Army appeared. Feria came from the State of Millain about the
end of August, and passing through the Valtoline was come to the Confines of
Germany; he brought with him 10000 Foot and 1500 Horse, all choice and veterane
Soldiers, very well in order, and led on by valiant and experienced Captains:
Giarardo Gambacorti commanded the Horse, Count John Serbellone the Artillery,
Iovan Di^z Sam^ commanded the Spanish Foot, Count Salm^ and Scomb^ the Dutch
Foot, which were divided into two Regiments; the Marquess Tarracusa, the
Neapolitans; and Count Panigarola, the Lombards; when these came to the
Confines of Burgondy, 4000 Foot and 500 Burgondian Horse were added, and when
they were passed Tirvolo, Aldring^r joy^d also with them, with the Cesarean
Army; which was come from Bavaria, and they went jointly together toward
Constance: The City was freed at the very news of the approach of so great
Forces. Horn, so famous and so valiant a Commander, would not tarry to see
them come: but leaving many Arms, and some Artillery in the Trenches, retreated
more inward into Germany; and joining with Weymer, they received many Recruits,
which came from the more inward Countries, under the young Duke of Wittenberg,
the Palatine, and the (...) O^o; and being thus reinforced, they resolved to
encounter the Enemy, who pursued them: they therefore encamped and fortified
themselves in some Woods and Hills, not far from Dutling, where they waited the
enemies coming: but when they came nee^, they durst not come forth into the
open Campag^, nor accept of Battle which was offered them; but suffered
themselves to be insulted over within their Trenches, by some Troops of
Dragoons, and Files of Musketeers, which advanced from the enemies Camp; after
which they retreated to beyond the Danow, burning the Bridge which they passed
over, to keep themselves from being overtaken by the enemy; so they retreated
into the Country of Wittenberg, thinking that the enemy being to take Rinfeld,
and three other lesser Cities, before they could come to Brisack, Brisack would
be forced to surrender for Famine, before the succor could come: but Rinfeld
and all the other Cities yielded at the first appearance of the enemy, within
24 hours; and Feria and Aldringer made such haste, as coming to Brisack, they
found the enemy retreated from thence; having brought in the succor, they made
not any abode there, but hardly affording their men leave to breathe, they went
toward Alsatia, and regained many Towns which had been taken by the enemy; and
made good progress in those parts; and had made greater, and peradventure had
wholly defeated the enemy, if Aldringer had co-operated sincerely in the begun
enterprise, and in their ruin; or had not the Dutch genius, naturally averse
to that of the Spaniards, gainsaid so gallant proceedings. Feria was entered
Germany with Title of the Emperors Commander, from whom he had received ample
Letters Patents, whereby he was not to be subject to the command or superiority
of any other Captain: this so large and independent authority of Feria caused
not only envy and emulation in Wallestein, who hated the name of a Spaniard,
but jealousy and despite; for not being able to endure that by the entrance of
another Army into Germany, which should have no dependence upon him, that
supreme and universal authority should be lessened in him, without which he
professed he would not have taken upon him the Generals command, and therewith
the defense of Germany, he began to doubt that that body of armed men, which
had no dependence upon him, had been secretly procured by the Spaniards, who
much distrusted his intentions; and been brought into Germany by them, not only
to moderate his authority, but his actions also; and to oppose his forces and
his ends, and his too high machinations, which he found the Spaniards feared he
had plotted in his mind; and by express Order from the Emperor, not being able
to keep Aldringer from going from Bavaria to join with Feria in Alsatia, yet he
sent him such Orders (as Aldringer, in his own discharge and justification,
made known after Fritlands death) as the execution thereof was likely rather to
occasion the ruin of that Army and Enterprise, then the preservation thereof;
he could not tolerate that that Army should advance with such success so far
into Germany, whilst he stood looking on: whereupon Aldringer, that he might
obey the Orders of the General (whose excessive authority, joined to his fierce
genius, was more formidable, and more punctually observed, then the Emperors
benign Orders) did not cooperate sincerely in enterprises with Feria; but
abusing the best occasions of warfaring, was not only a hinderance, but a
confusion, and prejudicial to the proceedings which had been effected, if he
had proceeded sincerely with Feria: the necessity that both of them were in to
pass with their Armies into Bavaria, whither they were sent for with much
anxiety and eagerness, by the Emperor, occasioned yet more harm, and had
likely to have been the whole ruin of Feria's Army; which that it may be the
better understood upon what occasions they happened, we must leave Alsatia and
the parts of upper Germany, and pass into Saxony and the lower Germany; and
anticipately relate some accidents which happened there.

General Wallestein, having tarried after the Battle of Lutzen almost all the
Winter in Bohemia, though he was very sollicitous in raising men, and in
recruiting his Army, that he might come into the Field in the beginning of the
Spring; yet reflecting upon the miserable condition of Germany, upon the
uncertainty and danger of War, and upon the ruins which might thereupon ensue,
he applied himself to reduce the public safety into some sort of security, by
counsel, and without effusion of blood; he therefore labored to bring the Duke
of Saxony off from the League of the German Princes, and to reunite him upon
any terms to the Emperor; which if he could have done, he verily believed that
that Prince being the fundamental Basis of the aforesaid League, he being
removed, the League would immediately fall to the ground; and that the Ele^tor
of Brandenberg and many other lesser Princes would follow his example: so as
that faction which joined in Arms with the Swedes against the Emperor, being
weakened, would infallibly be dissolved; and that the Cesarean party being so
increased, the lesser Princes would come in to Caesar, some suing for pardon,
some for composition; and then the Swedes being but few in number, destitute of
the German assistance, and bereft of the Maritime parts, would be brought to
such a condition, as not being able to receive any supplies from their own
Kingdom, they would be shut up, and as it were, imprisoned in Germany, and left
to the discretion of the Cesarean party. Thus he thought it a better and a
safer way, for the public safety, to quench so great a fire of War by these
Articles, then by the shedding of blood; this which might really have been
believed to be an assured wholesome Counsel, if it had been practiced by fitting
and adequate means, would doubtlesly have brought the Affairs of the Empire
into a better condition of safety; but being endeavored by odd and foolish
ways it did no good, but injured the public welfare very much, and wronged the
Inventer thereof much more; for Fritland coming out of Bohemia in the beginning
of the Spring, in the year 1634, with a powerful Army, he passed therewith into
Slesia; where lighting upon the enemy in the parts about Suainitz, who were far
short in numbers to him; instead of giving them battle, wherein he might have
been sure of Victory, he was the first who desired agreement and composure of
differences: to which purpose a Truce was appointed for 15 days, to negotiate
it; during which time, so shameful Agreements were capitulated, as it was
reported, between General W^llestein and Arnheim, and other of the Colleagues
Deputies, as none more pernicious, nor ruinous for Religion, and for the Sacred
Empire, could have been made; thereby whole Province; of the Empire, were
divided to the advantage of the Confederate Princes. Wallestein claimed the
Kingdom of Bohemia for himself, in just reward of many labors undergone, and
dangers by him run for the good of the Empire; many other things were agreed
upon in favor to Heresy; such Laws were given to Germany as pleased the
Confederate Princes, enemies to the Emperor; and for the upshot, General
Fritland obliged himself to join his Forces with those of the enemy, against
whosoever should dare to oppose the putting of those Capitulations in
execution, not excluding the Emperor himself, who received so much prejudice
thereby, and whose concernments were so ill dealt with: these Capitulations
being agreed upon, which seemed rather to be horrible treasons and seditious
Rebellions, were subscribed by General Wallestein, and were delivered to
Arnheim and the rest who negotiated therein; which when they were divulged,
gave, not without reason, great cause to suspect and distrust the actions and
intentions of the Propounder, and who being servant to the Emperor had agreed
thereunto; whereupon, though Wallestein did afterward profess, that his
intention in propounding them was to deceive the enemy, and to induce them by
so large concessions, to drive the Swedes out of Germany; which when it should
be done, Caesar would be superior in Forces, and might give them the Law, and
force them to accept of any conditions. Arnheim and the other Deputies having
received the Capitulations took their leaves of Fritland, and were already
gone; when not being gone one league off, they were troubled, that in this
Agreement no mention was made of the Swedes, whether they were to tarry in
Germany, or to go out: which happened, because each party standing upon their
advantage in the Negotiation, desired that such proposal should be made by the
other side; but being afterward aware, that what was agreed upon was not safe,
unless the establishment of this point were therein comprehended, they resolved
to return to the Camp, and have it cleared by the General; who being
interrogated thereupon, it is not known, whether as being terrified thereat,
and repenting what he had done, he embraced the occasion which might make for
his justification; or whether continuing in his first design of bringing the
business to that good end for which he professed he had moved it; he freely
answered, that the Swedes were to be prosecuted with the common forces, and
ex^irpated as disturbers of the public peace of Germany; and he was so
resolute in this point, as no reason which could be alleged to the contrary
being able to alter his determination; (and Arnheim and his companions
consenting, by no means, that the Swedes should be driven out) the
Capitulations were canceled, and the Treaty of Agreement was at the same time
almost concluded, and broken: yet the Capitulation was so detestable, as all
men were generally much scandalized with it: the rather for that Wallestein
strove not to regain his credit afterward by contrary actions, nor to cancel
the sinister opinions which he had thereby purchased: but, as if he scorned the
vulgar opinion* giving them new colors, he did consolidate them more and more,
till in time they proved pernicious to him. The Capitulations being broken,
Wallestein sent part of his Forces to assault Saxony; which made the Duke
thereof recall his men from Slesia to defend himself; Arnheim, immediately
after he had received his Princes Orders, marched with his Army toward Saxony;
leaving a Garrison in Slesia under the old Count de Toure, a chief Lord of
Bohemia, whose authority was so great in the Diets of that Kingdom, as the
Palatine acknowledged his promotion to that Crown from thence, which made the
Count be declared a Rebel by the Emperor: Arnheim also left Colonel Tubal one
of the chie^est of the Swedish Commanders, to accompany the Count. Wallestein
kept behind Arnheim, having also left as many men in Slesia as Arnheim had
done; but when he saw Arnheim so far advanced, as he could not return to
succor the Count in Slesia, he faced about, and returning speedily to Slesia,
he came thither just then when his men were ready to fight the enemy; and he
did so surround the enemy, as he took the Count and Colonel Prisoners, and gave
life and liberty to all the other Soldiers and Officers, upon condition that
they would march into the Emperors quarters, and join themselves to the
Cesarean Army; but the Colonel finding a means quickly how to escape, made men
suspect that Wallestein had underhand given him his liberty, as he had openly
given him his life. The Count having bargained for his own liberty delivered up
the Towns in Slesia which were yet in his power; and those of least consequence
being delivered up, the Du^mo di (...), which was the chiefest, and which
commanded all the Province, and which by agreement was to be delivered up, held
out; so as the Counts presence being requisite for the surrender thereof, he
was set at liberty, upon condition that he should return prisoner, if the Du^mo
were not effectually delivered up: which not being done, and the Count not
returning, Fritland was still more blamed of collusion with both the prisoners;
and much more, for that having sent so many of the enemies to the Emperors
Army, he was thought to have done it, for that owing their lives to him they
should upon all occasions depend upon him; yet professing himself abused by the
Count, and breathing out nothing but revenge, he went with his Army to Turingia
and Lusat^, Provinces which belonged to the Emperor, but were in the Duke of
Saxony his possession; and prosecuting his former designs he seemed resolved to
make that Duke and the Marquess of Brandenberg make peace with the Emperor; he
therefore made much progress there, took many Towns, amongst others, Franckfort
upon the Od^r, and Lansperg in Marca di Brandenberg, both of them great Cities,
and of much consequence; whereby he made way for passing further into the march
in the Country of Brandenberg and in Pomerania; in which case if he should come
to the Coasts of the Baltic Sea, he would keep (as he threatened to do) the
Swedes from being relieved from that Kingdom, and from returning thereinto:
these threats, accompanied by the multitude of his Forces, and by his happy
success, did so terrify those Electors, as finding themselves unable to make
resistance, they pressed very eagerly for relief from the Confederates;
protesting that that if they were abandoned, they must be forced to abandon the
Common Cause, and join with the Emperor. Oxenstern and the other Heads of the
League were divided in their judgments, not knowing whether they were to
abandon or to relieve those Princes; for by abandoning them, to boot with the
great error they should commit therein, and to boot with the loss of
reputation, they foresaw the manifest ruin of their party and union. On the
contrary, if they should relieve them, they must quit all upper Germany to the
Emperor, so full of Cities and Towns upon the Rheine and the Danow, which so
much to their praise and increase of Dominion they had won; and from whence
they got infinite contributions of Moneys, Men, Victuals and Munition; which
Towns and Territories being abandoned were necessarily to fall into the
Emperors power, if they should go to relieve Saxony; and they should thereby
infinitely weaken themselves and strengthen the Emperor: so amidst these
streights they pitched their thoughts upon Bavaria, which A'dringer being gone
into Alsatia, was bereft of all defense; and they held it their absolute best
course to fall upon it with all the Forces they could assemble; taking it for
granted that when they should have won that Dukedom, the way would be open for
them to enter Austria, and to come even to Vienna; they were confident that by
this noble and generous diversion, without loss of honor, or of any thing they
had gotten, nay by making yet much greater acquisitions, they might bring that
relief to the Electors which they could not do if they should go directly to
their relief with all their Forces, without manifest loss of honor and what
they had gotten; for the Emperor being assaulted in the midst of his Empire
would be forced to recall his Army from offending the Electors, to defend
himself; so as Fritlands cunning would be deluded, and his counsels
countermined wherewith he had fancied unto himself to destroy their League: The
success out-did the expectation of so noble and generous a resolution; for Duke
Weymer being deputed to execute it, he with 50 Cornets of Horse, and 15000
Foot, took both sides of the Danow, and coasting along came to Ratisbone, where
sitting down at unawares, he after several batteries forced it to surrender
within 12 days: having gotten it, he advanced and took Straubingen and
dechendorfe, great Towns upon the Rheine, and with such gallant acquisitions
advanced toward Austria; so as the Court of Vienna was in more fear then the
Electors of Saxony and Brandenberg had been by Wallesteins proceedings: it was
therefore resolved to send him precise Order* to return, and relieve Austria;
who being unwilling to give over so happy success, and the great advantage
which he hoped to reap thereby for the public welfare, was troubled much at
Cesars Commands; thinking that if that part of Germany should withstand the
enemies assaults a little longer, the assailants would be forced to change
their course, and leave Bavaria and Austria free to the Emperor, so to relieve
Saxony and the lower parts of Germany, which for their own safeties sake they
could not abandon; but this his backwardness being badly interpreted by the
Court, which was not well satisfied with his late and former actions; as if
being more desirou^ that Bavaria should be lost, then relieved, he valued not
the danger of Austria, so as he might revenge himself upon that Prince; he was
at last, but much against his will, forced to obey the Emperors re-iterated
Commands: he therefore abandoned that Country, and quitted the so many Triumphs
which he had won; and when he was come within twenty leagues of Ratisbone,
hearing that that Town was surrendered, he advanced no further; but finding
that the enemy drew near Passao, a very strong place, situated upon the D^ube,
and which being thought to be the gate of Austria was of no small concern, he
sent 3000 Foot* to de^end it; but seeming not to care much for Ratisbone, and
less for Bavaria, he retreated into Bohemia, and came with all his men into the
City of Pilsen: the loss of Ratisbone, which forced the Emperor to recall
Wallestein from Saxony, forced him also to send for Aldringer from Alsatia, to
relieve Bavaria, which was powerfully assaulted by the Colleagues; whose
departure was necessarily accompanied by Feria, who wanting men, and being
abandoned by Aldringer, could not tarry longer with safety in that Country; nor
could Aldringer tarry safely in Alsatia without Feria, nor retreat safely into
Bavaria: so as, for their joint security, which by disunion would have been
endangered, it behoved them to join in abandoning Alsatia, and in prosecuting
that voyage; and Feria being necessitated to follow the same way that the Dutch
had gone in the midst of Winter, to the great hardship and destruction of his
men, who begging quarter and lodging, which were ransacked and ruined by the
Dutch who had gone before, and quite berest of all provisions, they could not
get victuals for any money; by which sufferings, and by reason of the cold
weather which was very great that Winter, and which the Spaniards and Italians,
who are born under more benign heavens, could not well endure, and being also
often gauled by the enemy, that Army was miserably wasted, great hardships
having occasioned frequent and dangerous sickness in it: being at last, after
so many sufferings, gotten into Bavaria, Feria died of a Fever in Monaco, and
left the charge of his men to Count Serbellone; and as by Wallesteins departure
from the parts near Saxony all the acquisitions which he had made returned to
their former condition, so by the departure of these two Armies all Alsatia
reverted into the Swedes possession, who returning to Brisack soon brought it
into the former streights: The Infanta not being able therefore to build any
longer upon that Army, for his journey into Flanders, nor for the freeing of
that Town; and it behoving him to take his journey the sooner, for that in the
beginning of December 1633, the Infanta his Aunt left this world; and the
Provinces of Flanders wanting a supreme head by her death, pressed very much
for his coming; new Orders were therefore to be given, and new levies of men
were to be made; wherein neither the Infanta nor the Spanish Agents in Italy
were slack, who diligently sent out Orders, some for men, some for other
necessaries for that expedition; and though the Crowns, Provinces and Kingdoms,
were much exhausted by the select choice made by Feria, the year before, yet
ere May was over, the State of Millain was full of new Military men, most
whereof were old Soldiers of several Nations, commanded by men very
considerable, not only for noble birth, but for valor and long experience in
war. Count Monterei sent 6000 Foot, and 1000 Horse from Naples, all good men,
and excellently well armed, under his Heir, the Marquess of Torazzona, two
Brigades of Foot were raised in Lombardy, the one by Prince Doria, at his own
expense, who were commanded by Carlo Gausco, Camp-master, the other in the
State of Millain, by Marquess Lunato. Marquess Spinola raised also 500 Horse at
his own cost; and moneys were paid out of Cesars Court for recruiting Duke
Feria's Army: Wallestein was demanded to send 4000 Horse of those that were in
Cesars Army; which he refused to do, pretending that he could not lessen his
Army; but indeed, because he did not like that this other Army which had no
dependency upon him should enter Germany; fearing that the Authority and
Grandezza of such a Prince might eclipse his; and moreover, that the Spanish
Agents against whom all his thoughts were bent, might triumph over him. The
Infanta therefore, that he might take from him his pretense of denial, gave
order that moneys should be issued out of the Cesarean Court, for the raising
of so many Horse in Hungary, which should supply the place of those that should
be sent into Italy to augment the Infanta's Army: 600 other Horse were raised
in Burg^ndy by Count de la Torre, one of the chief men of Burg^ndy, and 1000
Foot were also come from Spain under Count Fuenclara with these Forces, and
with other, partly paid, partly noble volunteers, did this Army march, and the
Infanta therewith, toward Tirvolo through the Valtoline, and came to Zusteyne,
to pursue his journey into Flanders through Alsatia, so to join with the
Imperial Army, which was newly marched into the fields under the King of
Hungary, Son to the Emperor, he being chosen Captain General of the Cesarean
Forces by his Father, in Wallesteins stead; who a little before was not only
deposed from being General, but declared by public Edict, in the beginning of
the 34, Rebel and guilty of high Treason: whereupon he was slain by his own
Soldiers, a singular accident, and very well worth consideration, and which
drew the eyes of the whole world upon it, not so much for the singularity
thereof, as for the circumstances which accompa^ied this tragical event, for
the consequences which it drew after it; and for the discourse and impression
which it occasioned in the parties; for which it deserves really to be numbered
amongst the most memorable that has happened in these times, or in many passed
ages: since such an accident deserves to be described to posterity, with all
the circumstances thereof; though it was occasioned by many things which have
already been spoken of, yet will it not at all be from our purpose, if somewhat
exceeding the limits and confines of a compendious Narrative, we discourse
particularly thereupon, wherein weaving somewhat more at length some things
which have already been mentioned, together with many others which have not
been spoken of, but may relate to the chief affairs of Germany, the discourse
will rather deserve the name of a continuation of the thread of our History,
then a digression from it; whereby the Reader being a little diverted from the
course of our begun Narration, and finding himself afterward at unawares
brought into the forroad, will delight to be jointly instructed with the German
events, and with the sinister contrivals of this Commander, which brought him
to his end.

Albertus Wallestein, Duke of Fritland, being deposed in the Diet at Ratisbone,
as has been said, from being General of the Cesarean Forces, and being
afterward out of urgent necessity recalled to his former charge by the
Emperor, was a man of much valor, and of no less fortune and authority; and
such a one, as if the things done by him in Germany be well observed, he
certainly deserves the first place of as many Dutch Commanders as ever arrived
at the height of fame and glory: he deserved well of the Empire, but much
better of the Emperor, whose supreme authority upheld by the valor and
fortune of this Commander, rise to as great a height as did the like of any
Emperor for many late years: he held that place with so absolute command and
independency, as his not valuing even the Emperors commands was not imputed to
him for disobedience or contumacy, but to his greater zeal of good Government,
and to his better steering of affairs; which being governed as he listed proved
better for the Grandezza of the Empire: so as whatsoever transgression being
done by another would not only have been accounted a fault, but would have been
severely punished, being done by him was exempt from all suspicion of error:
nor was his fidelity less then his authority, whereby he won so much credit of
the Emperor, as his Imperial Majesty could never believe that any spot of
Felony could ever enter so faithful a Commanders breast: yet could he not
continue so long the course of his undoubted credit and sovereign authority,
but that he wa^, at last, forced unfortunately to submit to the natural
vicissitude of all humane things; and though experience teaches us, that it is
a natural and fatal propriety for all things, when they are come to the height
of greatness, to be subject to declination and ruin, yet if we will abstract
the fall of this so great and worthy Commander from the hidden, and by us
unknown properties, of humane vicissitude, and shall seek for any more apparent
cause of so great a downfall, it may be imputed chiefly to two things. First,
to his zeal of sustaining the Cesarean dignity against the prime Princes of
Germany; who thinking the Emperors greatness to be a lessening of theirs, set
themselves fiercely against him upon this account, as against him who valued
not the abasing of the common liberty of Germany, so as he might maintain the
Emperors greatness; to which was annexed a second cause, his fierce and
arrogant nature, by which he regula^ed his actions; for seeing himself firmly
seated in the Chariot of supreme authority, he was so encouraged, as knowing
himself able to do all things, he thought he might lawfully do so: so as when
his authority was not grown to that height, nor so generally hated, his faults
were imputed to the pride of his imperious genius, and therefore easily
pardoned, the greatness of his merits being considered; so when the chiefest
men found themselves thereby injured in their power, and that they began to
examine his faults with spleen and hatred, they turned them into disloyalty,
perfidiousness, sedition, and into affected tyranny, procured by mis-becoming
and scandalous ways: when the Command^n chief of the Emperors Arms was taken
from him, though he did not only yield ready obedience thereunto, and showed
great moderation in so great a lessening of Fortune; yet such a con^entation
differing much from the haughtiness of his revengeful spirit; it was thought
that like an incensed Achilles, or injured Narses, he hatched vindicative
desires against those who had wrought his downfall, and particularly against
the Duke of Bavaria, who had in all things cont^nually appeared his bitter
enemy, that he had plots against the Empire, and that he proceeded so far
therein, as that he endeavored to get the Imperial diadem for himself: so as
not unlike Narses, who conspired with the Barbarians against the Emperor
Justinian, he was suspected to hold secret intelligence with the King of
Swedland, Duke of Saxony, and with the other Confederates, against the
Emperor, and that he plotted the ruin of Germany; for the invading, and
taking of Bohemia, by the Swedish and Saxon Forces, which happened a little after
his deposal, and the rou^ which not long after was given before Lypsick to
Tilly, who was made General of the Emperors Forces, was generally attributed
to his counsel and instigation: but he evidenced his sinister intentions yet
more when the Emperor recalled him, when after the loss of Bohemia, the
affairs of the Empire were in very bad condition: he was doubtlesly upon that
occasion bound willingly to offer his endeavors for the sustaining of his
Prince and Country, even with the hazard of his life; but the haughtiness of
his proud spirit kept him from doing so noble and worthy an action; for being
re-called he seemed so far from accepting it, as at the first he absolutely
refused it, and at last, making use of the streights and ruin whereinto he saw
the public safety was brought, and of the necessity which was ^ad of his
assistance, he had the boldness to demand so insolent and arrogant conditions
from the Emperor, as one that had conquered his Sovereign could not have
propounded prouder: Amongst other things he required (and such was the
necessity, as it must be granted him) that his Arbitrament might be absolute,
not only over the Arms and Soldiers, but in making war and peace, insomuch as
it should not be lawful for the Emperor to give him any Order or Commission
which might concern the manner of making war, or the negotiating or concluding
peace; which wars or peace he might conclude or exclude without the Emperor,
but not the Emperor without him: he would have the choice and disposal of all
Captains and Officers of the Army; the like of the Governors of Provinces,
even such as were patrimonial to the Emperor; that the exacting of Tributes
and Revenues, the distribution of Goods gotten or confiscated by war, might
absolutely belong unto him; and finally, that it should not be in the Emperors
power to deprive him of the Authority of being General, unless he should give
him six months warning thereof before hand. A greater Authority certainly then
Dictatorship, which if it were always thought dangerous in a Commonwealth, it
was not only incompatible under a Sovereign Prince, as being d^ametrically
^epugnant to Sovereignty, but altogether unsufferable and unpracticable; and
the granting thereof being nothing else but the bereaving a Prince of the
essentiality, and the leaving him scarcely the bare name and mere semblance of
Sovereignty; it could not only be practiced without manifest injury to
Sovereign Power, but not so much as fall within the thought of a good Subject:
so great a concession forced by himself was therefore unworthy, dangerous to
the whole Empire, and the more formidable in one so highly offended, so
revengeful, and so tenaciously mindful of injuries received, so inexo^able,
inhumane, and so disordinate in his affections* and on the other side, capable
of any howsoever weighty under^aking, greedy of power, and of winding all
things about according to his pleasure; wherein he had no moderation of
counsel, nor curb to his ambition: to this was added, for the greater prejudice
of the present condition of Affairs, the great sway which he had purchased with
all the Military men of Germany, who appeared ready to obey his beck; every one
therefore foresaw, that the excessive authority which of mere necessity was
granted him, would rather make him aspire to greater things, and putting
himself in a posture of giving Laws to Germany, rather then to free her from
the calamities which she lay under. He was not wanting in cooperating to these
Prognostications; for his having abandoned the Field in the Battle of Lutzen,
and his Artillery to the enemy, who might easily have been then vanquished, if
instead of retreating he had sent for Gallasso's entire and fresh Forces, and
those of other Commanders who were not present at the Battle, and recruited his
Army therewith, and assaulted the enemies Camp, without giving them leave to
breathe, whilst it was astonished by the Kings death, and by the loss of so
many men who were slain in that conflict, was an action badly resented, and
which argued much error: his having after this cantonized himself in Bohemia,
and suffered the enemy which was confused and half routed to ralley, and to
recover Lypfick and almost all Saxony so easily, which were before possessed by
the Cesarean Forces; and on the contrary, his having recalled Aldringer from
Bavaria, and his hindering Ban^ere at the same time from recovering his own
State, were circumstances, which added to the former appeared very strange, and
did more aggravate his conduct of Forces which were so freely and absolutely
referred to him: but what happened afterward before Suainitz, and those infamous
Capitulations stipulated therewith the Emperors enemies did more undeniably
convince his loyalty, who had first let slip so (...) an occasion of quelling
the Emperors Enemies and Rebels: his not having afterward suppressed Count
Torres and Colonel Tubal, as he easily might have done, and his having let them
both escape when they were his prisoners, and his having listed the enemies
Soldiers in the Cesarean Militia, were great inforcements for the staining the
candor of his fidelity: his appearing afterward so repugnant to Cesars
Commands, when seeing Ratisbone assaulted by the enemy, and Bavaria cry for
succor when in such danger, not caring for the preservation of that so noble
Province and important City; and after the loss of Ratisbone, his so little
care to recover it, whilst the enemies were not yet fortified there; and his
not betaking himself to defend Bavaria, which after the loss of Ratisbone was
subject to the enemies inroads; but having in lieu thereof cantonized himself
again in Bohemia, without acquainting the Emperor therewith, did yet more
aggravate the suspicions, not to say the faults, of his preceding actions:
being come into Bohemia with all the blame which was laid upon him, he took no
care to acquir himself thereof, but, as if all things had been lawful for him,
he fell into greater and more important errors: he had (as has been said)
drawn the hatred and anger of the Electors upon him; for having contrary to
custom quartered his Army in their Dominions; he now began to take the same
license in the Emperors Hereditary Territory; an action which as it redounded
much to the prejudice of his Imperial Majesty, so was it diversely construed;
some attributed it to pride and neglect of the Emperor, as if by reason of the
supreme power which he had obtained from the Emperor, he cared not to use that
power against the Donor; some, to his resentment for having been drawn contrary
to his genius from the war against lower Germany, to defend Bavaria; the
greatest part suspected that under presence of quartering his Soldiers in the
Cesarean Territories, he intended to begirt the City and Court of Vienna, and
to imprison the Emperor within his Forces: moreover, the jealousy which he
had conceived a little before at the entering of the Duke of Feria's Army into
Germany in relief of the Empire, and of Constance and Brifack, and his yet
greater apprehension and incensement which he showed afterward against the
Army led by the Infanta: having so perfidiously endeavored the rain of the
former, and the exclusion of the other out of Germany, were evident signs of
his being highly displeased with those Forces, thinking that they were brought
into Germany, only to curb and counterpoise his Army, and to secure the Empire
against the novelties and revolutions which all the world apprehended from his
scandalous and abusive Authority; and though these and the like actions of this
great Commander, being weighed in a more curious balance, might seem to have
their defenses (as all humane, but especially Military actions never want) yet
did they not at all lessen the finister impressions radicated and accumulated
by his so many misdemeanors in men's minds, wherewith they were generally so
scandalized, as not admitting any defense, they all stood expecting some
monstrous and formidable products of so immense authority, in a man so fierce,
so irritated, and so apparently ill inclined; and the total of Religion, and of
the Empire, being treated of, they thought their suspicions certain; every one
therefore had a lash at him, all men exclaimed against him; and with open
months desired that provision might be made against the so near and so certain
danger: only the Emperor, who still confided in his loyalty whom he had ever
found faithful to him, was of a contrary opinion, and would not without
manifest proofs condemn his Officers; and some of the chief men who assisted
the Emperor, prevailed upon either by great rewards or promises, approved of
the Emperors disposition, and excusing the faults which were imputed to him
endeavored by many arguments to assert his innocence: there were two sorts of
persons that this mighty man had made his enemies, the Spanish Agents, and the
Jesuits; he was not mealy-mouthed toward either of these: of the former he
was wont to say, That it was better being succored by them with moneys, then
with men; and that both of them were to be absolutely banished out of Germany;
and it was said, that the banishment of the Jesuits was expressly articled in
the Capitulations of Suainitz: so as the Spanish Agents, thinking that he sowed
discord between the Empire and Crown of Spain, to the end that he might weaken
them both, and so destroy them; and the Jesuits thinking that he was resolved
to subvert the Catholic Religion, which though in appearance he professed to
worship, yet many of his actions having another aspect, he was no less
suspected to be an enemy to Religion, then to the Empire; and it was thought
that he professed the Catholic Religion, only outwardly, and to keep in credit
with the Emperor, who was a pious Prince; but that, for the rest, that he
intended to take away all the supports from the Catholic Religion, and from
the Spanish Authority, that he might the more easily effect his designs against
them. All of them therefore used their power with the Emperor, to contaminate
these his endeavors; amongst the Spaniards there was the Count d'Ognate,
Ambassador in ordinary with the Emperor, and the Marquess of Castegnada, also
Ambassador in extraordinary with the King of Hungary, both of them endued with
excellent Counsel and Judgment; who were very careful of the main Affairs.
Fritland had made both these his enemies, no less then he had done the Duke of
Bavaria; but he had incensed him now more then ever, for that after the loss of
Ratisbone he would not give the least assistance to his State, which was then
more in danger then ever: wherefore the Duke exclaimed against him in Cesars
Court; his keeping still in Bohemia added to his being hated and suspected; as
also the probable doubt, that he had still some design to make himself King
thereof; and that he tarried therefore there in these perturbations of Affairs,
to execute this his design now, when in likelihood he might easily effect it:
not so much in respect of the Authority he had over the Soldiers, who called
him their Father, and were ready at his least beck; as that all the Princes and
Hans Towns of Germany being much inclined to abate the Austrian name and
authority, would not only be well pleased therewith, but would favor it, and
assist him therein: but the more necessary provision appeared to be had against
the accumulation of so many mischiefs, the harder was it to find them out.
Cesars Decrees were of small validity against him who had the supreme and
absolute arbitrament over all Cesars Forces: so as the remedy appeared more
dangerous then the disease; and the Emperor still persevering in his
resolution of not condemning one of disloyalty, of whose fidelity he was so
well satisfied, he seemed not capable of putting on so stout a resolution; but
being at last overcome by so many exclamations and reiterated protestations, or
were it that the prejudice he received by the quartering of his men upon his
Territories grieved him; when he saw the very City of Vienna environed with his
quarters, and himself and his Court in a manner besieged; before he would come
to more sharp and severe courses, he made his desires known to him by Father
Chiroga, a Spaniard, a religious Capuchin, and Confessor to the Queen of
Hungary, that in consideration of his being so grievously troubled with the
Gout, which was a hindrance to him in his Military actions, he would be content
to give over his Command of being General, and retire himself, as he had done
formerly, to a private life: but were it either that he thought this desire was
made at the instant pressures of his enemies, or that he still persevered in
his machinations, he would not be persuaded thereunto, but answered, that he
had no desire to serve the Emperor against the Emperors will, that he was
therefore ready to obey his commands; but that it was also true, that as well
he himself, as his Commanders under him, had upon his Paroll been at great
expense, in raising men, for the recruiting of the Army, and that he was to see
them paid for the expenses they had been at, as the Emperor was to see him
satisfied: that therefore he thought it reasonable, that, in the first place,
his Majesty should find means to pay what he ought him, and to his Captains;
and that convenient satisfaction being given in this point, he would give over
his charge, and withdraw himself to a private life: but the Emperor not being
in a condition of disbursing so great a sum of money, and the jealousies, and
frequent protestations multiplying, he betook himself to somewhat a more severe
way: he sent the Baron of Questemberg, who was his chiefest Officer, to him,
and his chiefest Court-confident, and through whose hands the Affairs of
greatest consequence passed; willing him to complain, in his name, against his
passed actions, and particularly for his quartering his Army in his the
Emperors Patrimonial Dominions, and chiefly in the parts about Vienna, and he
gave him also a very resentive instruction, whereby the Emperor complaining
very much of the loss of Ratisbone, and of Wallesteins not recovering it, he
added, that those quarters did so much trouble his Imperial Majesty, as he
would rather lose a Field Battle, then endure them any longer: when Questemberg
came before Fritland, were it either that he had always showed himself much
devoted to his greatness, or were it that he feared to exasperate him too much,
if he should deliver him his message by word of mouth; judged it better to give
him his instructions to read; at the reading whereof Fritland being mightily
incensed, said, that he would renounce his charge of being General, for he
clearly saw all his enemies used their uttermost power to make him do so;
whereupon he published this his resolution in writing; and (which made much for
irritating the Soldiery) he caused several Copies of this instruction to be
dispersed amongst them; he also gave Order to his Cosen the Count of Tersica,
and General of the Horse, and to Count Chiuschy, his great Favorite, both of
them Bohemians, who possessed great Lordships in that Kingdom, and to the
Marquess Illo, a Burgondian, and one who was also much his favorite, to
negotiate with the Captains and Soldiers of his Army, and make them not
consent to his laying down his charge: these obeyed the Generals commands, and
began seditiously to publish throughout the Quarters and Precincts of the Army
the wrongs and injuries which were done to their General by his enemies, the
which not being any longer able to resist he was forced to renounce his charge,
and once more to give way to the apparent hatred of the Court; Saying that he
who was a Captain loaded with Victories and Triumph, and who now was arrived at
that height of greatness whereunto any humane thought could aspire, was not
troubled to return to a private life, that once more, after having undergone so
many labors, he might enjoy the quiet due thereunto; wherefore he was not
troubled to disrobe himself once more of that command which against his will,
and enforced, he had revested himself with; that he was only troubled, even to
the soul, to think that he must abandon so well deserving Soldiers, whose
deserts he had upon so many occasions known, and whose valor he had tried; but
that he was much more displeased, and that it did very much afflict his soul,
that by abandoning them he should be a means of their losing so excessive
expenses, which by his Orders, and upon his Paroll, they had been at in the
raising of men; which expenses, together with the pay, and rewards due for so
signal service, who was it that would pay them if he should abandon the Army?
who was better acquainted with the merits of every particular man then he? who
had seen what pains they had taken, what blood they had shed, what dangers they
had run, hazarding their lives so often, and so generously, for the common
safety: that they might easily see how little the Emperor valued their
deserts, the blood which they had spent in his service, the sorrow they had
suffered, and dangers they had undergone, for the safety and maintenance of his
Imperial Diadem; since he more esteemed the keeping of every Householder of his
Patrimonial Dominions from being never so little troubled, then the disbanding
of that Army which had done, and suffered, such things for his service: that
these were the things wherewith their General was grieved, and not the laying
down his charge; that upon this occasion he wished he had the wealth of
Croesus, or the Mines of Potosie, that he might make good his word unto them,
so to satisfy them for what he owed them; but that having nothing now left
after so many disbursements, which he also had been at for the common cause,
unless it were the Plate destined for his own use, he was very ready to offer
it them to satisfy them in part, for a much greater sum which he acknowledged
he owed them: that he desired them they would accept of it, at least as an
argument of his good will; that as he was always desirous to remunerate them
all, and each of them, for their deserts; so did it much afflict him, that
through the injuries of the times they were to be defrauded of their merits, as
well as he: to these and the like Speeches sp^ead abroad in the Camp, by those
he employed, they added, and minded them of the extraordinary parts, and of the
other excellent parts of their Commander in Chief: how upon so many occasions,
through his means, they had been Conquerors; his good usage of them, his
civility and liberality used to them all, his relieving them in their greatest
necessities, his affability and humanity; and, on the other side, they
mentioned the bitter injuries and persecutions of the Court, the nets that were
spread abroad for his ruin by his enemies, how ungratefully his so high
deser^s ^ad been acknowledged; and finally, they instil'd into the Soldiery
all the affection, tenderness and piety, which might make them compassionate
their Generals misfortune; and all that might move them to sedition, so far as
to exhort them to join with them, and to interest themselves in his just cause;
that they should not suffer themselves to be abandoned by their General, nor
consent to so unworthy, and so unjust, oppression of a Commander so full of
Victory, Merit and Valor; who for his part would always side with the
Emperor, under whom he had waged war so faithfully; that he would persevere in
his innate devotion toward his Imperial Majesty, but that, notwithstanding,
they were obliged not to suffer him to be trampled upon by the common enemies,
and not permit that he, who was the upholder of the Empire, the honor of the
German Nation, and who was the common safety, should be unworthily suppressed
by the envy of a few strangers, and enemies to the German Nation.

Wallestein was wont to confer the Captains places and the Offices of the Army
upon such as did wholly depend upon him; insomuch as if any were recommended to
him by the Emperor, they were sure to be denied; wherefore these things
prevailing much with the Army, the Soldiers were all jointly ready to go to
the Generals quarters, ready to offer up their lives and bloods in preservation
of his welfare and dignity, to vindicate the offenses which were unjustly done
him, and to receive the sign of sedition from him: but it was thought a more
moderate way, that the Capta^ns of the Army only should acquaint the General
with the common sense of the Soldiery, and with their earnest desires that he
would not abandon their hope and interests, by laying down his place of
General. The General seeming at first unwilling to grant their desires, said,
he would once more readily obey the Emperors commands; but seeing the
Soldiers pressures more fervent by his denial, he suffered himself to be
overcome; and, as if enforced, condescendded to the general desire of the
Soldiery: But upon condition that the Captains of the Army should subscribe a
certain writing, whereby they should swear not to abandon him, but to keep firm
to him upon all occurrences; and to follow him in all enterprises which might
tend to the preservation of his Person, State and Dignity, and to the good of
the Army; in observancy whereof they were to spare neither blood nor life; and
in the last place, they protested they would prosecute those as Traitors, and
disloyal persons, and punish them severely in their lives and goods, who should
not subscribe to this Oath. All the Captains who were in the Camp readily
underwrit this writing; and it was said, that some would not swear, but upon
condition that this new Oath should be understood in service to the Emperor;
and that this condition was rejected: but in fine, all swore in the Generals
words, some willingly, some for fear of their lives; for the Soldiers stood in
a tumultuous manner about the Generals Lodging, ready to make those that should
not subscribe pass the push of Pike. Gallasso and Picolominy, who were present
underwrit, as did the rest: but instantly going from the Camp, under pretense
of going to their quarters, to gather all their Forces into a body, they went
to the Emperor to acquaint him with what had happened, complaining and
protesting that they were compelled to do what they had done; and offering their
ready service to obey his Imperial Majesty's commands, in extinguishing this
commencing sedition. Aldringer was not then in the Camp, though Wallestein had
used all means to have him there; the Emperor being much moved at this
novelty, presently published a Proclamation, wherein he proclaimed Fritland a
Traitor, making Gallasso General in his place, and freeing the Commanders from
the Oath they had taken, and pardoning all such as had subscribed, so as they
would in a short time join with the new General, and swear loyalty to him in
Cesars name: but he excepted Fritland out of this pardon, and some few who were
his confidents, and had incited him to this sedition and conspiracy. At the
first news of this Edict divulged through the Army, every man began (...)
bethink themselves; some for fear of punishment, some out of hopes of pardon:
Wallesteins self thought himself not safe amidst his soldiers, chiefly when he
found that his chief confidents, Gallasso and Picolominy had abandoned him, and
that Picolominy came with 3000 Horse to take him prisoner; wherefore going out
of Pilsen, a City of Bohemia, where the Conspiracy was plotted, and accompanied
by those who were excluded pardon, he suddenly withdrew toward Egra, a strong
Town of Bohemia, confining upon Saxony, wherein was a Garrison add a Governor,
who were much his friends; and hoping to be assisted by the Duke of Saxony, and
by Duke Weymer, in this misfortune, he dispatched expresses to them,
acquainting them with his condition, and making them plainly see that this was
the time to quell the Austrian power; he desired them either to come speedily,
or send to Egra, where they might ripen the yet unperfect Counsels, and join in
a solid union against the Emperor: he sent the like advertisements to others
of the Swedish Army, with whom he had had some such intelligence before; but
being come with his associates to Egra, instead of finding any that would side
with him there, he found his murderers, and those who came to nip this
Rebellion in the bud; for the Governor of that place, and those who were
there, hearing of the Emperors Edict, received him within their Walls
joyfully, but conspired his ruin. The Governor invited Fritlands associates
to a splendid Supper, where whilst they were at the Table, they were slain.
Fritland who being ill of the Gout rested in another Lodging, hearing an
extraordinary noise at his Gate, got out of Bed, strove to open the Window, and
to endeavor an escape out of it, the Window not being very high; but the Door
being broken open, he was knocked down with Halberts.

This was the end of Albertus Wallesteine, Duke of Fritland, and thus ended his
vast and immense Plots; a Commander who certainly deserved any other death then
this: he was worthy to be compared to Stilico, one of the Emperor Honorio's
chiefest Commanders; not so much for the greatness of his Military actions, as
for his misfortune of having stained them at the last with Treachery. This
Stilico waging war, 1200 years ago for the Roman Empire against the Barbarians,
was then, as Fritland now, the only support of the Empire, which was in a
tottering and sad condition by the inundation of the Barbarians; and being
arrived, as this man was, to the greatest height as a private man could come
to, he unfortunately lost his life for Treachery and affected Tyranny: and yet,
as the spots which by our modern Mathematicians are round in the Sun, are so
buried in the refulgency of the Sunbeams, as they are not of force enough to
obscure the light and splendour of so great a Planet; so Stilico's faults being
outdone by the beams of his Valor, and by his famous Victories, did not at
all blemish his memory to posterity; wherefore we may hope that this our
Commander may fare accordingly. The two Scipio's after the Victories won, and
famous actions performed on the behalf of the Commonwealth of Rome, were
likewise accused, and ended their old age miserably, the one in prison, the
other in exile: Hannibal proved the like fortune amongst the Carthaginians:
Bellesarius and Narses, two famous Commanders, ^an the like misfortune under
the Emperor Justinian; and to come to later times, Gonzallo Fernandes di
Cardova, surnamed il Gran Capitano, being either guilty, or suspected by his
Prince to be so, died banished from the Court, and not much better then
Confined to a poor little Village. Howsoever, this our Commander wanted not
authentic testimonies of his fidelity, even after his death: the confederates
Commanders with whom it was thought that he had plotted so hamous Conspiracies,
having always found themselves deluded by these feigned Treaties, did not
believe him when he invited them this last time to Egra; but not trusting him
any longer, and fearing to be abused as they had been formerly, they moved not
at all, but proceeded so considerately, as his speedy death freed them from
that misfortune, whereinto had they been more credulous, they had undoubtedly
fallen; and as his most suspected actions, and those whereon his being guilty
of high Treason were most grounded, are accompanied by several Arguments of his
innocence, and seem not sufficient to convince him; so those good wits have not
been wanting, who by their eloquent declamations have endeavour^d to prove his
accusations false, and have vindicated his innocence: but, howsoever; all that
can be said in his justification cannot so far free him, but that his
publishing the Instructions brought him by Questemberg, and the subscription
underwritten by his Captains, and accepted of by him, together with all that
was done at Pilsen, must convince him of a manifest attempt against his Prince,
it not being lawful for a Vassal, under whatsoever pretense, to jest in so nice
Affairs; and the unworthy Conditions which he extorted from his Prince before
he would reassume the place of General, and those hateful Conventions agreed
upon with the enemies to the Empire, before Suainitz, were so enormous and
scandalous as they are not to be defended: Moreover, who can doubt, but that
his endeavors to ruin Feria's Army, and to keep out that of the Infanta, the
one whereof was to bring so much endammagement to Germany and the other would
have been manifest and clear evidences of Treachery in a much meaner Officer
then he? It being a no less hostile Act to endeavor the destruction of any
ones Forces and Armies by secret plots and machinations, then by weapon in
hand. The same may be affirmed of his persecuting the Spanish Agents, who were
so fit instruments for the Emperors service, and for his contrivals against
the Jesuits, who are so great maintainers of the Catholic Religion; it not
being to be denied, but that the one was a manifest attempt against the Divine,
the other against Humane Majesty; for which certainly any of a meaner condition
would have been blamed.

Now let us reassume the thread of our Narration. The flame of this horrible
Rebellion, which was likely to have undone all Germany, and therewith the
Germane Empire, being extinguished almost before it was kindled, and sedition
being also ceased in the Camp, the Army returned to the Emperors obedience,
who being freed from so dangerous a storm^ made his Son the King of Hungary go
into the Field with no less applause then success, who (as you have heard) was
chosen General of the Emperors Forces after Wall stines decease, to whom the
Duke of Bavaria presently joined with his Army, and with the Army of the
League, and being desirous to illustrate his first fruits by some signal
service, he began with the recovery of Ratisbone, which was formerly taken by
the Swedes: This is a Hans Town of Germany, situated upon the Danube, almost
in the bosom of Bavaria, a very opportune situation for the safety of
Austria, and for the regaining of Bavaria; there was in it a Garrison of 3000
Foot; and Weymer, who was formerly made General of the Confederates Forces,
desired by the perservation of that place not only to preserve the glory of
having taken it, but therein also the honor of his commencing General; and
being gotten thereinto before the King came before it, he lef^ a recruit of
1000 Foot, together with some Ammuniton, there; and then leaving it, he used
all diligence in raising as many men as possibly he could, to relieve it; but
it was too strongly opposed; for at the very name of the Kings going to the
Field, all the Nobility and Princes of Germany strove who should first join
with him; he had with him his own Army, and those of Bavaria and the Catholic
League; he still abounded in men, and had brought along with him a hundred
pieces of battery; yet the Defendants were not at all dismayed, but continued
their defense undauntedly for many days; but their Ammunition falling short,
they were at last forced to yield upon honorable Conditions, being still played
upon by 100 Cannon, and seeing no succor come; for Weymer could not assemble
Forces sufficient to relieve it; he could not get Marshal Horn, nor the
Lan^grave, to come to that enterprise, though he had sent for them, they being
both of them much displeased with his being chosen General, and were not
willing to be under his command; only Horn coming in at last, brought so few
men with him, as, being joined to Weymer's, they amounted not to 16000 fighting
men, too small a number, and much inferior to the Opposers. This Victory
gotten so succesfully, under the first Auspice of a young Prince, of great
Birth, it is impossible to express how much spirit it restored to the Cesarean
Forces, and how much it revived their valor, which, Wallestine being dead,
seemed almost quite extinct, conceiving, that he being gone who was thought to
be the only support of Germany, no action of moment could be expected from
Cesar's Forces. On the other side, that Victory did sufficiently abate the
pride and haughtiness of the Enemy, who, puffed up with success, were
victorious every where; and Fritland being dead, they thought they could meet
with no opposition; the Name of this young Prince was therefore not only
exalted to the skies, but he was received and cried up as a new deliverer of
afflicted Germany. On the contrary, the Confederates Forces, having lost much
reputation by this action, forsook Bavaria, and retreated toward Aus^erg, and
Swevia, thinking that the Infanta would come by that way, and join his Forces
with those of the victorious Kings they therefore betook themselves to hinder
their joining, from whence they foresaw great ruin and prejudice would ensue
to their Affairs. The King, on the contrary, hearing that (...) was assaulted
by the Sa^on Forces, was already marching to relieve that Kingdom; but
understanding by the way that it was sufficiently defended, and that the
Assailants had been repulsed with great loss from before the Walls of Prague,
he sent some Regiments thither to strengthen it, and returned back; and joining
with Bavaria, went to before Donavert, a strong in Bavaria, upon the banks of
the Danow, which was yet held by the Confederates, and which confining upon
Franconia, and the Country of Wittenberg, was the key of Bavaria on that side,
a place of great importance; and having recovered it also happily by assault,
he also forced some other Towns to surrender: Wherefore having recovered almost
all Bavaria, and left the Duke to recover the rest, the King went with his
Army, and with that of the League, against the Country of Wittenberg, a
fruitful Country, and which being till now untouched by the present Wars of
Germany was thought to be the Magazine of the Confederates Army; for the Duke
of that Country being a Protestant, and having always appeared to be a capital
Enemy to the Catholic Religion, and to the Austrian Name, furnished the Armies
of the League with all things necessary: Wherefore the King having refreshed
his men a little, went against Nordling, the chief City of that Dukedom, which
joining with Ulmes, not far off, was of great concernment for the Affairs of
Germany. This the Kings resolution made the Chieftains of the contrary party
very sollicitous to relieve it, lest it might be lost, as well as Ratisbone and
Donavert; so as they thought them bound to do their utmost to defend it.
Express Orders being therefore sent to all the Forces, even those of Garrisons
which were in several parts of Germany, they commanded them expressly to quit
the places and Towns wherein they were, and to join with them immediately in so
necessary and important a succor.

The King, on the other side, hearing of so great an union, dispatched away a
Messenger immediately to the Infanta, who was then come with his Forces to the
Confines of Bavaria, desiring him that for the present he would give over
prosecuting his journey, which he intended for Alsatia, and join with him in
the common enterprise against the common Enemy: Alsatia was then abandoned, for
almost all the Garrisons of the Towns thereof, upon General Weymers command,
were marched toward Nordlingen; so as the Infanta might more easily, and more
securely, march thorough Alsatia. His chief intent was, to get as soon as he
could into Flanders, where he was much desired by those Provinces which wanted
a Governor; but ^hearing no better harmony then what concerned the defense of
the Catholic Religion, the welfare of the Empire, and the Grandezza of his
own house, which depended all upon his joining with the King; setting all
things else aside, and not caring for what was said to the contrary, he fixed
his thoughts, and pitched his resolution only on this union. Taking therefore
all necessary orders for it, he went with his Army toward Monaco, where
Serbellone and Gambacorta, together with the remainders of Feria's Army,
joining with him, he drew toward the Danube; and passing over it about
Donevert, he came to the Cesarian Camp before Nordlingen, whither Weymer was
come a little before with his Army; and expecting other recruits was firmly set
upon the relief thereof.

He was quartered upon a Hill called Arespurg, just over against that part
where the Cesarean Camp was pitched; so as the City was seated just between as
in a Diametre between the two Armies, and the Hill was within four hours march
of the City, Weymer, out of a desire to end the business, endeavored to draw
the King out to battle; but the King expecting the Infanta, kept within his
quarters, and endeavoring to keep on the siege, would not hazard the public
and his private fortune upon the uncertainty of battle; Being afterward much
reinforced by the Infanta's Arrival he neither quitted the siege, nor refused
battle, if it should be presented by the enemy, but was prepared for both; his
Forces consisted of three Armies, his own of the Empire, that of the Catholic
League, and that of the Infanta's: They in all made up the full number of 13000
Horse, and 20000 Foot; in that of the Emperor, which was governed by Gallasso,
under the title of the Kings Lieutenant Gene^al, were 7000 Horse, commanded by
Picolomini, and 5000 Foot, besides 2000 Hungarians and Croats, which served
more to trouble the Enemies quarters with inrodes, then to fight in open
fields. In that of the League, wherein John de Vert, the Duke of Lorreynes
Lieutenant, commanded at first, and afterward the Duke himself when he was come
unto the Camp, were 3000 Horse, and as many Foot; in that of the Infanta's,
whereof the Marquess Leganes was Camp-master General, were 3000 Horse, under
the Ma^quess Spinola, and 12000 Foot under several Commanders, all choice and
veterane Soldiers, composed of several Nations; besides many Gentlemen and
Captains of quality, who served as Volunteers.

In this al^eration of affairs, the more that battle was desired by the
Imperialists, the more did the others cool in their desire thereof: yet Weyme^
continued the same fervency rather to fight, then to suffer such a City to be
lost whilst he looked on, and had past his word to those of Nordlingen, to
relieve them and free them from siege within six days. His loss of Reputation
egged him much on thereunto, which ^e foresaw he must undergo, if the loss of
this Town should be added to those of Ratisbone and Donevert; whereby all the
Hans Towns of Germany, from whence he had so great supplies of Moneys, Men,
Munition, and of Victuals, for maintenance of the Army, would certainly quite
forego the Leagues party, and turn over to the Emperor. So as those supplies
failing, the General con^ederacy would soon dissolve; he was also encouraged to
try his fortune, by his having been so often victorious over the Imperial
Forces, and by his being certainly advertised that the Infanta's men exceeded
not 2000 Horse, and 5000 Foot; Wherefore despising the numbers of the one, and
the courage of the others, he persuaded himself of assured victory. On the
contrary, Horn, the head of the Sw^dish Militia, measuring things more warily,
was against hazarding the Forces of the League upon the event of battle; and
almost all the subordinate Captains were of his opinion: They considered the
uncertainty of battle, that their numbers were fewer then those of the enemy,
that those whereof the Imperial Army was then full were valiant men, that there
were three Armies in one, conducted by three great Princes; that the King of
Hungary had won much reputation by the Victories of Donevert and Ratisbone,
that the Infanta and Duke of Lorrain, especially the Infanta, had store of
valiant and experienced men; that the presence of these Princes was much to be
considered, by reason of the courage that upon such occasions it infuses into
the Soldiery; that therefore the hazarding of a Battle might prove dangerous;
that the Victory would be more certain by delay then by fighting, for that the
Cesarean Army was straightened in Victuals, Straw and Fo^rage, and could not,
consequently, keep in those quarters long: on the contrary, that he was
abundantly provided of all these things from the Country of Wittenberg, which
lay on his back; so as since they might overcome and provide for the freeing of
the Nordlingers by cun^tation, wherefore should they expose the main affair to
the cast of a Dice? to this was added the difficulty of the way by which they
were to march, it being an uneasy Country for the carrying of their Cannon,
and being possessed and fortified by the enemy: that to boot with all this,
they expected Count Otto of the Rhein, with 2000 Horse and 5000 Foot, and Count
Cratz with 800 Horse and 3000 Foot, which were very considerable Forces upon
this occasion; which were near ^and, and therefore necessary to be tarried for:
but Crats appe^ring during this ambiguity of opinion, and the six days prefixed
for relieving the Nordlinge^s being expired; Weymer, who as General of the
Con^ederates Forces was to govern, being impatient of the least delay, or
doubting perhaps that the Rhingrave would not, out of emulation for
superiority, join with him, as he would not do in the relief of Ratisbone, not
suffering any further dispute, commanded to proceed to the relief: he had with
him somewhat more then 9000 Horse and 16000 Foot, whereof 4000 Horse and 5000
Foot were Germans, 4000 Horse and 2500 Foot Swedes, commanded by Marshal Horn,
6000 Foot were brought into the Field by the Duke of Wittenberg; and the 800
Horse and 3000 Foot brought by Count Crats, which in all made up the number of
9000 Horse, and 16000 Foot. This resolution being put on, they marched from
their quarters, intending to attempt a certain Wood, by which they were to pass
before they could come to the Field where they were to fight; and because it
was thought it would be hard to get into the Wood, by reason that the way was
so narrow, it was resolved that when they should have gotten it, they should
proceed to assault the Camp which lay beyond the Wood; and if they could not
gain the Wood, that then they should forbear, and take up their Quarter in a
convenient place, near a little River, where they would wait for the coming of
Count del Reno, who was thought to be within a days march. This Army appeared
with this resolution before the Wood, three hours before Sunset; against which
3000 Horse were immediately sent under Octavio Picolominy, to discover it, and
to entertain the enemy by skirmish: (...) whose appearing as many of the
contrary Camp advanced, and fought till night drew on; the Imperialists were
wholly unprovided of Muskets and Field* Artillery, whereof the enemy was well
provided; the Imperialists therefore were worsted in this encounter, and forced
to retreat with the loss of many valiant Soldiers, and of some Captains;
amongst which the Prior Aldobrandino, Nephew to Pope Clement the 8th, was one,
who having served with a Regiment many years in those wars, had given good
trial of his Military valor. The Imperialists loss in this first encounter was
notwithstanding fortunate for them; for it was the rise of a signal Victory
gotten by them the next day; for the Victors having after this made themselves
maste^s of the Wood, did not take up their quarters where they had designed,
nor waited not the coming of the Count del Reno; but having won the Wood,
doubted not to pursue their Victory the next morning: on the left side of the
Wood there stood a little Hill which commanded the Imperial quarters, and all
the Plain wherein the Catholic Army were to receive the encounter, and wherein
the main Battle was to be fought. The first of either of the Armies which
should possess themselves of this Hill commanded absolutely the enemies
quarters, and the place which was destined for the future Battle: Weymer had no
sooner cast his eye upon it, but considering the advantagiousness of the
situation, he designed to be master of it; and there being another little Wood
at the Foot of that Hill, he thought it necessary to possess himself of that
Wood, before he should master the Hill: not content therefore with having got
the first Wood, he would take the other that very night, to make way for taking
the Hill, which he reserved for the next morning: the Infanta was quartered
upon some other little Hill near this which were to be taken, but somewhat more
inward, and not so high; and he and his Captains having considered the
si^uation of the higher Hill, they had sent ^ome men thither; and in order
thereunto, they had sent Francisco l' Escovar, Serjeant-Major of a Brigade,
with 200 Spanish Musketeers, and not long after 200 Burgondians, with some
Troops of Horse, to guard the little Wood which was at the foot of the same
Hill; and thinking they had sufficiently provided for the defense of both these
places, they did no more therein. But Weymer, who was firmly resolved to make
himself master of the Hill, sent much greater Forces to assault that little
Wood, against which though l' Escovar fought valiantly, yet the assailants
remained masters of that second Wood that very night, as they had been of the
other before, took l' Escovar prisoner, and slew many of his men, not without
much loss of their own blood: this being the second bait which fortune laid to
entice the enemy on to battle, made the Cesareans more wary and more diligent
in defending the upper Hill; for they saw the enemy did their utmost to take
it, placing their chief hopes therein of that Victory which they thought
themselves sure of: wherefore the Infanta ceased not to send redoubled forces
all night to defend it, and to secure it from assault, which he was sure would
be given the next morning: he therefore sent several Regiments both of Foot and
Horse thither, some whereof were placed on the Front, some on the sides, where
the assailants were expected; and after these other Regiments were orderly
distributed, who were to reinforce the former upon occasion: they l^kewise
sent Artillery thither, and made Trenches for the better defense thereof; which
were perfected before the assault was given, though the situation was stony and
wanted earth; nor prepared they less for Battle on the Plain then on the Hill,
expecting that the enemy would undoubtedly sally out there from the Wood which
which they had taken. The Army was thus ordered in that Plain: on the right
wing was the Duke of Lorrein, General of the Catholic Leagues Army, and his
Lieutenant John de Vert, with all the Cavalry of that League: on the left was
the Imperial Horse; in the Battle which was placed in the midst was Marquess
Spinola, General of the Spanish Horse, and with him was his Lieutenant Paolo
Deutici; behind these were the Emperors light Horse, a good part whereof were
Croats. The Infanta's quarters were over all these upon a little Hill, wherein
was Artillery placed, and a good strength of men, to succor and defend the
Troops that were upon the Plain: at last, the morn appeared on the sixth of
September, wherein the enemy were seen to come in very good order toward the
well munited, and well garrisoned Hill, against which the whole force and
conflict of the Battle played, little being done upon the Plain: for W^ymer, who
was to assault the Cesarean Camp, kept within the Wood, being more intent to
send forth new recruits to the Hill, then to advance and confront the Enemies
Army; thinking, and not without reason, that that station being overcome, the
Army on the Plain would undoubtedly be vanquished. The whole concern touching
the Catholic Religion, and the safe^y of the Empire, was disputed upon that
Hill: the ge^ting up unto it was very steep: Horn with 4000 Horse and 5000
Foot, the most whereof were Swedes, and the cho^cest men of the Army, was one
that led on the assault; and Count Gra^z was the other with almost an equal
number of Combatants: it was defended by Don Martine d' Idiaques, with his
Brigade of Spaniards, Don Gasparo Toralto, with his Neapolitans, Gerardo
Gambacorta with the Neapolitan Horse, by Salma, Vormes and Leister with the
Dutch Horse; by the Counts of Torre and Alberg, with the Burgondian Horse; and
all these were to receive the first assaults: behind these were many Brigades
of reserve, amongst the rest two Brigades of the Lombardy, the one led on by
Carlo Guasco, the other by Count Panigarvola. Picolominy and Serbellone were
appointed to order this defense; to whose valor and experience the whole
defense of the Hill was entrusted: the Generals, Gallasso and Leganes, had no
certain place appointed them, but went every where, providing for, and
disposing of all things requisite for that days work. The assailants mounted
the Hill in very good order, and with a settled and constant pace; the first
that were assaulted were the Neapolitan Horse and Foot, and the Dutch; and so
fierce was this first assault, as though the Neapolitans resisted stoutly, the
Dutch faced about and began to run; but they were presently turned back by the
Officers and Soldiers of the other Brigades who were behind them, who with
their Pikes and Swords withstood them, and did not only force them to forbear
flying, but to reassume their abandoned stations; wherein Gambacorta did much
service with his Horse, who by Serbellones order fell upon the Flank of the
Enemies Horse, who had already possessed themselves of the station abandoned by
the Dutch, and forced them to forego it, and to quit it to Dutch, who were
driven back by his men: but Toralto's Foot speedily discharging their Muskets,
disordered the Enemies Horse, who came on so furiously, as many who escaped the
Musket Shot were thrown to the ground by the Pike-men, and the Foot who
followed them, assaulted with no less sury, behaving themselves gallantly; but
were but ill handled by some Piles of Musketeers, who assaulted them on the
Flank; and yet answering them stoutly, a great conslict began, which grew at
last to a fierce Battle, and continued a long time equal; wherein the Dutch
Horse, after some resistance, being again repulsed they forsook their station,
one of their Leaders was mortally wounded, and the other, which was Vormes,
slain right out; and they sled, some of them falling foul upon Toralto's
Brigade, other upon that of Idiaques, by whom being again made to stand by
their Pikes and Swords, they did not at all disorder their ranks; and the
assailants possessing themselves of the Dutch men's station, were masters of
their Cannon, and began to turn them upon the enemy, and had certainly
occasioned great disorder and prejudice, had not Serbellone prevented it, who
made Idiaques advance with his Brigade, which was composed not only of brave
and gallant Soldiers, whosevalour had been upon several occasions tried
formerly, and who had been exercised in Military Offices and Commands; but was
also adorned with many of the Nobility, who were all placed in the first Files:
these passing through a thousand deaths, sacrificing their lives for their
Religion, for their Prince, and for their own glory, did not only recover the
lost station, but made it good against many assaults which were given one after
another; and afforded the fugitive Dutch occasion of rallying once again, and
of re-entring the Battle. Toralto's Neapolitans were already wearied, and
lessened by long fighting, who no less valiantly then the Foot had fought
valiantly for a while, and maintained their Ranks, and had slain many of the
enemies, whose Forces plying upon this part, the Imperialists were likely not
to have been able to defend it much longer, which Gallasso and Leganes being
aware of, they sent thither a re-inforcement of a thousand Horse, and a great
many choice Musketeers, out of the Brigade; which were for a reserve; and the
hostile violence still increasing, they sent thither afterward Guasco's and
Panigarvolo's Lombard Brigades, which entering with great courage sustained the
Battle, which by the Neapolitans weakness began to give ground: these entered so
courageously, as the Fight seemed to be renewed; and the defense revived which
was almost given over; and though Panigarvelo after having long maintained
fight, was slain by a Musket Shot in the throat, and that Guasco wounded with
two Musket Shot in the thigh, and with one in the right hand, endeavored still
to fight; yet not being able longer to keep on foot, nor to manage his sword,
he was forced to retreat: but notwithstanding that one of their Commanders were
slain, and the other withdrawn, the subordinate Officers and Soldiers of these
two Brigades failed not in doing their duties; but fighting still courageously
and in good order, they made good their station, and maintained themselves
still stoutly against the Enemy, as if no harm had befallen their Captains. It
would require much time to relate punctually all the actions, all the assaults,
and resistances which were made; for the defense and for the taking of that
Hill; how now these pursued, how those gave now back, how the one party did
sometimes abandon their station, then repulsing the oppugners, regained them:
it would be long to relate what dangers were run, to name what Captains and
Officers signalized themselves that day by fighting, some by dying, some by
overcoming. The final end was, that at the end of seven hours fierce bickering,
the like to which was hardly ever heard or read of; the defendants after
several likelihoods of being conquered, remained conquerers: the occasion of
this Victory was the happy success that the Cesarean Army had on the Plain; for
Weymer finding it impossible to overcome the defense which was made upon the
Hill, after having lost the best men of his Camp by sending continuaally strong
re-inforcement thither, went, desperately out of the Wood; and in his weak
condition went to fall upon the Cesarean Camp, which being well marshaled in
Squadrons, expected him; and having fought unfortunately (for he was bravely,
withstood, and repulsed by the Duke of Lorrein, by John de Vert, and by
Marquess Spinola) he was forced to give back, and being pursued by the Duke of
Lorrein with the Cavalry of the League, and by Marquess Spinola, with those the
Infanta, and after these by the Croates, who afterward advancing, possessed
themselves of the passes by which the conquered were to seek their safety;
those who fought still obstinately upon the hill, seeing that Weymer did
directly fly with their chiefest strength, and that the way whereby they were
to escape was prepossessed by the enemy, they began to doubt that if they
should persist any longer in the enterprise, they should be assaulted on the
backs, and that not being able to escape, they should be undoubtedly cut in
pieces; and that though they should have the better upon the Hill, it would be
to no purpose, since the body of their Army was discomfited, abandoned the
fight, and gave over the enterprise, and left the Victory to the Cesareans;
which certainly would have proved their own, if when they had taken the second
Wood, they had immediately fallen upon the Hill, whilst it was ungarded; for
being masters thereof, they would have unlodged the enemy who were encamped
below; who being forced to retreat could not have escaped utter ruin; and
there being no other Forces then in the Field to sustain the Empire and the
Austrian Grandezza, they would have been the Arbitrators of Germany: On so
slight accidents do the victories or overthrows of Armies, and the
preservation or ruin of Empires and Monarchies, often depend.

Almost all the Imperial Cavalrie which were on the plain, followed those that
fled, and made great slaughter of them; more particularly, in a certain boggy
place, which those that fled light upon, where both Horse and Foot being
plunged up to the knees, they could not acquit themselves; but being unable
either to fly away, or to defend themselves, were miserably slain. The Duke of
Lorrein advanced, and took Horn and Crats prisoners, and many others of the
chief of the Army: Weymer, by means of a fleet Horse, fled toward Ulms,
accompanied with not above eight men; which City hearing how he had been
routed, shut the gates upon him; so as being deprived of that Refuge, ^he fled
still through the Country of Vertemberg, and had the good fortune to recover
Francfort; the number of the slain in the battle is variously calculated. Some
will have it, that 8000 were slain, and as many taken prisoners as they fled;
so as what with those that were slain, and those that were taken prisoners, and
dispersed, there hardly remained 2000 under Colors: This Victory was the more
remarkable by the little loss of the Conquerours blood; all that were slain or
wounded on their side not being full 2000, the Artillery to the number of 84
pieces of Cannon, all the Munition, all the baggage, and 300 Horse and Foot
Colors fell into the Enemies hand; not above the third part of the Conquerours
Army fought in this battle: For the Imperial Army, and that of the League,
stood in squadrons with the Infanta's Cavalry on the plain, being little more
then spectators of what was done upon the Hill: And the encounter which happened
after on the plain, from whence the victory first began was very slight, being
rather a victory, then a combat, for the Cesateans, and for the conquered
rather a fl^ght then a fight. The Infanta's Army fought most, and but a part
thereof neither, and by the confession of the Dutch, generally, and of Horn
himself, the victory was to be wholly acknowledged from the Infanta's Army, and
particularly from the Spaniards, Neopolitans, and Lombards, upon whom the whole
battle was charged. And such was their confidence and ambition, as they would
not communicate the glory of the victory with any other Nation, by calling them
in to defend the Hill; in so much as the Duke of Lorrein being advanced with
some of his Regiments from the plain, where he could not tarry any longer idle
looking on, as he end avoured to climb the Hill and assist the defendants, he
was withheld by his own men; and kept from going any further on, before he
could come to where the battle was fought. By this victory the Swedish party
which was before so formidable, remained little less then quite overthrown;
Oxenstern who was their chief directer, one who had been always undaunted, when
he heard the news, was so astonished as that he knew not whither to turn, or
what to do, to repair so great a blow. He was at Francfort, whither Weymer was
retreated after the battle; and having quickly gotten 3000 Foot, which came
from the Rhingrave of Hessen, and from the Duke of Luneberg, he with those, and
with some others, partly fugitives, partly those that he had sent for from
other Garrisons, went together with Weymer toward Mentz; hoping to find some
refuge there, whereby to stop the precipice of so great a ruin: But those of
the Town, affrighted at such a turn of Affairs, were more desirous to obtain
pardon for the faults they had already committed, then to incense the Emperor
by committing yet more, so as they would not receive them. They therefore
retired toward the neighboring Mountains of Rheine, and threw a bridge over
the River, that they might receive great succors which they expected from
France. On the other side, the victorious Army, to which those of Norlingen did
immediately surrender, passing into the Countries of Wittenberg, Franconia, and
Suevia, thinking that they would all come in and submit themselves; and that
they might get great compositions from thence, which all the people and parts
thereabouts did readily offer, to shun the sacking and desolation of their
Country. The like did all the Cities upon the Rheine and Danube; and those also
upon the Iser, Occino, and Neccar, (Rivers of that part of Germany) which had
sided with the Swedes. Thus the Conquerours minding more the reaping of
advantage by their victory, then to subdue the remainders of the conquered
party, afforded them convenience of recruiting, and of recovering their former
condition and honor; which though it was attributed to weakness in the
Imperialists Counsels, yet other more important reasons kept them from doing
it, lest they might put those remainders into utter despair. They were yet
possessed of many principal Towns near the Rheine: And the King of France being
very much pressed by them for succor, made use of that present necessity which
he saw they were in; desiring that if they would have the demanded succor,
they would deliver up into his hands the important Town of Filisburg upon the
Rheine; so as the Cesareans thinking they might more easily recover those Towns
from them then from the French, were reserved in totally extirpating them, to
keep them from despair: Thus in their low ebb of the relics of the victories
which they had formerly gotten made them secure and considerable even to their
victorious Enemies, as they had formerly when they got them, made them
formidable to Germany: Not long after the battle, it was consulted in the Camp,
whether the Infanta returning backwards should go for Flanders thorough
Alsatia, as he had formerly intended to do; or whether being already so far
advanced in Germany, he should pursue his journey through the Palatinate. For
his going thorough Alsatia, the convenience which he might have to relieve
Brisack, which was again besieged by the Enemy, was pleaded; and the easiness
and safety of his marching thorough that Country, which was now free from
Garrisons of the Enemy, they being gone, after the battle of Norlingen, to join
with their General. The shortness of the march pleaded for the other way and
the safety thereof; it being void of the conquered Enemy as well as Alsatia, as
also the much pressing of the Flemmings, that he would hasten his journey as
much as he possibly could: Moreover, the Winter-season, which upon any the
least delay before Brisack would come on, and would not only have blocked up
that way but all other ways, made more against his turning back, and for his
continuing the way he was in.

After several debates it was carried, that he should go through the
Palatinate; wherefore the Infanta, in company with the King of Hungary, entering
the Dukedom of Wittenberg, and having reduced it to obedience (for the Duke
thereof was fled with some few into the Country of Saltsburg) came into the
lower Palatinate, where the Infanta taking leave of the King, and having
obtained 2000 Horse from him for a conduct, passed victoriously every where,
and as triumphing over the Enemies of the Catholic Faith and of the Empire,
not meeting with any opposition; nay, all places through which he passed
yielded to him, and he was furnished every where abundantly with victuals, and
all sorts of refreshments. From the Palatinate he entered into the County of
Nansaw, and being come from thence to Cullen, where he was honorably received
by that Elector, he passed into Flanders with as much quiet and safety as he
passed through Castile and Arragon when he parted from Madrid. He came into
Brussels about the beginning of November, in the year 1634. where he was
received not only with great pomp but with incredible applause; his coming was
very seasonable; for the groundwork was already laid for a strong League in
those parts against the Spaniards, between the King of France and the United
Provinces, which was concluded on the beginning of March following; and
thereupon powerful Armies were prepared by them both to assault jointly the
Provinces which were obedient to the Crown of Spain: The King of France wanted
only a pretense whereby to honest the breach. But this new and great rupture
not being to be cloaked, the mask which had formerly been made use of between
the two Crowns must be taken off, and open War must be made, which did
necessarily require some pretense for its justification; therefore the King of
France made use of an occasion which happened at this time. The Archbishop of
Triers, one of the Electors, held (as has been formerly said) much closer
Intelligence with the King of France then with the Emperor and Austrians, with
whom for many occasions he had been several times distasted; and to boot that
this City was a member of the German Empire, it had been anciently under the
protection of the Dukes of Luxemburg, and by succession under the protection of
the King of Spain, who succeeded the ancient Dukes in that Dukedom; and the
King of Spain, under color of that pretension, was wont to keep some Soldiers
in Garrison there, and to use some actions of Jurisdiction: The Elector seeming
to apprehend the Swedish Forces had (as has been formerly said) put himself
under the King of France his protection, and received a French Garrison into
the City, expelling the Spanish: Nor herewithal content, he, to the great
prejudice of the German Affairs, delivered up to the same King of France the
Town of Hermensteyne; it was also said that he was to accept of the Cardinal
Richelieu as Co adjutor in the Archbishopric, to which the Electorship is
annexed, with intention of leaving that Dignity to him afterward, and so
introduce a Vote absolutely depending upon the King of France into the
Electoral college; A thing which though it was sufficiently contrary to
reason, and to the preeminence of the German Empire, and repugnant to the Votes
of the German Nation; yet would it not have been ill looked upon by the
Protestant Princes in those times, and to such as were ill affected to the
Austrian Name. And the Emperor fearing these plots which he saw were a framing
by this Electory, he ordered the Infanta that he should secure his person: In
order whereunto, the Infanta put 2000 Soldiers in some barks covered with
cloth, like to Merchants vessels which pass upon those Rivers, and sent them
down the Mosell, toward Tryers, which is seated upon the bank thereof, whither
being come by night, and telling the Sentinels that they were boats come from
Lucemberg, they fastened two Petards to two Gates, by one of which they entered,
and by the other 200 Horse, which were sent by land to that purpose by the
Infanta, who coming to the Gate at the same time that it was beaten down by the
Petard, the Horse and Foot entered the Town at unawares, cut the French Garrison
in pieces, who were overcome with fear, and the darkness of the night, and
easily made themselves Masters of the City, and of the Elector, who being
speedily carried to Lucemburg, and from thence to Namures, and so to Brussels,
was honorably treated there, as an Archbishop, and Elector, but was diligently
guarded, as a Prisoner.

The King of France held himself highly offended by this action, as if it had
been done in a resentment of the new Protection whereinto that Prince had put
himself; he therefore made the Electors liberty be demanded of the Infanta, by
his Resident who was then in that Court; to which the Infanta answered, That
what was done at Tryers was done by the Emperors express command, and that
therefore he was to address himself to Caesar. The King not being satisfied with
this answer, sent an Herald to the Infanta, who did intimate War against him,
and against the King of Spain, expressly declaring, and protesting, That that
intimation should serve as effectually for the King of Spain as if it had been
given to his own Person in Madrid.

Many Discourses passed about under the Names of the Kings themselves, and of
others, as they stood severally interessed or devoted to either of the Courts,
wherein each side sharply defended their cause. The most solid, and most
ascertained Reasons of this breach, published in print by the King of France,
in his own Name, were, That the Elector of Tryers, being abandoned by the
Emperor, when the Empire, beaten by the Swedish Forces, was not well able to
sustain it self, not knowing whom to ^ly unto for refuge, had put himself into
his protection, to free himself from being suppressed by them; wherefore he
deserved not to be made prisoner for doing so, without citation, or being
condemned; he therefore accused it, as not only unjust, but unworthy, being
committed against a Sacred Person, an Archbishop, and one of the seven Electors
of the Empire; and that since it redounded not only to the great offense of his
Crown, in respect of the protection whereunto the Elector had put himself, but
to the like of the Apostolic See, and of the Electoral College, the Pope and
Electors were to resent it as well as he. To this was answered, That that
Elector had never put himself into the protection of the King of France, but
had only desired some assistance from him, as from a Prince that was his
friend, against the Swedes; so as even by the Electors own confession the title
of protection was faulty, which was the chief foundation of the complaint, and
of the injury pretended to be done to the King; and if the Elector had desired
or received help under the name of protection, he ought not to have withdrawn
him from the natural Sovereig^y of the Emperor, nor from the protection of the
Dukes of Luxenberg, he being a Prince of the Empire, and under the protection
of the ancient Dukes of Luxenberg; it being a clear thing, That a natural
Subject cannot withdraw himself from the Jurisdiction of his Sovereign Prince,
nor prejudicate it by any action of his; and that howsoever his protection
against the King of Sweden did not extend against the Emperor, or King of
Spain, the one being his Sovereign, the other his ancient Protector, no
otherwise then fealty by a natural Subject of a Prince sworn to another Prince
from whom he holds any Town or Castle in Fee, shall never be of force to engage
him against his natural Prince, nor to withdraw him from his obedience; That
therefore the King of France ought not by title of new protection, to
intermeddle with what the Electors Sovereign Prince was pleased to order. The
groundwork of the breach seeming to be shaken by these Reasons, the King of
France pleaded other former injuries, which he had at several times, and upon
several occasions, received from the Crown of Spain; and beginning from the
reciprocal Marriages made between the two Kings, it was said that the Spaniards
had never ceased to make plots against the quiet and safety of France; and in
the first place, That the King of Spain had waged war with the Duke of Savoy,
under the honorable pretense of protecting the House of Mantua; against which
the same King did afterward conspire himself, for no other reason but because
the Duke would not join with him in making war with the King of France. To this
was added, the revolutions of the Valtoline, to the prejudice of the Grisons,
ancient Clients and Confederates of the Crown of France, which were endeavored
for no other end, and somented by the King of Spain, but only that he might
carry the war more commodiously through the Valtoline, from Germany to Italy,
and from Italy to Germany, and to make himself Master of the parts confining
upon the Valtoline: That the Court of Spain, not being able to endure the good
correspondency which was held between France and England, had, by means of
Marquess Mirabello, his Ambassador at Paris, sowed dissentions and discords
between them, and fomented the Rebellion of the Heretics of France, to the end
that the King being busied in suppressing them might not have leisure to defend
Mantua and Montferrat, which were then powerfully assaulted by the Spaniards;
and that when the King of France had by the success of his Forces, and by the
Peace of Susa, freed Cassalle the first time, the King of Spain had not only
let slip that occasion of preserving Peace in Italy, and of securing the
liberty of the Client of France, but had called in the Dutch against the City
of Mantua, whilst his Commanders endeavored once more to take Cassalle by
force; whereby the King of France was forced to send his Arms back again into
Italy, to secure his Confederates, and to keep the Spaniards within some
bounds: wherein faring as successfully as he had done the first time, which the
Spanish Agents were not able to endure, they had betaken themselves to sow
discord in his Royal family, making the Duke of Lorrein their Instrument
therein; and that thus they had endeavored to Arm France against France: that
the same King of Spain had sent a powerful Fleet to Sea to assault Provence;
and that he was near assaulting it several times, had he not been sometimes
detained by the season of the year, sometimes by storms: that, moreover, he had
furnished the Duke of Orleans with Forces, to pass armed through France, to the
end, that being backed by the Army of Catalogna, and by the Fleet at Sea, he
might trouble France: then falling upon the Affairs of Germany they complained
mightily, that the Austrians ends tended only to make the Elective Imperial
Diadem hereditary; and that therefore under the specious pretense of the
Catholic Religion, they aimed only at the abasing and annihilating of the
Catholic and the Protestant Forces, to the end, that having extinguished the
latter, they might the more easily subdue the others; and so arrive at that
Monarchy, whereunto though they had no reason to pretend, yet did they thirst
after nothing more; and that the King of France not being able neither in
justice, nor for the safety of his Kingdom, nor in respect of his ancient and
hereditary adherence to the German Princes, to tolerate that the house of
Austria should make way to so great advantages, by the ruin of his Colleagues;
lest when he should have compassed his defire, he might pretend superiority
over all Christian Princes; had desired to see the affairs of Germany reduced
into such a condition by civil means, as that the German Princes might live in
safety, and not fear being ruinated; and that so he might not be necessitated
to defend them by Arms: and that therefore upon several occasions, and
discourses of peace, he had always propounded a general peace, wherein all
might be comprehended, and all things might be amicably composed; for, said
they, no peace is otherwise truly made, but, like fire buried under ashes,
breaks forth into a greater flame; that it made not for the King of France, nor
for his honor, to compose differences with the Emperor, without including his
Confederates, who might be overcome afterward by the Austrian Forces; and that
the same consideration was to be had touching the affairs of the Valtoline: the
King having made it be trea^ed of in the peace of Cherasco, and of Madrid, that
some course might be taken to remedy what was done to the contrary at the peace
of Monsone: but that these endeavors not being listened unto, though they were
propounded with much zeal to the public peace; the King was forced to take up
Arms, so to get such satisfaction, which he could not do by friendly m^ans.

But the Court of Spain complained no less, nor did they cease to oppugn the
accusations and complaints made by the French: these began from before, from
the peace of Vervin, which was made the year 1601, wherein all reciprocal
offenses being laid aside, it was agreed, that neither of the Kings should
protect any one to the prejudice of the other; but should renounce all Leagues
and Intelligences contracted to the prejudice of either of them; and that
notwithstanding this, the year was hardly ended, when the French appeared in
Holland, under the King of France his own Colors, against the King of Spains
Forces; nor did King Henry the Fourth, with whom that peace was made, ever
re-cal so open Hostility, save only in appearance, and by vain Edicts, which
were never put in execution: insomuch as the French continuing in that Militia,
the King cared not for the complaints made by the Spanish Agents, but was wont
to jest and mock at them; whereby they inferred that that King was the first
breaker of peace, and the original occasion of any hostility which had been
afterward either tacitly, or openly, committed against him (if any such had
been committed); and that therefore the French had no just cause to complain:
they added, that King Henry did contrive a League with great Potentates
afterward, against Philip the Third, which was unperfected by the said Kings
sudden death; and that though Philip the Third might easily have resented these
so open Hostilities, and gainsayings of peace, after Henry's death, making use
of the pupillar age of the then present King, and of the ill humors and
factions of France; yet public peace prevailing over all resentment, he passed
by so great an offense, and became the defender of the young King, and of the
Queen Dowager, and consented to the reciprocal Marriage, to the end, that peace
and union might thereby be the better established between the two Crowns:
passing from hence to the League of Avignion, the year 1623, whereof the
present King of France was pretended to be the Author; they said that from
thence proceeded the following wars of Germany and of Italy, against the
Emperor and King of Spain; which being happily ended for the Austrians, the
peace of Monsone insued, which the King of Spain did not only not countervene,
but when it was concluded, had assisted the King of France with a powerful
Fleet, in the so important business of Rochel, and had assisted him therein, at
the same time when the King of France did openly assist the Rebels in Holland
against him; then coming to the last wars of Mantua and Montferrat, they
complained that the King of France had taken upon him the protection of the
Duke of Nevers, a Vassal of the Empire, against his Sovereign the Emperor, and
against the Spanish Forces employed in defending Cesars Authority: that the
King of France had no occasion to interest himself in that business, which did
not at all concern him, but was proper to the Emperor; and much less reason
had he to meddle in dividing Montferrat between the Dukes of Savoy and Nevers,
though he had done it with much prejudice to the Emperors Authority in the
peace of Susa: Wherefore the Emperor nor King of Spain had no reason to
ratify that peace; that then they came to the peace of Ratisbone, wherein the
Affairs both of Germany and of Italy being settled, it was soon broken; for what
concerned the Affairs of Germany, by the King of France, by the League which he
soon made with the King of Sweden; and as for the Affairs of Italy, it was not
sincerely observed, since he extorted Pinarvolo from the Duke of Savoy,
contrary to the Articles of that peace; and here heaping up all the accusations
against the King of France, touching his protecting the German Princes, the
Elector of Triers, and the Duke of Nevers; they said that these protections did
foment the Subjects of the Empire, against the Emperor; just as if the
Emperor of King of Spain, should take upon them to protect the French who had
taken up Arms against the King of France, and should foment and assist them: so
as the King of France numbers amongst the offenses which he pretends to have
received, that the Queen and the Duke of Orleans, the one Sister, the other
Brother in Law to the King of Spain, both of them being gone from France, were
received, with safety to their persons, in Flanders, and that 2000 Horse were
given to the Duke of Orleans for a conduct; so the Emperor and King of Spain
might with much more reason complain of the King of France for giving the like
protections and fomentations to the Hollanders, the German Princes, and the
Duke of Nevers, who were in Arms against the Emperor: that therefore it was no
less an injury to the Emperor, that the King of France should desire that the
German Princes, who had taken up Arms against him, should be admitted into the
peace which was in treaty between the Emperor their Sovereign and the King of
France; it being no better then to abet a Subject against his Prince, to
prescribe Laws between a Sovereign and his Vassal, and to make the world know
that the King of France was Arbitrator of Peace and War in Germany, and
Moderator of the Empire: which were undoubtedly too high pretentions, and which
were never put for, not practiced by any; that the case of the King of France
his Mother and Brothers, who were fled into the King of Spains Dominions, and
honorably received there, was otherwise; that these were personal Offices
between a Father in Law and Son in Law, and between Brother in Law in the like
case; nor did they extend further then to the person to whom they were done;
and if they would talk of the 2000 Horse given to the Duke of Orleans, these
and other assistances, as the Fleet at Sea destined against Provence, ought to
be opposed to the King of France his fomenting, so many both open and secret
Hostilities against the Emperor and King of Spain; since it was not
reasonable, that it should be lawful for the King of France to undermine the
Austrian Grandezza, and that the Austrians should act nothing against him: that
the dissentions between the Crowns of France and England, and the wars made by
the King of France against the Duke of Savoy, because he would not abet the
Spanish designs, were not to be considered, being things notoriously false, and
whereof there was no proof; that the world knew the reasons of the differences
between France and England; and whence the distastes arose in the Royal Family
of France, and what were the occasions of the war made against the Duke of
Savoy; and how much the then Queen Regent of France, and the Potenta^es of
Italy, did press the King to force the Duke to lay down the Arms which he had
taken up to suppress the Duke of Mantua.

These were the chief charges and defenses made by each party; and it being
hard to say what was the just cause of this breach, those who understood the
Affairs of the world best, were of Polybius his opinion, an ancient Author,
who discoursing upon the true occasions from whence the bitter Wars between the
Romans and Carthaginians arose, makes no account of this or that hostile act
which happened between these Commonwealths, or of any breach of peace between
them, but lays the true reason of the Wars which succeeded between them, upon
the mere Ambition that the one Commonwealth had to exceed the other. The like
(say they) was the occasion of the Wars between these two Crowns and Nations,
which contending for superiority, great Emulation arose between them, from
whence those reciprocal hatreds which are grounded between them, cannot be
cancelled by any Peace. The roots of the like Ambition being hatched (say they
then) in the Souls of both these Nations; it was necessary that the fruits of
hatred, continual jealousies, and reciprocal suspicions, by which their minds
are continually agitated, should bud forth. From hence grow cruel hatreds,
which branch out into secret treaties, into plots, and then into open Wars.
Building therefore upon these foundations, they say,' it is true that the King of
France had promised to forget all faults past, in the Peace of Vervin, and that
he had promised to forego all Intelligence with the Enemies of the Crown of
Spain; But that finding afterward, that his Kingdom was bounded on the South
by Spain, on the North by Flanders, which is under the Crown of Spain, on the
East by Germany, in part obedient, in part subject to the House of Austria, and
a little lower by Italy; which is likewise partly subject, partly adherent to
the same Crown: And thinking that being, as it were, imprisoned by the Austrian
Forces he did enjoy the freedom which became so great a King, but that every
the least addition of this so great power endangered the suppression and
suffocation of his Kingdom; he held his honor and authority to be but small,
and that the eyes of all the world were fixed only on the Austrian Sun. These
were sharp goads to unsettle a well fixed Resolution; he considered also what
commotions and troubles the mere Dukes of Burgondy, who commanded all Belgia,
had caused in France; that those Territories would now be incorporated into the
Crown of Spain, and backed by the Forces of Germany. That therefore it became
him to think not only upon his honor, but upon his Kingdoms safety; which
being weakened by the late Wars, and vexed with intestine dissentions, could
not well secure it self from so great a neighboring power; that it was usual
for Princes to keep others low, for their own better preservation, and to
endeavor the pulling down of those that were more potent; that principalities
were maintained by these Arts. He therefore applied himself to get out of their
streights, and to favor the Hollanders, lest if they should be beaten, the
King of Spain should grow too strong upon those Confines, or at least that that
wound being kept open, he might be less able to advance further; that
therefore this Resolution was more necessary then voluntary, arising from the
interest of self-preservation, which is by natural reason more warranted to
bruit beasts; (and surely then to men and great Potentates) then it is
prohibited by the gain-sayings of Peace: That such Peace wherein one of the
parties is subject to the other, does not deserve the name of Peace, but is
rather to be termed Slavery, and not likely to last long, as was clearly shown
by the Ambassadors of Privernum; who being asked, in the Senate of Rome, how
long that Peace was like to last which they desired? answered, that if it were
a good one for them, it should be perpetual; if a bad one, very short. An
answer which made those Senators know, that no people nor person can keep long
under the sharpness of an unjust condition; and this made them mitigate the
conditions of Peace, which were granted to those of Privernum. That
notwithstanding the King of France had pieced up that rent by the Truce, which
was by his means made between the Crown of Spain and the Hollanders; not
without much satisfaction to Spain, which was then desirous to see an end of so
expensive a War: So as the Spaniards had no reason to complain of any
assistance given to the united Provinces, wherein the chief foundation of their
Justice lay. That therefore when France was free of Civil Wars, and had
regained her former vigor, the King not being able to be wanting to the just
cause of the German Princes, who had recourse to him touching the succession of
the States of Iuliers and Cleves; though it was conceived that he had
contracted several Leagues against the Austrians: Yet if that Kings life had
not been cut off in the nick of time, all those Leagues and Unions spoken of
would have soon been seen vanish into smoke; and it would have been known that
they served for nothing but appearing threats, since it made not for that the
King who was then well in years, whose issue was young, and his Kingdom not yet
seled, to enter into new Wars for the interests of other men; and leave his
Kingdom to his young children involved in foreign Wars: For he might be sure
that Regal Authority which curbed civil dissentions, ceasing together with his
life, the Kingdom which seemed now to be united would fall into its former
disorders, which would draw foreign Forces into the Kingdom: That the present
King growng in years had given the King of Spain no occasion of complaint, but
had always corresponded with him, as became Princes that were friends and
joined in affinity. That the first encounters arose from what had happened in the
Valtoline, wherein the King had interested himself out of his being bound to
protect the Grisons, and out of the great prejudice which was thereby
occasioned to his own affairs, and to the German and Italian Princes. That the
first intermission was in a civil manner, not by Arms, which the King took not
up till the first conventions of Madrid were undervalued; and that
notwithstanding the King of France did temporise, to ripen some difficulties.
But that seeing no satisfaction given, he was forced to betake himself to Arms;
the business not being yet well adjusted, he was once again necessitated to
take up Arms, for the just and necessary defense of the Duke of Nevers, who was
by violence kept from succeeding in the State of Mantua and Montferrat; and for
no other reason, but for that that Duke was born in France, was of kin to the
King, and held great possessions of the Crown of France: That if the Auxiliary
Forces of France, in the behalf of that Duke, if the Peace of Susa ought to be
accounted violence or injustice, merely for that they wanted the Cesarean
Authority; that the appearing of the Spaniards against that very Duke, not the
division of Montferrat, made between the Spanish Agents and the Duke of Savoy,
were not countenanced nor corroborated by the Emperor; that if the merits of
the cause, if the intention of Arms, and dissension between these two Kings,
were to be balanced without bias, those of France would appear to be more
just, and less concerned then those of Spain: Since the later tended to the
offense, the other to the defense of an assaulted Prince; so as the Spaniards
had nothing to object against the Arms of France; nor could the Emperor
account his authority more injured by the French then by the Spaniards: And
that the award of the cause, made on the behalf of the French by the Peace of
Ratisbone, did more justify the Proceedings of the French then of the
Spaniards. For what concerned the affairs of Germany many other reasons were
alleged; amongst the rest, that there was a difference to be put between the
Princes of France and the German Princes; that the Regal Authority of France
was Monarchical, to which all the Princes of France are Vassals; that Germany,
on the contrary, was Aristocratical, consisting of several Sovereign Princes
and free Cities, who choosing the Emperor for their Head, obey, not as Subjects
to a Sovereign, but as Members and Colleagues of the Empire, enjoying many
privileges and exemptions which suit not with Sovereign Authority; from which
exemptions the Emperor not being able to derogate, if by any excess of private
power, exceeding the known Authority of the Laws, he^at any time endeavor to
derogate from them, or not observe them, they hold themselves as much injured
by him, as the Citizens of a Commonwealth would do, if their Head, abusing
Authority, and contemning the public Laws, should aspire at Tyranny: That all
Germany did at the present groan under the burden of the excessive Austrian
authority; that she had lost not only the substance, but the very shadow of her
original Liberty, and was therefore forced to send for the King of Swedeland
from the utmost Northern parts to recover their almost lost Liberty: That this
defense did anciently belong to the Kings of France, to whom upon like
occasions the German Princes had wont to have recourse: That the present King,
out of his too great respect born to the House of Austria, had neglected this
his duty to the German Princes; that he could not without much loss of
reputation degenerate from the Kings his Predecessors, nor by abandoning those
Princes suffer the King of Sweden to prevent him in that office which did of
due belong to him; nor would the Concernments of his own Kingdom tolerate that
the Austrian Authority should extend it self further by the oppression of those
Princes: And as concerning the conclusion of peace with the Emperor, it was
neither strange nor new, that the King should not make peace without his
Colleagues the German Princes, since there have been so many both ancient and
modern examples seen of peace solemnly concluded between Princes and Vassals
that have risen up against their Sovereign Prince: The peace of Constance made
between the Emperor Frederick surnamed Barbarossa and the Cities of Italy
which had rebelled against him; the Truce between the King of Spain and the
Hollanders; so many peaces made between the very Kings of France and their
contumacious people in the last Civil Wars; and the peace made not many years
ago between the Emperor and the Elector of Saxony, are sufficient proofs of
peace made between a Subject and a Sovereign. It was therefore concluded, that
the King of France his interesting himself in the civil dissentions of Germany,
and in the several peaces that were to be concluded, was not only just, and
usual, but more necessary then that which King Philip the second undertook in
the troubles of France, which could neither in justice nor for convenience be
paralleled to this; and though the King appeared to have undertaken them only
for Religion, it was at last discovered that it was more governed therein by
State interest, then by Religion; and that therefore if there were any parallel
to be made between the countenancing of Germany and that of France, France
might be said to have learned the the Doctrine of fomenting the differences
between people and their natural Princes, and of interessing her self therein,
for her own safety and grandezza, from the School of Spain: but that the
greatest part of these pretensions were rather seeming then substantial; for
Polybius, relating the true cause of the wars between the Romans and
Carthaginians, does not approve them as just; and though some Princes use to
keep inferior Princes low, and to weaken the superior; such proceedings are
to be esteemed rather tyrannical, then rational, and if King Philip the Second
had attained to such Counsels, he would never have consented to the peace of
Vervin, wherein Territories and Towns of importance were restored to the King
of France, who was then the inferior: wherefore that peace cannot be pretended
to be slavery, though the Austrians were superior to the French both in
Dominions and Power; for the Romans after the peace given to the Privernati, as
they will have it, were superior to them; and if peace between Princes of
unequal power may be violated by reason of the inferiors weakness, no firm
peace would ever be made between them, unless the more powerful should divide
States and Forces with the less powerful. They therefore concluded that none of
the reasons alleged did excuse the King of France his countervenings; nor
could the League concluded by his means, some years after between Spain and the
Hollanders, free him from the preceding countervening, but did rather aggravate
it; as well because the Hollanders, being strengthened by those fomentings, were
made the more able to withstand their King, and to force him to so
disadvantagious a Truce; as also by continuing the said assistance to them when
the Truce was expired: Passing then to the Affairs of the Valtoline, it was
said, That the short relation of that business would suffice to let the world
see whether of those two Princes were to be blamed. The King of Spain protected
the liberty and the Religion of the Valtolinians, by securing them in both by
some little Forts erected in the Valley against the imminent slavery of the
Grisons, who were prepared to subjugate them by force; and the Valtolinians
wanting men to munite them, the French, and with them the Venetians, stormed
very much, when Spanish Garrisons were put thereinto; as if the Spaniards had
no other end but to make themselves Masters of the Valley; the King of Spain,
to clear both them and the Venetians, deposited the Valtoline, together with
the Fort^ therein into the Popes hands, who was chose^ by them both to be
Arbitrator of the whole business, with power to dispose th^reof as he should
se^ reason to do; that while this was depending, the King of France possessed
himself both of the Valley, and of the Forts by Force of Arms: that when the
Pope sent men to recover them, the King, who would not make War with the Pope,
upon this account agreed with the King of Spain in the peace of Monsone, to
restore the Valtoline; but upon very favorable conditions, touching the
Liberty and Religion of the Valtolinians, and that the Pope should demolish the
Forts; whereunto the King of Spain condescended only because the King of France
obliged himself to observe the Covenants which were made in favor to the
Valtolinians; so as the Forts were superfluous, seeing that the two Kings were
engaged by the Peace to maintain the Liberty and Religion of the Inhabitants:
Therefore by this so favorable Peace to the Valtolinians, the King of Spain
was justified in his first taking up Arms. Neither did the Duke of Nevers his
business deserve much defense, if men will justly consider the result thereof;
for that Prince was not at all satisfied with the King of France his
protection, since he was deprived of Cassalle, and of the greater part of
Montferrat, which were conferred upon the Duke of Savoy, in recompense for his
pretensions, and for Pinarollo, which was assigned over to the King of France,
contrary to the Articles of Ratisbone and Cherasco; so as the Agreement with
the King of Spain, which was so much exclaimed against, would have been better
for the Duke of Nevers then the protection of France, so much boasted of by the
French. And for what concerns the meddling in differences between a Sovereign
and his Subjects, many considerations were propounded in favor of the
Austrians; for in Peaces made between the Emperor and the King of France, the
King had more then once renounced such Leagues and Protections, and promised
not to protect those Princes against the Emperor; so that as the present
discourse began with Polybius his Authority, the controversy may be ended by
Lucan's Authority, who decides the difference between Caesar and Pompey, in
these words. Tu nova ne veteres obscurent acta Triumphos,
Et victis cedat piratica Laurea Gallis,
Magne times. Te jam series, ususque laborum
Erigit, impatiensque loci fortuna secundi.
Nec quemquam jam far potest Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem -- Lucan lib.
1:
Gallusve priorem,
Austriacusve parem: Quis justius induat arma
Scire nefas; magno se Iudice quisque tuetur.
Victrix Causa Deis placuit, sed Victa Catoni.


Immediately after the intimation of this war, made in the King of France his
name, to the Infanta, did the publication of the League made between him, and
the Hollanders, which has formerly been mentioned, follow; and the execution
thereof followed the publication forthwith; for the King of France going to
Campania, assembled an Army of above 20000 fighting men, and sent it into the
Country of Lucemburg, under the conduct of the two Marshals, Chatillione and
Bresse; whereinto being entered, it presently took Orcimon and Rocca, strong
places upon the Confines, but of small consideration, which yielded without
fighting; and afterward it took Marca, a more considerable Town; and so
advanced into the Country which is under the King of Spain: Against this Army
the Infanta sent out a strength of 10000 Foot, and of 3000 Horse, the most
whereof were tumultuously ra^sed, and made Prince Thomaso, of Savoy, their
Commander in chief; who being distasted with the Duke his Brother, was
privately stolen from Savoy, whereof ^e had the title of Governor; and having
first spent some months in the Court of Flanders, he joined with the King of
Spains Forces in those parts. The Prince being come near the enemy, though he
knew himself inferior to them in numbers, yet having the advantage in situation
he refused not battle, which they presented him: Battle being given near to the
Town of Avein, after having fought valiantly four hours, he was worsted, left
three or four thousand of his men dead upon the place, to boot with his
Artillery, and besides many other Soldiers, and Captains of good condition,
who were taken Prisoners. The Hollanders were by the Covenants of the League to
assault the Provinces which were obedient to the Crown of Spain, a^ the same
time, with another Army on their side; and delaying to do it, they afforded the
Infanta a breathing time after his defeat; but coming at last into the Field,
commanded by the Prince of Orange, who joined with the French Army before
Mastrick, they made up a Body of 50000 fighting men, abundantly furnished with
Artillery, and all warlike preparations: the whole Country bein afraid of them,
and yielding to so great and formidable Forces, they advanced without any
opposition to Terlimone; which Town presuming too much upon its self, would be
the first that should oppose so vast and glorious an Army; for which boldness
it paid soundly: for being taken by assault, it was sacked with more cruelty
then has been heard of, of many years. Wherefore the Infanta, having this mean
while made up an Army of those that remained u^slain at Avien, and of other
Regiments, which was much inferior to that of the enemy, insomuch as he was
not able to keep the Field, put himself into Loveine with 5000 Foot and 2000
Horse: having quartered the rest of his Army upon the River Dee, distant above
a League from Loveine; and the Army of the League being marched toward tha^
City, after having taken Did and Ariscot, it came up to the Rear of the
Enemies Army; and the Horse which tarried last, not having all of them passed
the River, some of their Troops were de^eated; that Country was never so full
of terror since the war began: it was ov^rrun, sacked, burnt and miserably
destroyed, without any hope of present help; for the Infanta's Army half
routed, half run away, kept within strong Holds, abandoning all to Military
fury; and doubtlesly the assailants might have done great things, had they
known how to make use of occasion and of the advantage of time: but lying long
idle between Loveine and Termilone, they afforded time to the Infanta to
fortify himself, and to expect a great succor which was sent him from
Germany. The Colleagues finding the enterprise of Lorein to be too hard and
almost impossible, to effect, by reason of the new Fortifications and number of
defendants, they went to before Brussels; where^ore the In^anta left 2000 of
his best experienced Soldiers in Loveine, and went with the rest of his men to
Brussels; and the Colleagues returning from Brussels to Loveine, thought to
find that Town unprovided by reason of the Infanta's departure, and that they
might easily have taken it: but being abused in their hopes (for they found it
extraordinarily well garrisoned, and fortified round about) they gave the
business over; and suffering much in their Camp for want of Victuals, they were
forced to quit Brabant, and to retreat: which they were the rather necessitated
to do, for that they heard Picolominy was marching up apace to them with 6000
choice Horse, after whom the King of Hun^ary came, making long Marches.

^ut there (...) ^ed not so great an Army to fr^ Flanders from so imminent a
danger: a sor^ and unexpected accident, which be^ll ^e Hollanders, was
sufficient to dissolve that Army which was so formidable to Flanders: In
Gelderland, just where the Rhein dividing it self into two parts, makes a great
Island, which was anciently called Battavia, and is now called the ^mel Island,
there is a very strong Fort, of such consideration, for the situation thereof,
as it (...) commonly held to be the inlet into Holland; it is called Schinck
Sconce, from him who knowing the opportunity of the seat caused the Hollanders
to build it. This so important Fort being about this time surprised by the
Infanta's Soldiers put the Hollanders into such confusion, as ^aving all other
enterprises, they were con^rain'd to im^y all their ^orces and ende^vours in
the recovery th^eof: they th^efore reca^d the Prince of Orange and his Army,
and made him c^e to defe^ their own Country: he therefore returned to Holland;
and the French Army consumed by famine was ruined, and were paid for their
detestable cruelties used to the Inhabitants of Termilone. Thus Flanders was
little less then miraculously delivered from so great, and so near a danger:
but we have sufficiently discoursed of Foreign Affairs; it is time now that we
return to Italy, whereinto the Wars which were kindled in Germany flew; and
Italy sharing already in the effects of the peace which was broken between the
two Crowns, it followed by consequence, the quiet which she thought she had got
by the peace of Ratisbone, and the Treaties of Chirasco were discomposed, and
the Wars formerly appeased in Lombardy, and in other parts, began hotter then
before.

The End of the Thirteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK XIV.
The Contents.
THis Book tells you the redoubled going out of the Fleet from Naples against
Provence, and the accidental disaster of the latter. The occasion, rise,
encounters and progress of the French Forces, led by the Duke of Rhoan into the
Valtoline. The endeavors of the French to alienate the Princes of Italy from
the Spanish party, and to draw them over to their King. The Pope and Venetians
move not. The Duke of Savoy goes over to the French, more out of necessity then
of good will. The great Duke of Tuscany is constant to the Austrians. The Dukes
of Modena and Parma, and the Lord of Mirandola, negotiate with the French: the
Duke of Parma closes with the French, the others adhere to the Spaniards. The
Commonwealth of Genoa, notwithstanding the great damages suffered by her
Citizens from the Spaniards, and notwithstanding the distastes she had received
in her reputation, refuses to declare manifest neutrality, or partiality, yet
in fact keeps confident to both parties. The State of Millain is assaulted by
the French, and by the Dukes of Sevoy and Parma; who going against Valenza del
Poe, besiege it, but it is relieved, and quite freed by the Spaniards. The Duke
of Rhoan, having routed the Dutch and Millain Forces, remains absolute lord and
master of the Valtoline.

BEfore the Austrian and French Forces broke forth reciprocally into open war,
Italy being subordinate to the same disposition of affairs, was necessitated to
do the like accidents. The King of Spain, when the Duke of Orleans, and the
Duke of Momorancy's Forces succeeded not against France, resolved to assault
Provence, which being then unprovided, and not expecting to be assaulted,
afforded hopes of happy success. Having therefore recruited and augmented his
Army in Catalognia, he gave speedy Order for the rigging up of a Fleet at Sea
in Naples, which being furnished abundantly with men, and with all warlike
affairs, was to go forth to the prejudice of those parts, under the Marquess of
Sancta Croce. And though that Kindom was exhausted both of men and moneys, by
its having reinforced two Armies in Germany under Feria and the Infanta; yet
as if it had a Mine abounding therein, it was not long before by the
extraordinary diligence of Count Montercy, Viceroy of that Kingdom; the Fleet,
beyond all men's expectation, was ready to put forth from the Haven of Naples;
but failing in their supposal (for neither Galleys nor men were ready for that
expedition) after having tarried long in Favigiana, a little Island near
Sicily, and the winter drawing on, the business so speedily begun, and with
such hopes of good, success was put off till the next year; No man knew
whether, or against whom, this so great preparation was intended: but though
this expedition was much endeavored to be kept concealed by setting up
contrary Colors, and under contrary names and pretentions, yet at last after
so long delay it was known, or atlest suspected, that it was intended against
Provence. But the effecting of what was intended the year 1635, proved
difficult, and almost imposible: For the enterprise was disturbed in the
beginning by cross winds and storms, so as the intention of that voyage was
discovered; the Fleet went forth from Naples more numerous, and stronger then
before, about the middle of May 1635, and being 80 miles out at Sea, when
meeting with contrary winds and great storms, it was forced, not without danger
of Shipwreck, to make directly toward Corsica whither the winds drove it. Nor
did the misfortune end here, but as if that enterprise had been undertaken in
an unfortunate hour, the Fleet was hardly got behind Capo Corso, where it was
sheltered from contrary winds; when another storm arose from the other side,
more furious then the former, which sank 7 of the Galleys, with all the men and
munition that were in them. The rest being scattered, some here, some there,
were forced to throw their Horses, Munition, Artillery, nay the very moneys
which was to maintain the enterprise, overboard; and with much ado, got one
after another into Porta Longone: So as this second attempt proved more
disastrous then the former, and proved more unfortunate to the Spaniards then
to their Enemies. But whilst the King of Spain, and his Agents in Italy, were
busied in preparing against France by Sea; those of France were not idle in
making prepations against the King of Spain's Territories: Which preparations
being by land, and not subject to the instability of winds nor waves, struck
more home. The first blow light upon the Valtoline, the first occasion and
original of which action, together with the pretense thereof, must be made
known before we come to relate the proceedings.

The Grisons being displeased with the peace of Monsone, (as has been said)
had never approved of those Capitulations; nor would they allow of the annual
tribute of 25000 Crowns, nor allow that their Magistrates should be yearly
chosen by the Valtolinians, answerable to those Capitulations; being therefore
absolutely deprived of the pre-eminence, command, and advantage of so noble a
part of their State, they desired and endeavored nothing more then the lost
possession of the Valley; to which purpose they complained much, and made great
pressures in the French Court. The Court of France was no less discontented,
then the Grisons, with those Capitulations, (as has been elsewhere said) not
only for the prejudice which would thereby redound to their confederates, but
for the like which would result to the Kings Affairs, if things continuing in
the present condition, the Spaniards should be absolute arbitrators of that
Valley, and might pass their men, and whatsoever they listed, through it, as
freely as through their own Dominions. Wherefore it was no less endeavored in
France, then by the Grisons, how to find out some remedy against this mischief,
without absolute countervening the agreed on Peace. Some looking narrowly into
the points of that Capitulation, took occasion to question whether the
Valtolinians did understand themselves to be thereby put into a state of
absolute liberty and exemption, from the high and supreme command which the
Grisons had over it before the beginning of these commotions; or whether the
exercise of usual jurisdiction being only taken from them by the said
Capitulations, they were, as touching sovereignty, in the same condition of
subjection and vassalage that they were in before the insurrection. This was
only to deprive the Spaniards of the passage which they had by that Valley, and
so to rob them of the advantage which they pretended by the revolution of the
Valtoline, fomented by them: For if the Grisons should remain sovereign Lords
of the Valtoline, by virtue of those Capitulations, as they were before the
insurrection, they were to have all jurisdicton and command there, except the
ordinary jurisdiction both Civil and Criminal; which was by those Capitulations
granted to the Valtolinians: So as the allowing of passage was to be granted by
them, not by the Valtolinians Strong Arguments made for this; for if the
Valtoline were to return by these Articles, to the same condition it was in the
year 1617, who doubts but that then when there was not any insurrection the
leave of permitting passage to foreign Princes appertained not to the
Valtolinians, but to the Grisons? Moreover, no concession of Jurisdiction, how
largely soever expressed, was ever interpreted to the derogation of the
Concessors sovereign Authority. So as the exception made by the Peace of
Monsone, in favor to the Valtolinians, being only touching the election of
annual Magistrates for the administration of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction,
could not be extended to the supreme Mastery which the Grisons had there, and
consequently not to the granting passage: Nay, the yearly Confirmation of
Magistrates being to be made by the Grisons to the Valtolinians, and the yearly
tribute to be paid by the Valtolinians to the Grisons, witnessed that
sovereignty was retained in the Grisons: And the quantity of the annual tribute
being a more adequate price for the concession of usual jurisdiction, then of
Supreme power, which is held inestimable, was as much as to say, that the
former was only allowed to the Valtolinians, and not the latter; and yet it was
as strongly urged on the contrary; that the Grisons authority was violent, and
tyrannically usurped, over their ancient Companions and Confederates, the
Valtolinians, from which the Valtolinians having freed themselves by force of
Arms, and their having renounced the Capitulations of Millain, made between the
Duke of Feria and the Grisons, and this Sovereignty not depending upon the
Arbitrament or disposal of the two Crowns, could not be any wise prejudiced by
the Capitulation of Monsone: That the annual Tribute and confirmation of
Magistrates was a mere remission, no concession of the Valtolinians, merely to
free themselves from being disquieted, troubled, or persecuted by the Grisons,
but no price or acknowledgement of Sovereignty; which being anciently their
own, and now recovered by Arms, there was no need that it should be redeemed by
moneys; and on the other side, the Grisons Commonwealth being in a great part
subjugated by the Austrian Forces, and restored by the said Capitulations, to
her former liberty, was in all acceptions equivalent to the restoring of the
Valtolinians to their ancient Liberty and former Sovereignty: nor was it
probable that one of the two Kings, who had so openly engaged himself both by
Arms and by particular Decrees for the protection and liberty of the
Valtolinians, should mean to suppress them by the Articles of Monsone; and that
the other King, who boasts so much of the title of Just, should intend to
favor the unjust Tyrants and violent Usurpers of their Confederates the
Valtolinians liberty: nor did it belong to the titles of most Christian and
most Catholic, wherein the one and the other of these Kings do so much glory,
to reduce to the violent subjection of Heretics those Catholics who had so
justly withdrawn themselves from it: nor that the King of France should by so
gross dissembling blemish the glory which he had won in the first wars against
the Heretics of his Kingdom, by favoring Heresy upon this occasion out of
his Kingdom, which he had persecuted with Arms within his Kingdom even to
destruction; but that ifit had been the intentions of the said Kings to revive
the unjust, usurped, and now extinct Sovereignty of the Grisons, they should
have manifested their opinions more clearly, since the weightiness of the
affair did require it; and not have woond it up mystically and obscurely in
some few and general words: they therefore concluded that the reasons which
were alleged on the behalf of the Grisons were new inventions, mere subtilties
and sophisticated interpretations: But howsoever the French stuck stiffly to the
advantage of the words; and being desired by the Spaniards that they would
ratify the agreement to the Grisons; they answered, that the controverted
point of Sovereignty first be declared, it not being, in their opinion,
sufficiently cleared by these Capitulations: but the Spaniards replied, that
the ratification should be first made as clear and without controversy, so
that if any doubt should afterward arise touching the Sovereignty, it might be
friendly agreed by their Majesty's, answerable to the Capitulation of Monsone:
wherewith the French not resting satisfied, the King of France, to content the
Grisons, made a Declaration by him self alone in the favor of their
Sovereignty; and pretended that to suffer people to pass through the Valtoline
without their leave, was a mere gainsaying of the agreement; and the Spaniards
esteeming the French Decrees vain without the joint consent of their King,
passed as many men as they would through the Valtoline, and alleging that that
Declaration should by the same agreement of Monsone be made by both the Kings
jointly, they pretended, that being made by one only, it was null; and that to
deny them passage was to contradict the said Capitulation. These Affairs
continued thus controverted a while; the King of Spain endeavoring to keep the
Valtolinians on his side, promised to be aiding to them continually in their
Sovereignty and Liberty; and the King of France being unable to see the
Valtolinians to depend totally upon the Austrians beck, favored the Grisons
pretensions, and would not consent that they should ratify the Capitulations,
and promised to put them into free possession of the Valtoline, which they so
thirsted after; and the more to nourish this expectation in them, he was a
means why in the peace of Ratisbone, where it was covenanted that the places
taken by the Dutch from the Grisons should be restored, the restitution of the
Valtoline should also be inserted: which though it appeared to be expressed,
that some Dutch Regiments might be taken from thence, which were sent thither a
little before from Millain, lest the Swedes, which drawing near Italy, were
feared would enter by the Valtoline; yet since the general words might bear
another interpretation, they added to the hopes and expectations of the
Grisons, and gave the King occasion to betake himself to these words, so to
maintain the pretensitions of his ancient Friends and Confederates, and to make
amends for the prejudice they suffered in the Capitulation of Monsone. The King
of France reaped no little advantage by these hopes; for though being deeply
engaged in several affairs in Germany, he could not apply himself much to this
of the Valtoline, yet feeding them with continual promise, he kept them
constantly at his devotion, and depending upon his pleasure; so as thereby he
did not only recover the authority with the Grisons, which he had in that
Nation before the revolt, but had munh increased it these two last years; for
the parts of Rhetia being by the Emperor restored to the Grisons by the
Articles of Ratisbone, which were taken from them at the very beginning of the
Mantuan war, but upon condition that they should be no further fortified; and
the King doubting that the Treaty of Cherasco might be made null, and
peradventure that of Ratisbone also, by the re-assignment of Pinarollo, he
persuaded those people to keep them well munited, and particularly the passage
called Stainck, that they might keep out the Dutch, if they should attempt to
enter their Country again: he made also a Fort Royal be built near il ponte del
Reno; and making them believe that those Fortifications made much for the
recovery of the Valtoline, he put French Garrisons into the new Fort, and into
that of Stainck which was newly fortified, all which the Grisons gave way unto,
lest the King might be incensed at their refusal, and might waver in his
promise of restoring the Valtoline: but the King finding afterward what
prejudice the passing of the Duke of Feria and of the Infanta through the
Valtoline occasioned to his own concernments, and to those of the Germans his
Confederates, he bethought himself of removing that obstacle which could only
confound the progress of his affairs in Germany: he resolved therefore to send
Forces to recover the Valtoline, which expedition was not called the
maintaining of the Grisons Superiority, but the protection of the Valtolinians
Liberty, totally repugnant to the Grisons Sovereignty, which liberty the King
affirmed was near being suppressed by the Spaniards frequent passing through
that Valley: so as professing himself to be a Protector of all oppressed
people, he now intended to secure the tottering condition of the Valtolinians,
as he had restored the Grisons to their former liberty, and had secured them
from the Dutch by the building of Forts in Rhetia: he therefore made the Duke
of Rohan his General for that enterprise, ordering him to protect them against
the Spanish tyranny with his men, and with those which the Grisons should
furnish him withal. Rohan was of the Lineage of the ancient Kings of Normandy,
a Captain of a refined and experienced judgment, nursed up from his infancy in
Arms, not only an Hugonot in Religion, but a chief Protector of the Hugonots in
France, in whose behalf he had always fought against the Catholic Religion,
and against the very King, insomuch as he was the last of the Princes and
Chieftains of that party, who when they were beaten by the King, humbled
himself; and who being pardoned his hostile Acts, was banished the Kingdom, and
confined to the State of Venice; where having staid some years, he by the Kings
Commission went into Rhe^ia, and was assistant to the Kings Ambassador,
Monsieur Dulande, in the building of the Forts: he was afterward employed by
the King in the German wars; who thinking him to be a fit person to be employed
in the intended enterprise of the Valtoline, as one who had been much
acquainted with the humors of that people, and of those parts, wherein he had
lived, made him his General in that enterprise: nor did he err in his
judgment or choice; for he did many singular acts, whereby he won much honor
in the Valtoline, and obtained many famous Victories there, which had they been
done in a larger and more noble field, they might have made him vie for honor
with the most eminent Commanders of this age. When this business was first
begun, war was not as yet intimated to the King of Spain, nor was the peace
broken between the two Crowns: the business of Triers, from whence the breach
of peace proceeded, happened at this time. Rohan having received his Commission
from the King, went from Alsatia with but a few men to the Grisons, whom he
told, that the time which they had so long desired, and which the King had
promised of recovering the Valtoline was at last come; and acquainting them
with the Kings Commission, he exhorted them to concur with him in this
business, which was undertaken only for their good, and would redound so much
to their advantage. The Grisons believing him, took up Arms immediately, and
refused not to promote the cause with all their Forces: Rohan had not many
French with him, so as he began the war of the Valtoline with almost none but
the Grisons Forces: it is true, that the Venetians being very desirous that the
Valtoline should return to its former condition, dismissed 2000 French which
were under their pay, and who past easily into the Valtoline, and joined with
Rohan; who about the end of March, in the year 35, sent first to take the
Counties of Chiavenna and Bormio, to the end, that the way being blocked up to
the Dutch Forces by the latter, and to the State of Millain by the former, the
Valtoline might the sooner be recovered, which was seated between those two
Counties, not being to be relieved on any side. Nor was his counsel here in
vain; for about 1500 Foot, the most whereof were Grisons, and four Troops of
French Horse falling down into Chiavenna, under the Ambassador Dulande, they
took it, together with the black-house of La Riva, and presently began to
munite and fortify it. There also was a Fort erected in the plain of Chiavenna
beyond La Mera, upon the way which leads from Millain, called La Strada
Francesca, to keep any oppositions from coming that way: And taking also some
Barques for Merchandise which they found at La Riva, they furnished them with
Soldiers, and kept them to defend the upper Lake. With the like sp^ed he sent
about 600 Foot to Bormio, by the Mountains which were yet covered with snow;
who taking the unguarded Serra de Bagni, which stands upon the Mountain which
overlookes Bormio, and confines upon Tyrvolo, they fell down and took the Town
of Bormio without any resistance, together with the whole Country till you come
to La Serra Della Valtolina, so as that Country fell into their possession: the
Serra are nothing but certain great Gates or Portals of stone, made in form of
an Arch, which are munited on the sides by ancient Towers with strong Gates of
Wood, situated upon the passes, whereby men enter and go out of that Country:
Whosoever will come into these parts must pass through these Gates, the
passage in this Country being so straight, as the entrance thereinto is let in
or shut out, just as in Cities or private Houses; by the first Serra de Bagni
the Dutch are kept out, by the other toward the Valtoline the Spaniards. These
two Counties being taken and fortified, Rohan went from Rhetia, and entered the
Valtoline about the beginning of May, by the way of Poschiavo, which lies
between these two precincts, having with him 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse, and
reduced it into his power without unsheathing a Sword, or discharging a Gun;
and with much severity and inhumanity, forced the Inhabitants to abandon the
Spanish protection, and to adhere unto the French. Then building a Fort at Font
Martello, he fell down with his men toward Morbegno; and quartering them in
the Towns near the State of Millain, he began to unarm the people, and to put
several Taxes upon them: Nor herewithall content, he forced them to swear
Loyalty to the King of France; and doing other things in the Kings Name, he
professed nothing less then the maintaining of the Valtolinians Liberty, as by
his Letters Patents he was bound to do, and as he had promised the Valtolinians
both by word and writing; wherein he did not so much offend the Valtolinians as
the Grisons, to whom the King, and Rohan himself, that he might get them to
join in this enterprise, had promised, that according to his directions from
the King, he would reunited them to their State, and reduce them to their
ancient subjection; By which actions the Grisons were heinously scandalized,
and made their complaints to Rohan himself, and required the observance of his
plighted faith, and the restitution of what had been taken; who answered, that
when the War should be ended, the King would restore all unto them, provided
that that they would reimburse him the moneys which he had laid out: At which
answer, being more angry and incensed then before, they almost all of them left
him, and repassing over the Mountains, went back again displeased to their own
homes. By these so great, and so many alterations and novelties, the Austrians
in Germany, and Spaniards in the State of Millain, were much moved, and all of
them endeavored to bring what speedy and necessary help they could thereunto,
as to a blow which by the consequence thereof wounded the total of the common
Affairs. But the more the State of Millain was necessitated so to do, the more
was it retarded by weakness; that State being then no less exhausted of
military men then the Kingdom of Naples, the flower of them both being gone into
the low Countries: So as they wanted Soldiers for their necessary Garrisons,
much more to send into the field; weak was the preparation or provision
therefore which from thence could be applied against this commencing mischief;
the Cardinal Albernozzi was now Governor of Millain, a Churchman by
profession, and not at all experienced in the management of War; he immediately
deputed Count John Serbellone, with some few Foot Companies, for the defense of
those parts: Who thinking that the first thing that was to be done was the
recovery of Riva, gave orde that a Gally should be drawn out of the Arsenal of
Como, which was built before these present Commotions; and not thinking this
sufficient for the business, an other Gally was built by the moneys of the
Genoese, great Masters at this mystery, which was greater. And seeing that the
French were busy in fortifying places, to block up the entrance into the
Valtoline, he betook himself also to fortify other places, to oppose their
proceedings; but not succeeding herein, the French failed not to continue the
works which they had begun, and brought them on to Morbengo and Trano, the best
Towns of the Valtoline; the latter being seated on the right hand, the other on
the left of Adda: And joining with the Duke of Rohan, who was already gotten to
those Towns on the upper side, they sent 400 Horse, and 27 French Foot Colors,
into the Towns which lay lower toward the Lake, striving to block up the
Avenues to the Valtoline on that side, and to keep out the Spaniards, from
whom, they being then quartered in the Towns about Fort Fuentes, they in vain
endeavored to secure themselves. The French proceeded the better in their
works, for that Serbellone being then sick could not for many days oppose
them; so as necessarily Affairs proceeded but slowly on this side: But greater
and more speedy oppositions came from Germany, which had they been so
fortunate, as they were valiantly brought on; or had they not been defeated by
Rohans better fortune, they would assuredly have put an end to the woes that
that Country suffered long under. Seven thousand Foot, sent by the Emperor
under the Baron Fernamont, who had won much honor in the recovery of the
great Fort Filsburg upon the Rheine, met at Tyrvolo, near the Confines of the
Valtoline; who falling down with them into the Valley of Munister, he to succor
himself on his back, built a Fort above the Town Sancta Maria: Then marching
toward the Mountain Ombraglio, that he might enter the Country of Bormio, he
was kept out by Rohan who had diligently prepossessed the passes; or Rohan
hearing of great moving on that side, and foreseeing the danger which might
thence arise, he feared, and not without reason, that all his precedent actions
would prove to no purpose, unless he should secure himself well on this side:
Parting then from Morbegno, he marched speedily to Bormio, carrying many of his
men with him; and finding la Serra de Bagni, which is the usual way to pass
from Germany to the Valtoline, sufficiently fortified and garrisoned, he feared
lest the Dutch not being able to enter by that way, would come in by the lower
way of Agnedina; leaving therefore his men in Bormio, he went with some few to
Agnedina, which is a part of Rhetia, and by the assistance of those
Inhabitants, who are bitter Enemies to the Dutch, he soon blocked up and
munited those Passes, and put the Agnedini in a defensive posture, assuring
them that he would still defend them with his Forces, which lay not ^ar off, in
Bormio, in case they should be assaulted on that side. This being done, he
returned to Bormio, where taking fit order for all things, he returned to
Morbegno, fearing that the Fortifications were not there well finished, and
that they might be assaulted by Serbellone; but he cast his accounts amiss; for
Fernamont, who having well munited the new Fort of S. Maria, was passed over
the Mountain Ombragl^o, seeming as if he would send men to assault the Bagni,
went to assault the Sconce Fraelle, and having taken it, he went from thence by
unaccustomed ways, and having the good luck to meet with excellent guides, he
came to a certain place, where playing upon those that defended la Serra de
Bagni, on the Flank, the defendants were forced to quit the Serra to the Dutch,
who much beyond either their own or their adversaries expectation, became
immediately masters thereof; by which loss the French did not only abandon the
Bagni, but the Serra, and the Town of Bormio, and left the whole County at the
disposal of the Dutch, who in a short space marched on victoriously even to
Tirano, in the midst of the Valtoline; and Rohan, judging it impossible to
resist so great a fury, abandoned the Valtoline, and fled with all his men from
Morbegno to Chiavenna, burning the Bridges of Adda, to keep from being pursued
by the Enemy: But this his diligence was more then needed; for Fernamont being
come without any opposition to Tirano, and understanding that Count Montosi was
with a thousand Foot in the Valley of Lovigno, which was on his left hand, he
feared that he might pass from thence to Bormio, and block up the Gate of
Germany which he had opened; wherefore he forbore pursuing Rohan, and turning
upon Montosi came to Lovigno, where he found all that Valley also abandoned;
for all the French which were with Montosi were retreated to the Mount in tops,
and passing from thence to Agnedina, were come to join with Rohan, who was come
to the same Agnedina by the County of Chiavenna. Thus far the affairs of the
Valtoline went as well for the Austrians, and as ill for the French, as was
possible; and if Fernamont, leaving Montosi, had pursued his victory through
the Valtoline, or had gone to Riva (...) Chiavenna; or if Serbellone had
advanced with his men to Tirano, when the Dutch fell down to Bormio; or had he
advanced to Riva, when the French began to fly, doubtlesly they might have
carried the whole business: But though the necessity of securing the Pass of
Bormio may excuse Fernamont, Serbellone's slow proceeding admits of no excuse.
Fernamont's second error was greater; he might have returned to the Valtoline,
when he found himself safe behind by Montosi's flight, and joining with
Serbellone might have gone to Riva or Chiavenna, which being almost abandoned,
he might easily have made himself Master of them; entering into the Country of
the Grisons by the Valley of Lovigno he might have encountered Rohan, who in
his flight past that way; he might have fallen down upon Chiavenna by the
Grisons Country, and might have made himself Master thereof, it being enclosed
between his and Serbellone's Forces: But not doing any of these things, any of
which if he had done he might have been sure of Victory, he left his men in
Lovigno, and went privately to Tirvolo, only to provide victuals for his Army,
that he might maintain them without incommodating the Country; a resolution,
which, though it was commendable for the piety thereof, was to be blamed by
reason of War; for Rohan, going to Coira, and assembling the Inhabitants
together, he encouraged them the best he could to reassume the business of the
Valtoline; which if it should fall into the hands of the Dutch, they might
despair of ever regaining it; whereas he faithfully promised to restore it to
them, as soon as it should be recovered; and said, that he had Orders from the
King so to do. The Grisons abhorred that the Valtoline should fall into the
hands of the Dutch; wherefore they chose, as the lesser evil, to go immediately
to the recovery thereof with those very French who but a little before had
appeared so desirous to retain it for themselves: they therefore joined all
their Forces with those of Rohan, and fell down into the Valley of Lovigno, and
coming at unawares upon the Dutch before Sunrising, who looked for nothing
less, but were drowsy, or fast asleep; The French placed a good number of
their men behind a certain wall near the Church, which they made use of as of a
Trench, to beat down a Bridge which was over a little River; the rest fell upon
the Dutch, and slew many of them, who being in disorder, and not able to
resist, were forced, not without much loss, to retreat toward Molina, a Town
near Bormio, at the foot of the Mountains, where the Pass and Serra of the
Bagni is: They tarried there till Fernamont was returned from Tirvolo, and had
sent 1500 Foot and some Troops of Horse to take Mazzo, a Bridge upon the Adda,
some few miles above Tyrano: But Rohan hearing thereof went, without losing any
time, toward the same Bridge, by the Valley of Poschiano, where meeting both of
them almost at the same time, they fiercely disputed the possession of it; and
the question was undecided till night, and the decision was put off till the
next morning, both sides keeping quiet all that night, and each side guarded
the head of the bridge, by which both parties strove to enter, and to advance.
Fernamont came the same night to the Dutch with the Van, and knowing the
bridge, and the Enemies Forces which were on the opposite shore, he returned to
Bormio; and bringing the rest of his men thither the next day, he encouraged
his men with words, and more Forces: Wherefore Rohan fearing to be fallen upon
on the back by Serbellone, quitted the head of the controverted bridge, and
retreated to Tyrano; and being ascertained afterward that Serbellone was not
ready to move, he resolved to assault the Dutch, who were quartered in a Town
near Mazzo, though he was inferior in number, but superior in well armed
Cavalry. The assault was given so courageously, as after a long dispute the
French had the better, and put the Dutch to a direct rout,

(...) be all the rewards, all the fruits of Victory; theirs the Territories
which should be gotten by driving out the Spaniards; all which he faithfully
promised should be divided amongst them; reserving only the praise and title
unto himself of being the preserver of Italy, and the quelle^ of the Spanish
Empire therein: by these and the like persuasions he tried them all; and
endeavored to kindle such a fire in Italy against the Spanish Government, as
the King of Spain being entertained in the quenching thereof should forbear
bringing the like into other men's houses, or at least should not be able to
extinguish that, which being brought by him the King of France into Germany,
was endeavored likewise to be continued and increased by him; but these his
designs though they were much labored and negotiated by his Agents and
adherents in Italy, found not that correspondency in the Italian Princes, which
he had fansied to himself; for the propounded plot, the more plausible it was
for the novelty thereof, and for the desire that all men had and have of
Liberty, the harder of digestion it seemed to those who being endowed with more
wisdom did foresee the mortal infirmities which the bad concoction thereof
might cause to the imperfect health of this body in general, and to the
particular members thereof; for though the Spanish Forces, and commotions in
these last wars of Mantua and Montferrat, had been as hateful to the Italians
as they were dangerous; and the Arms and commotions of the French the more
acceptable, as being more advantageous for Italy at the present; yet was not
their hatred so much against the Spaniards, nor their confidence so great in
the French, as to free themselves wholly from the fear of the Spaniards, they
would submit themselves to the arbitrament of the French, as they foresaw they
must do if their common Forces should prosper; and though they were not
displeased to see the French masters of Pinarvolo and Casalle, since by the
possession of these two places they curbed the Spanish power, and rendered it
less formidable to Italy; yet they could not be pleased, nor think that it
stood with the common interest, that when the Spanish Forces should be totally
subdued, the French should succeed in their place; and if they were to be
accompanied by the Empire of one of them, they rather chose the Spaniards
company, whose moderation being proved for the space of a hundred years (if you
will dispense with the arrogance which is natural to that Nation) made their
Authority and Empire appear more tolerable: they were therefore content, seeing
they thought it impossible to obtain absolute liberty, to see the Spanish power
lessened, as it was at the present, but not totally bea^en down; so as
inclining to neutrality between the two Crowns, their intention was so to
counterpoize the Forces of both the Crowns, by the Italian Forces, as by the
help of the French they might keep the Spaniards short, and by joining with the
Spaniards they might not suffer the French to increase in power too
immoderately; and so secure their own liberty by this equality, as they might
neither be suppressed by the one, nor lorded over by the other; therefore the
Venetians, though to boot with their having opposed the Austrian Forces in the
Mantuan wars, they had also assisted the French in the Valtoline; yet for what
concerned the remaining affairs of Italy in general, and the State of Millain
in particular, they abhorred all novelty, and seemed more inclined to preserve,
then to beat down the Spanish Empire; nor did the Pope (though he had always
studied the Grandezza of France) seem to persevere in his accustomed course of
favoring and promoting the French interest; but being content to see the
Authority of France radicated in Italy, he was not pleased that the roots
should spread further. The Duke of Savoy though he was necessitated to second
the will and pleasure of the King of France, yet the manifest slavery which he
foresaw he should be subject unto, if the French should be victorious in Italy,
made him unwilling; for when the Spaniards should be driven out of the State of
Millain, he should be deprived of the prop which their Arms and Power in Italy
was to the Liberty and Sovereignty of his Dukedom, against the French Forces,
wherewith he was in danger to be overcome, if the French should succeed in the
State of Millain instead of the Spaniards, whereby his Dominions would be
imprisoned by the French Forces, and he himself made absolutely subject to the
arbitrament and will of the King of France, and of his Agents. The King of
France was aware of this difficulty, and that therefore he could not safely
build upon the Duke, though he should enter into the League; and on the
contrary, having found by experience some years before, that though Pinarvolo
and Susa, with other Towns of Piedmont, and almost whole Savoy was possessed by
his Forces, yet it was impossible for him to relieve Cassalle so much as with
one succor, without the Dukes permission; and that consequently he should find
it much harder, the Duke not concurring with him, nor joining in the League, to
assault or possess himself of the State of Millain, he resolved by present
offers and future promises to win his good will, and to promise that he would
make him absolute Lord of the State of Millain: these promises were the rather
credited by the alliance the King had to him, and by his affection to his
Sister, who being Daughter to a King, and Sister to two Queens, the King was
desirous to confer regal dignity upon her, to the end, that not being inferior
in degree to her Sisters, she might enjoy the title of Queen, which he
professed she should be deservedly honored with, when to the State of Millain,
Piedmont and Savoy should be added; and as an earnest penny of his promises, he
made the Duke General of his Forces and of those of the League, bargaining to
allow him 12000 Crowns a month; not being aware, that as no force tames, no
time consumes, nor any present reward counterpoizes the Liberty and Sovereignty
of Principality; so no tie of alliance or blood can secure it. The Duke
consenting to what he could not refuse entered into the League, and accepted of
the Generals place, which he was to exercise more according to his own
concerns, then according to the interests of others; it was said, and the
French did confirm it by their public complaints and exclamations, and the
sequel (though somewhat ambiguously) did afterward prove it; that in the
interview that passed between the Duke of Savoy and the Infanta, when the
Infanta came with his Galleys to Villa Franca, there passed secret
negotiations, by which the Infanta endeavored to draw the Duke over to the
Spanish party, and to win him from the French; and that the Duke acquainted the
Infanta with what necessity he had to keep fair with the Crown of France, lest
his State might be overrun by the French Forces, who might enter by Pinarvolo;
and that though he might be sure to be succored in such a case by the King of
Spain, as his Father had been, yet he was sure that Piedmont could not be the
precincts, as it always had been, wherein the conflict between the Forces of
the two Crowns should happen; and that though the Spaniards should be
victorious, the Combat could not but be very prejudicial to his State, and
ruinous if the success should prove otherwise; so as, he said, he was not to
declare for the Spaniard, but upon urgent occasion: but that when occasion
should serve, he would always make it known, how much he valued the
preservation of the Spanish Empire in the State of Millain: others added more
particular promises, that he would never consent to the taking of any Towns in
that State; but that fighting only in the Campagnia, he would carry things with
respect to the affairs of that Empire; and finally, it was commonly believed,
that a counter-league was tacitly agreed upon between them, for the common
concernment.

The Dukes of Modena and Parma, and the Lord of Mirandola, appeared contrary to
the Popes and Duke of Savoy's inward maxims; who driven either by their
dislike of the Spanish Empire, or allured by the great hopes they had in the
King of France, or eg'd on by the desire of enlarging their Confines, wherein
they thought themselves all of them too much straightened, or being moved by all
these respects, they gave ear to the new confederacy: Those of Modena and
Mirandola, though they entered into the Negotiation, it is not well known,
whether they concluded and subscribed it, or no; for, as shall be said
hereafter, they were diverted from it, before the publication: but the Duke of
Parma, who was more incensed against the Spaniards, and incited by more
resentments and greater hopes, did not only willingly and readily enter into
the League, but amidst the so many troubles and damages which did result to him
thereupon, showed such solid resolution and constancy therein, as it seemed not
only strange but monstrous to all men: every one wondering that a young Prince
should so totally abandon the footsteps so happily trod in by his forefathers,
and should so eagerly embrace contrary Counsels. The occasions of this so great
and constant alteration, if we will believe what he published by his Manifesto,
were of themselves so slight and so inconsiderable, as they were generally held
rather pretenses, then real causes thereof: so as several discourses arose
thereupon; the most universal was, that the Duke being young when his Father
died, and his Uncle the Cardinal, who was his Guardian, dying not long after,
grew to have haughty thoughts, and that being of opinion, that the obsequie and
adherence to the Spaniards, which was held by his Grandfather, Father and
Uncle, to be the chief foundation of Principality, was nothing else but mere
slavery; and that the Sovereignty of Italian Princes, who adhered to the Crown
of Spain, was mere subjection; that ^e therefore aspired to more absolute
liberty, for the arriving whereat he thought that the peace of Italy, and the
present condition of affairs, was a great obstacle which made him prone to
embrace novelties, and that he was fed with hopes by the French, that the
Spanish Empire being laid low, he might arrive at more greatness, and acquire
new Dominions; and it being conceived that so young a man could not be capable
of such high conceptions; it was commonly held that Count Fabio Scotto, who was
his Chamberline and favorite, one who was wholly inclined to the French, in
whose service he had one of his Sons, and from whom it was thought he received
a Pension, did kindle these thoughts and hopes in the young Prince: it was
thought that this man fomented his Princes inclination with several
suggestions, and that he strove by several means to incense him against the
Spaniards, and adhere unto the French; propounding unto him the continual
servitude which he derived from the obsequies of his Grandfather and Father to
the Crown of Spain; the meanness of his State and his low condition, whilst he
should continue to do so; and on the contrary, the liberty, esteem and increase
of fortune, which he assuredly would purchase by adhering to the Crown of
France; also the condition of the present times, which concurred thereunto, did
much foment such thoughts; for when this Prince began to interest himself in
these affairs, fortune began to smile upon the King of S^dens proceedings, and
to ^rown upon the house of Austria; and therefore he, either persuaded by
others, or by himself, that the fortune and power of the King of France, who
was the chief upholder of the Swedish Forces, being to be much advanced by the
ruin of the house of Austria, it must needs be excellent Counsel, to abandon
the falling fortune of that Crown, and to be one of the first that should
adhere to the others increasing fortune. The Court of Spain had from the
beginning discerned the sprightly genius of this Prince; and thinking by some
show of resentment to make him return to the way of his predecessors obsequie
and devotion, they made him stray the farther out of it; for when mention was
sometimes made of this Prince in that Court, they would talk of his elder
Brother, who being a natural fool, was declared incapable of succession;
sometimes they took Don Octavio into consideration, another elder Brother of
the Dukes, made legitimate, though a fool, and enabled to succeed in the
Principality, when his Father, Duke Ranutio, had not, nor hoped not for, any
lawful heirs: which things were brought upon the board rather to threaten the
Duke with the doubt of succession, if he should persist in these novelties,
then that there was any thought to put them in practice; and Duke Alexander,
Grandfather to the present Duke, having done homage to King Philip the Second,
when the Citadel of Piacenza was restored to him by the said Philip, and having
been invested therewith, upon condition that he should keep a Governor there,
in whom the Crown of Spain might confide, he thought that the King might have
some pretense or color to be judge in the controverted succession, and that he
might see his sentence performed by force of Arms, when he should by the Dukes
comportments be constrained to renew those things touching the succession,
which should he persevere in his forefathers devotion, would be laid aside.
This meddling with a part so sensible, and which could by no means endure to be
handled, occasioned quite contrary effects to what was imagined; for the Conde
Duca, who having framed such conceits forbear not upon occasion to speak of
them openly; whereas he thought thereby to suppress the eager desires of this
Prince, found afterward that they served for bellows to make flame higher; for
the Duke thinking that the Court of Spain meant, under these pretenses, to make
use of these ^etters, grew so enraged; as any the least commotion he heard of
in the State of Millain, much more the taking up of Arms by the Duke of Feria
and by the Infanta moved him beyond measure, as if they had been undoubtedly
prepared for his ruin; so as the fear of losing those possessions he had,
being added to the hopes he had fancied unto himself of augmenting them by
joining in League with the King of France, he began to raise men for his own
defense, to munite his Forts, and to hold closer intelligence with the King of
France, that he might the better secure himself against such threats; and
raising his thoughts yet higher, being big with conceit of the liberty of
Italy, he, like another Charles Emanuel, did so zealously covet the beating
down of the Spanish Empire, as not only one, but many Charles Emanuels seemed
in all men's opinions to be risen up in this young Prince; and his actions
showed in the progress of time, that Count Fabio was not the Author of these
sprightly counsels, but that they were the proper and natural conceptions
formed in the Dukes own Idea. The Alienation of this Prince and of the Duke of
Modena, though they were none of the greatest in Dominions nor in Forces, did
notwithstanding discompose the affairs of Spain in Italy, and were of no small
moment to the safety of the State of Millain; Commerce by Land being totally
separated by their States, from between the Kingdom of Naples and the State of
Millain, which was so necessary for the conveyance of Horse, which could not be
carried by Sea without much inconvenience; in which case, the State and Havens
of Genoa (which by reason of the good correspondency between the Crown of Spain
and that Commonwealth, had formerly been a safe landing for the Spaniards)
being now become doubtful (as shall hereafter be said) by reason of the bad
satisfaction which many of the Genoese Citizens received from the Court of
Spain, or not safe by reason of the French Fleets which were upon the
Mediterranean; and the Valtoline being in the hands of the French; Italy and
the State of Millain were subject to be invaded by their Armies: so as the
affairs of Spain were subject to manifest danger, and strange events. The
Spaniards therefore apprehending what might happen, strove to re-gain, at
least, the Duke of Modena, who drew along with him the Lord of Mirandola, who
depended much upon him; for if Modena should be wrought upon, Commerce with the
Kingdom of Naples was sufficiently secured, since his State confined on the one
side with the State of Bollognia, on the other with that of Crema; so as Horse
(which are not usually denied passage by the Popes through Romagna) entering
thereby into the Dukedom of Bollognia, and from thence into that of Modena,
they may enter into the Territori^s of Cremona, and from thence into the State
of Millain, without touching upon Parma. Don Francisco di Melo, one of the
chief of the Nobility of Portugal, descended from the noble house of Braganza,
and consequently famous for birth, but more for worth and dexterity, and great
abilities which he had in the concernments of Italy, where he had lived long
with the title of Ambassador in extraordinary from the King of Spain, in the
Commonwealth of Genoa, was returned now with title of Ambassador in
extraordinary to the Princes of Italy; wherefore being thought a fit Instrument
for such a business by Cardinal Albornoiz, he was sent to Modena and to
Mirandola, where having trea^ed successfully with both the Princes, he deviated
the intelligence which both of them had contracted with the French: the Lord
Mirandola was by agreement made with the King of France, to have received
shortly a French Garrison into Mirandola; but Melo withdrew him from those
treaties, and reduced him under the perpetual protection of the Crown of Spain;
and he prevailed so much with the Duke of Modena, as foregoing also the treaty
of League with France, which was already either concluded or near concluding,
he made him join in League with the Crown of Spain; upon condition that he
should forthwith send his Brother, Prince Reynaldo, who was afterward
Cardinal, to defend the State of Millain with a Brigade of Modeneses; and on
the other side, delivered him possession of Correggio, which had been the
reason why that Duke had been displeased with the Crown of Spain; he, moreover,
promised him in the Kings name many honors and dignities; upon which promise^
the Duke ere long went to Madrid, where he was honorably received, and made
General of the Ocean, with a stipend of 24000 Crowns a year. The great Duke of
Tuscany, either was not desired by the French to enter into the League, or
being desired, refused; it was not to be feared that he would enter into new
Counsels, were it either that, with the wisest, he did think them good for the
common good; or were it for that being Son to a Sister of the present Emperor,
he thought himself in honor interessed in what concerned the Austrian Family;
which was the cause why in the late wars of Mantua and Montferrat, he had
openly declared for the Austrians; and holding the State of Sienna, in Fee,
from the Crown of Spain, upon obligation to succor the State of Millain with a
certain number of men, he could not well join in Confederacy with other Princes
against the said State; and therefore soon after the war was begun, upon the
same Francisco di Melo's going to him, he entered into League with the Crown of
Spain, which was after established by his Secretary Dominico Pandolfini, and
sworn unto in defense of that State, and was bound to send the Brigade of Foot,
which he was to have sent to the State of Sienna, and which was accordingly
sent under the Marquess Camillo dal Monte; and, moreover, he of his mere will
and pleasure, obliged himself to pay 4000 Swissers, and to send 500 Horse,
which he soon did, under the Marquess Ricciardi; for which noble and generous
action, the King made Iovan Carlo, Brother to the said Duke, and who was
afterward Cardinal, Supreme General of all his Majesty's Fleets in the
Mediteranean: the French therefore had no hopes of prevailing with that State.

They thought they might build more safely upon the State of Genca, by reason
of the displeasure which many of those Citizens at this time conceived from the
Court of Spain; by means whereof they thought they might divert that
Commonwealth from that good cor^espondency which so many years had been held
between her and the Crown of Spain, so happily. And that it may be known how
this dissatisfaction happened, it will be necessary that repeating somewhat that
has already been touched, we make a particular discourse thereupon; the which
may serve not so much to acquaint the present Age with what has happened in
these our times, as the future.

The Commonwealth had held for an undoubted Maxim of State, that the King
being concerned in that State, by reason of her negotiations with that Crown,
should stand for ever well affected to the liberty thereof; And the King
likewise, out of the same considerations, was of the same opinion, that the
Commonwealth should always stand well affected to his Crown. From this
conformity of opinion did that perfect and affectionate correspondency result,
which made them never weary of assisting one another reciprocally; and a whole
Age of experienced happiness being past, there was nothing done either by the
Spaniards or Genoese, where^n the dignity of that Crown, and the preservation
of the Commonwealths liberty was not jointly intended. The Genoese allowed the
Kings of Spain to maintain a great number of Galleys in the Haven of Genoa,
whereby those Kings kept their Dominions in Italy joined to their Kingdoms of
Spain, which were so far divided both by Sea and Land. Passage was granted
easily, at the request of that Crown, by the Genoese, through their
Commonwealth; Those Kings made use of the Genoeses in their Affairs and
Employments of greatest importance, trusting them with the supreme command of
their Fleets at Sea, and of their Armies by Land; being enlivened by this
nearness and affiance the Genoese, brought home all that by their industry and
negotiation they had formerly gotten in several of the parts of the world, into
the States and Dominions belonging to that Crown. And the richest and
wealthiest of them, having employed their riches and fortunes in the service
thereof, were both a great help to the Spaniards, and received much honor and
advantage thereby. By these men's industry those Kings turned all the Indian
merchandise into Gold, and they conveyed not only the Spaniards Gold but their
own, and the like of all Europe, whither soever the occasions of that Crown
required, as often as the treasures of America came not time enough, or were not
sufficient to supply them. And all things went succesfully by reason of the
credit and great correspondency which they had gotten in all the world by their
real and punctual proceedings; a most happy Age, wherein nothing was contended
for between so great a King and the Commonwealth, but reciprocal zeal and
passion how to serve each other. The War made these late years by the Duke of
Savoy, wherein he was assisted by France against the Commonwealth, added new
and stricter ties to this so great an union; wherein the King having been very
ready and zealous to defend and preserve the Commonwealth, she found she had
not placed her hopes of preservation formerly in vain in the union of that
Crown; for the Commonwealth finding her self abandoned in those necessities by
all the Princes of Italy, nay by the Pope himself, not without apparent
scandal, she found no Arms ready to fence her self against so great a Tempest
but those of Spain; which coming, in both by Sea and Land to her assistance,
the Commonwealth being assisted only by the Forces of Spain, was able so to
withstand the Assaulters, as she had the better of the business; by all which
successes, the King and all his friends might easily perceive that the joining
of the French Forces to those of Savoy against the Commonwealth, was not only
to resent the buying of Zuccharello, but to bound the Austrian greatness; and
to begin the abasing thereof in the ruin of Genoa; and that likewise the fall
of that Commonwealth was not affected by the Rebublicks and chief Princes of
Italy, for any other end, save only that holding her to be too cordially united
to the interests of that Crown, they thought they could not safely build upon
her for those ends which they were intent upon; which were, to pull down the
Spanish Grandezza, the preheminency whereof they could not see, and patiently
suffer: So as the ones security, and the others greatness, which were
apparently practiced against, being joined to the reciprocal advantageous bonds
of such an union, it seemed that no future chance could interrupt it. But the
felicity of this world is not so secure, but that when it is come to the
height, it declines; for the storm which troubled Genoa was not well over, when
on the sudden, the so well grounded union was disturbed and endangered; it is
hard to penetrate into the true and intrinsecal cause of this change of this
Scene. But the Spaniards thinking that they had merited exceeding much of the
Genoese, by the assistance which they had given them, pretended mighty matters
from them; which not being granted neither by the public, nor by the private
persons, begot ill blood in them, and particularly in the Conde Duca; who was
of a high spirit, one who naturally abhorred ancient customs, inclined to
novelties, no ways desirous to give satisfaction to such Princes as were
friends to the Crown, and (chiefly) not to the Genoese. Neglecting therefore
that good correspondency which Charles the fifth, and Philip the second, and
the third, had still endeavored to preserve, he began on the sudden, and under
color of the emptiness of the Kings Exchequer, to seiase upon their riches,
which by reason of their greatness being become odious in that Court were also
esteemed hurtful and prejudicial, as if they had been accumulated by wasting
the Kings Patrimony. Which conceits being promoted by the Conde Duca his
authority, some books or libels concerning them were dispersed abroad in Madrid;
which though they were confuted sufficiently, yet they were readily embraced by
the other Spanish Agents. Whence very great inconvenience, loss, and
dissatisfaction redounded to the Genoeses: And the first blows being made at
private Citizens of Genoa, who would not consent to the injurious negotiations
which were propounded to them by the Conde Duca; therefore what began with
private men past on to the public distaste; by reason of the former Wars of
Genoa, some alterations had sometimes happened in that Court, to the prejudice of
the Contract: But such as by reason of their slenderness and seldomness might
well have been endured. And if the Kings, forced by some necessity, made any
alterations, yet knowing how useful and necessary the maintaining of the
Contract was, they avoided breaking it, and endeavored to piece it up by
making amends, some way or other, to the negotiators. So as the Contract was
kept still on Foot, and the sharpness or bitterness of the losses suffered by
the past alterations were abundantly salved by the assistance which was given
in the subsequent Wars. But the War being ceased, this mischief in those
Spanish Agents, against the Genoeses, began to be revived again, and renewed
with such vehemence, as being continued beyond all measure or end, it
necessarily brought the Genoeses even to the precincts of desperation: no great
enterprise or action was resolved upon in that Court, or in the Spanish
Dominions in Italy, where some design was not had upon the moneys of the
Genoeses; the arming made in Naples against Provence by the Viceroy Montersi,
was not only put together at first, and in a great part formed by moneys taken
from the Genoeses, but was recruited and reassumed twice or thrice by the same
moneys: this mischief began first by the Kings Decree published in the
beginning of the year 1627, a year after the war of Genoa; by which the
satisfaction and payments, which were formerly assigned to the Genoeses, in
so much Gold and Silver, which should be brought by the first Plate-ships from
America into Spain, were altered; in lieu whereof so many yearly rents were
assigned to them out of the Kings Revenue, and out of impositions.

The Conde Duca, and the other Spanish Agent esteemed it a great advantage to
make use of those ready moneys which they had of the Genoeses upon new
occasions: but as all novelties which are not introduced out of true but
appearing reasons, bring forth often sad accidents; so was this resolution
occasion of strange inconveniences, in prejudice to the contract which was so
necessary for that Court; for the King by this Decree suffered much in his
Credit and Reputation of contracting, which was formerly so highly valued: the
negotiating Genoeses did likewise suffer not only in their own particular
concernments, but generally in their Credit, which being formerly incredible
with all Nations, began by this Court-novelty, and by this alteration of pay,
to lessen. Foreign Nations suffered, which had trusted their moneys in the
Banks of the Genoeses; to the end, that they might exchange them from place to
place throughout all Europe, for the maintenance of the Spanish Armies and
Fleets: a great contrivement which had been long happily experienced, and such
as the Gold and Silver yearly brought in by the Plate-fleet, and the Annual
Revenues of the Crown not being sufficient for it, did like a devouring
whirlepool, always open, require indefinite ready moneys, at all times, and in
all Regions; which could be had no where else, but from the Mine of the
Genoeses Credit; all Merchants in all places suffered in their Commerce and
exchange of Moneys; which is the only means to make use of ready moneys with
least danger and expense in far-off Countries: the detaining these moneys in
this Court occasioned all this inconvenience; just as when the chief Fountain
is dried up, all the Rivulets which derive from thence do grow dry likewise,
and the Grass is burnt up. By these unusual accidents the good correspondency
between the Genoeses and this Crown began somewhat to slacken, advantage being
the best nourishment to inclination, and prejudice the worst venom; but these
novelties began soon to cease.

For the Spaniards finding, at last, how necessary it was for so vast a
machination to have Architects that were excellent at Traffic, who were born
out by credit, and very cunning in the winding and turning of Moneys and
merchandise; and finding that the Florentines, who in emulation or spite to the
Genoeses, were brought in by them to the contract, were not able to undergo
such a burden; and that therefore their Negotiations did not only not proceed
so well as they had hoped, but that Trade was interrupted, to the great
prejudice of the Crown, it behoved them to reduce it into the ancient channel,
and, in a great part, to put it again into the hands of the Genoeses; and this
resolution was the rather taken, for that the Spanish Officers found, that
Negotiation by the Genoeses was not so very prejudicial to the Kings purse, nor
to the bettering of their own fortunes, as some of them had believed; for to
boot that they found that the consideration money was not so excessive, as had
been thought; and that all the mischief proceeded from the great expense which
the passing of business through so many hands, and in so many places, brought
with it, they afterward, that they might make the Genoeses plunge themselves
further into business and negotiation, and take upon them greater bargains,
made the King invite them by Commendams, Titles and Rewards, more then the
emolument which the businese did naturally bring with it; and though the
interrupted negotiation began to grow better, yet many Staple Towns of Trade
were wanting, and therein many of their Creditors for ready money, who instead
of ready moneys which were due unto them at their Marts or Fairs, were forced
to receive payment in credit given in far-off Countries: so as the affection of
the Genoeses being moved by so much prejudice, made the Citizens grow somewhat
testy; and on the other side, that Hob goblin which misguiding the Spaniard in
point of profit in negotiation had troubled the current of business, did also
continually vex their minds, by the noise of the Genoeses wealth, and did
suggest thoughts into them of taking from them what they had gotten. They did
not re-attempt their goods nor the payments of the contract, finding the great
inconveniences which were occasioned by the last retentions; and which were
more apprehended now, by how much it was more necessary to maintain the credit
of the negotiating Genoese, which was not a little diminished by the late
Decree; and for that they saw the urgent necessities of the Crown, reduced by
that Decree into great streights: Leaving therefore the Negotiation untouched,
they seized upon the yearly Rents of the Genoeses, which were in Naples, Spain,
and in the State of Millain, and which were of great worth; a resolution which
was ill resented and worse digested; for none being, almost, prejudiced under
the name of Foreigners, but the Genoeses, against whom the King had no just
pretense at all, the injustice did the more appear, for that the natural
Subjects goods were not retained: this afforded occasion of several discourses;
as, whether the Kings Exchequer got more discredit, or advantage by it; whether
the Kings designs were more advanced, or more retarded thereby; whether it did
fasten or slacken the devotion of the Genoeses toward the Crown: Contrary
effects arising from the same cause which brings profit, and shows Penury,
which is a help to the Royal Revenue, and darkens Majesty, captivates the
goods, and alienates the affection; leaving it in doubt, whether there be any
thing of Royalty or Monarchy in that Project, which is neither ordered by
Justice, nor accompanied with Generosity; and because for justification of such
a Decree, provision might be had for repairing the loss, they talked of
assigning reparation to such as were grieved; but the restoring was not so
ready nor equal to the damage undergone, as was the benefit of the second
retention efficacious in behalf of the Kings Exchequer, to make the Officers
desirous to reiterate it to the prejudice of the same Genceses; the second
decr^e was therefore determined, which was the more felt, as the disease was
more confirmed, and touched many in their livelihoods and families; which was
stomack'd by many, and began to corrupt that confidence and trust which was
formerly had of the punctuality of that Crown, touching the payment of the
Revenues thereof, which were sold for ready moneys. Wherefore they bethought
themselves of being more backwards in interessing themselves again with that
Crown, and to listen more to novelties; and finding what great defalcations
were made in their principles, by the retention of the Revenues, they began to
fear, what happened, that the malady would be everlasting, and grow daily worse.
They therefore studied as much as they could to rid their hands of the
Revenues, by selling the Principal; that they might employ the price thereof in
other States, in whose justice they might more safely confide; since such vast
sums could not be employed in the Territories of Genoa. So as some thought of
sending their moneys to Rome, some to Venice; but this was presently hindered by
the same Spanish Officers. For being desirous to keep the Genoeses subject to
the Kings interests out of their own concernments, they by indirect means
hindered the sale of their principal; which proved very prejudicial to the
Genoeses; who not being able to receive their Revenues, nor to make use of
their principal, were forced contrary to all right, to keep it subject to a
continual diminution; and the retention continuing, many Citizens lost their
greatest wealth, whereby they maintained their families. Wherefore the
Commonwealth which heard continual complaints hereof, and evidently found how
much the prejudice of private, persons which was insufferable, did redound to
the public loss; was forced to complain thereof to the King, by Cesaro
Durazzo, whom they sent Ambassador in extraordinary to him to that purpose:
And he bringing back no satisfaction but in words, and faithful promises of
making reparation for what loss had been suffered, and of desisting from being
so in the future, which was not made good; for the retention continued, and the
Citizens began again to resent yet more, and to grow cooler in their affections
to that Crown. This ill disposition was yet more fomented, by but bad
satisfaction which the Commonwealth it self received at the same time from the
Officers of the Crown: Which beginning (as has been said elsewhere) from the
impunity of the Conspirators, which the same Officers with such eagerness
pressed for, was resented with no little admiration and grief by the private
Citizens, and as constantly denied by the Commonwealth. And as it was seen
that this earnest pressing of the Spanish Officers arose from the immense
desire they had to satisfy the Duke of Savoy's ardent desires, who was then a
bitter Enemy to the Commonwealth, and the chief favourer of the Conspiracy; so
did the Commonwealth think her self the more injured by that Crown; for that
preferring the Duke of Savoy's reconciliation before the sincere and never
interrupted friendship of the Commonwealth, it had concluded peace with the
Duke of Savoy, whilst the differences between that Duke and the Commonwealth,
were not yet well composed. To this was added the ardent desire of that Crown,
that Monsieur Di Sabran, Resident for the King of France, should not be
permitted to tarry in Genoa, which was interpreted by the Spaniards as a
beginning of the alienation between the Commonwealth and the Crown; by which
occurrences the Kings Officers believing that the Genoese fell much off from
the union, and good correspondency toward the Kings Affairs; and fearing lest
the wound should fester, which might occasion more mischief, they bethought
themselves of a means, by which the generality of the Citizens should be
enforced to be better inclined to the Crowns concernments then they held them
to be; and more desirous to join with the Court Agents in their desires; which
was an excepting some of the Citizens, who were held to be most affected to the
Crown, from the retention of Revenues: thinking thereby to insinuate unto the
rest that they might be the better able to get their rents, if they would
appear partial to the Kings interest. This caused great commotion amongst the
Citizens, all of them detested it, as seeds of civil dissension sowed by the
Spanish Agents amongst the Citizens. And the Commonwealth knowing how deeply
this struck at the foundation of publich Concord, did at the first hearing very
much resent it; thinking that the solid and well regulated Government of the
Commonwealth might be thereby much disordered; since those that were excepted
might mind more their private then the public good. And those that were
excepted were as much displeased thereat as were the rest; who thinking
themselves to be more noted then favored by that exception, seemed
particularly offended. The Commonwealth therefore, that she might countermine
and render this decree vain, which was so pernicious for her, ordered that
whatsoever rents should be paid to those that were excepted should be shared
equally by all that were concerned in the like rents. So the Commonwealth
making use of her Native Liberty, would make Italy see, and all Christendom,
how far she undervalued any Interest in respect of the liberty, The proceedings
of the Marquess Sancta Croce, General of her Spanish Fleets at Sea, did
likewise much irritate all the Genoeses; who though in respect of what he had
done for the Commonwealth, when he was made by the King Captain General of the
Forces that were sent to relieve her, he had received all the satisfaction both
of honor and gratitude that she could give him; yet the seeds of bad
satisfaction being already sowed (as has been said) by the Conde Duca, to the
prejudice of the Genoeses interests; Sancta Groce who was one that did chiefly
depend upon the authority of the Conde Duca, was of all others most sollicitous
and most accurate in seconding his Genius, greedily embraced the occasion which
presented it self, of sharing in his resentments. For being in Messiina, with
the Galleyes and Standard royal, when the Commonwealths Galleys came thither
with her Standard, he intended some innovation, in prejudice to the precedence
which was usually given there to her Standard; which Luca Iustiniano, the
Commonwealths General, hearing, though he had much ado to believe it, yet he
took notice thereof, complained much, and endeavored to remove him from the
thought thereof, both by affectionate entreaties, and by evident reasons
alleged on the Commonwealths behalf. But in vain, for Sancta Croce was
resolute in his intention; so as Iustiniano seeing he could do no good upon
him, that he might avoid further inconveniences, resolved to be gone; and
bringing news to Genoa of Sancta Croce's comportments, he inceased resentment
generally in the minds of all the Citizens, who were very much offended with
the Spanish Officers for the continual injuries which they received from them:
Wherefore the Commonwealth took from him all the privileges which she had
granted him for his former services. The Commonwealth was also very sensible
of another sad accident, which happened not long after, almost within sight of
the City. Ten Holland ships came to Genoa fraught with merchandise, and
victuals, which belonged partly to the public Granary of Genoa, partly to the
private Genoeses, and partly to foreign Merchants who resided in Genoa. Don
Melchiore di Borgia, General of the Neopolitan Galleys, was in the Haven of Vai
near Savona; and hearing of these ships, put to Sea, and assaulted them, and
took them, and carried them away to Naples, with their lading as lawful prize;
alleging for his defense, that being Holland ships, who were Enemies to the
King, he might lawfully take them. The Commonwealth held her self offended by
this action, several ways; chiefly, for the violation of the jurisdiction of
her See; pretending, as undoubtedly she might, that the jurisdiction of the
whole Ligustick Sea did anciently belong to her, she having won it with her own
Fleets, having anciently defended it from the Saracens; which pretension is
approved by ancient Cesarean privileges, and by the authority of the most
famous ancient Writers and Civilians. Moreover, she held her self injured by
the interruption of commerce, and concourse of Foreign Ships in her Havens,
for wrong done to the public Store houses of the City and of the
Commonwealth; for the loss that redounded to private Citizens and to
Foreigners, who resided in the City upon account of business, and to the
Custom-house; and finally, for the violation of the Laws of Hospitality: whilst
the Kings Captains abusing the reception which is court^ously given in the
Havens of the Commonwealth to the Kings Ships, they rewarded the courtesy
with injury and go out of their Havens where they are friendly received,
secured, and furnished with all necessaries to injure, the vessels of the
Commonwealths confederates; who frequenting the Haven of Genoa, come under
assurance of public faith, and of the Commonwealths protection, to supply the
City with victuals, and to maintain Commerce, which is one of the chief
foundation of the City and State of Genoa. And really the Ships that were in
Vai were rig'd out by the moneys of the Genoeses, which was detained in the
Kingdom of Naples; and was not only received and provided of all refreshments
in the Ligustick Sea. So as the Commonwealth seeing that the Captains of those
Ships abused such civility, and had turned her high favors not only to the
abuse of her friends, but of her self, had occasion to complain of this action,
which might justly be esteemed hostile; for indeed, what was it but debarring
of free Commerce between Foreigners and the City? What, but to pretend to
besiege the City by Sea? To the end that those vessels might not enter the
City, which were by her favor permitted to enter; So as after fitting
complaints made both in public and private, there were three Ambassadors
chosen. The first was sent to Spain, to complain of the injury received from
Don Melchior di Borgia in the Ligustick Sea, and to demand satisfaction: This
was Lucca Iustinian^, who being descended from a Father who had been long since
Doge, not long after his return from this Embassy, was with much applause
chosen also Doge, as his Father had been before him. Another was sent to
France, to complain of the taking of many Vessels of Genoa, which were taken by
the French, who coming out of the French Seas with Letters of Mart granted by
the King, committed Piracy upon the Mediterranean: This was Iovannai Baptista
Saluzz^, one who had been long employed in Embassies for the Commonwealth. The
third, with title only of a Gentleman of Genoa, was Iacomo Negrone di
Melchiore, a young man, but of great hopes, who was sent to the United
Provinces of Holland, to complain of what had been done in the Ligustick Sea,
of the common prejudice done to their Vessels, and to the Merchandise intended
for Genoa, to acquaint them how it was resented by the Genoese, and with the
remedy which was endeavored and expected from the Court of Spain, to the end
that those Provinces might not have the Navigations of their Vessels disturbed
nor interrupted afterward. The two last of these Embassies were ill
interpreted by the Spaniards, as esteemed to be sent for the holding of closer
intelligence with the King of France, and with the United Provinces. This
jealousy of the Court of Spain was augmented by another provision which it
behoved the Commonwealth to make, touching the unloading and passage which was
to be granted to the Subjects of Foreign Princes: For formerly, when for
almost a whole Age the Spaniards had met with no competition in Italy from the
French, neither by Sea nor Land, the concession or inhibiting of landing or
passage could cause no inconvenience; and therefore it being thought of little
or no concernment to the main Affairs, the arbitrament of concession or denial
was in the two Colleges; but now, when almost the whole state of Affairs was
altered in Italy; by the French Forces, which kept frequently in Piedmont and
Lombardy, and by the shipping of the same Crown, which entered the
Mediterranean not long after, (as shall be said hereafter) it became the
Commonwealth to reflect more upon the importancy thereof then she had done
formerly; wherefore, as things of greater concernment, it was thought fit that
they should be resolved by the same Colleges, but by the intervening of the
lesser College, according to the public Laws, which referred the dangerous
affair of such accidents to the said College. The result of this new
deliberation was, That concession being to be carried by the most Votes, the
Spaniards thought it would be a harder business to be decided, by reason of the
times, wherein they thought the Genoeses had slackened their studying the Kings
good, many of the Genoeses complaining, and, as being greatly concerned by the
retention of their Rents, exclaiming, that it was an unworthy and unjust thing,
that the Spaniards should purchase the convenience of passage from the Swissers
for great sums of money, and other honorable terms, and that the Genoeses,
receiving no recompense, should moreover be deprived of their rents, which was
the fortune wherewith they maintained their Houses and Families; and which not
being given gratis, but bought with ready moneys, was due unto them by all Laws
both Humane and Divine: And that, moreover, the public dignity was contemned,
and their Hospitalities were thereby violated. The King not approving of what
Borgia had done, and being desirous in some sort to satisfy the Genoeses
complaints, which were pressed home by their Ambassador Iustiniano; did at last
order by decree, that their merchandise and vessels which were taken should be
restored; and as the ready execution would have generally much quieted men's
minds, so the difficulties put therein by the Spanish Agents in Italy did
exasperate them, and made the proviso unsatisfactory. But on the other side,
the Spaniards did much resent the Commonwealths resolution; and not being able
to endure that the free concession of landing, unloading, and passage formerly
granted unto those of their Nation, should be now any ways controverted; they
thought that the favor their King had shown in the last War to the
Commonwealth, should be preferred before any motive which should have made the
Commonwealth put on such a resolution. The Court of Spain had much ado to
believe that so great a conspiracy against the Commonwealth, and the great
losses suffered by that War, should proceed only from the Duke of Savoy's
anger concerning Zuccharello, but rather for that the Commonwealth, contrary
to the ends and interrests of all the Italian Princes, would constantly
maintain union with the Crown of Spain: so as the assistance given by Spain
upon that occasion to the Commonwealth, (to boot that it was not gratis, nor
at the Kings expense, as those which were subministred for the protection of
Montferrat; but paid for by the moneys of the Genoeses) was only due to the
Commonwealth from the King by the Laws of gratitude and good correspondency,
but requisite for the safety of the Kings Affairs in Italy; which would have
run much hazard by the loss of the Commonwealth. But howsoever, who knows not
how far the merit of benefits received may be cancelled, and the memoy of them
quite forgot, by loading those that received them with wrongs and injuries? And
yet the Commonwealth minding more the substance of Affairs, then Accidents
which may happen, showed plainly to the whole world, and to the King and Court
of Spain, in the ruptures which happened afterward, how considerately she
proceeded in her actions.

For the Genoeses being amidst these Commotions, the French thought they might
prevail much with the Commonwealth; and thinking that if they could draw her
over to their side, they should have as good as effected their business; they
endeavored to make her declare for them, as they had done the like with many
other Princes of Italy. But the Commonwealth which would never be brought to
declare for Spain, was far from doing so; but carried her self so discreetly in
her actions, as neither of the Crowns had reason to complain of her: So as she
was equally pleasing to them both; and her carriage in the disputes which
succeeded afterward between the Forces of both the Crowns, was well received.
Wherein she wan so much credit with the French, and of Spain's Admiral, being
then in the Haven of Genoa, with the Standard royal, and with other Galleys,
the Admiral of France, came at the same time into the same Haven, with a
greater number of Galleys and better provided for fight; and the conflict might
have proved dangerous to the Spaniards, had not the Common wealth interposed
her self: So that as if both of them had put their differences to be decided by
her, they stayed there quietly with incredible respect, and forbearing all the
while of their abode there. And both their Admirals coming on land walked up
and down the City without any quarrelling; and that seemed to happen at this
time in the Haven City of Genoa, which happened in Noah's Ark, where beasts which
were at enmity with one another, laying aside all their rancour, lived
peaceably together. The like happened not long after in Savona, whereinto eleven
Neopolitan Galleys being entered, which had landed some Soldiers at Finale,
they were overtaken by thirteen French Galleys, and after them came a great
many French Frigates, not far from Savona; which assuredly would have made
themselves masters of the Neopolitan Galleys, had not John Baptista Baliano,
who was then Governor of Savona, willed the French General to forbear all
Hostility, which the French were ready to have used to the Enemy: So as the
King of Spain and his Agents might perceive, how differently the Commonwealth
(though so many several ways injured by his Agents) had carried her self, from
what some Italian Princes had done, who were near allied to the Austrian blood,
and who had received great honors and favors from the King: One whereof (as
shall be said in its due place) being hardly desired to do so by the French,
declared absolutely for Neutrality; and the other joined with the French, and
went with them to assault Millain. These were the practices of the King of
France, wrought in Italy by his Agents; and these were the fruits thereof; but
yet that King forbore not to attempt that by Arms which he could but weakly
compass by negotiation; not having drawn any others over to side with him, but
the Dukes of Savoy and Parma, the latter more then willingly, the other much
enforced; when War was openly declared, he raised an Army of 2000 Horse, and
12000 Foot in Dolpheny, and sent it into Piedmont under Marshal Cricky; to the
end that joining with the Forces of the Dukes of Savoy and Parma, they might
begin to fall upon the State of Millain: Which being then unprovided of men,
many whereof were employed in the Valtoline against Rohan, was but in bad
condition to defend it self. The Duke of Savoy was to concur in this enterprise
with 2000 Horse, and with about 10000 Foot, and the Duke of Parma, with 7000
Foot and 1000 Horse; which made in all 5000 Horse, and above 25000 Foot, a
formidable Army for the State of Millain, though it had been sufficiently
provided of Soldiers, much more now when it wanted them so much.

Cricky appeared about the end of August, in the year 1635. with Title of
Lieutenant to the Duke of Savoy, who was chosen (as has been said) Captain
General of the League, and of the King of France his Forces in Italy; and
having thrown a bridge over the Sesia, he presently took la Villata, together
with the Fort which the Spaniards had built there; and thought he lay idle
there some days, expecting the Colleagues, yet he kept the Enemy in suspense,
they not knowing where this so great a preparation would first fall: Doubtlesly
they minded most to assault that part which the Millanois call beyond the Poe,
in which, to boot with the Cities of Alessandria and Tortona, the Town of
Valenza is situated, upon the right hand of the Poe, just over against la
Lomellina; which though it were but badly defensible, either by situation or
art, was notwithstanding of great consequence in respect of the Poe, which
dividing this part from the rest of the State, and there being no other Town
upon the whole extent of her banks, fit for the casting over of a bridge;
therefore ^as when it was held by the Spaniards, it kept both parts of the
State) joined together by that bridge; so being lost, and the two parts
disjoined, the one part could not well assist the other; it was therefore to be
feared, that if Valenza should be lost, all that part of the State would soon
be taken; and that the other part being thereby weakened, and cut off from the
Sea, they should be totally debarred all Maritime succor; so as this being
added to the loss of the Valtoline, it was clearly seen how great a loss to the
State of Millain the taking of Valenza would prove: the inconvenience grew the
greater, for that the Duke of Parma being alienated, the accommodation which
(that part being lost) his territories could give for bringing relief by Sea,
was also lost; so as it was probable that Valenza would be the first place that
the enemy would fall upon; and therefore the Cardinal who was the Governor,
and the other Office^s, were troubled how to withstand this so imminent danger,
their forces being weakened, and their Soldiers exhausted; especially since
those few that were left to defend the State were sent for a little before to
keep Flanders from being assaulted by the French, and Hollanders; to the
slenderness of the forces was added the weakness of government; the Cardinal,
who was Governor, was by profession a Churchman, and little, or not at all,
versed in what belonged to war; though Don Carlo Colonna, a Commander long
trayn'd up in the wars of Flanders, by orders from the King, commanded in chief
the forces of the State; but Marquess Spinola, who was General of the Horse,
and of a susperior quality, quitting his own command upon this occasion, as not
enduring to be commanded by him, chose to serve as a private Volunteer; the
other Captains, though they did not openly refuse to serve, yet did it but
unwillingly; so as the disagreement, and disaffection of the Commanders, being
added to the weakness of the forces, made the defense dangerous; the danger was
yet great, for fear lest the Duke of Rohan, a Commander of known fame, might
fall with his men from the Valtoline into some other part of the State, and
might so divert those few forces, which being all joined together were not
sufficient to defend one part: or that joining with others he might make the
assault the sorer; amidst these dangers, the Duke of Parma, who had never been
provoked by any hostile act, stuck not to be the first that entered armed into
the State of Millain, in hostile manner, with seven thousand Foot, and one
thousand Horse, all very well appointed, about the beginning of September; he
was not above twenty four years old; but being sprightly, and building rather
upon certainties then hopes, he at first entered the territories of Tortona, and
crossing over, those of Allessandriae thought to join with the Marshal, who was
in the Villata, and with the Duke of Savoy, who expected his speedy joining
with his Piemontese in this enterprise; and not being well entered into the
State of Millain, he encountered twenty five thousand Foot, divided into two
bodies, at Ponte Carone; the one Spaniards, led on by Don Gasparod' Azevedo;
the other Neapolitans, conducted by Philippo Spinola, sent from Naples by the
Viceroy Monterei, and landed but a little before in the Seas of Genoa. Azevedo
marched foremost, who not tarrying for Spinola, who followed half a days matched
behind, he fought the Duke; and being at the first shot in the head with a
Musket he fell down dead; wherefore the Spaniards, though for a while they
resisted valiantly, yet being exceeded in numbers, they were routed, and put to
flight, the Duke hoping hereby for greater things; and being glad that he had
begun so fortunately, went more courageously forwards; but he had lost many of
his men, part whereof were slain in the fight, part disbanded in the march; he
found the Marshal at Piovera, who was come thither with his men, to guide him,
and secure him in his march; and turning with him back, he encamped before
Valenza; where assigning the lower bank to the Duke for his quarters, and the
upper bank to the Marquess Villeroy, who had some French Regiments with him, he
himself kept with his men upon a hill behind the Town; which being blocked up
on all sides, could receive no succor from any part, but only by a bridge of
Boats which was thrown over the Poe; the Town was not thought able to hold out
longer then six days, either by those that were within, or those that were
without, and those of the Spanish Army were so full of this opinion, as they
cared not to defend it, thinking it better to quit it, and spare those few
Captains, and Soldiers lives, in this so great scarcity of men, which if they
should tarry to defend it, must necessarily be lost; so as they were much
astonished and confused, not knowing whether they should adventure the lives of
the Defendants, not to lose the Town, or (not to lose the Defendants) abandon a
place of such importance; to this was added, that there being none to command
in Chief there, but only he who was trusted with it in time of peace, and whom
they that were to enter would not obey, it behoved to send one of better
quality and experience thither; Marquess Spinola, one upon whom the eyes of all
men were bent, though come thither as a Volunteer before the Marshal went from
Villata, had begun to make some fortifications; but would not take the place
upon him, it being far inferior to the place of General of the Horse which he
must then lay aside; and it was refused by all others, fearing lest they might
lose either their lives or honors there, or peradventure both; so as they
inclined rather to spare their men, then to defend the Town, which they held as
good as lost already; it happened that when the Marshal went from Villata to meet
the Duke of Parma, the Spaniard observed that he left Valenza behind him, and
took the way toward Allessandria, and afterward, toward Tortona; so as they
imagined he would first go to the taking of some one of those Cities; wherefore
Marquess Spinola went with some few Soldiers into Allessandria (where General
Colonna was, with the gross of his men) and offered himself ready to defend
either that Town or Tortona, if either of them should be assaulted by the
enemy; but when he saw the Marshal return from Piovera, and go, together with
the Duke, to before Valenza, he hasted thither, with Colonna, and the men which
were with him; and being come into the Town he found it provided of an
excellent Commander, the Marquess of Celada, a Spaniard nobly born; whom being
come a little before from Spain, and seeing that they were likely to abandon
Valenza, could not suffer such an amazment, and therewith such a prejudice to
the affairs of the Crown, and so great a lessening of the honor of Spain; he
therefore offered to take upon him the defense of that Town, and to sacrifice
himself and his fortune in so dangerous a business, for the public honor, and
safety; who being a Gentleman experienced in Arms, and sent from the Court,
with title of General of the Horse of an Army, which by the Kings order and
expense was to be raised in Alsatia, his offer was accepted, and much commended
by the Governor of Millain; the singular example of so generous magnanimity
encouraged many and filled them with generous emulations; so as not able to
stand spectators of the loss of that Town to the loss of their reputation, they
resolved to follow him; he entered Valenza two days before Colonna and Spinola
came thither, from Allessandria, with men, artillery, munition and victuals;
Spinola took upon him the already begun defense the more willingly, now that he
saw the place commanded by so gallant a person, whom he had very well known in
the Wars of Germany; and not refusing to serve under him, the generous
Spaniards would not exercise command over him, but left the titular, or seeming
government, to Martine Galeno, who was the Governor before, in whose name all
things were done; and they two, Celada and Spinola, jointly and unanimously,
did with much care and vigilance mind the defense of the besieged Town; and
seeing it provided of all things necessary (for new provisions were daily
brought in by the bridge) they fell to fortify it; but the Town being
environed only with an old ruinous wall, they first began to perfect the work
which Spinola had begun, which was a great strong Trench; which being Flanked
with eight bulwarks, begirt the Town at a competent distance, on the outside;
by which work, which was handsomely begun, and perfected, they hoped to keep the
enemy from the wall, as long as possibly they could; and having time and
convenience, through Cricky's negligence, to finish the work, they munited it
with many men; and for the better defense, they, besides the Bulwarks, made
certain low Redoubts in the ditch, which they call Capponiere, by a word taken
from Capons pens, which they are like; to these Capponiere some slingers were
sent by a covered way from the bulwarks, who kept the enemy at such a distance,
as he could not come near the wall, before he was master of the Capponiere; the
taking whereof, as it was very hard, they being under the shelter of the
Cannon, and musket of the Bulwarks which were on their backs; so were they
easy to be recovered, in case they were lost; for those that take them being
played upon by the same Cannon, and Muskets which did first defend them, they
are forced either to abandon their purchase immediately with much loss of
blood, first shed in the taking of them, and afterward in abandoning them;
which being abandoned are easily re-taken by the said Slingers, through the
same covered ways, who when they can make no longer defense, got with safety
into the bulwarks; the loss therefore succeeding the defense, and the defense
the loss, provision was had for the long preservation and safety of the chief
Bulwark, by which the place was secured; a moderen invention, the which the
sleighter it seemed to be, proved the more efficacious; for it is apt to weary
the fiercest assaults that can be given to Bulwarks; nor did they employ their
time only in fortifying and muniting, after Celada and Spinola were come, but
in sallying out also, and in assaults; for finding that the Duke of Parma's
quarters were not yet perfectly fortified, and hearing that his numbers were
much diminished by the running away of many of his men, they thought they might
easily make themselves Masters thereof by assaulting them early in the morning,
whilst the Soldiers were asleep; but the event answered not expectation; for
as they sallyed out, upon break of day, toward the Dukes quarters, they were
driven back to within their own walls, and fortifications, with loss of men,
and reputation; Richardo Auvoyadro, General of the Dukes Horse, a stout and
well experienced Flanders Soldier, whilst he was diligently looking to
affairs espied the enemy, and giving an Alarm immediately, went out himself
unarmed, as he was, on horsback, with only fourteen other horse which he found
ready, and in order, and encountered the enemy: and falling upon a squadron of
Carabines, which were advanced before the rest, he after a slight Skirmish
beat them back, and afforded time this mean while for the rest to arm, and put
themselves in order to defend their quarters; which the enemy being aware off,
and fearing they should fail of their hopes, they retreated to within their
works, in great confusion, leaving some of their men dead behind them, and
amongst which Don Iovan di Chiavari, nephew to Cardinal Albornizi; whose death
was recompensed with the like of Avogadro; who after having repulsed the
Carabines, being transported with the success, advanced forward, and going to
assault some Curassiers, was slain by a Musker shot, to the Dukes great grief;
who confided much in his Council, valor and experience; Valenza being
fortified, and 5000 good foot being left there, Colonna went out with only 800
Horse, and retreated to Pieve del Cairo, a Town beyond the Poe, in the
^omellina, six miles from Valenza, expecting more men, which were to come from
several parts; and in the interim was a Convoy to the Provisions which were
continually sent; and this he did, lest it might be taken by stolen assaults,
which would have been prejudicial to the relieving of Valenza; wherein many
valiant and experienced Commanders tarried, the very flower of the Spaniards,
besides Marquess Spinola; so as by the confidence that was had of them, by the
Works and Fortifications which were continually made, and by the continued
assistance that Don Carlo Colonna, who kept in the Lomellina, gave them, the
condition of the Town seemed to be somewhat bettered: This confidence grew
greater, for that the besiegers were found not to proceed with such vigor and
diligence as they ought to have done. The Duke of Parma, who being of a fiery
spirit, and desirous to bring the business to a good and speedy end, thought
every least delay a loss of time; nor could he endure that the business, which
of its self was like to be short and sure, should be prolonged, or any ways
doubted, by giving the enemy opportunity to fortify; wherefore he continually
solicited the Marshal, that he would begin the Trenches, prepare the
Batteries, and do all things which might make for the speedy taking of the
Town: but the Marshal continuing his carelessness, lay still idle, and as if
seized on by a fatal dull drousiness, seemed as if he had left thinking of the
business; and minding hunting more then warlike actions, he did nothing for
more then twelve days, but go daily to the Forest to hunt wild Beasts; and past
his time in other delights and entertainments, to the wonder and amazement of
all men, nay, even of the enemy, who often from their quarters saw him go a
hunting; he professed he would not meddle with the business before the Duke of
Savoy, who was General, should come into the Camp with such Forces as, by the
Articles of the League, he was bound to do; and so much did all men wonder at
this his manner of proceeding, and at these his failings, as not knowing
whereunto else to refer it, it was almost generally suspected that he was
bribed thereunto by the Spaniards; as if not knowing what else to do in this
perplexity of affairs, they had blunted the enemies steel with their gold:
which the Duke of Parma suspecting, he for very anger bit his lips and his
fingers ends; but at last, when the Duke of Savoy's men appeared under Marshal
Villa, who were not, both Horse and Foot, above 5000 fighting men; and when not
many day^ after the Duke himself appeared, they consulted upon the manner how
they should go to work; which having resolved upon in three days, and all
requisite provisions and orders being taken, the Duke left the Marquess Villa
to command his men, and returned himself to Vercelli. The Dukes men were
quartered in the Lomellina, a little above Valenza, upon the banks of Poe,
where there is an Island, by which two Bridges being thrown over, one on either
side of the Island, convenience of Commerce was afforded between the Duke of
Savoy's quarter and that of the Marshals, which was on the other side the Poe,
beneath Vicenza, and Parma's quarter which, was near at hand; who having lost
many men, some whereof were run away, and some ready to run; and he fearing
another assault, he desired to be recruited by Cricky; the Marshal being weary
of his so many pressings to expedite the business, was very slow in granting
him any recruits; the chief reason why Marquess Villa took up his quarter in
the Lomellina, was to keep the Town from being relieved by that way; so as
being straightened and environed on that side of the Poe by Parma and the
French, and blocked upon this side from receiving any relief from the State of
Millain, the Town might be brought to surrender the sooner; and that he might
the better do this, he sent some Soldiers by night to assault the Fort which
guarded the head of the Bridge; and sent some others afterward, to the end,
that whilst those within the Fort were busy in defending themselves against
the assaulters, they might fire the boats which upheld the Bridge, as they did;
and after a fierce skirmish the Half Moon being taken, which gua^ded the Bridge
of the Fort, the assailants entered, hoping to take the Fort it self quickly,
when the use of the Bridge being cut off by firing of the Boats, new men could
not come from Valenza to defend it; but many came out from Valenza, who
quenched the fire, and defended the Bridge, and who also recovered the
Half Moon that was lost, forcing the assailants to retreat; but that which the
Piedmontese could not effect, was done the next night by the River, which
swelled so high as it brake the Bridge, and disordered the Boats; which Villa
being aware of he sent a greater number to reassume the assault, who for a
while were kept off by the Cannon and Muskets which played upon them from the
Town; but at last they took the Fort, though they were held play, till the
Garrison, by means of the Boats which were yet fastened to the bank, got off
with the loss of about 200 men, whereof some were drowned whilst they sought to
save themselves from the enemy; the rest being carried down the River in two
Boats; the one whereof got safe to land, the other being driven upon the shore
in the Parma quarters, were at first shot at, but afterward, upon yielding
themselves, were taken Prisoners. This accident did much trouble the Spanish
Camp, which being weak for want of men thought it self not safe in Pieve,
whither, as has been said, it had retreated, when it came out of Valenza;
wherefore Colonna, calling a Council of War, asked their opinion touching the
urgency of the present condition; the greatter and better part were for
retiring from those quarters; thinking it the better course to preserve their
men, then to tarry in Valenza, which not being to be relieved when the Bridge
was b^oken, would assuredly be assaulted by Villa, who, being a wise Commander,
had found the weakness of their men and quarters. Colonna inclined to this
opinion, who to this purpose had sent some to find where they might quarter
with most safety thereabouts: but Frederick Imperiale, Son to the Marquess of
Oira, Nephew by the Sisters side to the late Marquess Spinola, an approved
Soldier, and trained up under his Uncle in the wars of Flanders, was of
another mind; and with him did Pietro d' Aro join, who was Lieutenant of the
Horse; their reasons were, that they were to keep that station, were it only
not to show their fear and weakness to the enemy, and not to make the
defendants despair of succor by their removal; that it was not probable that
Villa, who was a no less wise then valiant Commander, being bound to keep the
Town from being relieved, would quit his station to hazard an unsafe
enterprise; that the place was capable of Fortification, and that it could not
be long ere new Forces would come from the State of Millain, who were ready to
march, and who when they should be come, the besieged would cease to fear any
longer. This opinion was approved by all, and was successful in the sequel; for
that very night there came thither a Brigade of Lombards, speedily raised at
his own charge, by Cardinal Trivultio, in the name of his Son the Prince, and
brought unto the Camp by Count Carlo Marliani, consisting for the most part of
Soldiers that had fled from the Duke of Parma, whilst going out of the
Territories of Piacenza, he went to join with the French Camp, and which were
incited by the Cardinals authority, and by his large pay; they were a great
help to the condition of affairs, in this so great scarcity of men, and when
things were tottering, having not only weakened the Dukes Forces, but
strengthened the Spanish Camp; so as Colonna, who together with the remainder of
his men, Valenza being well garrisoned, could not keep the field, nor look the
enemy in the face, but was likely to have abandoned his station; was able by
the coming of this Brigade to make his station good, to face his enemy, to
maintain the affairs of the Town in reputation, to keep the enemy from
forraging, to scour the Country to the prejudice of the enemy, and to attempt
somewhat upon the Towns thereabouts, particularly against Sartiranno. Don
Martino of Aragon came thither also not long after, with some Companies of his
Brigade which were quartered in Novara; and some few days after there came two
other Brigades thither from Naples, raised by the Viceroy Monterei, as soon as
he heard that the State of Millain was assaulted; the one consisted of 1200
Foot, conducted by Don Carlo della Gatta, the other by Lucio Boccapianola,
wherein were 1600 men; so as the Camp was much reinforced by the coming of
these men; but though these Forces were sufficient for the safety of the Camp,
and for the keeping of the Field; yet did they not at all serve for the defense
or relief of the Town, which was severed from the River, and enclosed by the
enemy on both sides, who were very well fortified; and which Town was already
begun to be battered, and assaulted: the chief Battery was placed by the Covent
of the Capuchins, situated at the foot of a Hill, behind Valenza, which by
reason of the neerness and height of situation did absolutely command it; the
others were disposed of lower in fit places; but though they all played
continually, yet did they but little harm, not playing all upon one place, but
sometimes on one place, sometimes on another, according as they were levelled,
to the no little wonder of the defendants, who laughed at such Batteries; and
the assailants seeing how little good they did thereby, began to turn their
Batteries upon the houses; but were it either the fault of the Cannoniers, or
the ignorance or treachery of those that ordered the Batteries, they got no
more advantage thereby; for the bullets flew so high, as, for the most part,
they either fell into the River, without touching the houses, or upon the
opposite bank of the Lomellina; so as they only beat down one Gate, and the
tops of two neighboring Towers, which were soon mended by the defendants
diligence. The Duke of Parma was impa^ient to see this, finding thereby the
miscarriage of the enterprise, foreseeing the ruin of his so high hopes, and
the ensuing of the like to his own Territories; to this was added, that Cricky
who did not much mind the Siege, was very negligent in the Government, and in
the Discipline of the Camp; so as his men were likewise much lessened by
running away: he was therefore forced to send for 2000 of the Militia of
Montferrat, till he might receive new recruits from France; and the Duke being
in greater want of men then the Marshal, (for his men ran so fast away, that of
1000 Horse which he brought with him from Parma, there remained but 200, and of
the 7000 Foot, less then 3000;) nor knowing from whence to get any more, he lay
idle in his quarters; and there being no good correspondency held between him
and the Marshal, he could not expect any assistance from him; and though the
Dukes displeasure appeared to be somewhat mitigated by the coming of a
Gentlemen, who was sent to the Camp by Cardinal Richlieu, to keep the Duke
steadfast to the League, and to chide the Marshal for his proceedings, as well
in carrying on the Siege, as in his behavior to the Duke; and to wish him in
the Kings name that he should hereafter treat the Duke with all honor and
satisfaction; yet these reprehensions being thought to proceed from some
complaints made to the Court by the Duke, they caused no good effects inwardly;
and were so far from sweetening their distastes, as they did rather exasperate
the malignancy which they had conceived one against another; and yet the Duke,
continuing constant to the League, did not only not repent what he had done,
but notwithstanding so many distastes and misfortunes, professed more constancy
still in his resolutions to Monsignior Gorio Pannolini, Vice-legate of
Bolognia, who was sent unto him by the Pope, who being much pressed by the
continual complaints of the Spanish Agents, had sent him to admonish the Duke
seriously, and to wish him that he would retire to his own Dominions, and not
persevere in the League any longer, to the so great perturbance of Italy, and
of the public peace. The Pope, all the while that the Duke appeared so highly
distasted with the Court of Spain, that he prepared for Arms, that he took
Commanders and Soldiers into pay, with manifest appearance of making war with
Spain; never cared to suppress so great a commotion, nor to sprinkle a little
water upon so great a flame; nor did the event of this Negotiation deceive the
judgment which was made thereof; for when the Vice legate was come unto the
Camp, and had delivered his Embassy to the Duke; the Duke did not only not at
all value it, but acquainted the Marshal with it; wherewith the Marshal
thinking himself injured, he complained bitterly to the Vice-legate, that the
Pope should use his authority to divert the Kings Colleagues, and to withdraw
them from siding with his King: at the making of which complaints the Duke
being present, he seemed also to be displeased with the Vice-legate; so as the
Vice-legate returned with little satisfaction, and less fruit of his
Negotiation, to Bologina; and the Pope not any ways resenting this success, nor
having at any time after pressed the Duke to desist from this enterprise, he
did not only not appease the anger of the Spaniards, but did the more confirm
the general jealousies which were conceived at these proceedings: it being
unlikely, that he who, when he might, cared not to keep his Vassal from
beginning such a business, should endeavor to withdraw him from it, when he
was deeply engaged therein.

Now to reassume the Siege of Valenza. New recruits came daily to the Marshal
from France; so as the Camp being much increased, when they saw they did no
good by their batteries, they fell to assault the Trenches, about which, as
also about the Capponiere, much labor was taken, with variety of fortune, and
mortality of the parties; the end whereof proved, that several reiterated
assaults proved still unfortunate to the Assailants, who were never able to
take any thing save one Capponiere, which they got not without much loss, and
did not keep long; and yet the Defendants having lost many men, and not being
able to be recruited, they began to forbear making out any more salli^s,
whereby they had not a little prejudiced the Enemy; so as minding only the
defense of their Trenches, they endeavored to preserve themselves as much as
they could, and to draw out the Siege at least so long as that the earth might
become untractable by the rains of the approaching winter, and might force the
Enemy to be gone. But though the defendants had the better of the businesses in
repulsing assaults, yet was it not had without the loss of many men, whereof
Cesare Caraffa was slain for one, and a Spanish Sergeant Major; but many more
of the meaner ^ort of Soldiers, and many of the Captains, Officers, and
Persons of Quality, of the Enemy, were slain; but all this was not
considerable, by reason of the continual recruits which they received from
France; and it was reported, that ten Regiments were upon their march; so as
the Town was not likely to hold out long: Moreover, by reason of the length of
the Siege, many things necessary for the maintaining of the Town grew scarce,
Moneys, Salt, Match, Oil, and Grist, the Enemy having beaten down the Mills
which had furnished the Town with Grist; and none being left but two
hand-mills, the general necessity could be but badly supplied: Therefore all
hope of preserving the place grew daily less and less, not only in the
defendants, who through such wants decreased, but in those who labored to
relieve them; for it being to be done either on this side, or on that side the
River, it was (if not impossible) very hard to be done on either side. There
was no thought of relieving it by the Lomellina, the Bridge being down; and to
relieve it on the other side was too desperate a business, the Mountain at the
Foot whereof the Town stood, the Hill which stood on the side of it, the fields
and banks which environed it being all of them possessed, and well munited by
the enemy; and Parma's quarter was at last recruited by the Marshal: The
difficulties growing thus great, the chiefest of the Spanish Army began to
detest the generous resolution of Celada and Spinola, by which they and so many
of their best men had engaged themselves in that defense, and whereby they had
been obliged to hazard the Garrison and State of Millain: not knowing therefore
very well what to do, they inclined rather to abandon then to relieve the Town;
and beginning now totally to despair of keeping it, they began to think what
they were to do when it should be lost; and foreseeing that when the enemy
should have taken Valenza, they would go either into Allessandria, or into the
Territories of Tortona, as they openly threatened they would do, they began to
build a Fort beneath Valenza, there where the Tanaro falls into the Poe,
intending to throw a Bridge over there, whereby passing over into the
Territories of Alessandria, they might the more easily get into that part of
the State, to relieve either of those Cities if they should be besieged, or to
defend the Campagna if it should be annoyed by inroads, or at least that they
might bring some help to the languishing Town, if any way might be opened
whereby to do it on that side; which though they were but slender undertakings,
and but of little hope, yet the extremity wherein they were did either persuade
them to it, or made them believe it to be the least of evils: whilst the
Spanish Army was amidst these miseries, troubles and dangers, three Brigades
came very seasonably; the one Spaniards, under Don John di Garray, the other
two Neapolitans, under Achilles Minutulo, and under Andrea, Count di
Marianella, which made in all about 4000 good men, and well appointed, who were
sent by Sea by Marquess Sancta Croce; who being gone the third time from Naples
with the Fleet to Sea, to assault Provence, and hearing the great danger that
Valenza was in, (and then the State of Millain,) held it his better course to
endeavor the preservation of that State, then to put for possessing what
belonged to another; deferring therefore his chief enterprise, he very
seasonably landed these Brigades at Finale, and sent them to before Valenza, by
whose coming the Spanish affairs got a little breath, and every one began to
hold the abandoning of Valenza, and the Captains therein, to be not only
ignominious, and detestable, but dangerous, and ruinous; so as they resolved by
all mean^ to relieve it; to this purpose they held a consultation in Dorno, a
Town between Pavia and la Pieve del Cairo, whither all the Commanders, and
Chief Officers being come; as the Cardinal Albornozzi, and with him Don
Francisco di Melo, Don Antonio Ronchillio, who was Lord Chancellor, and diverse
others of the Council both of State, and War; they all were of opinion that the
Town must be relieved; but with such caution, and circumpection, as that by so
doing they might not be enforced to a battle, which notwithstanding the
re-inforcement which was come, they did, all of them, abhor: the resolution was
in it self repugnant, by reason of the neerness of enemies army, for the
caution did absolutely resist the execution of it; and yet the business being
long discussed, there was a remedy found: Don Martin d' Aragona, and Don John
di Garrai, took upon them the charge of this business, and propounded a means
which was generally approved, and found a way how to relieve the Town safely,
without hazzarding battle; and it was this, that some place should be found out
in the Lomellina, near the Poe, and near Valenza, capable to receive the whole
Army, and all provisions necessary for the maintenance thereof, which might be
so fortified, as they might not be compelled to quit it, nor be brought to
fight, neither by assault, nor want of provisions; from whence they proved
thus, that it might be possible to relieve the Town, without being forced to
fight; the men which lay before Valenza would either come and join with the
Pidemontese, who were quartered on this side the Poe, and which were fewest in
number; or they would not come; if they should not come, who could doubt but
that the Army being safely quartered in the Lomellina, wherein were 6000 Foot,
and 1200 Horse, all of them good men, and well appointed, and being to be
masters of the field, might by boats brought by land bring into the Town what
relief they listed, and not so only, but by the advantage of their numbers
force the Savoyards to quit their quarters; and if they should come to join
with them, and that the greater part of those that lay before Valenza should
pass from that place to this, it was certain that they could draw the enemies
army out of their quarters, without much slackning the siege of Valenza; in
which case, the Town wanting opposers, they would not need many defendants,
whereof having already more then needed, the same effect would be wrought by
the passing over of the enemy, as if they should be succor'd by the defendants;
moreover the enemies trenches being weakened, and almost abandoned by that
coming over, men enough, and sufficient provision might be conveyed into
Valenza, from the City of Alessandria; these things being granted, they proved
that doubtlesly the Town might be relieved, without their armies being forced
to fight; this dilemma was generally approved of, so as some might be sent to
discover the country, and the enemies fortifications, before the resolution
should be put in practice; but because there was some difference in opinion
between Aragon, and Garrai, about the manner how the succor should march
toward the river, and about choosing the place where the whole Army might be
safely quartered; as also where they were to put the Boats into the water,
which were to conveigh in the succor; they were both of them ordered, that
taking along with them Colonel Frederick Imperiale, Vincenzo Monsury, and the
Count Trotti, they should go to discover the Country, and choose out both the
safest places; having with them a Convoy of four troops of Horse, they viewed
all the parts thereabouts narrowly, not without some opposition made by the
enemy, who met them with the like number of Horse, so a Skirmish happened between
them, with some advantage to the discoverers, who effected what they went
about; they found a place near a Chapel, between Frascarvolo and the Poe, as
fit as might be for their purpose; being far from the enemy, munited before by
a deep way, and behind by a rivulet of clear water, which served not only for
a ditch, and safety, but for drink for the Camp; and which was of more
concernment, the place was almost fortified of it self; they found it a harder
business to choose the other place, for conveying the boats over, by reason of
the Fort, which being first built to defend the head of the bridge belonging to
Valenza toward Lomellina, and which (as has been said) was afterward taken
by Marquess Villa, was still held by the enemy, and commanding both the upper
and the lower side, kept them from all hopes of compassing their intents; and
the less, for that though the retaking of that Fort was a thing not difficult
of it self, yet was it dangerous to put for, for fear lest the attempting of it
would draw all the Enemies Forces to defend it; in which case, they must either
go thither with their whole Camp, and come to a battle, or not coming, quit the
business; the one of which was contrary to the resolution they had taken, the
other of little honor, and less advantage. For their design being discovered
by the attempt, they would fortify the bank better; they therefore out of
these respects left thinking of taking the Fort, and therewith the discovery of
the upper bank, which lying between the Fort and the Piedmonteses quarters,
they could not well do; and went to discover the lower side, where they
observed a place which being far enough off was out of the Forts reach, and fit
to bring relief. So as they all approved it, except Imperiale, who said that
the same distance which rendered that place free from being offended by the
Fort, made it also too far off for bringing relief, since it answered not just
upon the banks of Valenza; but between Valenza and the Parma quarters, so as
the boats which should be put in there, would be necessarily carried lower by
the current of the River; and falling toward the Parma quarters would not
relieve the place besieged, but the besiegers. He therefore was for bringing
succor by the bank above the Fort, where the current would carry the boats to
the very side of Valenza; and that to keep them from being endangered by the
Piedmonteses quarters, the body of their Army should advance, and by its
interposition keep the succor from being offended. But this was not then
neither approved, as being contrary to the resolution of avoiding being
compelled to fight; they therefore continued their choice in both these places,
and the Camp master General had notice given him thereof, that he might advance
with the Army. The Army marched, and being come to the place near the Chapel,
they made a flying squadron of 800 commanded foot of several Nations; which
being led by Marquess Torrecuso a Neapolitan, was sent to Frasearvolo, which
was the nearest place to the Enemies quarters, that lie might keep there, and
secure those who wrought upon the Trenches, and that he might be ready to
receive and withstand the first incounters. The rest of the Camp staying at the
Chapel, there made up the body of an Army; and immediately giving out
Mattocks, Pales and Spades, fell to fortify, and perfected their works in one
night and day; and having brought thither the provisions which had been
diligently provided by Senator Arias, they stood expecting what the Enemy would
do in this so great alteration of Affairs. They were not long in comprehending,
that counsels and resolutions which are taken in common are better acted then
discoursed of; for the Marshal and Duke of Parma, fearing Villa's quarter, and
that relief would undoubtedly be brought if they did not pass over the Poe,
went with the greatest and best part of their men to the Piedmont quarter,
where the Duke who was come but a little before from Verselli was; and thinking
it now time to fall to work, they marched out in ranks into the field, to
assault the succouring Army; they were about 4500 Foot, who all obeyed the Duke
of Savoy, the General of the Colleagues; they advanced on the left hand toward
Frascarvolo, having sent some Troops of Horse before, and some Foot toward the
right hand near Poe, to hold those Forces in play, and to oppose them which
should come from the left wing of the Spanish Camp. Torrecuso marched out with
his men from Frascarvolo against the Enemies Army, when he saw it march toward
him; and putting his men into a squadron, advanced with certain Files of
Musketeers, and possessed himself of a great hedge which was before him: Under
the shelter whereof he very seasonably let fly a shower of Musket Shot, against
the Enemies van which approached; whereat the Spaniards, who were at dinner,
stood to their Arms, and put themselves in a defensive posture. The General was
in his quarters, which were between the Artllery and the body of the Army; he
ordered his Foot and Horse to draw out into ranks, the Foot within the
Trenches, and the Horse at the place appointed for the Magazine; and in this
interim the skirmish grew hot between Torrecuso and the Enemies Camp. The
General wholly intent how Affairs should be governed in this onset, and
knowing Torrecuso wanted Horse, commanded Don Alvaro Quinones, Leiutenant
General of the Neapolitan Horse, to go speedily and receive or withstand him
with three Troops of Horse, which were then upon the guard; and sent Don John
di Garrai first to him with a strength of Musketeers, and some carts of
Ammunition, and afterward Don Martin of Aragon. Quinones finding Torrecuso
alre^dy much engaged, kept in a place a little distant from the skirmish; and
Garrai, with Aragon, advancing, re-inforc'd some stations which they held to be
convenient to maintain the skirmish; which when the General saw it grew greater
then was thought it would have done, and that Quinones stirred not, he sent
Colonel Imperiale, with two Troops of Horse, to assist the fight, with
directions to tell Torrecuso, that he should not engage any further, and to
protest unto him, that if he should be further charged by the Enemy, he would
send him no more help then what he had already done; because, according to the
common sense, he would not endanger a general battle. He notwithstanding
endeavored with the Horse, which Imperiale brought, to defend those stations
which were reinforced by Foot: So as the skirmish being maintained valiantly,
and in good order on this side, it continued for full four hours; neither side
sending out any more men: For Colonna would not, as it was agreed upon, engage
himself in a general combat; and the Colleagues Army, which esteeming the Enemy
to be far inferior to them in Forces, was gone out with an intent to fall upon
them, and defeat them utterly; seeing how Affairs were ordered, and that the
Enemy, without coming out of his Trenches, sent a good strength of men out
against him, conjectured that the Enemy was stronger then he thought at first
he was; so as he cared not much to enforce the first encounters any more, but
kept on the fight with slight skirmishes till night coming on, he retreated to
his quarters, from whence he was with such fervor come. Though some will have
it that there was no good correspondency between the Duke of Savoy and the
Marshal, which was the cause why things were not acted as it was agreed they
should be. Torrecuso seeing that the defendants had the better, and having
received orders not to advance any further, retired also into Frascarvolo, more
like a Conqueror then conquered; and to observe his orders, he withheld his
men from pursuing the Enemy, as they were desirous to do. But the Spanish
Commanders being aware, that by the coming over of many of their men to that
part, the Camp before Valenza was much lessened, and the Trenches but badly
guarded; order was given that 500 Foot should come from Allesandra to Valenza,
with good store of match, which the Town wanted much. These were led on by the
Camp-master Lodovico Guasco, being guided by Maximiliano Stampa, Count di Monte
Castello, nephew to Guasco, who knew those ways very well; and passing on
succesfully between the Duke of Parma's quarters and those of the Montferrians,
they were not at all disturbed by the enemy, that side being open, without
Trenches, and almost abandoned; but they ran danger in approaching the
fortification of their friends; for as they drew near Fort Rosario, a Fort
which stood toward the Mountain, and which had been bravely defended all the
time of the siege by Ottaviano Sauli, a Gentleman of Genoa; and the
forerunners, or Scouts, not having given the true watchword whereby they were
to have been admitted and received, but had given the last nights watchword,
Sauli doubted that some treachery might lie hid under that false word, and
therefore made them keep aloof off with his Musket shot, wherewith some of them
were slain; but when Guasco, and other Captains who were very well known to
Sauli, began to parley, they were soon known, and let in; by this happy success
another better fortune followed; for Cricky, and the Duke of Parma, ^earing
that this relief was brought into Valenza, which was reported to be greater
then it was, they began to apprehend the safety of their own Trenches,
quarters, Artillery and Baggage, in case they should be assaulted by those that
brought in the succor; for knowing in what woeful condition they had left them,
they verily believed they would have been taken and sacked, with the loss not
only of their honor, but of their Artillery, and with the destroying of their
Fortifications, and the loss of those few men that were left to defend them, so
as they thought good to return speedily to their first Quarters.

This so sudden resolution of the Colleagues facilitated the bringing in of the
whole relief by the Lomellina; for the Spanish Army being encouraged by the
preceding days success, and seeing that the Enemy had abandoned the field, knew
they were absolute Masters on this side the Poe, and saw not any thing that
could keep them from relieving the Town; leaving therefore all their Militia,
with half their Foot, under the command of Camp-master Boccapianola, to guard
their Quarters, they went out early in the morning with the rest of their men,
and marched toward the upper bank. The Horse, which was commanded by the Count
di Sora, marched on the right wing, within sight of the Piedmontese Quarters,
to the end that the Foot, which were divided into three Squadrons, being
sheltred by them, might advance safely toward the same side, and with them the
munition; and three Troops of Horse went before the Foot Van. The convoy of
relief went on the other side, toward the place that was chosen on the lower
bank, led on by the Marquess Lunato, and Colonel Frederick Imperiale, to whose
charge the whole business was committed: Two pieces of Cannon went before them,
with some Foot; and behind came a competent number of Carriages, loaded with
Boats, and with all things requisite for relieving the Town. In this posture
did the Army march, being favored by a thick mist, which kept them from being
seen by the Enemy; and whilst the Scouts went without any opposition to the
other side, Don John di Garrai, who having better considered the windings of
the Poe, and finding by the manner of the Enemies proceedings that no Forces
would come from the Piedmontese Quarters which might any ways make him
apprehend a general Battle, (having first agreed with Colonna, that the succor
would come safe between the aforesaid Quarters, and the Fort) he ordered Lunato
and Imperiale that they should go thitherward, and toward the place which was
first proposed by Imperiale, to execute their Commission: The new Order was
obeyed forthwith; so as the succor wheeling about behind the Fort, it drew
near the bank which was above it, where it was played upon by Musket shot, which
came in abundance from the said Fort, and by two pieces of Cannon, which played
from the top of the opposite shore; but the Cannon shot, though it were
dreadful, yet being made but seldom, they did more terrify then endammage; and
to the hail of musket shot which came from the Fort, no readier nor fitter
remedy could be found out then to assault the Fort: Wherefore Colonel
Imperiale, who attending still upon the succor, saw how necessary it was to
provide against this inconveniency, sent to advertise Colonna how affairs went,
and how requisite it was to assault the Fort; whereupon Colonna forthwith
commanded some Companies of Spaniards and Italians, that they should assault
that Fort, who going boldly on, took it; for they did no sooner skirmish then
scale it: The Marquess Torrecuso was the first man, who having moved
l'Imporiale a little before to favor the putting of the Boats into the River,
was intent upon the passing of them over, it being the action of most
importance; when he saw the Foot advance to give the assault, leaving the whole
care of the relief to Colonel Imperiale, he headed them with his sword in his
hand; and plucking the Stakes from out the Steccado, wherewith the whole ditch
was environed, he was one of the first that got upon the Parapet; all the rest,
moved by his example, followed him; so as most of the Garrison were slain, and
the Ensign and Captain were taken prisoners. The succor past on the mean
while without any disturbance, and advanced with their Boats, which falling
down the stream, came happily to the Shore at Valenza, and by them as much
relief as was desired was conveyed in, the Enemy looking on, who endeavored in
vain to hinder it with their Cannon and Musket shot from the Capuchins Chapel.

By this succor the Town was not only well provided of all things needful, but
wholly freed from Siege; for the Colleagues despairing to make further
progress, foreseeing that by the approaching winter the earth would become so
spungie as it would not be to be wrought, and that the Army being bemired, and
not able to receive any food, would be besieged even in the open field, they
resolved after fifty days siege to give over the Enterprise, and to retreat, to
the no little confusion of the Commanders in chief, who being at variance
within themselves, and unsatisfied, laid the fault of this ill-guided Siege one
upon another. The Duke of Parma parted not long after, much discontented, for
France, where he intended to give a clear and full relation unto the King how
Affairs had been carried in this Enterprise, and to desire to be protected by
him, and to be defended in his Dominions, which, when this business miscarried,
he apparently foresaw was exposed to the invasion of the Spanish Forces, for
his having sided with France: But this happy success was a little overcast by
the death of Colonna, who through his extraordinary pains taken in this Siege,
died the day before the Town was relieved.

Valenza being freed, the Colleagues Army dissolved. The Duke of Savoy
retreated with his men to Vercelli; and the Marshal to Cassalle; upon whom the
Gates of the Town were shut, upon pretense that there being scarcity of
Victuals in that City, it could not provide food for so great a number of men,
without evident danger of wanting necessary nourishment for them that were in
the Town already; wherefore he was forced to divide his men amongst the Towns
of Montferrat, which though they suffered the like want of victuals, yet being
weak and unable to refuse giving quarter, they were forced to yield to the
stronger power; the remainder of the Duke of Parma's men were likewise
distributed into the same Towns; the Duke himself being retreated to Cassalle,
where he had the Castle given him for his lodging: on the Spaniards side, their
Armies were also put into their Winter quarters, except some of Serbellone's
Brigades, which were sent to recover the Valtoline; for at the same time, which
was about the beginning of November, Fernamont who had raised more men in
Tirvolo, prepared to pass the Moun^ains once more, to reduce the Valtoline into
its former condition; and to this purpose he had sent to Millain and to
Serbellone, to agree upon the time when they should fall upon the French
jointly, Serbellone, on the State of Millains side, and he by Tyrvolo, that so
they might effect their business the sooner and more safely; but Rohan's speed
prevented these designs, who hearing how near the Dutch were, sent immediately
1000 Foot to Bormio, whither not long after he himself came with the remainder
of his men: being come thither he found the Dutch fallen down by unknown ways
into the Plain; without any delay, he once more assaulted them; and not without
loss on their side, forced them to re-pass back over the Mountains to Tyrvolo:
they being gone, Rohan leaving a Garrison in Bormio, and fearing lest
Serbellone might fall upon him on his back, and hearing that many Grisons were
come down to assist him, he made the like haste as before, and brought 4000
Foot with him, amongst which 200 Zuricani; he appeared, unexpected, at Morbegno
about noon, where Serbellone was with 3500 Foot and 200 Horse, and not having
heard of the rout given to Fernamont, expected news of his coming, to the end,
that according to appointment he might at the same time fall upon the enemy on
the back; but he fared no better then Fernamonte, for whilst he was at dinner,
he unexpectedly was assaulted by Rohan; and not having time to assemble his
men, who were dispersed into the parts thereabouts, he was soon overcome and
routed, many of his Captains being slain or taken prisoners, amongst which the
Count di San, the second Captain of Horse, and Count Valenza, Nephew to
Serbellone; and Serbellone's self being pursued by the enemy fled to Fort
Fuentes, wounded in the arm and on the back; such Soldiers as could save
themselves fled, some one way, some another way, to the nearest Towns of the
State of Millain.

Thus Rohan having beaten the enemy the fifth time, remained all that Winter
master and peaceful possesser of the Valtoline, of the Counties of Bormio and
of Chiavenna; and greatly rejoicing, forced the Inhabitants to new agreements,
pretending that the Valtoline, contrary to the Articles of Monsone, was wholly
and totally fallen into the arbitrament of the King of France; and not being
able to obtain of those Inhabitants, though beaten by his Forces, and several
ways oppressed, any thing of what he demanded, he began by strange rigor and
extortion to tyrannize over them; but they little confiding in the promises of
liberty and maintenance of their Religion, which were made them in the King of
France his name, patiently underwent their bad treating, and would never forego
the authority and protection of the Crown of Spain; promising themselves, and
confidently believing to be preserved and maintained by the King of Spain in
their entire Liberty and Religion, according to his Promises and Decrees:
miserable and woeful wretches, whom you shall soon see abandoned to their former
yoke of slavery, by those in whom they so much trusted, and for whose sake they
suffered so much at the present.

The End of the Fourteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK XV.
The Contents.
THe King of Spain, for the preservation of the State of Millain, sends a new
Governor, new men, and good store of money thither. The Duke of Savoy
returning thither with his men, and with those of France, takes Bremi, and
reduces it to a Fort Royal; and by frequent inroads troubles that side of the
Country. The Duke of Parma's Dominions are assaulted by the Spanish Forces,
after his going for France; and are defended by Marquess Villa, who is sent
thither by the Duke of Savoy. With a good strength of Horse and Foot, and is
defended by strong diversions till the Spring; in the beginning whereof, the
Duke of Parma returns from France, endeavors by means of the Colleagues Forces
to get into his Country, goes to Nizza Della Paglia; being to throw down a
great Trench which was made upon the bank of Scrivia, he turns back; and
repassing the Poe, endeavors to effect his design on that side; but meeting
with strong opposition there also, he is forced to return; and passing again
with some men over the Poe, he tarries with them in Nizza, till such time as
the Duke of Savoy, going with the body of the Army into the Confines of Novara,
to annoy that part of the State, may divert the Governor from guarding the
Grand Trench, and leave free passage by that way for the Duke of Parma; Who by
several accidents abandoning the design, marches with a few men toward the
Sea; where getting into a little Vessel, he passes incognito into Lavigiana,
and gets into his own Territories. The Duke of Savoy passes succesfully over
the Tesino, and causes such terror and confusion in Millain, as the Governor
is forced to abandon the Trench, and defend Millain. And going with all his men
toward the Enemies Camp, he assaults it in ^ornavento; but the Duke freeing
himself from the assault returns to the greater Lake; whither being come, and
fearing that the Governor who was gone to Romagnagno, would assault him on
that side, resolves to return toward Piedmont. The Governor seeing the State
freed of the Enemies Army, betakes himself, partly, to recover the Towns taken
by the Enemy, partly, to resent himself to Piedmont, and the Duke of Parma's
State; and having sent what Forces he could thither, he proceeds so far, as
the Duke who was retired to Piacenza, maintains a siege till such time as,
seeing no succor, he is forced to compound with the Governor. The War of
Parma being appeased, the Governor turns upon the Towns in the Langhe, which
were yet held by the Enemy; and having taken some of them, he hears that the
Duke raises Forces in the Canavese; he marches toward him, and having in
vain provoked him, to battle, he sends Don Martino of Aragon with a strong body
of men to discover Vercelli, against whom Marquess Villa, who was returned from
the State of Parma, coming forth with a no less number of men, a great Skirmish
is had, wherein the Marquess has the better. The Governor understanding
afterward, that Count Verrua was gone to besiege the Roccad' Arazzo, he
prepares to defend it: And succeeding fortunately therein, his happiness was
imbittered by a great defeat which the Duke gave to Don Martino of Aragon
before Monbaldone. After which the Duke returning victorious to Verselli,
within a month after dyed. Some Islands in Provence are taken by the Fleet
which came from Naples. A French Fleet comes from Britany, enters the
Mediterranean, with which an other joins which was provided in Provence; both
which keep in the Ligustick Sea, doing but little good, and less in Sardignia,
and Winter in Tolone; but putting to Sea in the Spring, they recover the
Islands which were taken the year before by the Spanish Fleet. The Pope labors
to compose the Wars between Christian Princes, but in vain. A League is
concluded between the Crown of Spain and the Grisons, by which the Valtoline
returns, upon some conditions, under the ancient Dominion of the Grisons. The
State of Millain is at last freed from the French Forces, by the recovery of
Bremi.

NEws being come to the Court of Spain of the assault given by the Colleagues
Army to the State of Millain, and of the scarcity of provisions, and Garrison,
which were there; though Burgondy were assaulted at the same time by the Prince
of Could with another Army, and Flanders and Germany were full of several
perturbations; (all which required extraordinary provisions) yet the King would
have the State of Millain, of all other parts, chiefly and fully secured and
furnished. For it being the Bulwark, and, as a man may say, the Rendezvous of
the Spanish Arms, the greater the prejudice should be that would result by the
loss thereof, the more necessary was it to provide for the safety and
preservation thereof. And Cardinal Albornozzi who was a Churchman, not being
very proper for that Government, in so turbulent and dangerous times, and the
care of that State being to begin by the choice of a Governor, who might be
fit for that charge, and for the condition of the present time^; Don Diego
Philippes Gusmano, Marquess of Liganes, who had formerly served in Flanders,
was constituted to succeed him: Who though he went speedily from Court, came
not to Millain before the midst of October, a little after Valenza was freed
from the siege; and not long after that by the rout given in the Valtoline, the
recovery of that valley appeared desperate. With him came many Spanish
Cavaliers, who being zealous of that Crowns Reputation and Grandezza put
themselves to serve as Volunteers under this new Governor; he brought also a
million and a half of Ducates, which was brought after him in Galleys. But the
Duke of Savoy and the Marshal, being with no great honor driven from before
Valenza, and hearing how ill they were spoken of in the Court of France, and
particularly the Duke, (who heard himself taxed of double dealing,) they
endeavored to give better satisfaction to the Court then yet they had done, by
recovering their lost Reputation. Having therefore mustered their Forces at
Villata, which was yet in their possession, they went to the Lomellina; and
going to Candia, whither 400 Foot were sent by the new Governor, they met with
some opposition; but making themselves presently masters of the place, the 400
Foot were sent prisoners to Gasalle: And not thinking that place convenient for
their design, as being too far from the Poe, they went lower, and took
Sartiranna; where were 200 Foot, who being as the others, forced to yield,
were, as the others were, sent prisoners to Casalle; from hence they march to
Bremi, a Town upon the Poe, with whose situation being satisfied, they
resolved to make use of it for a groundwork of their premeditated designs.
For considering that, by casting a Bridge over here, they might overrun the
Country of Allessandria and of Tortona, and the Lomellina and Country of Pavia
joining thereupon, they thought that when they should have fortified themselves
there, they might make a good part of the State of Millain, on each side of the
River, subject to their commands. Falling therefore with all diligence to do
what they intended, they within a short space erected there a Fort Royal, big
enough to receive an indifferent Army; and putting thereinto a good Garrison,
they thought they might keep firm footing in the State of Millain, and lay a
good foundation for the further designs they had upon that State; and if they
should do no more, they thought they should win much glory and reputation in
keeping a quarter in that State, and an almost impregnable bulwark, by which
they hoped to have subjugated part of that, the whole whereof they so much
thirsted after: The Duke of Savoy was thought to be a chief plotter of this,
being defirous to cancel the sinister opinion out of the French, which they had
conceived of him, by reason of what had happened before Valenza, by giving them
this place in lieu thereof, which was of greater consequence, and a more
convenient seat: And therefore he did not only assist the already begun
Fabric by his care and diligence, but stuck not sometimes to work thereupon
with his own hands as a private Soldier. The work was begun about the end of
November, in a time when the Lomellina having already been the seat of the War
before Valenza, was wholly destitute of victuals, forage, and of all things
else necessary for the maintenance of an Army, in a time when the earth being
covered over with Ice and Snow, and the ways deep, it was impossible they could
be disturbed in their work; an advantage which was well repaid, by the
prejudice that the same difficulties occasioned to the laborers, and to the
whole French Army; for the Soldiers not being able to resist the bitterness of
the season, and the scarcity of victuals, so many of them died, as in a short
time, and before the Fort was finished, they were reduced to a very small
number; yet the work was finished, and abundantly provided of all warlike
necessaries; but not being able to tarry in so desolate a Country for the
scarcity of victuals, a sufficient Garrison being left there, all the rest of
the Soldiery went out, and ran plundering up and down, some in the lower
Montferrat, some in the parts about Alessandria, where taking Towns, they, with
much rigor used toward the Inhabitants, got together as much victuals as they
could, and brought it all speedily into the new Fort. The Duke of Parma was not
present at this building, being gone to Paris to negotiate his own interests
with the King, hoping not only to be rewarded and honored, but to be by him
assisted in the maintaining of his Dominions, which in his absence were exposed
to the assaults of the enemy; in defense whereof, the Duke of Savoy, were it
either to regain the Kings favor, and to cancel all shadows of suspicion, or
to ease Piedmont from quartering, he sent the Marquess Villa with 1800 Horse,
and 4000 Foot, to boot with the remainder of the Parma Forces, to go jointly to
the defense of those Sta^es. The Marquess marching out of Cassalle, and having
without any opposition crossed through the Country of Alessandria, came to
Scrivia a River which runs near Tortona; but the new Governor, who hearing of
this marching, was before hand, got into that City, hoping assuredly to hinder
the enemies passage over that River; to which purpose he placed two pieces of
Cannon, and some Sacres, upon a certain rise on the inward bank, on the
opposite side whereof the enemy marched already; and he also placed all his
Musketeers there: he also sent a Troop of Dragoons beyond the River to discover
the enemy, which were driven back over the River by the Marquess his Guard, and
forced with much loss to get within shelter of the Artillery on the other side.
The Marquess drew out his men in battle array to venture foording his men over;
and after having skirmished a while, finding himself inferior to the enemy
both in Forces and situation desisted from passing over there, and tried
whether he might not overcome the enemy by Military industry: this River is
foordable only in three places, the first in this place which was well guarded
by Tortona; another five miles lower at Castle nuovo; the third between these
two, which is called passo della Lupa. The Marquess would not venture over
here, it being so near the other place, and from him: the Prince being come to
Traghetino, within three miles of Castle nuovo, found that Villa stood
expecting him in the field with his men in order; and not thinking it fit to
face a Captain and old Soldiers proud of their late got Victory, with fresh
and unexperienced men, staid expecting new recruits from the State of Millain;
where, by order from the Governor, some 3000 Foot were in readiness to assist
the assaulted State, under Don Iovan Vasques Cornado, Governor of Cremona, and
800 Horse under Don Vincenzo Gonsaga, Lieutenant General of the Horse of the
State of Millain; who being come from the greater Cassalle, in Barques along
the Poe, to Boreto, a Town of Modena, landed there, and joined with Prince
Lewis, intending to fall jointly upon the State of Parma. Marquess Villa, at
the news of the coming of this recruit, was gone from Castle nuovo to the banks
of Poe, between Barcello and Colorno, thinking that this succor would land
there, that so he might keep them from landing; but seeing them fall lower, and
fearing what did indeed happen, that when they should be landed they would
march into the Country of Parma, he thought to oppose them at the pass of
Lenza, a little River which divides the States of Modena and Parma, upon which
there were two Bridges; upon one of the which, called Ponte della Sorbolla, he
himself stood with his men, and sent 500 men of Parma to defend the other,
thinking that the enemy would fall on by that of Sorbolla: but seeing that they
went to assault the other, and that having driven away those of Parma, not
without some loss, they were passed to this side the River, he feared that they
would overrun the Country even to the Walls of Parma, as they might well do;
wherefore leaving the Parma Militia to guard the Bridge of Sorbolla, he went
himself with his men to the Hospital St. Lazzero, to keep them from advancing
nearer the City; between the River Lenza and the City of Parma there goes a
large way, with a great Ditch on either side; the Prince and the Spanish
Commanders, thinking to charge through to the City, by that great way, they put
their men in order; and so did Villa his: a Van of 500 Musketeers marched
before the Prince his men, half on the one side, half on the other side of the
way; betwixt whom the Horse marched, and behind them the rest of the Spanish
Foot, and in the Ree^ came those of Modena, 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, in
number. The Marquess disposed of his men en Croupe; and were it either that the
Spanish Horse which advanced wanted Musketeers, or that the way through which
they came galloping was so narrow, as no more then five Horse could come on
front, it was easy for the Marquess (who already was passed over with the
Piedmont Horse) to make head against them, and to keep back and repulse the
enemies Horse by his Musketshot, who being dispersed fled, some to Castle
nuovo, some to Ponte Curone, some being love wounded, some slain. Don Martine
d'Aragona received a sore wound himself, and the Governor not appearing with
any succor, the foord was forsaken; so as not only those who were already
passed, but those that tarried behind, passed over together with the Foot,
without any gainsaying; Villa being doubly glorious, first for having deluded
the enemies advantages by his cunning, and by his valor routed their Forces,
he pursued his march, and came with his men to Castle St. Iovanni, and from
thence into the States of Piacenza and Parma; and having distributed his men in
these States, instead of being a guard and defense unto them, he drew a new war
and a new enemy upon them; for he had no sooner refreshed his men, but that he
entered the Dukedom of Modena with 1000 Horse, and 200 Foot, without giving any
notice thereof to the Duke of Modena; and having taken Castle nuovo del
Regiano, he made a Rendezvous of Arms there, and quartered his Horse in the
neighboring Towns, putting compositions upon them.

The Duke of Modena took this freedom ill, as he had reason to do; chiefly
finding, as it was true, that this was not done by Villa's own motion, but by
order from the Duke of Savoy, and the Marshal; and perhaps also from the Court
of France, in resentment of his parting from the League with France, without
saying any thing, and for having wholly joined with the Spanish party, when so
great a change was least looked for; it not being likely that the Marquess
would otherwise have done so great an affront to a Prince, who was son to a
sister of the Duke of Savoy, whose Captain General he was: the Duke of Modena
thinking therefore how to defend himself, and how to resent so great an
affront, mustered 4000 foot, and 1000 horse of the trained Bands of the State,
with whom, and with two field pieces, he sent his uncle Prince Lewis, to oppose
those who had entered his State in hostile manner; and having sent news to the
Governor of Millain of this unlooked for affront, he expected good succor and
assistance desended by the same forces; he therefore placed his design on the
passage at Castelnuovo, as being further off and unguarded; so as while he kept
his files in order upon the side opposite to Tortona, he feigned as if he would
try his fortune over that foord, that he might so keep the Governor at bay,
but ordered his horse to go down the river toward Castelnuovo; where foording
over the river without any opposition, he made himself master of the further
shore; and when he thought his horse were well advanced, he withdrew his foot,
and marched after them; the Governor being too late aware of the Enemies
purpose, began to doubt that he might pass over that foord which was unguarded;
wherefore he dispatched away Don Martine d'Aragona speeedily thither with the
greatest part of the horse, and some foot, to the end that he might be there
before him, to defend the passage; but with express order, that if when he
should become thither, he should find the enemy were not yet come near the
foord, he should endeavor to keep them aloof off it; and if they were come so
near, as that they were already begun to wade, he should withdraw a little into
a wood which was not far off; for that he himself, who prepared to follow him,
would come thither, when half the enemy being not well over, he might enclose
them between his men, and those of the Aragons who were in the wood; and so
having destroyed that part, the rest who were beyond the water, might be forced
to wheel about, and might easily be overtaken, and being in an enemies
country, and overpowered by numbers might be assaulted, and defeated: but the
design failed, were it either that the Aragon did not perfectly obse^ve his
orders, or that the Governor tarrying longer then he ought to have done,
marched not soon enough; for the Piedmont horse got to the foord before those
of the Aragon, who though he got to the other side with some of his fleetest
forerunners at the same time when those of Piedmont entered the river, and
endeavored to munite the bank with the militia of Castelnuovo, and to hinder
their passage; yet instead of retreating to the wood, and affording time for
the Governor to advance, he gave order that his horse, leaving the foot
behind, should advance as fast as they could; which the horse observing, they
came thither, when the first part of the enemies horse, on the head whereof was
Marquess Villa, having overcome the opposition made on the other side, had
already foorded over with Musketeers otherwise. He placed 200 Musketeers on the
Front, which were entertained by a great squadron of horse, 200 more Musketeers
were on the right hand of the horse, a good part stood behind some trees that
were cut down, which served for a Trench; he fortified a place behind him with
Parma's Soldiers, to serve him for a retreat, in case he should not be able to
resist so many men; nor herewith content, he did not fill up the whole breadth
of the way with Artillery, to the end that if he were forced to retreat, he
might do it without confusion, contrary to what the enemy did, who promising
themselves assured victory, provided not any place of retreat: the Skirmish was
fought with much valor and courage, and the Spaniards came very hot on at
first, thinking to discompose the enemies ranks at the very first onset; but
they were soon deceived, meeting with as stout resistance, for above two hours
space; but at last being overpowered in numbers, Villa was forced to retreat,
which he did without disorder, by the part of that way, which he discreetly had
left open: Don Vincenzo Gonsaga pursued them fiercely, as also Baron
Battavilla, and Count Arese; who being opposed by Don Mauritio of Savoy, with
his regiment, they met with some resistance; but not long after the first
falling on Scipione Fiesco, brother to the Prince of Messerano, and Captain
Guirini were taken Prisoners, and many were wounded and slain; so as not able
to make his party good any longer, he was disordered, and retreated without
confusion also, by that part of the way which was left open; and certainly they
would all have been certainly ruined, had not Marquess Villa, who had all this
while assisted in the fight, rallied all the valliantest of his men, and
putting himself on their head, fought undauntedly, and withstood the violence
of the enemies, who thinking themselves sure of victory, came up in close
ranks, and cheerfully pursued the chase; and though the Piedmontese met with
hard usage by the Musket Shot, wherewith many of them were slain, yet did they
so resolutely resist, and the assailants were played upon so fast by the
Musketeers, who were placed behind those trees which being cut down, served
them for a rampire, or trench, as Gonsaga, Battavilla, and Arese, who fought on
the head of the horse, being wounded, Villa easily disordered the enemies
horse, being now without leaders; and forced them afterward to fly back in
disorder; Villa pursued them till night, which came soon on, and then he left
free passage for the enemy to fly, and to retreat; and he bringing back with
him above a hundred prisoners, and of these some of the Chiefest, he retreated
victoriously toward Parma: the City refusing to receive in so many men, shut
the gates upon them, but took in the Captains, who were nobly treated by the
nob^lity of Parma, and the rest were sent to quarter in S. Secondo, Soragna,
and in Fontanello. At the same time that this succor was sent directly from
Millain to the Duke of Modena, the Governor would also assist his State, and
his affairs by diversion; he therefore ordered Don Carlo della Gatta, to enter
the Dukedom of Piacenza with 4000 foot, 600 horse, and six pieces of Artillery;
who in obedience thereunto, sat down immediately before Castle S. Iovanni, the
first Town of that Dukedom confining upon the State of Millain; and placing his
Artillery against the walls of that Town which were weak, and old, and not
lined with earth, the Townsmen, who saw they could not resist, surrendered the
Town; and Gatta entering thereinto fell to take the Castle, wherein were 120
French men, who after 15 days siege were forced to give it up; during which
time the Governor desired that the horse, who were not employed in that
service, might over run, and lay waste the country of Piacenza, to help the
Duke of Modena, yet more by diversion, which was molested by Marquess Villa:
wherefore the Marquess of Carracena, who commanded them, chose out 300 of the
best horse, and went first to assault 250 French horse, who were quartered in
the Towns three miles from Piacenza; he fortunately routed them, and chased
them till they came to a certain rivolet which ran cross the way, which when
the French had past, they rallied, and faced about, and being routed again by
Carracena, they got under a Town called Rottofreno, from whence some Foot came
forth to aid them, they fell to skirmish the third time; wherein Carracena
being sore hurt in the leg by a Musket Shot, he retreated and gave over the
fight; so as the French Horse which pursued them, routed them, and had the
slaughter of them till they came to Castle San' Iovanni, which when they were
come near unto, the rest of the Horse which were there coming forth, together
with a Foot Company to assist them, they fell into further disorder; for this
succor coming the same way as those that were pursued did, they were broken
and disordered by their own men, who fled back by the same way: in this action
about 100 of Carracena's Horse were slain, and some taken prisoners, amongst
which Beccaraia a Captain of Horse, who was first sore wounded; and yet the
entrance of Gatta and Carracena into the Territories of Piacenza was not to no
purpose; for it freed the Duke of Modena from having his Country molested by
the Piedmontese; it being necessary to send for Marquess Villa back to relieve
the parts about Piacenza; so the Duke of Modena being free from this
disturbance, had leisure to resent himself, and to take Rossenna, a Town
belonging to the Duke of Parma, which was wholly environed by the Territories
of Modena. The Spaniards took likewise Colorno, a Castle belonging to the Duke
of Parma, considerable for its strength, and for the opportunity which it
afforded of passing to the City of Parma; and some months before, Fiombo, and
Guadamiglio, two Towns in the Territories of Piacenza lying beyond the Poe,
were taken by the Marquess of Carracena. But the Governor, that he might
revenge himself yet further upon the Duke of Parma, gave order to Gerardo
Gambacorta, General of the Neapolitan Horse, that he should enter his
Territories with two Dutch Regiments, the one of Horse, conducted by Count
Slic, the other of Foot led on by Colonel Gild' Ais; and that they should
proceed further against him. The Duke of Savoy and the Marshal thought that it
would redound to the discredit of the League, if they should suffer those
States to be invaded whilst they stood idly looking on with their fingers
underneath their girdles, and should behold the misfortunes of that their
Confederate Prince, whereby they might fall into the displeasure of the King
and Court of France, the King having given the care of preserving his Dominions
in charge to them; since therefore they could not directly assist by
opposition, they resolved to do it by diversion; so joining their Forces, and
making up a body of 9000 Foot, and 500 Horse, the Marshal went therewith from
Vercelli, and passing over the Sesia, took Palestre, an open Town, where there
was no Garrison, from whence he went to Confienza, and then to Robbio, where
there were some small Foot Garrisons; and taking them upon conditions, he
passed with all his men over la Gogua, a River in Lomellina, and went to
Vespolano, where for two hours space he was stoutly resisted by the Townsmen,
who when they were able to do no more, quit the Town, and retreated to the
Castle: The Marshal entered the Town, and quartered his men thereabouts; but at
so small a distance, as they might easily come together and jointly defend
themselves, in case they should be assaulted: The Governor hearing of this new
commotion, sent Orders immediately every where, that all the Foot and Horse
should meet about the Tessino; he recalled Gambacorta with his Dutch Regiments
from the parts about Piacenza; and fearing that the enemy might fix their eyes
upon Vigevano, he ordered them to march with all diligence toward that City;
whereinto having formerly sent 100 Spaniards, he went from Millain to
Biagrassa, where Gambacorta was come that very night with two Dutch Regiments,
and with the Horse from the Country of Piacenza; and there being only a hundred
Spaniards and some few Dutch in Vigevano, he feared that the Marshal might keep
that City from succor, if the Marshal coming to the Tessino, should hinder the
passing over of that River, and consequently it would be taken; wherefore he
commanded Gambacorta that with all speed he should pass over the Tessino, and
should secure that City and all the adjacent Towns from being sacked, and from
inroads; all which being punctually performed by Gambacorta, the Governor
passed with the rest of the men to Vigevano, where he tarried some days to
expect a Regiment of Dutch, conducted by the Baron di Lezer, who was to come
shortly, and also to tarry for the Artillery which was come out of Pavia, and
could not be long a coming. In this interim some of the Marshals Forces
advanced to a little weak Town called Civagliana, which they took, leaving the
Castle unattempted, which they would not tarry to take, the enemy being so
near; but the Governor, who was in Vigevano with 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse,
thought it stood not with his honor, that the enemy should advance armed
further into the State of Mallain; and should continually grieve the
Inhabitants, sometimes with quarter, sometimes with composition: he therefore
resolved to march into the field, and keep them from such insulting; he went
straight to Novara, intending to come upon the back of the enemy, that so by
keeping him from returning he might easily vanquish him; being gone a few miles
he heard news, that the Marshal was gone with his Army out of Vespolno, and
that he was ready to give him Battle if he should advance; and that to that
purpose he had sent some Forces that morning to Sastrego, a Town near Strano,
where the Governor was to quarter that night: the truth is, that the Marshal
was advanced with 1500 Dragoons, and 1000 Foot, to Serano, and leaving them all
in a certain Wood, he himself advanced to discover Serano, where he intended to
lie that night, and so to advance toward the Tessino. The Governor hearing
this, which was also confirmed unto him by Gambacorta, who was so far advanced,
and got so near the Enemy, as he could not retreat, he sent him forthwith order
to fall upon him; assuring him that he would come in unto his succor with the
rest of the Forces. Gambacorta was not slow in executing his orders, nor the
Marshal less slow then he in receiving the onset; thinking that the whole body
of the Enemies Army was not there, but only some Troops of Horse which went
for forage, or to quarter in the neighboring Towns: So as falling together by
the ears, they fought a while with equal Valor and Fortune, till two Troops of
Dragoons of the Spanish party advanced; who gave fire so fast, as beginning to
disorder the first ranks, which were already well advanced, all the rest were
routed by the Commissary General of the Cavalry, Don Ferdinandod' Heredia, and
turning their Horses heads began to run, and were pursued for a mile and a half
by Gambacorta; till being come to the wood where the ambush lay, they staid.
Gambacorta doubting the coming of the Governor, whom he saw not yet appear,
and seeing that the Enemies faced about, and prepared to resist feared an
ambush, and forbore pursuit; nor durst he with unequal Forces run the hazard
which he apprehended, as if the Governor had come he would have done, and so
have gotten a fuller victory, for which he deserved to be accounted not only a
valiant, but a cautious and prudent Commander. For being content with the
slaughter and imprisonment of many, he very seasonably withdrew himself and
his men from the imminent danger. There were slain in this conflict about 150
of the Marshals men, and some 60 taken prisoners; and all the mischief befell
the Duke of Savoy's Horse, which fought more stoutly then the rest; and
hereupon some dispute arose between the Duke and the Marshal: The Duke
complaining that the Marshal, upon the first declension of the fight, got upon
a fleet Horse and to save his life abandoned the Dukes Horse. Those that were
worsted retreated from Vespolano to Palestre; and the Governor going to
Novara, pursued the Enemy, who though they made some show of facing him, yet
when they heard he was come near them, they past back over the Sesia, and
retreated into Piedmont: Hastily freeing that State, which but a little before
they had so resolutely assaulted. And as this assault proved unfortunate for
the assailants, so neither had the diversion intended that effect which was
hoped for: For the States of Parma and Piacenza were molested in the interim;
the Duke of Modena was assisted in the State of Parma, and the Kings men,
notwithstanding this unexpected assault, were not sent for back from the parts
about Piacenza. But both the Dukedoms of Parma and Piacenza, were sacked,
fired, and laid desolate; and yet was the Duke of Modena sent to by the Pope to
forbear all Hostillity against the Territories belonging to the Church, and was
desi^ed by his Wife, who was Sister to the Duke of Parma, to come to
composition; and the great Duke of Tuscany, Brother in law to the Duke of
Parma, interposed himself also in the business of compounding; wherefore the
Duke withdrew his Soldiers to within his own State. But notwithstanding, the
Spaniards, who were come to succor Modena, forbore not to ransack the Country,
and to commit other hostile acts; Carlo della Gatta, having taken Castle St.
Iovanni, went to Rottofreno, a Town 7 miles from Piacenza, and not far from the
Poe, took it, fortified it, and put a Garrison of 600 Foot, and 200 Horse into
it, which curbed and troubled the whole Country. It was likewise thought fit to
molest the States in those parts which lay nearest Genoa; 400 Foot were sent to
Frederico Imperiale, under Sergeant Major Francesco Tuttavilla, and two Troops
of Horse, the one Curassiers, the other Dragoons; who together with some of
Prince Doria his Militia, being raised in Bobbio, went against Valdetara, a
large Town belonging to the Duke of Parma; where the Horse not being yet come,
70 of the Trained Bands of the Country were entered; but L'Imperiale making
himself master of the parts thereabouts, and causing two piece of Cannon to
advance, it yielded: That Town being taken and well garrisoned, he went to
destroy Le Ferriere, a very advantageous place belonging to the Duke of Parma,
to which the way lies by a very narrow passage at the foot of a high Mountain,
called Della Penna, wherein was a Garrison of the Duke of Parma's subjects;
L'Imperiale came against it with 500 Foot, and the Troops of Dragoons; the Pass
after the first volley was abandoned, all men running shamefully away; passing
on, he came to Le Ferriere, wherein there being a Garrison of the Countrymen,
with some pieces of Artillery and Morter-peices, he met with some resistance;
but it lasted but a while, for it yielded the same night that Imperiale came
before it, and all the Forges and instruments thereunto belonging, were
forthwith destroyed; which was done by order from the Governor. Moreover, the
Soldiers were permitted to plunder the whole Country, who got thereby great
booty in cattle and victuals. Some few days after he past to the plain of
Piacenza, where he found the whole Country forsaken by the Inhabitants who
fled, and Imperiale advanced no further; for hearing that greater number of the
Dukes Forces, both Horse and Foot, drew nigh, he kept his men on the side of
the Mountain, expecting greater recruits from Millain, which did not only not
come; (for at Millain they endeavored to send greater Forces on that side
against the Dukes dominions;) but these very men were sent for back, to be used
in more necessary employments. The State of Millain was molested by the French
at the same time that the Duke of Parma's Country was annoyed by the Spaniards:
For the Garrison of Bremi, overrunning the adjacent parts of the State of
Millain, made themselves be soundly felt; and on the other side, the French
were much afflicted with sickness, occasioned by the ill air, and marshes
thereabout; whereof 40 and 50 dying on a day, they within a few months lost
above 4000 of their men; and it was thought, what between the building and
maintaining of that Garrison, that Fort cost the French more men, then the
taking of such another would have done; and diminishing not only by the death
of so many, but also by the running away of multitudes, the French Army already
was reduced to so small a number, as it could not have subsisted long, had it
not received new and great recruits. Nor did the Kings men suffer sore
hardships here only, but the Inhabitants of the County of Como shared in the
like. The Duke of Rohan being (as has been said) after the rout given before
Morbegno to Serbellone, peacefully possessed of the Valtoline, and having with
him about four thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, was impatient to think he
should lie idle; and envying the Marshal, who made himself be so terribly felt
from the Fort of Bremi, and who did so enrich himself by booty, desired to do
the like himself, and to get more footing in that State: He therefore made some
small barques in the Valtoline, which being brought in the beginning of the
Spring, 1636. to the bank of the little Lake, full of Soldiers, he put them
into the water; and going to Pradel, he took it; and going by the way called
Francesca, and thence to the three Pievi, Towns belonging to the State of
Millain, he burnt and consumed them, together with many other neighboring
Towns. He came next (but without Artillery) to Fort Medegin^, whither Lodovico
Guasco being sent a little before with a strong Garrison, Rohan proceeded no
further, but retreated to the Valtoline.

But greater preparations for War then those of Rohan, or the Marshal, were
made the preceding Winter in all parts. Nine Troops of Horse, and nine
Regiments of Foot, were newly fallen down from the Alps; and the King of France
having set his heart upon being Master of the Mediterranean, he assembled many
Ships and Galleoons in Britany and Provence, and increased the number of
Galleys in Provence, wherewith he gave out he would do great things. On the
other side, the Spaniard made no lesser preparations, as well to defend his own
Dominions, as to offend those of others: They had taken order for four
Regiments in Germany, two of Horse, and two of Foot, whereof one was
Curassiers, the other Dragoons, which they expected shortly; and being to pass
through the Swissers Country, they had already sent moneys to those Cantons, to
the end that being paid, they should not hinder their passage: Moreover 3000
Spaniards were entered the State of Millain, sent from several parts, and 1000
Horse from the Viceroy of Naples, who being sent through Romagna, into the
State of Modena, were already come into that of Millain: But before these, the
French Regiments appeared in Piedmont; and the Duke of Parma, was also come
thither, who was returned from France loaded with promises, and satisfied with
the Courts good intentions and effects; for he brought precise Orders to the
Duke of Savoy, and to the Marshal, to re-place him in his States; in obedience
whereunto, the Duke of Savoy went anticipately into the Field, together with
the Duke of Parma, and the Marshal; their chief intention was, as the effects
did afterward demonstrate, to put Parma into his State; which when they had
done, they should, with his men, and those of Villa's which they should there
find, assault the State of Millain, either by the territories of Tortona, or
by those of Cremona, whilst the Duke of Savoy, and the Marshal should do the
like by that of Novara, and by the Lomellina; or if they liked it better, they
should turn upon the State of Modena, and oblige the Spaniards to assist that
Prince with good forces, who for having abandoned the French party, and adhered
to the Spanish, they desired to suppress, and thus by either of these ways to
divide the Spanish force^, and make them less able to defend the State of
Millain. Thus the Duke going from Vercelli, and the Marshal from Cassalle, they
joined their forces together, which amounted in all to about 18000 foot, and
4000 horse, and past over the Poe at Bremi, and the Tanar^ at Filizzano, and
from thence advanced to Nizza della Paglia, to repossess the Duke of his
Dominions: The Governor was then far inferior to them in men, the regiments
not being yet come which were expected from Germany; so as not thinking it fit
to oppose them in open field, he resolved to fortify the right bank of Scrivia
with a great Trench, which beginning from the skirts of the Appenine should run
along the river to where it falls into the Poe, which would be above fifteen
miles in length, which the river it self served for a ditch, the river being
very dangerous to wade over, by reason of the swift current, and which
therefore made this fortification unaccessible; so as though it seemed not to
be defensible, as requiring many more Soldiers to defend it then the Governor
had to place there; yet since the river admitted access to the trench, but in
very few places, those places being well munited, it was sufficiently well
provided for elsewhere, by the swiftness of the river, and by some Corpse de
Guard placed in convenient places, which might hinder any desperate attempts
which might be made by the enemy where they should think them weakly guarded;
and yet the Governor being desirous that the defense should not be defective,
he brought thither all the Soldiers that he could get either in the State of
Millain or elsewhere, even to the lessening of the usual garrisons, and most
important places; he did not only summon the common Soldiers thither, but the
Officers, and best experienced Commanders; nay, he himself would assist there
in his own person; nor did his counsel herein, nor his expense, and labor in
that work prove vain; for the enemies being as desirous to overcome that
Trench, as the Governor was to defend it, they sent the most experienced of
their army to discry it, who finding it untakeable, and unpassible they gave
over the thought of attempting it; they thought it not good to expose their
Soldiers at one and the same time to the swiftness of the river, and to the
shot of the Spaniards; they therefore resolved to try another way; they went
from Nizza, and past back over the Poe, and coasted along the left side of the
river, till being come to Giarvola, they had past by the head of the Trench of
Tortona, which terminated on the opposite bank: here they thought to pass the
Duke over into the Country of Piacenza, in their Boats which followed them
down the stream; and so they thought to cousen the Governor; but they found
new difficulties, which opposed them also in this their enterprise; they first
saw Marquess Spinola with many Musketeers on the other store, ready to hinder
their passage; wherefore not thinking it fit to attempt it there, they marched
on; hoping they might advance so far, as that they might find Marquess Villa on
the other shore in the confines of Piacenza, with his own men, and with those
French who were in that State under Count S. Paul; who might receive the Duke,
and secure the passage over the river; Villa, upon orders received from the
Duke, was really joined with Count S. Paul, and was marched thitherward; and
having in his passage recovered the Town and Castle of S. Iovanni, was come to
Arena, a Town in the Territories of Pavia, to receive the Duke, whom they
expected suddenly to see on the other shore; and having driven away some horse
which were in Arena, they kept in those parts; but the Dukes met with new and
greater oppositions, which kept them from advancing so far; Count Ferrante
Bolognino, a Knight of Jerusalem, one who had been long versed in the wars of
Flanders, and who was newly come to Italy, to serve as Camp-master in these
Wars; having received orders from the Governor to hinder the passing over the
Poe, had made some fortifications upon the mouth of Tessino, and had drawn
thither also many mills, upon which, as also upon the banks, he had placed many
Cannons and Musketeers; So as the two Dukes finding these new difficulties, and
oppositions as hard to overcome as those of Serivia, they past no further on;
but betook themselves to make inrodes into the Country, and to prejudice the
Towns thereabouts; which causing great fear in those of Pavia, they knew not
how they should be able to defend themselves from being sacked, if the enemy
should draw near their walls; and truly there not being so much as one Soldier
in the Town, (for the Governor, as you have heard, had sent for them all to
the Trench) the danger of that City was not inconsiderable; not only in
respect of plunder, but also that it would be very hard to get the enemy who
was very strong, out, when he should be possessed thereof; the Governor
apprehending this sent Spinola immediately to defend it, with five hundred
Musketeers, which yet were not sufficient to free those Citizens from fear, who
for their greater safety, and to keep the enemy from their walls, were resolved
to break down an arch of that noble and magnificent bridge, which close to the
City stands over the Tessino; but these and other provisions which were h^d,
were more then was needful for the preservation of Pavia, for the Confederats,
letting slip so fair an occasion, whereby they might have conveyed the Duke
safely into his Country, drew back, though they were not pursued, and returned
to Bremi; where not giving over the thought of conveying the Duke into his
Country, they resolved to make the enemy forgo the Trench by a lusty
diversion; which being abandoned, they might pass him over with a few men into
the country of Piacenza; they knew that the continent of Novara, as being that
part which of all the State of Millain was farthest off from the Trench, was
totally without Garrison, or defense; wherefore they thought, that by going
thither with the main body of their army, they might cause the Trench to be
abandoned; so being come to Bremi, they sent the Duke of Parma with 3000 foot,
and 300 horse toward Nizza, to the end that when the Trench should be
forsaken, he might pass with those men into his own dominions; they afterward
gave out that they intended three things, to the end that the Governor being
to defend them all might speedily leave the passage over the Trench free to the
Duke: The first was to sit down before Valenza; The second, to go take in
Sandoval; And the third, to march strait toward Novara: The Governor hearing
these designs published, did at the same time make two provisions; he sent Don
John di Gattai with 3000 foot, and some horse, to succor Valenza, whether Don
Francisco di Melo resolved to go soon after; and he sent Gambacorta with the
greatest part of the Cavalry, to relieve Rottofreno, wherein there was but a
small Garrison, for that part thereof were sent for to the Trench: wherefore it
was straightly besieged by Marquess Villa, who finding the Dukes expectation
vanished by withdrawing of the Leagues Army, and hearing how the forces were
lessened about that place, did not let sl^p the occasion of going to take it;
both these provisions were well warranted; for Garrai getting into Valenza,
whilst the enemies army looked on, endeavored sollicitously to perfect the
Fort S. Diego, which was already begun upon the Banks of Poe, in the same place
where the Fort was much guarded the foot of the Bridge of Valenza, toward the
Lomellina, that upon the like occasions that place might be secured; which Fort
was soon perfected, or at least put into a condition of convenient defense; so
as being assaulted by the French whilst they marched from Bremi to Novara, it
did not only resist the assault, but two hundred horse going forth under the
shelter of the Artillery of the Fort, they repulsed the assailants, and slew
some of them, and in particular the Ma^quess of Canesi, a prime Cavalier of the
French, and of great expectation, and Gambacorta, who went to Rottofreno,
finding the passes well blocked up, and fortified by Villa, returned back, not
doing any thing; yet the preservation of that place being of great consequence,
he was sent thither again with the same Cavalry, accompanied with a good
strength of Musketeers; and being come thither he did not only bring in the
relief, but made the enemy remove just when the Town was ready to surrender;
which mean while notice being come to the Trench, that the enemies Army was
marched toward the territories of Novara; the Governor being very careful of
those parts which were wholly unprovided of any Garrison, sent Don Martine d'
Aragona and Lodovico Guasco away with all speed, and with a good strength of
men to mark what way the enemy went, and to defend the Towns of those parts as
well as they could from them; and to the end that the enemy might not attempt
passing over the Tessino in the Barques which usually go thereupon, he gave
order that they should all be detained either in Pavia, or in the greater Lake,
from whence Tessino comes. The Governor continued (notwithstanding) with the
main Body of his Army at the Trench; except it were those who were sent to
Valenza when the enemy drew near the Town, and who returning were busied in
keeping that pass blocked up from the Duke; the Duke was come already to Nizza
with the men that were allotted him; where he tarried till he might see the
Trench abandoned, that he might pass into his own Dominions; whilst the Army of
the League, being come into the Territories of Novara, overran that Country,
firing and laying all things waste where they came, sacking some Towns, and
bringing others under composition; and as it went to Fontaneto, a Town not much
fortified, but of much consequence for entertaining Commerce with Vercelli and
Piedmont, the Towns men who confided in the Castle which was there, made some
resistance; but being overcome on the fourth day, they were miserably sacked,
in revenge for the death of Marshal Toras, who was unfortunately slain by one
of the first Musket Shot that was made out of that Town; a death unworthy so
gallant a Commander, and which was very ill resented, not only by his friends,
but by his enemies, for his singular valor, and for the gallantry of what he
had done. Fontanero being taken, they talked of going to Sandoval, or to before
Novara; but a strange and unexpected accident happened, which made them think of
greater things: six French Soldiers, who according to the fashion of the
Spanish Soldiers wore red Scarffs, coming to the Tessino, feigned themselves
to be Spanish Soldiers; and seeing the Barque wherewith they cross the River,
and which is commonly called Porto, on the other shore, as he is called
Portenaro who guides it, they earnestly desired the Portenaro that he would
come and pass them over to the other side, offering him a good reward for their
waftage: the Portenaro thought them to be friends, by the red Scarffs which
they wore, and being too credulous and too greedy of gain, went to the other
side the River, and took them into his Porto, who presently slew him; and
passing over to the other side, they found the Country abandoned by the
Inhabitants, who by reason of the neerness of the enemy were fled to the tops
of Mountains; so they took some Cattle, and passing with them over the River,
they went and acquainted the Duke and the Marshal with what they had done, and
showed them how easy it was to pass over the Tessino. The enterprise was very
hopeful, and glorious beyond expectation, and was not to be despised; and so
much the rather, for that to keep in the State of Novara, as they had done till
now with little advancement, made but little for their honor; wherefore that
somewhat might be done, they thought they were forced to embrace any whatsoever
hard employment, and then much more this which was so easy, and which was so
propitiously presented to them by fortune; they were the more encouraged to
this enterprise by what little esteem was had of the enemies Forces; which
keeping still within the Trench, they thought they would not dare to encounter
them, and that at the present they would shun coming into the open field, to
keep from hazarding the welfare of the State upon the uncertainty of a Battle;
having therefore sent some Horse over the Tessino, to discover the Country and
the affairs better, they tarried expecting their return; that they might the
better ground their resolutions; and finding by what they brought back, that
they agreed, in their relation, with what the others had said, they threw over
the boats which they had brought with them in Carts, and making a Bridge of
them passed the Army over to the other side; and staid some days waiting some
happy occasion, which this so fortunate accident might present unto them; the
Bridge was thrown over near Casa della Camera; the first thing which they did
after they were passed was to break the Sprone (which is nothing else but the
keeping in of the Tessino with great stones, to the end, that the water being
thereby stopped may rise into a channel, which they call ill Naviglio, whereby
they pass even to Millain, carrying and re-carrying boats full of provision
(from the Lake whence the Tessino comes) to Millain, and which are necessary
for the City, and for the Inhabitants (who live upon the Lake) and to take away
the water from the Naviglio, that so they might streighten the City in point of
provision; and bereave it of the advantage it got thereby; they afterward
fortified themselves in Tornavento, a little Town on the left bank of the
Tessino, and extended their Fortifications to the Brughera; which is nothing
else but a Copse of many miles about where nothing grows but brush-wood or low
shrubs, which those of Lombardy call Brughi; they tarried there some days
pillaging those parts; and having no place to take, nor Mountains nor Riv^s to
pass over, nor no enemy to encounter (for Guasco was not yet come thither, and
Don Martine d' Aragona, being far short of them in numbers, who heard in Novara
that the enemies Army had passed over the Tessino, did also pass over it
himself a little lower, and was come to Bigarasso) they might march safely to
the Walls of Millain; when the enemies passage over the Tessino was heard of,
and that an infinite number of the Inhabitants thereabouts were flocked
together, with their Wives, Children, and with what else they had of most
value, as to a place of refuge, the Citizens fell into such terror and
confusion, as greater was never known in the memory of man, or was ever read of
in ancient Story. The City of Millain was bereft of defendants, and as it were,
exposed to be assaulted by the enemy, who was very strong, near at hand, and
was hourly expected to appear before the City walls; they saw the Governor and
all the chief Officers stood idly, minding only the keeping and defending of
the Trench, and that they did not at all care for the rest of the State, so as
they might keep the Duke of Parma from passing over; that this was the chief
thing whereupon all their thoughts were bent, that they cared not though the
enemy burnt, plundered, and laid the Country waste; they saw that the Army
which had been raised at the peoples so great expense, and which had suffered
such hardship in their quarters all the Winter, made nothing at all for their
sa^ety at this time of so near danger; so as the people exclaimed in the
streets against the Spaniards, and against the Governor himself; and bewailing
their miseries were nearer tumultuating, then preparing to prevent their
imminent danger: many also thinking the City lost sent away what they had, of
most precious, into the State of Venice; so as the Gates of the City were
pestered by those who believing in her safety ran thither with what best things
they had, and by th^se who not confiding in her safety fled away with what they
had of most precious, and conveyed them into safer places; they were all the
more disturbed by hearing that the Duke of Rohan was fallen down by the Valley
of Sarsina into the State of Millain, and was come near Lecco, which if he
should take, he might safely come to the City, and joining with the
Confederates Army might put for mighty things; so as in this great confusion,
many of the chief Gentlemen had recourse to Don Ranchillo, a Spaniard, and
Chancellor of the State, who in the Governors absence supplied his place,
desiring that he would use his authority, and that he would endeavor the peace
and safety of the City: he had at the same time received Letters from the
Governor who was at the Trench, of the same tenure; wherefore beating up Drums
immediately, to raise as many Citizens as he could, as well Gentlemen as
others, he distributed them upon the Walls and Gates in several places to
defend them: he also took care for repairing the walls and Gates, where it was
most requisite, whereby, and by other provisions, men began to be of better
hopes; they were chiefly quieted by the coming of Prince Borsoda Este into the
State with 2500 Dutch, who sent them immediately toward Lecco to oppose the
violence which Rohan threatened, and to keep him as far from the City as he
could; but the confusion of the Confederates was not less then that of the
Millainois, when they found themselves in an enemies Country, which was laid
waste, abandoned by the Inhabitants, and wherein the neighboring Towns not
being able to furnish food, contribution nor quarters necessary for their daily
sustenance, they were forced, not without delay, difficulty and danger, to have
them from Piedmont, and from the Continent of Novara; they therefore knew ^at
to keep there with so much inconveniency, was impossible; and that to go to
Millain, as their so happy passage did in honor bind them to do, was dangerous
and difficult; for if they should do so, they must necessarily, in the first
place, abandon the Bridge, which not being to be fortified, it was impossible
to secure; and the impossibility of securing it arose from the left side of the
Tessino, which being very high and commanded by many Hills, it was altogether
as impossible as necessary, to fortify all those Hills, so as to secure the
Bridge from battery, and to fortify them so, as that the one might be a help
to the other, and that they might all jointly concur with that which guarded
the head of the Bridge; for otherwise any one of those Hills being taken by the
enemy, and a battery being thereon placed, the Bridge must necessarily be
beaten down, the Army must be debarred the River, being in an enemies Country,
wanting the convenience of retreating, and of those succors which they were
only to expect by the Bridge; being, moreover, exposed to be insulted over by
the enemy, who (it was to be supposed) would quickly come, and fall upon them,
to their ruin and undoing: to this was added, that they heard a flying rumor,
that the Governor hearing that they were passed over the Tessino was already
removed, and was already come with his Army very near Millain; so as if they
should go thither, the Governor must either necessarily be got before them
with his Army into the City, or come upon them when they were hottest in
besieging it, or when they should have finished their Siege; in any of which
cases there appeared manifest ruin; for if he should come before they were sat
down before the City, it would be a rash and headlong resolution, to go to
assault a great City well peopled, and that they should not be able to continue
the Siege, having an enemy Army upon their backs, and that in their retreat,
which would be necessary, they were likely to receive a great blow; and that,
say they should take the City, the Soldiers would assuredly fall to plunder,
and would not obey their Captains commands, but flying from their colors, and
running about the City without any Military Discipline, nothing but ruin was
to be expected; they therefore concluded, that their going to Millain would
afford the enemy an opportunity of obtaining a signal Victory: Yet the Duke of
Savoy had much a do to keep the Marshal from going thither. Who alleged that
the pressing over the Tessino had always been dreadful to that City, and was
likely to prove so now more then ever. That therefore it behoved them to make
use of the occasion, and aspire after the victory, which they could not fail
of, if they would courageously go about it: That else they had done better
never to have passed the Tessino, then after so happily past it, to do nothing.
That to make any doubt thereof, was nothing else then to abandon the occasion
of overcoming, and to shun victory: That the French Army had never past the
Tessino, but that the issue thereof had been the entire acquisition of the
State of Millain. Wherefore then should they now forbear, when the Enemy, who
were inferior to them in Forces, and far more inferior in Courage, would
never dare to show their faces, nor hazard battle? When the people full of
confusion and fear, and moreover, very ill satisfied with the Spanish
Government, would join with the^in the ruin of so abhorred an Empire. But
reasons to the contrary, and the authority of supreme command which resided in
the Duke, prevailing over the Marshals Allegations, and the having also heard
for certain, that the Governor was at last gone from the Trench, and was come
near the City; the Marshall was forced to give way to the Dukes will, not
without much murmuring: Not proceeding therefore any further, and being forced
to go from thence by Famine, they resolved to go toward the Lake, and to take
Sesto, Anghiera and Arona, which were situated in the mouth thereof; which
believing they should take without any manner of difficulty, they thought to be
thereby masters of the whole Lake: Whereby they should command the only
passage which the Spaniards had to bring men from Germany into the State of
Millain. And not being now able to bring in any by the Valtoline, that State
would be a prey to the French Armies, when they should assault it with greater
Forces. The Duke therefore preferring the safety and advantage of this
proposal, before the airy and perilous enterprise of Millain, made the Bridge
be broken up, and ordered that the Army should march toward the Lake; putting
some of the Boats, whereof the Bridge was made, into Carts; and drawing some
against the current of the River, they marched with their Army divided by the
River; the Marshal with his French along the left side, the Duke along the
right side, with his Piedmontese. But the Governor having, in this interim,
heard of the Enemies being past over the Tessino, by messengers sent unto him
from the City, and of the confusion of that City, the desolation of the State
of Novarra, and of the Towns on this side the River, he at last left the
Trench; and sending precise orders to all those that were either in the Country
of Tortona, or in the parts about Picenza, to follow him, he past over the Poe
and the Tessino, with Don Francisco di Melo, and some others, and came to
Pavio; and without entering Millain, he went directly toward Biagrassa. He sent
Melo, notwithstanding, to Millain, to be Governor of that Castle, lest some
disaster might happen in so great confusion. For fearing lest the Enemy might
approach the City, he thought fit to put a wise Governor thereinto, and one of
authority. Melo being come thither, was very diligent in bringing Ammunition
into the Castle by night, lest if it should have been discovered, it might have
caused greater fear in the people: He also armed 1200 Horse which were come a
little before from Germany, and put the much confused Affairs of the City into
better Orders. The Horse being armed, were presently sent to Biagrassa, and
with them 13 Companies of Neapolitans; and those who were come from the French,
and from the parts about Piacenza, past over the Poe and the Gravalone, and
went to join with the Governor, who in a short time was able to muster 15000
Foot, and 5000 Horse. And whilst others were coming, the Governor went with
three Troops of Horse from Bigarassa to Tornavento, the same day that the Enemy
going from thence went toward the Lake. The Marshall hearing this, who marched
on that side the River, and was not advanced full twelve miles, halted, and
advised with the Duke, and they both resolved to return back, and go to their
former quarters of Tornavento and Brughera; for it was very probable that those
who marched on this side with the Marshal might be defeated if they should be
pursued by the Enemy, being divided by the River from their associates: For the
River, which runs very swiftly from the Lakes mouth to Tornavento, would not
suffer them to throw over the Bridge there, that so they might join their
Forces together; nor did the same swiftness of the River permit that the boats
which were drawn against the Current could come time enough to piece with the
others, before the Enemy might come upon them. Whereas on the contrary, by
returning back, the Boats which were below, would anticipately come to the
former place; so as the Bridge being speedily put together, they might meet
with their joint Forces, before they could be assaulted by the Enemy. This
Resolution was soon put on and executed; and about the going down of the day,
the Duke and the Marshal came both of them to Tornavento, the Duke on that
side, and the Marshal on this. The Marshals chief care was to fortify that
place, and the Dukes, to cast over the Bridge speedily; a little below
Tornavento, where the Enemy might advance, there was a great ditch, which had
been formerly made by the French, when they were masters of the State of
Millain, that they might bring the water of Tessino thereby, and convey it
elsewhere; which ditch, because it proved to no purpose, and had cost much
money, was then, and is yet called Panperduto, (which we may translate lost
labor) the Marshal made use of this ditch for a Trench and Parapet to his men.
For intending only to stand upon defense, he had left Monsieur Di Boisac,
Commissary of the Horse, without, with 300 Horse, that he might flank
Panperduto, and playing upon the assailants on that side, might keep them from
being assaulted. The rest of his men he kept within the ditch, where on the
Front, and on the left side, they were sheltred by the same ditch; on the right
side by the Naviglio, and on the back by the Tessino and Tornavento. Being thus
securely seated, the Marshal stayed expecting the Governor, who being returned
before the Marshal from Tornavento to Bigarassa, made his men advance to
Constanzano, within three miles of Tornavento, that he might gaul the Enemy on
the back, in case he should continue his march toward the Lake, and that he
might fight him if he should tarry by the way. The Governor came to
Constanzano, the same night that the Marshal was returned to Tornavento: And
notwithstanding that all those that were at the Trench, nor other that he
expected, were not yet come to him, and those that were already come were very
weary by their long and speedy march; yet placing his hopes of victory upon
coming before the Bridge should be perfected, which till it should be so kept,
the Enemies Forces un-united, he was ready to go to assault them; the rather
for that two hours before day Gambacorta was come to him with part of the horse
whereunto he was driven, not so much out of the danger which delay might
occasion, by giving the enemy leisure to perfect the Bridge, as for that his
Army not being able to continue in the place where they were, out of many
reasons, but especially for want of water, he could not, without much danger,
and without loss of honor, retreat, the enemy being so near; so as the choice
was turned to necessity, and the peoples murmuring made the necessity greater,
who being subject to such charges, and to such trouble in quartering, could not
endure that the War should be spun out, without hopes of ever seeing an end of
their so many sorrows and calamities; he therefore doubted that if he should
delay fighting them now that they were so near, the people might go wild, and
perhaps produce some bad effect; so as their opinions were not listened to who
thought it rashness to go in the condition they were in to assault an Army well
munited within its Works, and which, when the Bridge should be made, would
become more powerful; but the peoples crying out for battle prevailed over
these and many other considerations; and the Governor inclining to give them
satisfaction, gave order to fight; he had not now above 10000 Foot in his Camp
(for all the Foot were not yet arrived) and between four and five thousand
Horse, who by reason of the straight situation were placed behind the Foot, in
nine Squadrons; so as the Foot were to undergo the whole brunt of battle,
without receiving any help from the Horse. Marquess Spinola was by the
Governors side, and Don Francisco di Melo who was come that very night from
the Castle of Millain, out of the great desire he had to be present at this
action: The conflict, or rather the assault, began four hours after Sunrising,
on the second of June, and endured till three of the night; so as they fought
fifteen hours without any intermission, and was continued by the assailants,
with much valor and constancy, though upon so many disadvantagious terms; the
enemies were very well sheltered (as has been said) on all sides, and yet the
assailants, who gave the assault with naked breasts, and in open field,
advanced so far, as they came to push of Pike, for all the hundred horse which
were left without by the Marshal; for though they turned at first to good
purpose, to keep the assailants aloof from the Trenches; yet the Governor
having sent Gambacorta against them with five hundred horse, and after him
another squadron of as many Curassiers, commanded by Augustine Fiesco,
Gambacorta fell furiously upon the Enemy, and drove them into a wood which was
behind them; whereinto when he with his men entered, they were furiously played
upon by musket shot from the Enemies Trench, whereby some of them were slain,
amongst which Gambacorta, who was shot through the body with two Musket
bullets; A death which was esteemed a great loss; he being a gentleman of a
stout heart, good at Counsel, and well versed in military affairs, wherein he
had given good proof of his valor: wherefore his death was much resented by
the whole camp; the horse which entered the wood with him, their captain being
slain, were forced to retreat, and were pursued by the enemies horse, which (in
this the others consternation,) had time to rally themselves; they chased them
till they came to Fiesco's squadron, who did not only make head against them,
but forced the French back into the same wood; whence not daring to come forth
any more, the assailants, when that impediment was removed, had opportunity to
advance unto the Trenches; amidst all this toil and danger the heat was
excessive great, and there was no water thereabouts; so as the soldiers, hot
with continual fighting, having no shade to shelter them from the Sun, which
shone then excessive hotly, nor water wherewith to quench their thirst, they
could no longer withstand the extreme heat, which consumed them both within,
and without. Serjant Major Octaviano saw a Windmill somewhat far from the place
of fight, but well guarded by the enemy; he went thither with a good many
Musketeers, and driving the Defendants away, not without much contest, he
became master thereof, and opened unto the thirst-burnt Soldiers a large vein
of water, who as soon as they heard thereof forsook their ranks, and without
any respect ran confusedly in crowds to refresh themselves therewith; this
refreshment enabled the army to continue the fight more vigorously; and the
Governor hearing what refreshment the Army had received, ordered Sauli to have
a great care of that station, and not to abandon it without particular order
from him; but all this while the victory was far off, the Duke of Savoy having
remade the Bridge, past over with his fresh-men to this side the river, and
brought very seasonable succor to the French, who were ready to forsake the
field; by whose coming though the defense was much strengthened, yet did not the
assailants fail to play their part, but kept the field as before; and therefore
though the Dukes arrival took from them the glory of victory, yet was it not
sufficient to make them losers; at last that which the night could not do, the
wearyness of the soldiers did, which put an end to the assault three hours
after Sunset; the assailants departed in good order, not losing one man in the
retreat, being well backed by the Cavalry; but this was more then needed; for
not any of the enemy (a thing no^ often read of) came out of their Trenches, to
pursue them; their end being only to keep their quarters, they thought they
had done enough to keep from being driven from thence; or peradventure, the
Gallantry showed that day by the assailants made them keep in; but because the
place where the sight was was incapable of quarter, being nothing but
brush-wood, without water, save that of the Mill, without Trees, without
fortifications, or forradge for the Horse, which had born armed men all that
day, without either food or rest, they were forced to go quarter at Biagarassa,
which was fifteen miles off; this business decided the difference between the
Duke and the Marshal touching going to Millain; and the Army that was assaulted
had the honor, though not the title of victory, which was due to it by
Military law, for having kept it is station; and it would have carried away
entirely the title of Victory, if the Duke of Parma, who was the chief occasion
and end of these conflicts, had made use of the occasion of passing over the
^rench at Tortona at the same time when it was abandoned by the Governor, and
had so past happily into his Dominions. This Prince, as you have heard, was
sent from Bremi to Nizza, with a convoy of three thousand Foot, and three
hundred Horse; to the end that the going of the Consederates army toward the
territories of Novara being likely to draw the Governor, with his men, from
defending the Trench, to defend these parts, the Duke might make his way by
that Trench, when it should be abandoned, and pass securely into the Country
of Piacenza. The business succeeded as it was designed, and better; for the
Governor being forced by the unexpected passage of the French over the
Tessino, hastily to forsake the French which he left guarded by Carlo della
Gatta, with only five hundred foot, too small a number by much for the large
extent thereof, and the weather being then very dry, and the Scrivia very
shallow, it had been easy for the Duke to pass the Trench, and come into his
States; and if, as easily he might, he had done so, what greater glory could
the Confederates have won, then to have then put that Prince happily and
honorably into his Dominions; and that whereas to keep them from doing so the
Governor would force them to fight with so much disadvantage, against the
Trench of Tortona; they to effect it, by better and more advised counsels had
compelled him to abandon that Trench; nor had their glory ended here; for they
might moreover have boasted to have almost totally freed the Dukes Dominions,
and to have brought his Convoy safe into the territories of Piacenza; which
being joined to the forces which were there already might have defended that
Prince from being injured by the Spanish forces; which successes would
assuredly have been glorious, and memorable, if the Duke of Parma had
co-operated to perfecting of the common ends and Counsels; the reasons which
hindered the Duke of Parma from doing so may be guest at by a letter which he
writ to the Duke of Savoy, in answer to one written to him by the said Duke,
two days before the conflict at Tornavento; wherein Parma was exhorted to
advance, and get into his Dominions by the Trench which the enemy had
abandoned; whereunto Parma answered the day after what had happened at
Tornavento; that it was impossible for him to undertake that journey, for want
monyes; that moreover he wanted victuals, munition, and carriages to convey his
baggage, though it were but little; and that it was impossible for him, though
he should make never so much diligence, to repair so many wants; especially
since he who was deputed to defray the expenses had refused to pay a small sum
of money which he had desired; he also said that by the convoy which was given
him he had no power to command, nor to make the Soldiers obey him; so as he
could not make use of them who were become very contumacious; for though, at
first, they seemed very willing to serve him, yet not long after they had
altered their minds at the instigation of others, who had suggested unto them,
that they should not be satisfied in their pay, when they should be come into
his Country; wherefore perceiving that ill blood began to be bred amongst
them, and that this malady began to spread abroad in the multitude, it had so
infected them, as many of them had run away that very night; and that therefore
he had given them leave to go unto the Camp, to the end that his Majesty's
affairs might suffer no prejudice by their absence; and parting that very night
from Nizza with seven other horse, he went toward the Sea, whither being come
about break of day he hired a little Vessel at Voltri, and steering directly
toward Lerici, and passing incognito through the Luniggiana, he came unknown
and almost unaccompanied into the same City from whence he departed ten months
before, so nobly attended by Lords and Soldiers, full of high and generous
designs, like one who had returned from war in triumph; and yet when he was
come home, he seemed more distasted with his success, then sorry for what he
had done. Marquess Villa, by reason of new advertisements which he had
received, was gone with the Piedmont Horse and Foot to Voghera, to assist the
Duke in passing over the Trench; but hearing that he was gone toward the Sea,
intending to go by that way into his States, he resolved to march to Piedmont
whither he was sent for by the Duke of Savoy: he therefore went from Voghera to
Castle nuovo upon the Scrivia, where refreshing his Soldiers and his Horses,
he went strait toward the Trench which was not far from Castle nuovo, and
making a sufficient gap by Mattockes and Spades, he passed through it, so near
Tortona as he was saluted by the Artillery, though without prejudice; whereby
the Duke might know how glorious an action he had let slip. Having once more
passed through the Territories of Alessandria, with like happy success as he
had done before, the Country being unfurnished of Soldiers, he came without
any opposition to Asti, and from thence to the Duke, who was still with the
Marshal at Tornavento, that they might not lose the glory which they had won by
making that place good against so fierce an assault; and as if they expected a
second assault, they seemed not at all to fear it, but stood fixed, and
resolved to receive it; but not being re-assaulted, nor being able to tarry
there any longer with so many dis-accommodations, and being greatly molested
with abundance of Horse flies or Hornets, which the dead unburied carcases had
either drawn thither, or generated, they resolved to remove from thence,
leaving these words written in a conspicuous place. Quod non potuerunt Hispani,
potuerunt Taffani.
What the Spaniards could not do,
Hornets and Horse-flies did pursue.


And making their first march toward the Lake, when they were come thither,
they threw a Bridge over between Sesto and Castelletto, Towns which lie in the
mouth thereof, intending to go from thence to before Arona, and to take it; and
thinking to make themselves first masters of Angiera, a Town which lies also
upon the Lake, over against Arona, they planted Batteries against it. The Count
Bolognino was entered Arona with a good Garrison, which would have withstood the
Siege a good while, if it had been attempted by the enemy; but a new and
unthought of necessity forced them to retreat and quit the Country; for the
Governor, after what had happened at Tornavento had made up the Body of an Army
near Buffaloro, between Biagrassa and Tornavento; and having sent Melo back to
guard the Castle of Millain, and Bolognino with Forces into Arena, he threw two
Bridges over the Tessino, by which passing over that River, he gave out that he
would go to Romagnano, a Town on the left side of the Sesia, where he might
commodiously besiege the enemy, who were quartered in the mouth of the Lake,
and hinder their proceedings, and keep them from retreating; so as they must
ncessarily be consumed there, for want of meat; for that Country being
abandoned by the Country people, who were withdrawn to the Mountains, and the
Governor keeping in Romagnano, they could not be nourished by the Country, nor
receive victuals nor succor from Piedmont, nor from the County of Vercelli, by
reason of the craggy Hill which rises from Romagnano toward the Lake: on the
side whereof there were only three ways, which being guarded by reasonable
Garrisons, excluded all passing from Piedmont to the Lake: this evident danger
being foreseen by the Duke, and by the Marshal, they quickly gave over the
enterprise and retreated; and passing back over the Tessino, they got before
hand into Romagnano, where they fixed their quarters, seeming as if they would
keep there; but the Governor being come to Carpignano, he incommodated them
there, and begirt them on sundry sides, and sent some men into the Country of
Vercelli, to hinder the bringing of provisions to Romagnano; wherefore they
were forced to go from thence, and abandoning the State of Millain, retreated
into Piedmont, being lessened both in Forces and Honor; insomuch as the rest
of their Army being disbanded, most of the French retreated to Pinarvolo, and
from thence into France, and the Piedmonteses kept in Piedmont.

The Confederates Army being dissolved, the Governor betook himself to drive
out the French Garrisons, which kept yet fortified in some parts of the State
of Millain; and sent several Commanders to recover them. Don Martine d' Aragona
recovered Fontaneto, in the County of Novara, which was taken by the
Confederates, and till now kept with a stout Garrison. Don Vincenzo Gonzaga
recovered many other Towns in the same. Giuseppe Monpavone, Governor of
Alessandria, drove the French Garrison out of Annone; and it being a place of
consequence, he fortified it; and now there remained no Towns in the hands of
the French, except Bremi and Villata. Villata was quickly slighted and
abandoned by a small Garrison which was in it; so as all the remainder of the
French were in Bremi; which being a strong Town, and well munited, the taking
of it was put off to another time. The Governor also showed some resentment
against the Duke of Savoy; Lucio Baccapianola, by his Orders, entered Gattinara,
and without any opposition took it, and sacked it; and Don Philippo di Silva,
who succeeded Marquess Spinola in the place of General of the Horse, entered the
County of Asti with some Horse, and took Arazzo, Montealto and Montegrosso; and
some of the Garrisons of Alessandria, made inroads into the enemies Country,
burning and sacking many of their Towns: which actions did gainsay those secret
intelligences which said, and more publicly the Marshal, that the Duke held
with the Spaniards; but greater resentments were plotted against the Duke of
Parma, who being come into his State was not idle; for though the Marquess
Villa was gone from thence (as has been said) and was returned to Piedmont,
and that consequently the Duke wanted that assistance, yet overcoming all
difficulties with his undaunted spirit, and having yet some two or three
thousand French with him, part whereof were come with Marquess Villa, part sent
to him by the River of Genoa, with permission from the Genoeses, and having
added to these a Body of his own Subjects, and some others that he had taken
into pay, he once more besieged Rottofreno at a distance; nor herewithall
content he by way of resenting Prince Doria's attempts against Valdettaro, sent
to take St. Stephano, a Town belonging to the same Prince in Fee from the
Emperor, seated upon the Confines of the State of Genoa; and passing over the
Poe was entered into the State of Cremonia; and doing much prejudice to the
Towns of that Country, he pretended revenge for the ruins occasioned in his
Country by the Kings Soldiers; wherefore the Governor, being scandalized at
these new attempts, and seeing the State of Millain almost freed of the
Confederates Forces, he sent some of his men under Don Martine d' Aragona to
prejudice that Duke, with order to quarter in those States, and that without
attempting any thing against the chief Cities he might overrun the Country, to
the end, that the Duke being mortified by such losses, and terrified by fear of
greater, might learn to know how unable he was to defend himself against the
Kings incensed Forces. Don Martine being entered into the State of Piacenza
first, freed Rottofreno from being besieged by the Dukes men, drove away the
assailants, and killing and taking many of them prisoners pursued them to
underneath the Walls of Piacenza, he afterward recovered the Castle St.
Stephano for Prince Doria, which was taken from him by the Dukes men; and
Cardinal Trivultio being entered at the same time, by Orders from the Governor,
with a Regiment of Dutch, into the States of Cremona and Lodi, he drove out
those that were placed there in Garrison in some Towns that the Duke had taken
but a little before in those parts; then passing over the Poe, and joining with
l' Aragona, he went to possess himself of the State called Palavicino, by which
acquisition all Commerce was almost interdicted between Parma and Piacenza;
many Towns of those Territories were afterward taken, and the Salt Pits were
destroyed, which brought in a great revenue; and the Duke of Parma, not able to
keep the Field against the Spaniards, retired to Piacenza where he was first
besieged at a distance, and closer afterward: it is a thing verywell worth
observation, to think how that Prince amidst so many adversities, and being so
near utter ruin, did notwithstanding keep so close to his first resolutions,
and how he kept his first hopes, against all probability of not only obtaining
his pretensions, but even of being preserved from imminent ruin; for though he
had much reason not to doubt that the King of France, who was his only hope,
and who endeavored now to get the Princes of Italy to adhere unto him, would
suffer that the first and almost only one of those Princes, and who so freely
and so courageously had declared for him and his Crown, would suffer that he
should now upon that account be oppressed and ruined; making him thereby an
example to others, how little they were, in the like case, to rely upon the
protection of that Crown; yet the Affairs of that King were at that time
reduced to so bad a condition, that they rather seemed to need being assisted
by others, then to assist others. The Cardinal Infanta, going from the Confines
of Flanders with a gallant Army, was entered Picardy; and having taken La
Capella and Corbie, two principal places upon those Frontiers, overran that
Province victoriously; and burning, and sacking all before him, he was advanced
even to the Walls of Amiens, and St Quintins. And the King not having Forces in
readiness, to with-stand so sudden, and so unexpected a storm, caused Men and
Arms to be tumultuously raised, for the defense of Paris it self; and by an
Edict, which the French in their Language call Arierban, which is as much as to
say, the last Call, (which the Kings of France never make use of, but in
extreme necessity) he summoned all his Feudatories, and all his Nobility, to
assist in defense of the public safety, which was then tottering. Nor was this
all the danger of that Kingdom; for the Prince of Conde was forced to rise from
before Dole, a Town in Burgondy, whither he had been sent a little before by
the King with a powerful Army. For Gallasso being assisted by people of the
same County was entered Burgondy with a strong Army; and overrunning all the
Towns thereof on this side the Some, had taken Merabaule, and was come to
before St. Iean di Beaulme, a Town standing upon the Some, between Verdune and
Shalloune. Nor was this Kingdom in less danger on the parts toward Spain;
whither the King having sent a powerful Army, commanded by the same Prince of
Conde, wherein were many Signieurs of France that served to assault Spain on
that side; and the Prince being encamped before Fonterabie, a frontier Town of
Spain over against Gascony, he had reduced it to great extremity, not without
much danger to Spain, if it had fallen into the hands of the French, as
necessarily it must have done, had not the Admiral of Castille come from Spain
with 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, which passing over the Pirenean Mountains,
came unexpectedly to before Fonterabie, just as it was upon Articles of
surrender, and freed it luckily; for at the Admirals appearing, the Prince of
Conde raised the siege, and the Admiral taking St. John di Luz, and besieging
Bayonne, overran Guascony, plundering and bringing the parts thereabouts into
composition; how could the Duke of Parma expect or fancy unto himself any
assistance from the King of France, whilst his own Kingdom was so full of
troubles, and assaulted on so many sides? and which was worse for him, the
French were almost gone all out of Italy, and the Spaniards were increased in
numbers and reputation, and left untroubled by that League which was intended
for their ruin. He saw apparently that could not be diverted from prejudicing
him; nay, the Governor of Millain having heard that some few French, who were
yet in Cassalle, were ready to pass over to Piacenza in boats, when they should
see the Poe swollen with water, had ordered that a Steccado should be made over
that River near Valenza, to withstand those Forces, and had a good Garrison to
be placed there to oppose those boats, and all others who should go upon that
River: And the Governor had given order to Cardinal Trivultio, to have an eye
to those parts; who fearing lest some Mantuans, and some of the State of
Venice, not being able to enter the nearest way into the Dukes States, might by
way of diversion assault the State of Cremona, or of Lodi, he went first with
the men that were assigned him to the frontiers of those Counties, to defend
them from any incursion; so as that Prince was excluded from any succor on
every side. There was only one loop-hole left open, from which he might hope
for safety amidst these so many streights; which was the King of France his
Fleet, at that time come into the Ligustick Sea, as shall be said in its proper
place. But to boot with the hindrance (as shall be said) which the Spanish
Galleys gave to the landing of the French Fleet, keeping it from landing its
men; the Governor who was himself with part of his Army in Alessandria, stood
ready to oppose any who should land in relief of the Duke, or to prejudice the
State of Millain. This was the condition of this Dukes Affairs; and to fill up
all his misfortunes, the Emperor after having taken the Duke of Saxony off
from the Protestant League, and brought him by the peace of Prague to side with
him, he had also at this very time compassed his fervent desire of seeing his
Son, the King of Hungary, Elected King of the Romans; an Election which had
suffered great opposition, by those who desirous to abase the Austrian name,
used all the means they could to keep him from it; the which being overcome by
the dexterity and several negotiations of the Spanish Agents in that Court, and
particularly by Count d' Ognate, it was happily achieved about Christmas, the
year 1636. In which Election, the Marquess of Castagneda, who was Ambassador
from Spain with the same King of Hungary, upon whom the Election fell, did very
much cooperate. True it is that the success of the Austrian Forces at this
time did very much facilitate this choice; which having shut up the Swedes in
the furthest corner of Pomerania, and were near driving them out of Germany,
obliged some of the Electors, though contrary to their wills, to permit that
the Imperial Diadem should be continued in the House of Austria; the peace and
union of the Duke of Saxony, and this Coronation, and the late victories, did
doubtlesly redound much to the greatness and security of the Austrian name: so
as the Duke of Parma might see how prosperously the Austrians whom he had
abandoned, proceeded; and on the contrary, how the d^vo-King of France his
affairs, which he had so readily and with so much tion embraced, how much, I
say, they had miscarried, and consequently he might easily perceive to what
condition his affairs were brought; and that to stand pertinaciously to these
designs was nothing else but to fight against heaven, and to run headlong into
ruin; he might also know that the Princes of Italy were not well pleased with
this new fire which he had kindled in Italy.

The Pope, in consideration of the Sovereignty which the Apostolic See has
over the Duke of Parma's Dominions, feared that they might be possessed by the
Spaniards; and was angry that the Duke who was his Feudatory should so
obstinately subject himself to so many evils; wherefore not only he, but the
great Duke, whose Sister was Wife to the Duke of Parma, interceded for him to
the King of Spain and his Agents, to be more reserved in their resentments,
desiring them to pardon somewhat, in respect of the merits of the former Dukes
of Parma, much in respect of tha^ Prince his young years, and not to discompose
Italy; and they continually solicited the Duke, sometimes by fair means,
sometimes by foul, that he would foresee and know his danger, and the like of
the common affairs; they prevailed more with the King of Spain and his Agents,
then with the Duke. The King seemed willing to pass by so many offenses, and to
restore his Territories free and entire to the Duke, as they were before he had
used any hostility, without lessening his former authority or liberty; but all
this was nothing; for the Dukes devotion to the King of France was such, and
had so bewitched him, as he was no more himself; so as not knowing how to
forsake this earthly deity, by whom he hoped to obtain an earthly Paradise, he
seemed to rejoice in becoming a Martyr, and in sacrificing his State and
Fortune in maintenance of his Faith and Devotion toward that Deity whom he had
once adored, and to whom he had wholly dedicated himself; wherefore the losses
he had suffered, the dangers he had run, and those which did still threaten
him, nor the afflictions of his people, (who desirous to rid themselves of so
many sorrows desired he would incline to peace;) nor any fair conditions that
could be offered him, could do no good upon him; nor did they appear adequate
remedies to mitigate his mind, but rather made him the more refractory. The
Governor not being able any longer to endure so much obdurancy justified the
Kings intentions to these Princes, which was not to oppress this Prince, but to
reduce him and all Italy to quiet; and resolved at last to alter his way of
proceeding; and to proceed with more severity since he saw fair means could do
no good; he therefore gave order to Cardinal Trivultio to besiege Piacenza yet
closer, and sent Colonel Gill di Hays to him, a valiant and understanding
Soldier, who by order from the Cardinal assaulted Rivalta, and took it within
five days; there were in it 400 Foot, whereof 50 French, who went all free out,
and the French were sent with a sufficient convoy into France. The Cardinal
designing afterward to take the Island which is encompassed by the Poe, over
against Piacenza, sent Sergeant Major Ottaviano Sauli to take it; who going
first to discover it, with the Engineer Prestino, drew afterward near it with
his men; who being got into the Island they first repulsed five barques loaded
with Soldiers which were sent from Piacenza, as soon as the enemies design was
known, to prepossess the Island; he also fortified the bank which was opposite
to Piacenza, and built a Fort in the midst of the Island, whereby he became
master of it, and began to streighten the City; and at the same time the
Cardinal and Marquess Antonio Pietro Lunato, who was General of the Artillery,
did much molest the City with their Artillery; affairs continued thus for above
a month; in which time the Cardinal sent Don Vincenzo Gonzaga to take several
Castles in the territories of Parma, and Gill di Hays, to take others in those
of Piacenza; by the taking whereof the Cities of Parma and Piacenza being more
straightened were quite excluded all communication; at last the Duke seeing the
Mills near the City beaten down by the enemies Artillery, the State almost
wholly possessed by the enemy, all Commerce kept from the City of Parma,
himself and his Wise so straightly besieged in Piacenza, as the scarcity of
victuals was so great in that City, that wanting meat even himself to eat, he
held it for an extraordinary present to receive every week a Calf from
Ottaviano Sauli, which was duly sent him by order from the Governor, and which
being safely kept was all the flesh he had for his own Table for the whole
week; finding himself therefore, I say, thus straightened, and having no hope of
succor, he foresaw he should be reduced to utmost extremity, if he should not
yield to these so terrible tempests; wherefore he began to listen to conditions
of Agreement, which were still kept on foot in Millain for all the fighting and
batteries, by Count Carpegna in the Popes name, and in the name of the great
Duke, by his Secretrary Dominico Pandolphino; nor was the agreement hard to be
made; for the Spanish Agents being desirous to have an end of all this trouble,
accept of any conditions: when therefore it was known that the Duke would
parley, all hostility was suspended, and an agreement was quickly made between
Don Francisco di Melo, Ambassador plenipotentiary from the King of Spain to
the Princes of Italy, and Secretary Pandolphino. The Articles were approved by
the Governor, and by the Duke; but were never published but by what was
comprehended by the sequel, and by what was commonly said, they were; that the
Duke returning to the King of Spains devotion should enjoy the same, nay
greater honors under the protection of the King Spain, then formerly; that he
should renounce any League made with any other Prince, against the Crown of
Spain; that he should dismiss all the French, with a Passport that should be
given them by the State of Millain, whereby they might safely pass into France,
and that in lieu of them the Duke should have a Garrison of Italians, Dutch or
Swissers, such as the King should confide in: That the Governor should
withdraw all his men into the State of Millain, quitting all Towns that were
taken; and leaving them in the same condition they were in before the War; all
which Articles were fully performed on both sides.

This Peace, as also the precedent War, afforded diversity of Discourse. Many
praised the Kings moderation and magnanimity, even to the skies, who being so
highly offended by so inferior a Prince, had notwithstanding suffered it, with
a Princely Grandezza, and had considered t^merits of the offenders ancestors,
and the youthful spirit of the delinquent, against whom he had made war more by
constraint, then free will; but with such moderation as by the manner both of
taking up Arms, and of laying them down, it was evidently seen, that the King
never intended to suppress this Prince, but only that by making him lay down
his fierceness he might receive him into his protection, and make him capable
of all honors and favors that he could expect from his Majesty; that
therefore the Kings Forces had fought rather to subdue the Prince his
obstinacy, then his Towns; and rather to win his good will, then his Dominions;
many, on the contrary, detracting from the praise of so singular an action,
attributed all that had been done neither to the worth, nor to any good
intention in the King, but to mere necessity which had forced him to do so; for
to have resented himself against this Prince, to the oppressing his
Principality, and possessing himself of his Dominions, though perhaps he might
easily have done it in this present conjuncture of times; yet to keep them
would be a very hard business, and apt to cause immortal wars; so as after
having been at much expense in getting them, after having been troubled with
war to keep them, all would end in a necessary restitution; that herein the
States appertaining to the Sea of Rome were concerned, which would never sit
down by so great a loss; that the great Duke of Tuscany was herein concerned, a
Prince so well affected to the Crown of Spain, and who had merited so well
thereof; and whose friendship was now of great concernment thereunto; that the
Duke of Parma's wife who was niece to the Emperor was concerned herein, so as
what reason had he to distaste the great Duke in a thing which so nearly
concerned him, in his sisters behalf, and by alienating him to give occasion to
him who could not sit down by the ruin of his sister, and brother in law, to
fall upon new resolves by way of resentment; was the condition of affairs such
as this time, as that it made for the Crown of Spain to alienate a Prince who
was most sincerely inclined to the interest thereof? that what was yet of
greater importance, the satisfaction, and safety of all the Princes of Italy,
was herein concerned; who thinking so great an increase of the Spaniards power
in Italy was a decrease of their own Empire and Liberty, would have turned the
whole world upside down, rather then suffer those States to be joined to that
of Millian; to what purpose was it then to destroy a Prince, whose destruction
would occasion war to succeed war, hatred to succeed hatred, enmity to succeed
enmity, to the so much prejudice of the destroyer? that there was fresh
example, what wars, troubles and dangers, the taking away of the Palatinate
from it is natural Prince had occasioned, and did still occasion to the
Emperor, and to the House of Austria; that the Examples of the Valtoline, and
Duke of Mantua in Italy, were yet more evident; thus they, by these arguments,
and examples, concluded that necessity was turned to virtue in the King of
Spain.

But the Duke was the subject of no less various discourse; some praised,
others dispraised the generosity of his mind, which could not submit to the
injuries and oppressions of the Spaniards, but had dared to oppose their
insolences; that he had given a singular example of a free spirit, becoming a
Free Prince; and had taught the Spaniards, who had wont to insult over the
Princes of Italy, how they ought to esteem them, how respectfully they ought to
proceed with them, and what the greater and more powerful Potentates can do,
when the lesser can make such noise; that the reason why he had not compassed
the chief end of his high and generous pretenses, was not out of any fault of
his, but of others; it being apparent, that if they had proceeded effectually
before Valenza, Italy would never have seen a more illustrious day for her
liberty, then that wherein he went out armed from his Dominions, when fighting
the Spaniard at Ponte Carone, he had the better of them, and slew their
Captain, who led them on so proudly against him; that success cannot detract
from the glory of enterprises, especially when their miscarriage proceeds from
casual accidents; that howsoever, amidst so many adversities he had made the
Spaniards see that a great part of their losses, and dangers, had proceeded
from his alienation; that the Pavian, and Novarese Towns, the Cities of
Millain, and Pavia, together with their territories, had doubtlesly suffered
more prejudice upon his account, then the parts about Parma, and Piacenza; and
that Millain, and Pavia had been as near being lost as Piacenza and Parma; that
therefore the Potentates of Italy were always to acknowledge the lessening of
the Spanish pretensions, the moderation, and respect, which shall hereafter be
used toward them, the esteem which shall be had of them, and their liberty,
from this Prince; others, on the contrary, ascribed the actions of this Prince
neither to worth nor generosity, but to madness of youth; for beginning at
their beginning, and continuing to the end of the Tragedy, they said, that
without any just occasion given, he had swerved from the footsteps of his
forefathers; who having placed the soundest foundation of their Principality
upon Friendship with Spain, had never reason to repent it; what reason then had
this Prince to doubt the favor and protection of that Crown, if he had
continued to follow his Predecessors footsteps? but that from his Infancy he
had aspiring thoughts, and greater pretentions then became his condition; that
he seemed to undervalue the Friendship of Spain; and that by inclining more to
that of France he had begot no little distrust of his intentions, which caused
the Spaniards to conceive ill of him, and to spy into his ways; whereby
discovering his aversion, he had given them occasion to complain thereof, and
sometimes to break forth into words of just resentment; which might have served
to admonish him; but he esteeming this medicine poison had broken out upon
small occasion; nay indeed upon none at all, if he would consider things
justly; chiefly when the question was touching a Prince so inferior in force
and power to the King of Spain, and when greater things had been past by, by
greater Princes, and winked at, to keep them from disturbing the public peace;
how many distastes had Duke Charles Emanuel suffered before he broke with
Spain; nor did he ever come to any breach till his own Dominions were assaulted
by the Spaniards; so as he may rather be said to have taken up arms in his own
defense, then against the Crown of Spain; how many injuries have the Venetians
past by, nay how many the Popes themselves, not to mention other Princes? how
many dislikes have been winked at between the two Crowns of Spain and France,
and between them and other Princes; that great Princes do sometimes use acts of
superiority and Seigniorie toward lesser Princes, and the lesser have been
known to think it wisdom to suffer them; nor do greater Princes use always to
look big upon lesser, but to proceed moderately with them; generously pardoning
the defects and failing of lesser Princes committed against them, without so
much as taking any notice thereof otherwise the world would be turned upside
down, if arms were to be taken up upon every small offense; that this is kept
for the last refuge of an assaulted, or tottering State; not to offend or
provoke one that is more powerful; not to vent hatred upon the weaker, or to
secure suspicion; that then there being no occasion of a breach, it must
necessarily be concluded, that either fear of being oppressed by the Spanish
forces, or hopes of getting either the State of Millain, or part of it, by
adhering to France, or a desire to put Italy into her former liberty, by
driving out the Spaniards, had thrust him upon this novelty; as for fear, it
was said, that being strengthened by the so many merits of his predecessors, he
could not possibly dread those forces which had been such a prop and defense to
other Princes of Italy, that had not deserved so well of the Crown of Spain;
that Ferdinand the Cardinal, and after Duke of Mantua, might serve to witness
this, who having given more manifest signs of alienation from that Crown, both
in Rome and elsewhere, then Parma had before the breach; yet when he succeeded
his Brother in the Principality, contrary to the expectation of all men, nay of
himself, he was received into the Protection of the Crown of Spain, and
effectually defended by the Forces thereof, against the Duke of Savoy, who was
joined in alliance and interest to that King; and yet this Ferdinando was not
munited by the merits of his predecessors; nay his Father was sorely suspected
to have conspired against the Crown of Spain; and as fear appeared not a
sufficient occasion to justify this commotion, so had he less reason to be
induced thereunto by hope; for not to say, that the aggrandizing of ones self
is no just reason to make war; he who shall balance these hopes justly will
find them not to be well placed, but that they were very ^rail, and
unconsiderable. The French pretend that the State of Millain does by ancient
right belong unto their Crown; and therefore is unalienable either in part or
in whole; and they have spent more blood and moneys to get it then it is worth;
and will any one then believe that if the French should get it, they would give
it him, or divide it with him? especially since he concurred to the getting
thereof with so small Forces; and if reason did not convince him in this,
former examples might have excluded him from all hopes thereof. Lewis King of
France won that State, assisted by the Venetian Forces, and covenanted with
them expressly for the City and County of Cremona, together with whole
Giaradada; but as soon as he achieved his intent, he re-demanded of the
Commonwealth all that by the said Covenants was due unto her; and this not
under any other pretense, but for that it being a State appertaining to the
Crown, it could not be dismembered from it; and as for the so specious pretenses
of the Liberty of Italy, which never moved the greater Princes of Italy, how
could they rationally fall into the conceit of this Prince; who being none of
the chiefest amongst them, neither for Forces, Wisdom nor Experience in wordly
Affairs, might learn by their proceedings, that though they were sometimes
perhaps incited by greater provocations of more absolute liberty; yet they have
always temporized, lest being freed for the present they might be afterward
forced to yield to worser conditions; and being content with having brought
Italy now to a greater equality, studied how to preserve her in it: these were
the considerations which were commonly had upon these occurrences, which as we
leave undecided, so will we leave them free to be approved or disapproved, as
every one shall think fit.

And now to return to our discourse, a little before this very time, when the
Duke of Parma's Dominions were by this peace freed from war, Donna Anna
Caraffa, the only Daughter and Heir to the Prince of Stigliano, a chief Lady in
the Kingdom of Naples, was married to the Duke de Medina dellas Torres, a chief
Lord of the Family of Gusman, and one of the Grandees of Spain, and who lately
succeeded Count Moanterey in the Vice-royalty of the Kingdom of Naples; from
which marriage a Son was soon born, to whom together with the large patrimony
in that Kingdom belonging to the Mother the Patronage of Sabioneta did belong,
as being descended from a Sister of Vespatian Gonzaga, married to the
Grandfather of Donna Anna; this place, by reason of its strong situation, is
almost impregnable, seated in the State of Cremona, toward the Dukedom of
Mantua; and therefore of great consequence, not only for the City of Cremona,
but even for the whole State of Millain; and whereupon the Spaniards had fixed
their eyes long before, being very desirous to be masters of it. The Princes of
Italy who did not love that the Spaniards should get this place, were very
jealous of this their desire; and the Spaniards never having been able to get
footing there, though that Lady, as also her Father, both by birth and
marriage, were Subjects to the Crown of Spain; yet they obtained their ends in
these times without any violence, or just occasion of complaint to the Princes
of Italy; for the aforesaid marriage, and the birth of this Son, Heir, and
Successor to that place, made way for them to get that which they valued so
much, and so much desired; but this place being for some respects assigned over
to the Duke of Ranusco, and that assignment was now descended to the now Duke
of Parma, who was his Heir and who succeeded him; therefore the Duke of Medina
and his Wife, in their own names, and in the name of their Son, sent to Don
Francisco di Melo to recover the deposited place. Melo went to Parma, where
that Duke not being able openly to refuse restitution, he demurred upon the
expenses of the Garrison which had been kept there during the time of
depositure, which he said came to 300000 ducats; and Melo being unwilling that
the business should be retarded for point of moneys, the sum of 300000 ducats
being reduced to 200000, the Duke was contented to assign the place over to
him, and the Italian Garrison marching out, a Spanish Garrison was put into it,
to the great satisfaction of the Spanish Agents: but this was not done before
the Castle of Rossenna was restored to the Duke of Parma, which was taken from
him by the Duke of Modena, as has been said, when he first moved against the
Duke of Parma; with which restitution the differences between those two Princes
were adjusted; it was generally thought that the Duke of Parma did so easily
part with this, to revenge himself of the Venetians, with whom he was much
unsatisfied, because they had never lent him any the least assistance in the
present war, but had suffered him to submit to the Spanish Forces; knowing very
well how much the Venetians would be troubled at the Spaniards having of that
place; but though the Duke was not assisted by the Venetians, or by his Brother
in Law, the great Duke, with Arms; yet could he not deny but that he was
favored by them both, by their powerful endeavors that his Dominions might
not be taken from him, which doubtlesly prevailed more with the Spaniards; and
it is certain, that these two Potentates were ascertained by the Spaniards,
that they made not this war to oppress him, but to extinguish that fire in him
which was not ple^sing to these two Potentates, nor to the other Princes of
Italy, in respect of the common concernment: wherefore having, without advising
with them, and contrary to their liking and minds, continued his commotion,
they had no reason by assisting him, to be drawn into a war which they foresaw
would be pernicious, to their particular, and to the common interest; and which
would make Spain their enemy, and keep them from using their best endeavors in
that Court for his service.

The Governor being rid of the business of Parma, which as a stumbling block
had been a great hinderance to the proceedings of the Kings affairs, applied
himself to re-gain the Langhe; which are little Castles held in see of the
Emperor by several Lords, situated in the Mountains of Liguria, confining
partly upon the State of Millain, partly upon the Commonwealth of Venice,
partly upon Piedmont, and Montferrat; and at the present garrisoned, partly by
the French, partly by the Piedmonteses. The Governors Forces were at this time
increased by men come from Spain, Naples and Germany; and he expected others
from the Swissers, which made him betake himself the rather to this business:
it was not long since the Duke of Savoy, being desirous to defend himself in
those parts, had taken the County of Milesino, seated on the back of Savona,
wherein was a Castle called Cengio, very strongly seated, and very convenient
for passage by Sea; and which standing in the midst between the Marquisate of
Finale and the State of Millain, was very proper for the preservation of that
Marquisate; the possession of this place caused much jealousy in the
Spaniards, who were desirous to open a passage by Finale for the men which for
the future they intended to land there; and also because, when Finale should be
assaulted, it was not to be succored by the State of Millain, but through that
County. The Governor was therefore forced to clear those parts from the
enemies Garrisons: to effect the which, he began with the Town and Castle of
Ponsone; whether under the conduct of Emilio Gliglino, he sent a body of men,
part Spaniards, part Italians, part Dutch; who coming within sight of the Town
took it without any opposition. For the Garrison which were French, at the
first appearing of the Enemy abandoned it, and retreated to the Castle; to the
taking whereof, Artillery, and greater store of forces being required, Don
Martind' Aragona was sent thither with more men, and with Artillery, which
being planted against the Castle, and the Defendants hearing no news of any
relief, it was within a few days surrendered. At the same time Gill de Hays,
boasting that he could surprise Nizza, he was sent thither by the Governor
from the City of Alessandria, with three Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse;
who parting two hours before Sunset was to have been that night at Nizza,
which was not above twelve miles off: But not coming thither till two hours
after the Sun was up, and therefore not able to take it by surprise he
possessed himself of the Convent of Capuchins, where he fortified himself; the
Governor thought himself engaged in that enterprise; wherefore he quitted
Cengio in the Langhe, that he might not leave the business of Nizza
unperfected; he therefore went thither himself in person with all his Forces,
and having opened Trenches on several sides, even almost to the ditch, a Parley
was heard beaten on that side, where Serj ant Major Ottavino Sauli was advanced
further then the rest with Marqness Cosmo Richardi his Brigade; who entering the
Town, and Hostages being given on all sides, the Town was soon surrendered. This
business being over, the Governor sent presently some Brigades to take in
Aiano, a strong Town in the County of Asti, where it confines upon Piedmont,
and therefore of great consequence for getting into Piedmont. To which
expedition, the Camp-master General, Phillippo di Silva, was deputed; who in
his passage took a Town called Costigliole, near Aiano; and finding there great
store of Corn and Wine, he sent Ottaviano Sauli to possess himself of
Montegrosso, a neighboring Town also, seated upon a Hill well peopled, having
a strong Mannor-house which serves for a Castle; whose Defendants standing upon
their defense, and having stoutly resisted Sauli's assaults, were at the third
assault overcome, and many of them slain; and the Castle after obstinate
opposition was also taken. Then they went with all their Forces to Aiano, which
stands upon the rise of a Hill, and commands all the plain about it: Silva not
thinking that he needed any Artillery, failed in his supposal, being forced to
keep five days before it till the Artillery was brought, where with he made
two batteries; and having played a while upon the Town, he took it upon good
conditions; which when he had done, he reinforced it with new works, and put a
strong Garrison into it. The Governor went from Nizza to Annone; and passing
over the Tanaro, upon a Bridge which was thrown over at Croce Bianca, he
thought to attempt the taking of Asti by assault; but Marquess Villa being come
thither, with about 4000 Foot, he forbore the ^attempt. But considering of what
importance the Castle of Arazzo was for the safety of Aiano and Annone, he sent
some to take it, and to fortify it, and put a good Garrison into it. From
thence he past over the Poe to Valenza, resolving to quarter in the Canavese,
that he might vex the Duke on that side: And being come thither, he quartered
his men in Pertegno, Assigliano, Riva, Costanzo, Carenzana, and Desana; and
hearing that the Duke and the Marshal, who had past over the Poe at Pontestura,
were come with all their Forces to Morano, a commodious Town for neighborhood
of the Poe, and strong by reason of the moorish ground about it, he used all
the art he could to draw them out of those plashes; and to this end sent to
take Balzola, a Town equally distant from either of the Armies: which being
taken, the Duke endeavored to recover it by might; but failing thereof, he
began to fortify the parts about it, that he might besiege it; but the Town
being soon relieved, he was forced to return to Morano, from whence the
Governor could never draw him out to battle; and the Governor not being able
to keep long there for scarcity of Forradge, and finding that the Duke was
resolved not to stir out of those miry places, he returned to Costanza, where
he stayed some days without doing or receiving molestation; except that having
sent Don Martino to discover Bremi and Vercelli, he was met by Marquess Villa;
who was come with some Forces from Vercelli, with whom he skirmished, and Villa
worsted him. Many were slain on the Aragon's side, amongst which Camp-master
Boccapianola, and Spadino a Captain of Horse, and Antonio Ulo^, with seven
other Horse Captains, were taken Prisoners and sorely wounded. The Governor
heating afterward that Count Verrua was gone with a body of men to Rocca d'
Arazzo, he resolved to go to the relief thereof with his whole Army: He
therefore sent for recruits from Alessandria; wherefore Count Galleazzo Trotti
came from thence, and wading thorough the Tanaro entered the Town with 300 Foot,
for Count Verrua was not yet got thither; in which time, the Governor passing
over the Sesia and the Poe, came to Annone, not far from Arazzo, where he found
Don Martino, who being by him sent with 5000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, was come
thither the day before, just as the Enemy (who were already entrenched before
the place) began their batteries. The Governor commanded Don Martino, Don John
de Garrai, and Monpavone, to discover where they might bring succor; who
brought word back that truly the business would be hard, but not impossible;
wherefore the Governor gave order to advance. The Tanaro runs between Annone
and the place besieged; and the bank being higher on that side then on this,
and well fortified by the Enemy, the others, who must needs come to the hither
bank if they would relieve it, when they were come thither were subject to be
played upon by the Enemies Musketters. Moreover, the Duke of Savoy, and the
Marshal, were come to the besiegers Camp, with as many men as they could bring,
with firm resolution to keep back all succor, and to take that place in the
face of the Enemy. But it being impossible to ford over the River any where
without endangering the loss of their men; and it being necessary for them to
pass over it, if they would bring succor, the business seemed more desperate;
but the industry and valor of the succourers overcame the difficulty, who
having prepared many Gabbions for defense, advance to the River side behind
those Gabbions, conducted by Garrai; and by the shot which being sheltered by
those Gabbions, they made at those of the contrary shore, they forced the Enemy
to abandon it. In this interim, Aragon having thrown the Bridge of boats over
which he brought in Carts, Don Iovanni Romero, past over with 1000 Foot, to
whom many of the Garrisons were added; and going jointly to assault the Enemies
Trenches, they fell upon them in good order, and without much Resolution. But
meeting with no less resolute resistance, and being over-powred by the
Defendants number, and by the advantage of situation, they were likely to have
been repulsed; had not the Artillery, which at last was brought unto the Camp,
and which were speedily placed in a convenient place, by the Marquess of
Caracena, made them abandon the defense, and given the assailants full victory,
with much prejudice to the Enemies Camp. The combat lasted from noon, the first
of August, till night, which parted the fray: The next day the Duke and
Marshal, though they had seemed to fortify all night, and to maintain
possession, yet they went away by break of day, without any molestation; for
the Tanaro which was between them, and the deepness of the way, kept them from
being pursued, only some Horse followed them, more to show their Courage, then
out of any thought of damnifying them; especially since the Duke and Marshall
being come, the Enemies Camp was so increased, as there were in it above 8000
Foot, and 1000 Horse. They left great quantity of Arms and Munition in the
Trenches; 500 of the besiegers were slain, and many more wounded; few of the
Relievers were slain, but many wounded, which rendered this days action more
famous.

But this success was soon allayed with as much misfortune, which not long
after the Spaniards suffered in the Langhe, under Don Martino, whither the
Governor had sent the said Don, with 4000 Foot, 800 Horse, and 6 pieces of
Artillery, to secure Finale, which he foresaw would be endangered by Sea, by
the French Fleet, and by Land by the Duke of Savoy. The whole body destined for
this service consisted of Spaniards, under Don Antonio Sotelo, of Dutch, under
Prince Boro d' Este, and led on by Gil de Hays, and Colonel Leiner: The Horse
was commanded by the Baron of Lisao. Don Martin being come to Carcare, a place
appertaining to the jurisdiction of Finale, he heard that the Duke being gone
from Asti with a strong power, was come to Saliceto, and hasted to enclose him
in those streights; and that possessing himself of those passages whereby he
had entered the Langhe, he intended to keep him out of the State of Millain; he
therefore sent 600 Foot to enforce Finale; and by common consent of the
Commanders it was resolved to retreat, and to prevent the Duke in his design,
and therefore to return to Bistagno, where being to meet with more Forces, and
being nearer the State of Millain, they thought they should be safe if they
could get thither. The difficulty of this consisted in that he who will go from
Spigno, a place by which they were to go, and get into Bistagno, must pass by
Monbaldone, which is almost in the midway, and so must pass underneath the
Dukes Musketeers, which being led on by Marquess Villa, were to their knowledge
already got thither, which made this resolution dangerous; yet their necessity
of getting into a place of safety, and their hopes that by their industry,
orderly marching, and by their valor, they might overcome all difficulties,
they resolved to advance, the rather, for that being better informed, they knew
that the Duke was not yet come thither with all his men, but that the Van was
only there under Marquess Villa; they therefore made their Horse advance under
Lisao their Conductor; and after them Gil de Hays with his Dutch, which made
the Van; and then Sotelo's Spaniards, with the Artillery and Munition, who was
followed by Prince Borso with his Regiment of Dutch; the Rere was brought up by
Colonel Leymer, with his Regiment of Dutch Horse, backed by two Companies of
Dragoons: Marching in this order, when they were come near Monbaldone they saw
some armed men in certain Inns, against which Don Martin made two Files of
Musketeers advance, to possess himself of those Inns, and drive away the
Soldiers which were there: These Orders were succesfully followed; for the
Musketeers drove the others out, and made themselves Masters of their
habitations: This mean while the Horse were commanded to halt, and to face the
Enemy, who kept still at Monbaldone; and the Foot coming up at the same time,
they made a Squadron, and caused the Artillery to advance with a sufficient
Guard: ^he Squadron, from which Files of Musketeers continually issued forth
and skirmished, marched but slowly, giving the Artillery time to advance, and
get to a place of more safety, where they were afterward to halt, and
entertain the Enemy till the Artillery were come to Bistagno. Those who had
formerly taken the Inns seeing that the Artillery and the Foot were well passed
on, and got into a place of safety, they likewise would retreat, and went to
join with the Horse who stood upon the plain and (...) the Foot, who when they
should have marched were also to r^eat; but on a sudden they might see Marquess
Villa fall down with the Horse from Monbaldone, and charge the Foot, which
being in plain open field were abandoned by the Horse, which not making any
resistance began to fly so shamefully, as the enemy leaving the Foot began to
pursue them and cut them with their swords; and afterward falling upon the
Foot, did so disorder the Squadron, as some flew one way, some another, in
great confusion; and the Artillery and Munition being abandoned fell into the
enemies hands. The Duke of Savoys coming with the rest of the Forces to
Monbaldone made much for the happy ^ssue of this action; for coming when the
fight was begun, he assisted in getting the Victory; many Spaniards were slain
in this conflict, and many taken prisoners, amongst which some Commanders: it
was thought that if Lisao, who commanded the Horse, and was the first that
began to run, had made head and charged the enemy, the Foot would have had time
to have charged their Muskets again, and to have rallied; so as all might have
succeeded happily; and that this march might have equaled the succor which but
a little before was given to the Rocca d' Arazzo. Lisao who was justly blamed
for this default, alleged for himself, that he had told Don Martino it was
impossible for him where had placed him, if the enemy should assault him; and
Don Martino complained of the Governor, who when he sent him into those parts,
promised he would fall upon the Territories of Vercelli, so to divert the Duke
from the Langhe, which promise he had not made good; with this Victory Duke
Victorio ended his life just a month after he had gotten it; he died in
Vercelli, where the Marshal also was; and it was commonly enough said, that he
was poisoned, though the Physicians, who cut him up, said that there appeared
no signs thereof in his bowels. This suspicion was occasioned by an invitation
which was made by the Marshal, some few days before the Duke died, to the Duke,
Marquess Villa and Count Verrua, where after having been sumptuously feasted,
they fell all three immediately sick; the Marquess mended within four days, but
the Duke and Count died within 8 or 10 days: it was notoriously known that
great hatreds, diffidencies, detractions and imputations, passed reciprocally
between the Duke and Marshal, which made that to be suspected which befell the
Duke, and the Count, who was most inwardly acquainted with the Dukes ends and
intentions. The Duke was of an accurate understanding, he foresaw the manifest
ruin of his Principality by this war; if the French should beat him they would
be his Masters; if they should be beaten, they would be his enemies: it behoved
him therefore to carry the business so as that he mig^ not be oppressed by
Victory, nor ruined by the loss of it; and chie^y, so as the Spanish Empi^e,
which was his only support in Italy against the French, might not be weakened;
so as though he did many things to the Spanish prejudice, yet he never
endeavored their ruin and destruction; by which artifices he made the world
suspect, that not being able to do less, he shunned the danger which he saw did
threaten him; so as his not being able to manage the common a^ms freely, as it
rendered his actions doubtful of double dealing, so did it make them excusable:
but these were divulged opinions, without any proof or certainty, only that the
Marshal published them; he embraced many enterprises, and had many designs: a
little before his death, he treated with Don Andrea Fossa, Abbot of St.
Theodoro di Genoa, who was after chosen General of the Cannons of Laterane, to
join in League with the Commonwealth of Genoa, seeming to value her very much,
and professing himself to be as well affected to her, as his Father was the
contrary; he therefore gave him Order to lay some foundation for this; but his
death, which ensued soon after, put an end to this and to all his other
negotiations; he died on the 7th of October, the year 1637, in the 50th year of
his age; besides Daughters, he left two Sons behind him, Francisco Giacinto,
the eldest, who died a year after his Father, in the sixth year of his age, and
Charles Emanuel, who succeeded him, and was not above four years old. This
Prince his death was believed to be very prejudicial to the Crown of Spain; for
as, whilst he lived, the King of Spain might assure himself he would never be
absolutely against him; so being dead, and the Government of the State falling
upon the Dowager Duchess, who was Sister to the King of France, all men
thought she would be absolutely guided by him; and people were generally much
troubled to think, that if the young Duke should die, who seemed not then to be
over healthful, the States of Piedmont and Savoy would fall unto the Crown of
France; and it was forthwith seen that the French did greedily aspire after
them; for the Duke being dead, the Marshal, who was in Vercelli, endeavored to
bring a French Garrison in thither; and had done it, had not Marquess Villa,
who was not perfectly recovered of his sickness, been aware thereof, and
brought many of the Dukes Militia into the Town, by which he seasonably
prevented the Marshals designs. This Dukes death was the occasion of great wars
to Piedmont, which we will leave to speak of till the next Book; for we must
now give over the affairs of Lombardy in the condition we have spoken of, and
looking a little backwards, reassume the proceedings at Sea; which, not to
interrupt the Land affairs, are of purpose treated of here.

About the time that the things which have been spoken of, happened on Land; the
Fleet at Sea, which having put twice forth from the Haven at Naples could never
light upon Provence, fell at last upon the two Islands of St. Honorato,
anciently called Lerino, and St. Margherita: the latter being divided from the
former by a narrow channel; small Islands, and almost uninhabited; Count
Monterei was the occasioner of this enterprise; who having labored the sending
out of this Fleet twice, and spent vast sums of money therein, was loath that
this enterprise which he esteemed as his own, and from whence he hoped to reap
great things, should vanish away in smoke; and seeing that the defense which
was prepared in Provence, and the lessening of the Fleet which was shattered by
tempest, made the enterprise unpossible to be effected as it was first
designed, he turned his force upon these two Islands. The Marquess of
Ferrendina did also cooperate herein, who appearing in the Seas of Genoa, with
a Squadron of Spanish Galleys whereof he was Captain; being well furnished with
Soldiers, he found the Marquess of San' Croce with the Neapolitan Fleet in the
Haven at Vai, who had but few men aboard, he having sent them, as you have
heard, to before Valenza. Ferrendina incited San' Croce to join with him in
taking of these Islands; which when they should have taken, they thought they
might at least be able to hinder those of Provence from Trafficking by Sea, and
be ready for some greater enterprise as occasion should be offered. About the
midst of September, San' Croce, Ferrandina and Don Carlo Doria, Duke of Tursis,
went with 22 Galleys, 5 Ships and some Shallops, toward those Islands; whither
when they were come they landed their men the same day in the Island San'
Margherita, as being the greatest and nearest the Continent, and therefore
apter to be relieved; they without any withstanding became masters of it,
taking a small Fort which was all they found in it, wherein were 50 Soldiers
in Garrison, who after having made some shot, surrendered the Fort: they went
afterward with their Galleys to batter a certain Tower called le Crocette,
which was newly built upon a point of the Continent, so near the Island as they
played upon them with their Artillery from the shore over against them, whereof
they thought they might easily make themselves masters; but the Tower
resisting, and many men coming to defend it, they gave it over; they then went
to the Island St. Honorato; where though they met with more resistance, because
there was there a greater Garrison and better Fortifications, yet it was
surrendered though it held out somewhat longer then St. Margherita; there
marched out of both these Islands about 400 Foot; and the Viceroy of Naples
receiving advertisement of all that was done, abundance of victuals, Munition,
Arms and Artillery, and all things necessary to munite them, and maintain them
were sent from that Kingdom; there was great fame at this time of Maritime
preparations made by the King of France, both in the Seas of Britanny and
Provence, to furnish out a powerful Fleet, and to keep it in the Mediteranean,
not only to secure Provence from the Spanish Fleet, but to resent himself upon
the Kingdom of Naples for his offenses intended against Provence: it was
therefore given out that the King of France, holding intelligence with many
Lords and others of that Kingdom, (who were held to be dis-satisfied with the
Spanish Empire) would send that Fleet to prejudice that Kingdom; which when the
Viceroy Monterei heard, it made him not only provide for offending Provence,
and for securing the State of Millain, but for defending that Kingdom, in case
effects should be answerable to what was said: No appearance was ever found of
the intelligence or dissatisfaction which was spoken of, though strict inquiry
was made thereinto; and yet without omitting to provide for the war of
Lombardy, which the Viceroy minded as much as that of Naples, he made all
places where the Fleet could Land be munited with strong Garrisons; he gave
order for levying a Dutch Brigade, he armed at least 40 men of war, he
reinforced the Galleys, made great provision of Arms, Ammunition and
Artillery; he made many Brigades be raised throughout the Kingdom, he gave
order that the Mediterranean Militia should be in readiness to come, if
occasion should serve, to the sea side; he chose 15000 of the best experienced
Neapolitans, to defend the Walls; and he did apply himself with such diligence
and indefatigableness to have a care of all places, as he might be truly said
to be the soul which did at that time maintain and inanimate the vast body of
the Spanish Monarchy, which was assaulted on so many sides; all these
provisions were so ascertained and so fitted, as the French Fleet, which was
numerous for Vessels and Soldiers, hearing thereof, forbear not only
assaulting, but approaching the Coasts of that Kingdom; and keeping long in the
Ligustick Sea did not any thing worth so great a preparation; nor could it ever
hinder the passage and landing of Soldiers which were sent from Spain, and
from Naples, to the State of Millain, for the requisite re-inforcement of the
Army in Lombardy; for at the same time that the French Fleet lay in the
Ligustick Sea, the Spanish Galleys came to shore at Finale whilst they looked
on, and landed as many men as they pleased, without any hindrance. The French
Fleet consisted of 60 ships, which were come from Britanny, into the
Mediterranean, commanded by Henry of Lorreyne, Count Harcourt, and by Monsieur
De Sordi, Archbishop of Bordeaux; to which were added 13 Galleys of Provence,
amongst which was the great Galleoun Guise, commanded by Count Poncurletto, all
very well rigged, and provided of Artillery, and all other Navall necessaries;
they sailed all of them by the Islands, which were taken by the Spaniards but a
little before, not making any one shot at them, though they were provoked by
many made from those Islands; and tarrying a while at Villa Franca, they
appeared in the Ligustick Sea, about the end of September, 1636. The Spaniards
Forces at Sea were far inferior to this Fleet; wherefore it became the Spanish
Galleys to give way to the French Fleet, and to keep out of the reach of
Cannon, wherein the French exceeded them. And yet the Duke of Ferrendina, who
was in the Seas of Genoa with his own squadron and other Spanish Galleys,
understanding that the Enemies Fleet was come to anchor at Mentone, a place not
far off, belonging to the jurisdiction of Monaco, made toward them; and
appearing before them about break of day, began to shoot at them; and after
having hit them with many Cannon shot, returned to the Haven of Vai from whence
he was come. These Spanish Galleys kept still in some of the Havens in the Sea
of Genoa, to the number, for the most part, of 40: and though both the Fleets
professed to bear all respect to the Commonwealth, and not to do any act of
Hostility against either other, whilst they kept within the Havens of the
Commonwealth, and did effectually make good their professions; yet not
satisfied with the exact cautiousness of the Militia, they attentively observed
the ways of oneanother, lest they might be taken unawares, where they could
not evade danger in so near neighborhood; and more particulary the Spanish, as
being weaker both for number and quality of vessels, and consequently more
subject to misfortunes. They therefore were extraordinarily diligent in
learning the first motions of the Enemy; and to this purpose, to boot with much
diligence on land, they kept Feluccaes, and other vessels at high sea, by which
by fires at night, and by smoke in day time, they were continually advertised
which way the Enemy went: And yet the Spanish Fleet was one day in very great
danger of being sunk or taken. This Fleet stayed one whole night in the Haven
at Vai, knowing that the other lay in the Haven at Alassio, not above thirty
miles off; from whence the French Fleet put to sea, and favored by the
darkness of the night, undiscovered by the Sentinels, they upon break of day
appeared so near Vai, as had not the Spanish Galleys cut their Cables, and
speedily put to Sea, the French Fleet could never have got a more famous
victory: They got away in so good time, as they past all safe away, and escaped
the Enemies hands. These two Fleets kept long near one another, in the bosom of
the State of Genoa, without coming to a dispute; but the French finding at last
that they got but little good, and less honor, by staying here, that they
might not return to France without having done any thing worthy so great a
preparation, and such threats, they resolved to assault Sardignia, whither they
hoped to come unexpected and unlooked for by the Inhabitants, so as they might
do some good there. And coming to land in the desolate Haven of Orestano, a
City no less desolate in Sardignia, then was her Haven; and little inhabited by
reason of the malignity of the air, they entered thereinto on the Saturday, in
the time of Carnivale, when the Inhabitants dreaming of nothing less then of
being assaulted by so many ships, were more busy in feasting and revelling
after the manner of the Carnivale, then in defending themselves: Wherefore
being terrified, they fled most of them to within land; those who stayed behind
sent some to the ships to know what they did intend; Answer was made, that they
intended to take the City, and to keep it till such time as the King of Spain
should restore the Islands which he had taken in Provence; so they landed their
men, and entered the City the next day, which was almost abandoned by those few
Inhabitants which there remained, where they refreshed themselves with those
good things which they found ready there to make a good Carnivale. But two
days after, armed men began to appear upon the neighboring hills, who
skirmish'd with them; and the French being therein worsted, they fearing that
the numbers of the Enemy might increase, they retreated the second day of ^ent,
not without some loss both of men and reputation, to winter in Provence. When
the Commanders of the Spanish Fleet heard this, they finding that Winter was
already begun, did also disband their Fleet, sending some squadrons to winter
in Spain, some in Genoa, some in Naples and Sicily, till they might put to sea
with more safety the next spring. But the French Fleet, about the beginning of
March, 1637. went, together with many of the Nobility and Soldiery, to recover
the Islands; and having possessed themselves of the convenientest passes, to
keep off any succor that might be brought, they might see a great ship which
passing thorough with a fore-wind by the Fleet, entered into the little neck of
water which divides the two Islands; and thinking to be safe there amongst
Friends, was the next night wholly burnt. Count Monterei had sent it from
Naples, loaded with Victuals, Munition, and all things necessary for the
maintenance of the Islands; it brought also 40 pieces of Artillery; for the
Viceroy being glad that the Kings Forces had at last got good footing there,
and hoping that the crown would be much advantaged, and Provence much
prejudiced thereby, had a special care to keep them. But Count Harcourt,
General of the Fleet, fearing what was true, and despairing to recove; the
Islands if that ship should land her provisions, sent one of the fi^e-ships
full of powder, and artificial fireworks which was in the Fleet; which entering
by night where the ship was, fastened her self with grapling-irons to the ship;
and giving fire to the train; the Mariners got out of the fire-boat into a
schiff which was behind her, and retreated without any harm to the Fleet. The
fire took soon hold, and quickly devoured the ship and all that was in it; some
few escaping, who threw them selves into the Sea: So as the Garrisons in the
Island, missing of those supplies, could continue defense the lesser while; the
which they notwithstanding drew out a long while, by reason of the many Forts,
Trenches, and other works, which were well munited, so as the French were to
win them by inch-meal. They assauted Sta Margherita first, which resisted
stoutly a long while: The ships accosted it, and with their Cannon beat down
the first rampires, which were erected to keep them from landing; they then
landed their men, but not without much effusion of blood; and having taken some
small works, they came before Fort Monterei, which was munited with four
bastions, together with their ditches and two half moons; the French thought
they should meet with stout resistance there, and therefore wondered very much
when they saw it abandoned ere assaulted; for the Defendants were retired to a
neighboring Fort which was greater then all the rest and was called a Fort
Royal; and flanked with five Bulwarks; in the mid^ whereof was a Tower, which
in that Island served for a Fortification; The French being Masters of Fort
Monterei began to draw a trench cross the Island, wherein they might the more
safely lodge; then coming before the Fort Royal, and other smaller Forts, they
endeavored to take them; many were the assaults, and many the Sallies which
were made; the oppugners behaved themselves like good Warriors, and the
Defendants like good Soldiers, and that Island served for a Steccado of
Val^ant Champions; Don Michaele Perez defended the Fort Royal, a valiant
Sardinian, who upon this occasion played the part of a good Soldier, and of a
wise and bold commander, who kept this place against a powerful Fle^t by Sea,
and a flourishing Army by Land, wherein was all the Nobility of Provence,
besides many other Nobles who were come from the more inward parts of France;
he kept it from the 24 of March, till the 12 of May following, without being
relieved; for Don Mel^liore di Borgia, who was sent with the Neapolitan Galleys
to relieve it, seeing a powerful Fleet ready to resist him, had no mind to have
to do with so many Cannons, against which he thought it was impossible for him
to live at Sea. Perez got leave from Harcourt to send to Millain for succor;
but none appearing within the perfixed time, he surrendered the Fort Royal, and
the other forts, upon very Honorable conditions; even with leave to carry away
two pieces of Artillery with all his train and tacklings, and with permission
that he might have vessels allowed him, to carry himself, and Soldiers, and
all their goods to Finale 986 persons came out of the Island, honored and
praised by the Enemy for that valiant behavior, and the Captain was highly
esteemed and favored by Harcourt; the Island Honorato was not defended like
this; wherein was another Fort which surrounded our Ladies Church, and was a
Pentagon, consisting of five Bulwarks, begirt with ditches, covered ways, half
Moons, and other works; there were six other Chapels of devotion in the
Island, dedicated to several Saints; which being reduced into little
Fortifications defended the Island, having two Cannons apiece in each of them,
with sufficient Garrisons; the Fleet after having made 300 Cannon shot, landed
their Soldiers in the cloud of smoke; which ere they were come within Musket
shot of the Fort, beat a Call, and quickly agreed to surrender up that place,
and all the other Fortifications, upon such conditions as the General should be
pleased to give them; about some 500 Marched out on the 14 of May with their
Arms and baggage, but without Colors: they had Boats allowed them to carry
them to Port Hercules; this was the end of this enterprise, which without any
good done, occasioned vast expense to each of the Crowns, and much loss of
blood to that of France.

The Spanish Empire at Sea suffered not a little by the coming of this Fleet,
for it never had any competitor before in the Mediterranean, but b^re absolute
sway there; but the coming of this Fleet did not only trouble the Crown in the
possession, and command thereof, but made the name of France of more authority
to other Princes who had any possession on her shore; Moreover, many armed
vessels come from Provence under her protection, which by Letters of Mart from
the King of France committed piracy upon the vessels of the King of France his
Enemies; in which letters of Mart, the Spanish, Neapolitan, Sicilian, and
Sardinian vessels were directly named, and indirectly all those of any other
nations, though friends to France, were included, in case any the least goods
appertaining to any subject of Spain should be found therein; for then all the
other Merchandise, as well of Friends, as enemies, became lawful prey, by the
ancient Laws and constitutions of the Crown of France; and neither did the
smaller vessels only, but even the Fleet it self seized on Merchants Ships in
the Mediterranean, of which no discourse of restoral was to be had, if there
were any the least thing in them belonging to any of the Kings enemies; and
this rigor was so abused, as the French Mariners would by force, and by
threats, make the owners or masters of such ships as were taken, confess before
the Judges that the goods therein contained belonged to the Crown of Spain* and
did without all remedy appropiate them unto themselves; this was the condition
of the affairs of Italy both by Sea, and land; yet Germany was in a worse
condition; which being a Province full of Noble Principalities, and oppulent
Cities, which enjoying almost absolu^e liberty under the Emperor, constituted
so many Potentates, and Commonwealths; so as by reason of the abundance of
Inhabitants, it had always been a fruitful mine of Soldiers, and Armies, was
now so desolated and wasted by intestine dissentions, which were openly
fomented by the King of Swede, and underhand by the King of France, as some of
the Provinces thereof had almost no inhabitants left in them; nor did Flanders
nor France fail in feeling their share of the mischiefs which the influences of
the Stars, or rather, the hand of God irritated by our sins, drew down upon all
Christendom; and therefore all Christendom being plunged in War and Ruin,
which instead of being extinguished did daily increase, the Pope, the Common
Father of Christians, thought good to interpose his authority, in composing so
many Wars, and in reducing so many discords to peace and union; this holy
endeavor was not only praised by all men, but in appearance willingly listened
unto; those seeming most desirous thereof who in their hearts were furthest
from it; the City of Cullen was chosen for the place of Negotiation, where the
Princes were to meet by their Ambassadors, with full Authority as
Plenepotentiaries; the Pope chose Cardinal ^inetti, who was sent thither with
the title of Apostolic Legate; the King of Spain, who showed a great readiness
to peace, sent thither the Duke of Alcala, Don Francisco di Melo, and Don
Ronchiglio, Chancellor of Millain; the Emperor nominated the Bishop of
Wurtzberg, Count Fuccaro, and the Count Counselor Ferdinando Maximiliano
Kurtz, and the King of France Marshal Berse, and Mounsier Davo: but the
Emperor, and King of France, were slow in sending them thither: the occasion
of this delay was, for that the Emperor Ferdinando the second being dead a
little before this negotiation, who was succeeded in the Empire by his son
Ferdinando the third; who before his Fathers death, was chosen, as has been
said, King of the Romans; those who were not pleased that the Empire should
continue in the house of Austria took occasion to pretend that the Election of
the King of the Romans, and consequently the present succession to the Empire,
was not Legitimate; as being done without the intervening of the Electour of
Triers, who was still Prisoner in Flanders; of these, the King of France,
professing himself head of all the rest, would never not only acknowledge, but
not so much as call the present Ferdinando the third, Emperor, nor King of the
Romans, before he was chosen Emperor; and the Emperor being desirous to get
the King to acknowledge this his title, desired him that he would grant a
Pasport to the Ambassadors which he was to send to Cullen; thinking that the
King being to make some decree for safe conduct could not choose but name him
Emperor; which to evade, he did not only refuse to grant such a pasport, as
being superfluous in the Emperors own Dominions; but desired that the Emperor
would give Pasports, and safe conducts, to all the Princes and Hans Towns of
Germany, his Confederates, as he professed, that they might pass safely to the
Convention at Cullen, and there safely Negotiate their several interests; he
required also that safe conduct might be given to the United Provinces of the
Low-Countrys, and to the Queen, and Crown of Sweden, who were so deeply
concerned in that peace; he alleged for this his pretention, the bond of
League which he had with all these Princes, States, and Cities, which would not
suffer him to conclude any peace without their agreement; he added, that if he
should enter into this Negotiation without them, he should give them just cause
of jealousy, and complaint, as if he had abandoned them, contrary to the
Articles of Confederacy; the Emperor not permitting that the Princes, and Hans
Towns of Germany, under the Command of the Emperors, and who had rebelled,
should be admitted to treat of peace in company with him who was their
Sovereign Lord, denied absolutely to grant them safe conduct; the rather for
that only the Plenipotentiaries of Sovereign Princes were admitted into the
convention at Cullen; but the King who had taken up arms in this cause, not
upon any account of his own, but in defense of the Germane liberty, said, that
he having no interest in that cause save only the patronage of those Princes,
he was but accessory, and the Princes Principals; so as there was no reason
that the Principals should be excluded, and the accessory admitted; and that it
was no new thing, but an ancient custom, and now in practice, that in disorders
which sometimes happen between Sovereigns and subjects, agreement be made by
covenanted Articles; and as for the Queen and Crown of Sweden, the Emperor did
not refuse to grant safe conduct, if it should be demanded by her, and by the
Deputies of that Kingdom, and not by the King of France; but the Swedes were so
far from desiring it, as they were entered into private treaty with the
Emperor; absolutely denying to come with the other Princes to the Convention
at Cullen; because they knew that the Cardinal Legate, who had the first place
in this convention, would treat them as Heretics, and consequently would not
suffer them to intervene in any treaty of peace; nor would use such respect to
their Agents, as he did to those of other Princes; the Emperor, on the
contrary, complained of the difficulties interposed by the king of France; as
if they were apparent Arguments, that he did not only not wish well to peace,
but that he was more intent then ever upon War: and upon fomenting the
Insurrections of Germany; and that therefore out of these pretensions
proceeding slowly in the Treaty of Peace, he intended to give occasion to other
Princes, (who though they desired peace, would not for their own honors sake
seem to desire it more then others) to proceed with the like slackness in this
affair, which was so necessary for the peace of Christendom; and therefore the
Emperors Plenipotentiaries, nor those of the king of France, not appearing in
Cullen; those of the king of Spain who were come to Cullen after the Legate,
lest by being come before the rest to the Diet, they might seem more greedy of
peace then others, they never appeared in that capacity before the Legate, nor
did they seem to be come to treat of Peace; and the king of France, finding not
long after that his pretenses, being contrary to the Negotiation so much
desired by all, were generally ill resented, and that they were imputed rather
to his no inclination to peace then to any thing that he alleged, he recalled
his Plenipotentiary power conferred on Berze, and Davo, and gave it to the
Cardinal of Lions, brother to Cardinal Richelieu, which occasioned other
difficulties, which troubled the Treaty no less then did the former; for the
Caesarean Agents, thinking that this was done on purpose that the French
Ambassador might by his Cardinal dignity precede all others; (whereunto the
Emperor nor King of Spain would by no means consent) they refused to send
theirs thither. These, and other pretentions, occasioned such difficulties, as
not only no conclusion was come unto, but no commencement was given to the
Treaty which was propounded by the Pope, and in appearance so much desired by
all; so as the Negotiation proved abortive, and ended before it began.

Let us now return to the Affairs of Italy. A Treaty began by chance, and
almost unthought of, in the beginning of the year 1637, which being afterward
continued and concluded, put a period to the business of the Valtoline, between
the two Crowns, and the Grisons League, in the subjection of the Valtoline,
which by the Articles of this Con^ederacy was remitted upon some conditions to
the three Leagues: And that the foundation of this business may be the better
known, it will be necessary that we reassume the whole business from the
beginning, and repeat some things which have been loosely related.

The ancient Confederacy between the Crown of France and the Grisons, appearing
to those people to be turned almost into subjection, was not willingly suffered
by them, who thought themselves daily more straightened and more invaded in
their Liberties by the Agents of that Crown; it began to be very bitter, when
by reason of the Grisons joining in League with the Venetians, the French
pretended that their ancient League was thereby prejudiced; and their resenting
it made the Grisons suspect that they had gone along with the Spaniards in that
insurrection which happened afterward in the Valtoline: these bitternesses
increased by the peace of Monsone, by which the liberty of the Valtolinians was
approved of, so much to their prejudice, by the same King who was the Grisons
Protector, contrary to what the King had always promised, and which was
professed publicly to all the world by Arms; but they grew greater and more
insufferable, when thinking by this last endeavor of the Duke of Rohan to be
restored unto the ancient and free possession of the Valtoline, they saw they
were kept from it by the French Forces; and when any endeavor of restitution
was had in the Court at Paris, the King, as Protector of the Valtolinians, did
not restitution, upon condition (notwithstanding) that the Catholic Religion
should be secured there without any mixture of Heresy, and that the Civil and
Criminal Justice should remain to the Valtolinians, answerable to the
Capitulations of Monsone. This was caused, for that the King of France finding
that he could not maintain his authority in that Valley, which he greatly
desired to do, without much disturbance to his own affairs, without much war
and expense; and that assigning it to the Grisons, it would be immediately
taken away by the Austrian Forces; and that he should be obliged to recover it
again; so as the loss succeeding the recovery, and the recovery the loss, a
perpetual circumvolution would ensue, which would make him subject to perpetual
wars and much expense; being desirous to get quit of this trouble, he had a
design to win the hearts of the Valtolinians; and by granting them all that
they had from the Crown of Spain, to alienate them from that Crown, and make
them wholly depend upon his Crown; and by this means to spare the continual
expense he was at in maintaining that Valley at his devotion; embracing
therefore the cause of their Liberty, he offered the Valtolinians more
advantageous conditions then they could get from the Austrians, whilst they
should depend upon his protection: this course did totally alienate the Grisons
from the Crown of France; nor did it gain the Valtolinians, who could never be
brought to confide in the Kings promises; which if they should have done, they
were sure they should be more prosecuted by the Arms of Austria, which confined
upon them, then by the French which were so far from them; and the Grisons did
believe that the unexpected conditions, so contrary to that absolute Dominion
which they pre ended to under the Valtolinians, and which they expected to
obtain from the King of France, were but cunningly propounded to cause delay,
which would at last end in a manifest exclusion of the promised restitution; so
as they were highly offended; and, moreover, the Fort which Rohan did still
keep well munited with French Garrisons in Rhetia, seemed to them to be but
formal fetters of the public liberty, which they saw was reduced to greater
subjection, whilst the Valtoline was possessed by the French: they likewise
observed Rohans residence in Coira, the Metropolitan City of Rhetia, where he
carried himself imperiously with them, rather like a Princely Governor then
like a Guest or Ambassador, seeming as if he labored to overthrow the public
Liberty. To these public distastes other private grievances were added, by
reason of detaining the Pensions which the King was used to pay to the
principal men of that Nation, to the end, that by their authority they might
keep the people well affected to him; so as failing of those advantages, they
did by contrary endeavors strive to divert those that did depend upon their
authority, from the French: these people being therefore much incensed, and
weary of this usage, they hatched ill will; and persevering but untowardly in
the ancient League with that Crown, they consulted with themselves how they
might throw off their present condition, which they thought was reduced to
slavery, and shun the worser which they feared they should shortly be brought
unto; but having well debated these things, and finding that they could not
compass their ends, without being upheld by some great Potentate, they quietly
dissembled the iniquity of their present condition, the best they could,
expecting some opportunity whereby they might free themselves from this
imminent subjection. On the other side, the Court of Spain and her Agents in
Italy, knew as well the necessity, as the difficulty of recovering the
Valtoline; especially in times of such insufferable troubles; and considering
the jealousies and suspicions, and afterward the hatred and enmities that the
recovery thereof, if they should get it, would bring upon them from the
Venetians, and from all the Princes of Italy, who for their own safety sake did
not well endure the Spaniards superiority in that Valley; they considered also
the continual wars which they must have upon this account, the expense of
moneys, the shedding of blood, the great disturbance which that Valley
occasioned to the Kings Affairs, which like a Bone out of Joint did discompose
the whole Body of the Austrian Monarchy.

Things being in this posture, Don Frederick de Henriques, the Spanish
Ambassador, happened to be in the Court at Ispruch, and a Deputy of the
Grisons, who was named Granazza, one of great credit and Authority in that
Commonwealth, between whom occasion being acdentally offered of discoursing of
the Valtoline, something arose between them touching the composure of those
affairs, which like seed sown in well prepared ground, took root, and produced
the fruits of those Agreements which did afterward ensue; for the business
being well discussed and digested between them, they agreed that the French
should be driven out of the Valtoline, by the joint Forces of the King of Spain
and of the Grisons; and that the Catholic Religion, and the profession
thereof, being allowed to the Valtolinians, without any mixture of Heresy, the
King of Spain should adjust businesses between them and the Grisons; which if
the Valtolinians should not agree unto, they should be no longer assisted by
the King of Spain's Forces. They likewise agreed upon a perpetual Confederacy
between the Crown of Spain and that Republic, with free leave for the King of
Spain's people to pass through the Rhetian State, and upon obligation of serving
the Crown of Spain in the Wars of Millain with a certain number of men, to be
paid by the King of Spain; together with many pensions promised to the prime
men of that Nation.

Things being thus rather rough-cast then perfected, the Grisons, who were
impatient of the Company of the French, took heart, and causing some Forces to
come from the State of Millain, they made themselves masters of the Valtoline,
and drove the French from thence; and being assisted from Germany, they
recovered the Forts of Reno and Steinc, which were yet held by the French; and
afterward coming to a general insurrection, Rohan himself was taken prisoner,
from whom, when they had got him into their power, they got by Agreement
stipulated the restitution of as many Forts as were yet in his hands, and the
withdrawing of all the French out of Rhetia, upon tie that he should remain
Prisoner till all that he had promised were performed. This news being heard in
Millain, the Spaniards were not so much delighted therewith, as they were
afraid that the Agreement made at Ispruch would vanish to nothing, if during
six weeks time the King of France should get power or authority in that Diet;
nor did they fear in vain; for that King leaving the way of War, as too tedious
and costly, fell to Treaty, to keep those people in their loyalty; and to this
purpose, besides moneys given about, he offered to give them the Valtoline
freely, without any condition belonging to Religion or Justice; but nothing
would do any good; for the Governor of Millain having sent Agents into those
parts, with moneys, and power to offer much more then the French did, he
prevailed, so as the Grisons stood firm to what was agreed on at Ispruch; for
being weary of their ancient friendship with France, they desired to try new
Fortune; which they assured themselves they should find more prosperous in the
Confederacy with Spain. The Grisons knew that the possession of the Valtoline,
which was the principal point of this Negotiation, was to be held more safely
by the friendship from Spain, then from France; for their Confederacy with
Spain secured them from any disturbance they should have in the Valtoline from
Germany, or from the State of Millain, with the confining Principalities;
whereas they could not keep from being offended, nor secure themselves of
protection and assistance from France, by reason of the far distance thereof,
in case they should be molested in that Valley by the neighboring Austrian
Forces, by reason of the difficulties and excessive charge which the recovery
of that Valley did continually cost that Crown; and howsoever it was much
better for them to be sure not to be molested by the neighboring Forces of
Austria, then after being molested to be protected by the far-off the French.
The prefixed time being past, Rohan, who had several times endeavored to
escape, but still in vain, was forced to surrender the places held by him, and
to free them from the French, with which he was set at liberty, and was forced
to resign up to the Grisons all that he had got in those parts, and so ^o be
gone, elsewhere with little honor. The Grisons being thus fully restored to
Liberty, sent their Deputies to Millain to conclude this so important Treaty:
The Valtolinians sent their Deputies thither also; but the business growing
excessive difficult, and the Governor not knowing how to decide it, they were
all turned over to the Court of Spain; whither the Deputies being come, and
being very well received by the King of Spain, and having their expenses
discharged all the time they were there, the business was almost two years in
hand. The Valtolinians pleaded the ancient Rights of their Liberty, the Grisons
tyrannical oppression, their zeal to Religion, their constant loyalty to the
Crown, and toward the Austrian name, their protection of Liberty, given by his
Majesty's particular decree, and promised them by his royal word, the
Pontifical Decrees, and the Sacred Canons, which forbid that Catholics should
be under the subjection of Heretics, the Popes own Authority, who would not
permit that the Empire of the Grisons should extend to that Valley, the
Articles of Monsone, the offers made unto them by the King of France, if they
would accept of his protection, their constant refusal thereof; and finally,
the sufferings which they had undergone for doing so. They also desired that
the condition of the Grisons, with whom his Majesty treated of joining in
League, to the prejudice of their Liberty, might be considered: they being
Heretics, Enemies to the Catholic Religion, falsifyers of their words, who
term not standing to their Covenants, liberty, and the being obliged thereunto,
Slavery; and that they would bear with any thing, so they might get the
Valtoline again, which when they should have gotten, they would renew their
confederacy with France, with the Venetians, and with any other Potentate that
they should please to renew it, or to continue it with, and would carry
themselves without any respect to any conventions; so as the present agreements
would neither gain their affections to the Crown, nor would it secure the
covenanted passages, but would be the loss of the constant Faith and Loyalty of
the Valtolinians, and of the sa^e passage thorough that Valley, which his
Majesty had till now constantly enjoyed. All which reasons being alleged and
reiterated over and over, and amplified, were not sufficient to hinder the
things agreed upon at Ispruch. For the Court of Spain were confident that the
Grisons would continue constant in the observancy thereof, for the same reason
which had brought them to make this new confederacy; which was, what was said,
before their being sure, during the confederacy, not to be disturbed in their
possession of the Valtoline by the Austrian Forces, from whence they could
only expect molestation. So as the King might be sure, that whilst no novelty
should happen, on his account, in the Valtoline, the Grisons would not violate
the new confederacy; and so that, to shun any occasion of trouble in the
Valtoline, they would forbear any of the least alteration of what was agreed
upon. And the King thought that he had fully satisfied the Valtolinians, both
in their spiritual and temporal interests, by the two conditions which were
annexed to the Confederacy. The first whereof was, that the Catholic Religion
should be sincerely observed there, without any mixture of Heresy. The other,
that a Tribunal should be erected in that Valley of two grave men, and men of
authority; the one to be chosen by the Governor of Millain, the other by the
Grisons; to which Tribunal the Valtolinians were to have recourse, in point of
any civil or criminal grievances which they should receive from the Grisons
Agents or Officers.

Thus the Valtolinians obtained entirely the chief point concerning Religion,
for the preservation whereof, according to their own profession, they had first
taken up Arms; and they did in a great part receive satisfaction in the other
point, touching their politic Liberty; they not being to be oppressed for the
future by the Grisons in these two points. And yet this settlement, for what
concerned the cause of the Valtolinians, was variously discoursed upon: Some
blamed it, as being unworthy the Religion and Majesty of the King, for the
reasons alleged by the Valtolinians; and for that it seemed, drawn thereunto
by the great advantages which he got by this new convention, he had abandoned,
nay suffered his Clients the Valtolinians, who had deserved so well of him, and
of the Catholic Religion, for which they had undergone so great and so many
troubles, to be trampled upon in their Liberty and Religion by the tyranny of
the Grisons. Others, though they wondered at the Kings determination, did
notwithstanding execute it, out of the necessity whereunto the Kings Affairs
were at the present reduced. But those that discoursed hereof more freely did
not only approve of the Kings Resolution, but without any regard almost had to
the v^in name of the Liberty and protection of the Valtolinians, did commend it
as being done justly and wisely: Considering that the Liberty of the Valtoline,
as it leaned upon the King of Spain, was of its own nature odious to all the
world; and impossible to be maintained by humane force. They therefore
concluded, that the King neither could, nor ought to permit, that his Royal
Authority, and therewithal the Catholic Religion, for want of his assistance
should be endangered in other more important places, by his up holding the
Catholic Religion, and the politic liberty of that little Canton. The Affairs
of the Valtoline being then adjusted, the Deputies were sent to Millain, that
the conditions of the confederacy might be there stipulated, as they were
afterward: But whilst this so hard, and so important business, was discussed
there, the Governor by his Forces, but much more by his Industry, ended the
important enterprise of Bremi. This place (as has been formerly said) was of a
large circuit, and very commodiously seated, environed with ditches, flanked
with Bulwarks, abundantly provided with Victuals and Ammunition, munited with a
numerous Garrison, and briefly, reduced into a Fort Royal; and therefore held
by the French to be a strong defense, and Rendezvous for Arms, capable to
receive an indifferent Army; and holding it, for these respects, impregnable,
they called it a new Rochel. The Governor before he would betake himself to
this place of so great concernment openly, would have all his preparations
ready, and that so secretly as the Enemy should not be aware of it: To this
end, he distributed many Soldiers in the parts thereabouts, under the pretense
of quartering, and under the color that those places might be better
garrisoned by reason of the neighborhood of Bremi; he therefore sent some to
Valenza, some to Alessandria, others to Montaro, and into Lomello, into which
place he also sent Victuals, Munition, Straw, and other provisions, fit for the
intended enterprise. And to make the Enemy the less apprehend this siege, he
sent men to Filizano, giving out that from thence he would make himself master
of Mount calvo: He also considered the custom of the Poe; which swelling in
May, when the snow falls down from the Alps, would be a great hinderance for
the Armies abode in those places, which at that time are subject to great
inundations; being therefore to anticipate the enterprise, he provided much Hay
and Straw; which though it were very hard to get in any quantity then, Winter
being well nigh ended, yet diligence overcame all difficulties. These things
being thus ordered, he commanded that they should fall to executition, which
was carried so silently, and so unexpectedly, as the Soldiers were before the
Walls, even almost before they were discovered; their secrecy made them so
confident of good success, as they prepared Scaling-ladders to attempt taking
the Town by surprise, and so to make themselves masters of that Fort by
stealth, before which it was thought that whole armies would be consumed before
it could be taken. The Governor therefore ordered that four Bodies of
Soldiers, commanded by the best experienced Camp-masters, should, by night,
about the midst of March, 1638, at one and the same time fall upon the Town in
four several sides; the first that were to give the two first assaults, were
Don Antonio Sottelo and Count Ferrante Bolognio; the first coming from Mortara
about the coming on of night, with 3000 Foot, and the other with as many from
Valenza, and bringing with them all necessary instruments, they were each of
them to possess themselves, in the several places appointed them, of the banks
of Poe joining upon the Town, and there to fortify themselves; and so by
bereaving the enemy of any benefit of communicating by the River, exclude all
succor by that way, which was thought would assuredly be sent from Cassalle:
the business proved lucky, and better then was supposed; for Sottelo advancing
to a certain place called Bonobo, lying between the River and the Town, which
was seated very high, and fit for the business, made himself master of it
without any opposition. Bolognino did yet more fortunately discharge his part;
he went at the same time out of Valenza, and having assaulted the lower station
called Corno, and which was fortified and garrisoned by the enemy, he at the
very first drove out the enemy, took the place, and began straightway to
fortify against the enemy; and then raising Trenches along the bank, went to
join with Sottelo, who advanced with his Trenches likewise from Bonobo; and
joining together, they at very first blocked up the Town from the River; and
having each of them brought many sacks with them, which they filled with earth,
and made sudden Trenches with them, and many Barques being come to them from
Valenza with Faggots, and other Instruments for perfecting their
Fortifications, they raised that work higher: on the same night Don Iovan
Vasques Coronado, and Don Carlo della Gatta, were ordered to accost the ^own
from two other parts, further from the River; the former coming with Sottelo
from Mortara was to assault the ^own on that part which is called Forbice
vecchia; and the other coming from Lomello, was ordered to approach it by the
Covent of the Capuchins; and when both of them were got thither they were to
fall a scaling; wherein if they succeeded well, they were to give notice to
Sottello and Bolognino, that they might do the like with the Ladders which they
brought with them; and if the first Scaladoes should not succeed well, they
were either by real or seeming assaults, to endeavor to divert the defendants
from that part of the River where Sottello and Bolognino were; that so they
might leave them the Fortification on the bank unmolested by the enemies
Garrison, on which Fortification the groundwork of the business lay: nor were
they to forbear fortifying their stations, and to sense themselves from the
Musket Shot of the enemy, before daylight, if they should miscarry in their
Scalado; but both of them finding the defendants readier and more intent upon
the defensive part, they failed in the chief intent of the Scalado; for as soon
as they approached, a hail of Musket Shot was let fly at them, together with
thunder of Artillery, and lightning of artificial fires, which though they kept
the oppugners from making Scaladoes, or giving assault, yet could they not keep
them from fortifying the stations wherein they were. Don Martin d' Aragona was
the Head and Superintendent of all this Enterprise, to whom only the Governor
had communicated the whole design from the beginning; so as he ordered all
things as his Lieutenant; and diligently applying himself to all parts, ordered
all things requisite for carrying on the work: Tiberio Brancacchio Camp-master
was also ordered to go with his Brigade from Alessandria, with many Carriages,
many Sumpture-Horses, and store of Artillery, to Valenza, and from thence to
Sartiranna, to drive the Enemy from thence; who moving early, and being come to
the intended place, after having made forty shot of Battery, took the Town,
which the Captain of the Garrison yielded upon Articles: And Brancacchio going
from thence, went by Orders from the Governor to join with Gatta; nor were the
horse idle, but were distributed into such parts by which succor might be
brought. Don Vincenzo Gonzaga was to guard the Passage over the Poe with 1500
Horse, at Villata, where it falls into the Sesia: the custody of Frassineiro
fell to Ferdinando de li Monti Captain of the Dutch Cavalry, with as many
Horse: the guard of Lomello to Don Alvaro di Quignones, that he might be ready
there, as occasion should serve; but Marquess Cricky as soon as he heard of
this so sudden, and so unexpected assault, sent nine Barques from Cassalle,
where he then was, and in them 1200 Foot tumultuously and on the sudden put
together, together with much provision and munition; not so much to supply the
Town, as to defend the bank of the River, to the end, that the enemy, who he
thought was possessed thereof, might not keep it, nor block up the way from
succor; but the design being foreseen and prevented, they did not only not
possess themselves of the banks, but neither did they bring in succor; for
the Barques coming to shore at Sotelo's quarters, were encountered, and after a
long fight departed, being hardly dealt with; and passing afterward to where
Bolognino was, three of them landed their Soldiers; and the others fiercely
fighting would have done the like; but meeting with stout resistance, after a
long fight, fell together with the munition wherewith they were fraughted into
the enemies hands; two of the three Barques which landed Soldiers were sunk,
and 70 prisoners were taken, whereof two French Captains; and hardly 200 of
those that were landed, being favored by the night, got wounded into Bremi,
the rest being slain or drowned; the defendants afterward sallied out to
recover the Sconce Corno, which was taken at the first by Bolognino; who
finding the defendants negligent, drove them out; but Bolognino, with some 200
of his men, got it again within two hours: then the Governor came to the Camp;
who viewing the stations, Works and Fortifications made by his men, commended
them, to the great satisfaction of the Commanders and Soldiers; and having
given several other Orders touching the fortifying of quarters, and the
environing the Camp with a Trench, he retired to Sartiranna, from whence, as
from the nearest place, he might give out Orders, visit the Camp, as he often
did, and provide things necessary; but Fortunewould have her share in this
enterprise; for an accident which happened helped much not only to the taking of
this Town, but to the total of all affairs. The Marshal seeing the unfortunate
success of those that were sent from Cassalle, thought to place a battery upon
the shore opposite to the enemies Trenches, to the end, that the shore being
cleansed, the way might be open to bring in succor by water; and whilst,
accompanied by three or four Horsemen only, he stood behind a Tree on the
opposite shore, looking with a Prospective-glass, where the battery might best
be raised, he was hit by a Sakers-bullet, which was shot from the enemies
Trench; and falling dead from off his horse, his body was carried into
Cassalle, and after solemn obsequies, was carried into France; whither it was
accompanied by almost all the flower of those few French who were yet in Italy;
so the French being without a head in Italy, became like a body without a soul:
on the contrary, this chance added force and courage to the enemy, who began to
make their approaches, whereby to come to battery, and then to assault; the
batteries were raised in five places; the one of six Cannon in Sottello's
quarter, another of four in that of Vasques; the third, of four Cannon more in
Bolognino's quarter, the other of three Guns apiece, the one in that of Carlo
dela Gatta, and the other in that of Prince Borso: all which playing
continually upon the Town, and falling with their approaches into the ditch,
the defendants at last beat a Parley, and not long after concluded that they
would surrender the? Town, upon Articles, that all the French should march out
safe and free, and might have a safe conduct to convoy them to Cassalle; that
they should go out with Drums beating, match lighted, Colors flying, Bullet in
mouth, their Flasks full of Powder, and that they might carry with them what
Baggage they would: There marched out about 1800, whereof 1400 bore Arms, the
rest were sick o^ wounded; and they were attended by 3000 Horse to Cassalle,
under Don Vincenzo Gonzaga.

Upon these terms was Bremi surrendered, after thirteen days Siege; a place of
so great concernment for the preservation of the State of Millain; well
provided of instruments and munition for its defense, and of victuals for the
defenders; and since it seemed strange, that such a place, so well provided,
should be surrendered in so short a time; the French, who were not able to
endure it, impleaded the Commander thereof, a man of low birth, and perfer'd by
Cricky (whose Groom of the Stable he had been) to that charge; he was accused
of cowardice and of treachery; and not long after by Order from the King he was
beheaded publicly in Cassalle; but more for cowardliness then treachery. Many
will have it, that having gotten much money by dead pay, as not having kept so
many Soldiers as the King allowed for, he surrendered the Town for fear of
losing the moneys he had got, in case the Town should be taken by assault; and
that this was the treachery which he was accused of: This Town continued in the
hands of the French from the end of November 35, till the end of March 38,
wherein it was re-gained; when it was taken, it was better fortified; and the
French having kept it so little a while, it was said that they had built,
furnished, fortified and munited, it for the Crown of Spain: being taken it
seemed also to be a curb to Cass^lle, which was but 15 miles off, and that it
kept all that part of the State of Millain from the inroads of the enemy; and
that from thence the Spaniards might now make inroads into Montferrat and
Piedmont; and what was of more importance, the French could not boast that they
had any receptacle for their Armies in the State of Millain, to the conquest
whereof they had aspired; great rejoicing and Bon-fires were made for this in
Millain; but afterward, upon consideration that all the aforesaid advantages
were not to be paralleled with the cost and care of keeping it; and that the
pre^udice would be much greater which would result to the State of Millain, if
it should be re-gained by the French, then the advantage which was had by
keeping it, it was not many years after dis^antled and demolished.

The End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
Book XVI.
The Contents.
THe Duke of Savoy being dead, differences arise between the Duchess Dowager,
and the Princes her Husbands Brothers, touching the Guardianship of the young
Children, and the Regency of the State. The Duchess in the Princes absence is
sworn Governess and Regent; being compelled by the King of France, she renews
League with him. The Governor of Millain goes to before Vercelli, and after a
long Siege takes it upon Articles. The Princes of Savoy assisted by the
Spaniards and Piedmontese take many Towns, and make much progress; they go to
before Turin, and having tarried before it some days, retire without doing any
thing; falling, as before, to overrun Piedmont, they are received every where;
till Forces being sent to the Duchess from France, under the Duke of
Longueville, she recovers Chiavasco, and other Towns which the Princes had
taken. The Prince Cardinal, fearing Corneo, goes to defend it; and Prince
Thomaso, going once more with the Spanish Forces to before Turin, surprizeth
the Town; and the Governor of Millain coming in unto him, they with all their
Forces, attempt the taking of the Citadel, whither the Duchess was retired.
The Siege is suspended by a Truce, which being ended, the French under their
new General Count Harcourt, take Cheri; but being presently besieged by the
Governor of Millain, they are forced through Famine to quit it, and retreat in
face of the enemy to Carnignoula.

BUt for all this, though the State of Millian was free from Wars at home, yet
could it not long continue the quiet which it enjoyed by the recovery of Bremi;
and as if it had been by fatal misfortune subject to a Series of troubles,
being freed from defensive Wars, must be engaged in Wars offensive, not long
after, for the Interest of others; The Duke of Savoys death, the minority of
his Children, their Guardianship, together with the Regency of the State, which
was disputed between the Mother and the Uncles of the Infants, caused Civi^
Wars in Piedmont; wherein France being zealously interressed for the Mother,
and Spain for the Uncles, civil War was mixed with Foreign War; which being not
long after the Dukes death brought by Spanish Forces into Piedmont, was there
exercised with much fervor between the two Crowns; the which Piedmont being to
afford field room, and the State of Millain Arms and fomentation, the
Millinaeses suffered no small prejudice upon the same account wherein the
Piedmonteses suffered much more; for the better knowledge whereof it will be
necessary to take our rise a little higher.

There has always been a competition for the guardianship of the Pupil Princes
who are to succeed in the States, between the Mother, and the nearest kindred
of the Fathers-side; which competition, though by the Roman Laws it be
generally decided on the Mothers behalf, yet being in substance variously
practiced by the Princes of the blood, is not as yet decided, but depending;
for it has sometime been given absolutely to the Mother, sometime to the
kindred on the Fathers-side, and sometimes jointly to both; nor has Piedmont
been exempt from the like Competition; where though sometimes the kindred on
the Fathers-side have been allowed the Guardianship of the Pupil Princes, yet
this has happened either by force of Arms, or by the Mothers death, or because
the Fathers kindred have been chosen to be Guardians; but this case not having
happened in this our age, it was not evident in what condition the kindred was
under the Supreme Regency of the Mother; and every one interpreted this
obscurity to the Mothers advantage; yet the condition of times, and accidental
Circumstance, have always had a great stroke herein; in these present ruptures,
the Princes could not be more crossed, not only in their pretending to
Guardianship and administration of State, but even in their returning to their
own Country, from whence they were excluded; for to boot that they were far off
when the Duke their brother died, whereby the Duchess met not with those
oppositions which she might have had, had they been present; their being in
much disgrace with the King of France made much against their pretentions at
the present; for whereas they had formerly professed to adhere constantly to the
King of France and his party, they had with little respect quitted him a little
before their brothers death; and with much scandal to his Majesty, were gone
over to the King of Spains side; Prince Thomaso was the first, who being
distasted by the Duke h^s brother was gone from Savoy, where he was Governor,
and past privately with his wife and Children into Flanders, to the Infanta his
Cousin-german; where taking up Arms, he stuck not to come into the open field
as Captain and Conductor of the Spanish Forces, and to march with open Colors,
as has been elsewhere said, against the Ensigns of France; and the Prince
Cardinal, going not long after his brothers departure, upon the same occasion,
from the Court at Turin, went to Rome, where he openly disclaimed the
protection of France, and turned over to the Emperor, and to the House of
Austria; For which actions, the first being hostile, and the other so high an
affront to the King of France, his Majesty was much offended, holding the one
for an open enemy, and the other as totally alienated from him and therefore
desiring that the affairs of Piedmont might totally depend upon him, he would
not suffer that either of those Princes who were become followers of the
Austrian and Spanish party should have any thing to do in the Guardianship of
their Nephew, or in the Government of the State; which he would, as in justice
it did belong, should totally and integrally depend upon his Sister. He
therefore informed her, and his Agents did publicly protest, that if she
should receive the Princes into Piedmont, much less admit them to share in the
Regency, or administration of State, she would countervene the league which was
made between him and the late Duke, and which was yet in force; and he desired
that the Chief Towns should be assigned over to him, for the safety of the
young Duke, lest the Uncles assisted by the Spanish forces might make
themselves masters of the State, to the perpetual exclusion of their Nephew;
Thus by reason of the Princes being absent from Court, and through the King of
France his anger conceived against them, it was easier for the Lady Christiana,
sister to the King of France, and Duchess of Savoy, to take absolute
possession of the guardianship of her Children, and of the Regency of the
State; to the which she was called by the Laws, and by the ancient customs of
the House of Savoy, and not without some testimony of her Husbands Will. She
therefore obtained that title by succession, and reduced the Forts, Arms,
Revenues, and treasure of the State, into her power; which she did the more
easily, for that to boot with her right to the regency, she was then fortified
with both domestic and Foreign Forces which were then great and powerful in
Piedmont for the Duke, a little before his death, and also the Marshal, knowing
how great an advantage the Fort of Bremi was to them, had an intention to take
Vigevano, a City in the County of Pavia, and to fortify it; and aspired to
greater things: There were therefore about 18000 fighting men in Piedmont, part
French, and part Piedmontese, who were in a readiness for such an Enterprise.

The supreme command of the French did, by the death of their General, the
Duke, undoubtedly fall upon his Lieutenant General the Marshal; and none would
think but that he would adhere unto his Kings Sister. The Piedmontese were
commanded by Marquess Villa, General of the Dukes Horse; one in whom the
Duchess might safely confide, he being a well experienced Commander, and of
approved valor, and one whom she upon all occasions had favored very much.
The place of General of the Foot, being vacant by Count Verrua's death, was
soon conferred by the Duchess upon John Iacinto di Simiana Marquess of
Pianezza, who was then Lieutenant General of the Horse, a man both very wise
and valiant. Her brothers favor being added to all this, she was immediately
after her Husbands death sworn Guardianess of her Children, and Sovereign
Regent in Vercelli, by all the Gentlemen and Officers of the Court, and by the
military men that were the^e present, and afterward was sworn the same in
Turin by the supreme Senate of Piedmont, and by the particular decree of the
same Senate, and by all Magistrates, Feudatories, Subjects, and Vassals of the
Ducal house; and in all this, no mention was made of the Princes, nor durst any
seem thereat distasted; and yet the sequel proved, that though the former
carriage, and present conditions of Dowager Duchess, naturally born to Govern,
were satisfactory to all, and Universally acceptable, yet many of the
Piedmonteses, out of an inward affection, and devotion to their natural
Princes, were not well pleased that they should be excluded; but the evident
knowledge that their exclusion proceeded not from the Dowager, and that she had
no hand therein, did not only acquit her from so much rigor in the opinion of
the world, but was a powerful lenitive to mollify the minds of those
Piedmonteses who were well inclined to the Princes; and many of them
considering, more wisely, how many inconveniences the plurality of Gaurdians
had occasioned in other States, setting all other respects aside, were better
pleased that the Regency should be restrayn'd to one alone, then diffused into
many; and it being agreed upon by all that the Mothers right was to be
preferred before any other Competitour, they were not only not displeased that
it should be in the Dowager, but did willingly give way unto it, as justest and
safest for the State, and for the public quiet; One of the first things the
new Regent did, was to send messengers to both these Princes, to acquaint them
with the Duke their Brothers death, and how she had taken upon her the
Guardianship of her Children, and the Regency of the State; and withal how
displeased the King of France was with them both; and acquainting them how
strong the French Forces were in Piedmont, she admonished them, and did
earnestly, exhort them, that they would keep where they were at the present,
lest if they should come into Piedmont, they might fall into some great
inconveniency, by some orders that the King of France might give to his
Commanders, which it would not be in her power afterward to divert; and
telling them how that all this was done, against her will, she exhorted them
that they would endeavor to appease the Kings anger, and by joining with him
again get into his former good opinion, to the end that they might all of them
jointly cooperate to the young Dukes quiet, and safety; and as a token of her
good will toward them, she promised to make speedy payment of the Arrears, and
for the future of their annual allowances, called in French Appenage, which
were sequestered from Prince Thomaso, by the late Duke, after the battle of
Avein, because he had carried Arms there against his confederate the King; and
as for the Prince Cardinal, though they were not absolutely sequestered, they
were detained, or but slowly paid, for his having past over from one
protection to another, nothing could disturb the calm commencement of the
Dowagers Regency, as it was thought, but fear of the Spanish forces, if they
should take upon them to maintain the Princes pretenses; and should strive to
bring the Princes into Piedmont, and into the Regency of the State by mere
force; which was not very unlikely, by reason of the requisite jealousy, which
Piedmont being to be governed by the Dowager, who was so straightly united to the
Crown of France, might with good reason bring to the State of Millain; and she
was much troubled that she could no further be friend them, by reason of the
League which continued yet for some Months with the Crown of France; Fortune,
which would also have her share in these Ruptures, did miraculously assist her
herein; for the Spanish Agents who governed the affairs of that Crown in Italy,
reflecting upon the condition of Piedmont as it was now altered by the Dukes
death, and foreseeing the tempests which were likely to fall upon that State,
considered also what might redound to the State of Millains, and to the Kings
affairs in Italy, by those alterations; Wherefore weighing the business well,
and conferring together by Letters and Messengers, when they had discussed all
thing considerately, they were all of one mind, that to avoid all
inconveniences, they must not distaste the Dowager in her regency, nor cause
any jealousies in her. And the Court of Spain being acquainted with this their
resolution, did approve of it, out of the great desire they had to see the
Affairs of Italy quieted; the said Agents, doubting that the Dowager would be
compelled by the King of France to renew the league, which he had contracted
with the late Duke, and desiring to be assured of her, and to assure her, they
propounded unto her, that the King would be obliged not to molest her in her
Regency, but would assist her strongly, if she would join in League with him,
and help to drive the French out Piedmont; and not allow passage, for the
future, to the Forces of that Crown thorough her Dominions. And lastly, that he
would endeavor to make the Princes her Brothers in law observant to her, so as
she would give each of them what did of right belong unto them. It appeared
clearly, that the Spaniards by their offers labored more to accommodate their
own Affairs, then to favor those of the Dowager; which, if she should accept
of these offers, would run apparent ruin; since she could not but draw her
Brothers enmity upon her, by adhering to his Enemies, without manifest danger.
Wherefore being desired by Abbot Vasques, an Agent for the Governor of
Millain, that she would send some trusty person to Genoa, with whom he might,
by Order from the King, negotiate some Affairs, to the common good and
satisfaction; when she heard by Cavalier Olgiato, whom she sent to Genoa, what
Vasques proposals were, she answered freely. That she had always nourished
thoughts of Peace, and that she would be always ready to quench any fire which
might be kindled; wherein she would engage her self to the utmost of her power
therein. But that she could by no means, nor did it any ways suit with her to
enter into War against France upon the account of Spain, nor to separate her
self from her Brother in the present conjuncture of times. And that since she
had restored their Appenages to the Princes her Brothers in law, which was
sequestered from them by the late Duke; and treated with them as civilly, and
with as much affection as the present condition of Affairs would permit her to
do, she knew not what they could pretend unto more, nor wherein else the King,
upon this account, would interpose himself. And she was so stead fast to this,
as she would not consent to stand neuter between the two Crowns, though she was
much pressed thereunto by the Abbot; alleging that, during the League, it was
not lawful for her to make such a promise: So as the Spanish Agents seeing they
could get no more from her, who they saw could not effectually promise more,
they were for the present satisfied with her good will and intention, which
they knew must, for her own interest sake, keep her from desiring any
alteration; nor did they think to alter their good inclinations toward her.
This was the substance of the negotiation in Genoa, between Abbot Vasques, and
the Cavalier Olgiato; before which meeting things being past contrary to all
men's expectation, between the Dowage, and the Spanish Agents, with reciprocal
satisfaction; it was publicly argued throughout Italy, that secret
intelligence was held between them, and that a secret neutrality was agreed
upon by the Dowager, between the Arms of both the Crowns. For the Governor of
Millain, according to common resolution, did openly profess to be far from
thinking of molesting her, no not upon the least occasion. It was also
observed, that the Dowager did not in any manner disturb the Government in the
business of Bremi, and that which past in the Court at Rome, about these times,
did corroborate this indulged opinion. As soon as the Cardinal heard of the
Dukes death, and that the Dowager had taken upon her the Regency, to his
exclusion, he thought himself much affronted, to be made subject to her
Authority; and resolving not to submit to such exclusion, he went privately,
accompanied with a few, out of Rome toward Piedmont. This so sudden departure
caused great commotion in that Court; and every one thinking that it was not
done without knowledge of the Spanish Agents, it was much talked of both in
public and in private; and it was held to be the beginning of the troubles of
Piedmont. Wherefore the Marquess of Castle Roderigo, who was then Ambassador
from Spain at Rome, seeing all men's eyes turned upon him, upon this occasion,
did publicly declaim against it; and with many asseverations protested to the
Pope, that it was done, not only without his counsel or participation, but
without his imagination; and that he and all the Spanish Forces were far from
dreaming of any novelty in Piedmont; and that the Dowager should not be
disturbed in her Regency by them, nor by the King of Spain. These things being
known in the Court of France, and consequently well weighed by the Cardinal
Richelieu, an attentive looker into the ends and counsels of other men, and
especially into those of the Dowager, he thought it impossible that the
Spaniards setting their own interests aside, and those of the Princes, so near
allied in blood to their King, and who had lately declared themselves to adhere
to that Crown, should be, without any compensation, so free of their favors to
the Dowager in her Regency. Wherefore he could not believe but that she not
being content with the King her Brothers protection, had also anchored the ship
of her Regency upon the protection of that Crown. And therefore, though that
Crown was very well satisfied upon the account of Bremi, (knowing that it was
long ere she had been desired to assist in that defense; and that as soon as
she was requested she made preparations, which should have appea^ed before
Bremi, had not the too hasty surrender thereof prevented their march,) yet were
they not altogether free from being jealous of her sagacity, and of so many
favorable Demonstrations made to her by the Spaniards. When the Cardinal was
therefore come to Savona, he sent the Abbot Soldati to the Dowager, to acquaint
her with his coming thither; whereat she being very much moved, she presently
dispatched away to him by three several ways the Count di Camiana, the
President Morozzi, and Monsieur di Druen, with Orders to represent unto him, in
her Name, the impossibility of her receiving him, or his Brother, whilst they
adhered to the House of Austria; and that the Officers and Commanders of the
King of France his Forces, which were very strong in Piedmont, did freely
profess they would proceed with them in hostile manner, if they should come
near Piedmont; and that if she should receive them she should go against the
League, which would make them pretend that she should assign over the Towns
unto them; and to pacify him the more, she gave order to those that she sent,
to promise him in her name, that she would pay him his allowance or Appenages,
whereof she sent him by these her Messengers some ready moneys in hand: The
Prince was pacified, or at least seemed to be so, with these Proposals; and
intending to winter in Genoa, staid some days in Savona, and afterward
altering his mind, he returned to Rome; whither when he was come, he was
disquieted with what had happened in Piedmont after his Brothers death; he
began to solicit his interest with the Pope by word of mouth, and by Letters
and Messengers with those Princes from whom he thought he might receive any
advice or assistance; he made his complaints to them all of the injuries which
he had received, and strove to justify his pretenses; he alleged the ancient
Institutions and Customs of Piedmont, by which he pretended the Guardianship of
the Infant Princes of Piedmont, and the Regency of the State, during their
minority, did belong to the next akin by the Fathers side; That Thomaso, Uncle
to Bonifacio, had thus exercised the Guardianship, joined therein with Cecily,
Mother to Bonifacio; That thus Amadeo, Guietta of Burgondy being excluded, was
Guardian to Philip, and the younger Sons of Thomaso di Conte Moriana; That
Lodowick of Savoy, and Amadeo Conte di Genoa, had thus been Guardians to Amadeo
who was afterward called il Verde; wherefore he ought not to be now debarred
the same privilege, being so near allied in blood and interest to the Duke his
Nephew; That he and his Brother could not justly be banished their Country, not
having done any thing that might deserve such a punishment; That contrary to
all reason, they were declared to be Enemies to those States, the safety and
preservation whereof, especially in such dangerous times, did only belong unto
them; That the Mother was governed by the advice, and (to the horror of all
men) begirt by the Forces of those who having great designs upon those
Dominions, were known to be more desirous to get them for themselves, then to
defend them for the Orphans; which the possession of Pinarvolo and Cassalle did
sufficiently witness; That the Marshal had given proof of this in Vercelli, by
the jealousies which he caused there at the instant of the Dukes death; after
which Books declaring the presention of that Crown to the States of Savoy and
Piedmont, were publicly sold in Paris: How could those Forces be therefore
confided in, which pretend to the owning of those States to the which at the
present they profess protection? that the exclusion of the Uncles did expressly
tend to this, that the Mother might be governed as they pleased who had
procured the Uncles to be excluded; with these and the like examples which were
subject to many exceptions, and might be replied unto by many other examples,
did the Prince Cardinal go about to justify his and his Brothers cause; and
both of them thinking that they might ground their pretentions best in the
Court of Spain, they labored there, and with the Spanish Agents in Italy, to
get their cause to be embraced by them, and powerfully assisted by their
Forces; wishing them also to consider, how much danger would redound not only
to their Kings Reputation, but to his Affairs and Dominions, that the supreme
arbitrament of Piedmont should depend upon the pleasure of the King of France,
by his Sisters means; which King making himself master afterward of the chief
Towns confining upon the State of Millain, the Crown of Spain might get a new
and a powerful neighbor; that it became not his Majesty to suffer that he and
his Brother should be so persecuted, for the name sake only of having adhered
to him; then he strove to persuade the^ that the business would be easy, by
reason of the peoples inclination, who desired, beyond comparison, rather to be
governed by their natural Princes, then by a foreign Lady, who was suspected,
by reason of her greatly enforced and necessary dependancy upon the King her
Brother, upon whom being of necessity to rely; a blind man might easily see
the ruin of the house of Savoy, and the danger of having the people
recommended to their protection, subjected to a foreign yoke; and that
therefore it was most certain, that when the people of Piedmont should see
their Princes accompanied by any considerable strength, they would unanimously
abandon the Dowager, and adhere to them; but these reasons could not prevail
with other Princes who were concerned at a further distance with the
concernments of Piedmont; and much less with the Spanish Court and Agents, whom
it concerned more nearly; were it either that they were weary of seeing the war
renewed in Lombardy, or that fearing, according to the ancient Spanish maxims,
that to wrestle in Piedmont would undoubtedly draw on war from France in the
State of Millain, they desired rather to enjoy the present advantage, then
hastily to provoke trouble; they therefore held it better not to disquiet the
present peace, though it were doubtful, then to enter into new wars, which
might be long, and costly, and of uncertain event: thus thinking it suited
better with the common interest, not to innovate, then to maintain the Princes
presentions by Forces, they proceeded cooly and reservedly with them; and
seemed more inclined to dissuade them from pursuing so dangerous a business,
then to adhere unto them therein, whereby to make the Dowager jealous; they
found yet the Princes of Italy lesser inclined to them, who being desired by
the Cardinal that together with their so just cause, they would embrace the
common concernment of Italy, which did so much depend upon the good or bad
success of Piedmont; none of them would so much as appear to favor their
pretenses. The Dowagers affairs seemed therefore to proceed successfully on
this side; if fortune had not pleased to put a spoke into her wheel here, the
Dowager could ^ave desired no greater safety to her self, nor to her Sons
Principality; and the Princes, though exiled, might have shared in the
happiness, as was thought by those who saw best into business; but the heavens
had destined it otherwise; for the King of France, who was more obliged then
the Mother her self, by reason of the protection he professed to take of the
young Duke, to preserve the peace of Piedmont, which was so necessary for the
present affairs of his Sister and Nephew, became the chief instrument of
disturbing it; to the great admiration of all those who considering the
inconstancy and vieiffitude of humane affairs, wondered that the Spaniards who
had great reason to oppose the Dowager, should willingly offer her peace; and
that the King of France should purposely disturb it. This King was with
miraculous fortune and valor got rid of the wars and troubles whereinto the
Austrian Forces had brought his Kingdom, as has been said before; wherefore he
prepared to revenge himself by falling upon the Emperor and King of Spains
Territories with as much fervor as they had done upon his; to this end, he had
disburst moneys to the Hollanders, and to Duke Weymer, to the end, that these
passing back over the Rhein, might enter Germany with the men which he had
furnished them withal; and re-enforcing the Swedish weakened party, might renew
war with the Emperor; and these having at last recovered Schincks Sconce, and
making ready a powerful Army which they joined with another Army that he had
raised in his Kingdom, and entering Flanders might assault those Provinces,
which were under the King of Spain, and embroil them as formerly they had done,
but the Swedes and Hollanders covenanted with the King, that he should assault
the State of Millain with a powerful Army, at the same time that they should
fall upon Germany and Flanders; to the end, that the Austrian power being
assaulted on several parts might be the more easily subdued, and that the King
of Spain being molested in Italy might not assist the Austrians in those parts:
he therefore substituted the Cardinal of la Vallette, in lieu of deceased
Cricky, in the command of his Forces in Piedmont; and assigned him men and
moneys, wherewith to renew the war in the State of Millain, which could not be
done without the consent of the Dowager of Savoy, the French Armies being to
pass through her State, before they could enter the State of Millain; she was
therefore desired by the King not only to renew the League which was made with
her husband, and which was then expiring; but that she would join her Forces in
Piedmont with his, and resolve to make war upon the State of Millain. The
Dowager being no less affrighted, then surprised with this demand, by which all
her designs were overthrown, said, and did all she could to evade it. First,
she represented unto his Majesty, how much better peace would be for her and
her Son, in those his tender years, then war; how much the present times did
differ from those when her Husband lived, wherefore she was to govern her self
by other Counsels; that for the present the safety of her Sons States consisted
chiefly in peace, and the ruin thereof in war; she therefore desired him not
to put her upon so dangerous a point; that it better became the protection
which ^s Majesty professed, to preserve peace in Piedmont, and to keep (...)
^om the revolutions and combustions of war, then to put it to the hazard of
dangerous events by fomenting war made by his Majesty elsewhere; that the
entreaties of his Widow Sister, and the innocence of his little Nephew, ought
to prevail more with his Majesty, then the fierce cruelty of the Swedes and
Hollanders, or the ambitious and unquiet advice of his Counselors, who pretend
to vent their rage against the house of Austr^a, at the cost of Piedmont; that
his Majesty ought not to subscribe to the revengeful spirits of other men, in
prejudice to an Orphan Prince, who had put himself under his protection; (...)
therefore desired that his Majesty would be contented to consent to a Truce
with the Austrians for what concerned the affairs of Italy, or at least to a
suspension of Arms touching those of Piedmont; to the end, that his Nephew and
Client might enjoy quiet, and might avoid those dangers which the wars that his
Majesty would interest him in would draw upon him; that he would therefore
suffer him to increase in peace, and be well settled in his Principality, that
so he might be better' able to serve his Majesty in weightier affairs.

These so just entreaties, accompanied by so strong reasons, might have
prevailed with the King, but they could not move the solid resolutions of
Cardinal Richlieu, who like the Primum mobile, would turn about the lesser
Planets, and make their interests absolutely submit to those of the King. Being
therefore resolved to revenge himself upon the Spaniards for their attempts
made upon France; and being also moved by the ancient competitions and
emulation which he had long hatched against the house of Savoy, he cared for
nothing less then the peace and safety thereof, so as it might make way for his
resentments; wherefore confiding upon the continual good success of his
Counsels, and upon the prosperous conduct of the Arms of France, he was ashamed
that the Dowager should so much distrust them; and professing that both she and
her Son would be freer from mischief, whilst they were within the King of
France his quarters, then in the peaceful quietness which the Spaniards offered
her, he would compel her, not only to depend upon the Kings party, but to join
with the King in carrying on the war against the Kings enemies, as the King
would with her, against her enemies: but the Dowager persisting in being very
averse from entering into any offensive war, the Cardinal told her freely, that
she ought not to complain, if the first thunder of war, which was intended for
elsewhere, should fall upon her Sons Dominions; so being much oppressed by the
Kings demands, and by the Cardinals authority, she tried whether she could
avoid offending either of the Crowns, by going a middle way; she therefore
offered the King free passage for his men through Savoy and Piedmont, and very
earnestly desired him that that might content him, and that he would suffer her
Son to enjoy his Territories in peace; but the Cardinal not being herewith
satisfied, she condescended (since she could not choose) to the desired League;
but only as far as concerned defending of their common Dominions, not the
offending of others in theirs. The Cardinal would go no less, but grew more
severe in his demands; for thinking (as he said) that she had agreed upon some
secret intelligence with the Spaniards, he would force her to declare her self
openly to be their enemy; he therefore required that she would declare her self
absolutely for an offensive League against any whososoever; whereupon the
Dowager called all her Counselors and chief Officers of her Court together,
and acquainted them with this so important business; and though they all saw
the great danger which the renewing of the League would bring upon the Dukes
State, and upon the Dowagers Regency; yet following the late Dukes example,
they thought they had better break with Spain, then provoke the Forces of
France.

Thus the Dowager being forced to take poison for a medicine, consented to the
renewing of the League, in the same manner as it had been agreed upon by the
Duke her Husband. This resolution, though it were* violently extorted from her,
was notwithstanding the best the Dowager could put on in these times of
ruptures, not so much for her own interests, as for those of Piedmont. For
finding that the King of France was resoved to make the State of Millain the
seat of War, to join with him therein, was nothing else but to suffer the
calamities of War to fall upon the State of Millain, and to free Piedmont from
them: Whereas by doing otherwise, she must have made Piedmont the seat of War;
the two last Dukes afforded clear examples in both these cases. Charles
Emanuel, joining with the Spaniards, would oppose the succor which the French
intended to bring to Cassalle; whereby he did not only lose Pinarvolo, and
other. Towns in Piedmont, but did keep the War a long time in his own Dominion,
to the great prejudice of his people: and Victorio Amadeo, by joining with the
French, carried the War into the State of Millain, and brought all the
mischiefs that accompany War thither, freeing his own people from them. And yet
because, in the conclusion of the League, Piedmont was assaulted by the
Spaniards (as shall hereafter be said) the people, who began to make trial of
the trouble and mischiefs of War, blamed the Dowager, attributing the cause
thereof to the renewing of the League. Wherefore those Piedmontese who wished
well to the Princes inwardly, strove to make her and her Government odious,
which had till now been acceptable to all, and whispered amongst the common
people, that she had renewed the League to maintain her power of Regency the
better, and to keep the Princes the more securely far off. These whispers
prevailed with those who knew not what violence she had undergone; nor what
Wars and mischiefs would have resulted from the contrary resolution: For
doubtlesly, if she had been assaulted by the French for refusing to renew the
League, she had been forced to call in the Spaniards to her defense; who were
very ready in such a case to maintain her against her Brother. So as they might
then have more justly reproved her for calling in the Spanish Forces, which
they so much desired. Moreover, the falling foul upon Piedmont was resolved
upon in the Court of Spain, long before the League was renewed. For they no
sooner heard of the League made between the King of France, and the Swedes and
Hollanders, to the prejudice of the Spanish Crown, and particularly to the
State of Millain; but the King of Spain thought it became him to provide for
the necessary defense of those parts; and as for the Affairs of Italy, he gave
order to the Governor of Millain, that he should immediately march with his
Army against Piedmont, and should prevent the Forces of France and Piedmont; by
which he was likely to be immediately assaulted in the State of Millain. To
this effect, he sent him moneys and men; and promised him that he should be
provided with all things abundantly from Germany, and from the Kingdom of
Naples: So as the necessity which the Civilians call Causativa, by which the
Dowager was compelled by the Cardinal to join with her Brother against the
Spaniards, was turned to a necessity, which the same Civilians call Praecisa;
and therefore she who was very unwillingly drawn to renew the League, and who
by many subterfuges delayed the subscribing it, when she saw her self assaulted
in Piedmont by the Spaniards, thought it no longer fit to defer it. The
Governor of Millain had scarcely done with the troubles before Bremi, nor were
the Soldiers well cured of the wounds which they there received, when these
commands came to the Governor of Millain from the King; he thought that the
State of Millain being now free from the French by the recovery of Bremi, his
Government should hereafter be peaceful; but being surprised by new and
unexpected orders, he was forced to turn his sails according to the unlooked
for wind, which was contrary to his calculation. He therefore by means of
moneys newly received, gave order for the raising of 4000 Swissers; and
propounded Vercelli to himself for his first enterprise; to the end, that when
he should be master thereof, his way might be open for further progress in
Piedmont. This new War made by Spain against Piedmont was made in the Kings
Name, without any mention of the Princes or their Interests, which the King did
not then think good to have to do with; were it either that he thought his
Forces sufficient to invade Piedmont, without those of the Princes, or that he
thought the making use of their name would do him but little good, and be of
great expense to him; or that he thought it misbecame his Forces to embrue
their hands in civil Wars, and to foment discord between the Nephew and Uncles,
equally allied in blood to him: However it was, the Governor, in obedience to
the Kings commands, sent speedily and secretly to all the Soldiers that were
quartered in the Lomellina, that they should march toward Palestre; where
having immediately thrown a Bridge over the Sesia, he made his Horse pass over
it, that the passes about Vercelli might be taken, and so all supply kept out;
and the Foot being come the same day, toward night, they were suddenly
quartered in several places about the Town. The Spaniards and Burgondians were
quartered between the River Sero and St. Bartolomeo, the Italians were
quartered between St. Bartolomeo and the Zocolanti, or Franciscan Friars. The
Dutch and Grisons, which were newly confederated, and which Grisons were never
before known to fight in the Spanish Camp, were quartered between the Zocolanti
and the Sesia: the Island which is made by the Sesia and the Sero, being the
most dangerous place of all the rest, as most exposed to be assaulted by the
Enemy, was allotted for quarter to the Marquess Iovan Francisco Serra, a
Genoese; to whom the Governor gave a Brigade of old Neapolitans, that he might
serve with them as Camp-master in the present war: and because the place
required a better Garrison to defend it, there were added some Companies of
Spaniards, and Grisons, and some Millaineses; and that so sudden and unexpected
a moving might not appear strange and unjustifiable; the Governor leaving
Cardinal Trivultio, at the Helm of the State when he marched into the State,
published a Manifesto in form of an Edict, wherein repeating what has been
formerly said, he told; that the King of France, contrary to the Articles of
Ratisbone and Cherasco, had through threats gotten Pinarvolo from the late
Duke; and had afterward constrained him to join in league against the State of
Millain; which notwithstanding the King of Spain, bearing with that Dukes
Childrens minority, and considering that those States were governed by a
Dowager Princess, had pardoned the hostility committed against him by the
Father, and the Grandfather, and not using any resentment against the Orphans,
or the Widow, or State of Piedmont, had continued his love and Protection to
that Ducal House; so as he had not only forborne all hostility, but had
acquainted the Dowager, that if she desired peace and friendship with him she
should not assist the French Armies with men, Victuals, or any other thing, nor
continue the league with the King of France, but should continue a real
Neutrality between the two Crowns; offering her, moreover, to assist her with
all the Forces of his Crown, in case she should be troubled by her brother, for
her Neutrality; that the Dowager not being permitted by her brother to embrace
so justifiable, and so convenient a contract, was forced to enter into a league
against the State of Millain, to the end that the King of France might
afterward possess himself of the Orphans State; that therefore his Majesty
being desirous to continue his Protection to the State, and knowing that there
was no other humane means to free it from oppression; but to make himself
master of the Towns of Piedmont, he was compelled to assault them, not out of
any intent of keeping them, but to drive out the French, and to compel them to
a good peace; by which when they should restore Pinarvolo, and all other the
Dukes Towns, his Majesty would also restore whatsoever he should have gotten by
his Arms in Piedmont; and that so the House of Savoy being put into peaceful
and quiet possession of the States which it inherited from it is predecessors,
might enjoy them in peace and security; he professed therefore that he intended
not to make War upon the Natural Subjects of the Country, nor to enter Piedmont
as an Enemy; wherefore he exhorted the natural Piedmonteses, that as he would
not suffer his Soldiers to injure them, they should also forbear wronging his
Soldiers; and that keeping correspondency with his Majesty's Forces they would
not oppose their so justifiable intentions, which aimed only at the welfare
of their natural Prince, and of Piedmont: and he lastly declared, that if they
should do otherwise, and assist the French Forces, he should be forced to alter
his manner of making War, and make them partake of the miseries which war
brings with it usually. This pretense of Protection, clad with gracious and
affectionate appearance, was not generally thought real, and, in process of
time, was known to be feigned by the Governor, to make his taking up arms
appear less odious; for the King of Spain, his Court, and whole Nation,
provoked by Wars made against him, sometimes by Duke Charles Emanuel, sometimes
by Duke Victorio, who joined in league with France, to his prejudice, and now
lastly by the present Dowager; who having renewed the league with her brother,
was ready to make War upon him; not being able to suffer any longer so many
hostile Acts, resolved at last to cast aside all his Royal respects which
inclined him to the good of Savoy; and though he knew that the Dowager was
compelled to that War, and that neither she nor her young son were guilty of
their predecessors attempt, and much less of this whereunto they were forced;
yet seeing that the King of France, who was more nearly concerned in his Sister
and Nephews interest, cared little for what of prejudice might redound to them
thereby, so as he might make War offensive upon the State of Millain; neither
did he the King of Spain, who was the party assaulted, think himself bound to
suffer himself to be wrought upon by those respects of love and compassion
which prevailed nothing with the King of France; The Edict being published, the
Governor, in execution of the Kings Commands, went to encamp before Vercelli;
which was a City begirt with walls, strengthened by Bulwarks, and environed by a
large Ditch, beyond the which were many fortifications, ordered and made with
incomparable industry by Duke Charles Emanuel, when it was restored to him by
Articles of peace, in the year 1617, after it had been taken from him by Don
Pedro di Toledo: by which excellent fortifications which rendered it almost
impregnable, it was in a manner new built. The Marquess Dogliano son in law to
General Villa, a great confident of the Dowagers, was Governor of the Town;
who together with his Father in Law opposed the Marshal, when after the Dukes
death he would have taken it: two days before the arrival of the enemies Army,
there were two Troops of Horse entered into the Town, which were sent from
Turin; which came in a very seasonable time: for the more secure the Town was
by reason of the fortifications, the more need it had of Soldiers; for there
were in it only three Troops of Horse, the two Troops that came last being
therein numbered, and the Foot of the Garrison, together with the Citizens which
were fit to bear Arms, were far short of that number which was requisite to
defend all the works; but the Defendants, though they were but few, trusting in
the relief which they shortly expected, betook themselves courageously to the
business; they knew that the French Army was fallen down from the Alps, and was
come into Piedmon^, more in number by what was given out then indeed they were;
but in effect, being joined to the Dowagers men they made near about 7000 Foot,
and 3000 Horse. The French Army was commanded by the Cardinal Della Vallette,
and by his elder brother the Duke of Candale; who though they Commanded the
Kings Forces in Piedmont with equal Authority, and with the like title of
General, yet the Cardinal had the preheminency in Authority; both by reason of
his being Cardinal, and for that the Cardinal Richelieu did more confide in
him; but as the news of these Forces, which were presently to come to relieve
the Town, did much encourage the Defendants, so did it make the Governor of
Millain the more careful to fence himself against such a force, which he
foresaw would fall upon him, when his Siege was at the fairest; and therefore
having allotted their quarters to each nation he betook himself with all
diligence to draw the line, which was about ten miles in compass; a work not
only strong for the large compass thereof, for the greatness and height, but
more for the deepness of the ditch which it was environed with, for the
Artillery which was set in several convenient places, and for being very well
tackled: the line was soon finished through the diligence which the Governor
caused to be used therein; but though the work nor workmen were not disturbed
from without, for the great store of rain which fell, kept the enemy from
advancing fast, yet were they often assaulted from within by the Garrison of
the Town; who whilst the Army being busied about their Fortifications, did not
much mind the Siege, made out four Sallies at one and the same time; which
being given in four several places, they were at last repulsed, though they
fought valiantly; and in one of them, which was made on the Governors own
Quarters, they left many behind them, whereof four Captains, and one Sergeant
Major. The line being finished, they fell to make their approaches, and order
was given to make batteries; the Spaniards and Burgonians wrought over against
a great Tenaglia which was before them; the Dutch and Grisons wrought over
against another Tenaglia which stood on the Front of their Quarters; and the
Italians wrought also hard against a great Bulwark which was without the City,
all of them striving who should be the first that should finish their task. And
whilst these were thus busied, they ceased not to molest the City in several
manners, particularly with Grenades, which flying on high, and then falling
into the City, broke down houses, and few many. They betook themselves also at
the same time to the taking of certain little houses, which though they were
without the Enemies Fortifications, were not abandoned by the Defendants. The
Dutch went against these on one side, and the Italians on another; and at last
they took them, though not without much loss of blood to the assailants;
amongst the rest Bartholomeo Palavicino was there slain, a Captain of Horse,
whilst he was backing the Foot who fought against the little Houses; Count
Iulio Cesare Boromeo, Camp-master, was also slain there. The Defendants were
not discouraged at the loss of these two Houses, but sallying out the next day,
they recovered that which the Dutch had taken, and slew almost all that had
taken it, and took the Captain Prisoner, who was notwithstanding rescued by his
own men before the fight was over, and the same House was again regained by
them, not without much loss of blood: But as the Camp without was held work by
the sallies from within, so did not they cease to molest the Enemies Country
which was without, by sending out Horse. Don Vincenzo Gonzaga routed a Troop of
Tronsono's Horse; and others did the like. The news of succor which was coming
did this mean while increase; and the Dowager being much concerned in the
preservation of this Town, resolved to go her self in person to Crescentino,
where the whole body of the relieving Aemy was to meet: Here she assisted at
the general Musters, encouraging the Soldiers with her presence, and by her
fair demeanor, and by her speech, wherewith she was richly endowed by nature;
she encouraged the Captains, and chief Officers, giving them rich presents, and
omitted not any thing which might incite them to expedition, and to behave
themselves bravely in this business, which, the more to inanimate them, she
called hers: but the Army was retarded by the abundance of rain, which kept
them from marching; at last, after long delay, they marched on with ten piece
of great Cannon. The Cardinal, and the Duke his Brother, who were naturally
given to be extraordinary circumspect, slow and irresolute, in all their
Military actions, did also much delay this succor; insomuch as they appeared
not in sight of the besieging Army till 20 days after they had begun the Siege.
The Governor had therefore the longer time to perfect his Fortifications, and
to bring on his approaches, and to throw a Bridge over the Sesia, by which he
might send to encounter the enemy, in case they should attempt to relieve the
Town on that side; at last the first ranks of the French appeared on this side
the River, and all the rest appeared soon after; but the Commanders stood some
days idle, contemplating the strength of the Trenches, which finding to be
almost unvanquishable, they also threw a Bridge over the Sesia, over against
the Abbey of St. Lasaro, by which they sent men to possess themselves of that
Abbey, which being defended but by 60 Soldiers, after the making of some shot,
surrendered; here the French made their head-quarter, and began diligently to
fortify it; viewing attentively on which side, and where, they might best
bring the relief; and the Governor, though at the first appearance of the
enemy he seemed very desirous to fall to an assault, lest in case of delay his
Army might be assaulted by the enemy on the back, yet he was kept from doing
so, for that all things were not ready for an assault.

For though the Spaniards were already come to the brink of the ditch of the
Tenaglia, on the front whereof there stood a Half Moon, which was made
undefensible by their Cannon-shot; and though the Dutch were also gotten to the
ditch of the other Tenaglia; yet the Italians, who were in the middle between
them, were not come within 45 paces of the Bulwark which they were to assault;
and yet the Governor fearing to be disturbed if he made any longer delay,
setting all considerations of whatsoever difficulties aside, gave Order that
every one should be ready in their quarters, about two a clock at night. Thus
the sign being given at the hour appointed, they fell on courageously; and
finding the defendants awake and vigilant, the conflict was great, and hard,
the defendants assisting themselves with Grenades, Fireworks and Stones; and
the assailants as valiantly overcoming all difficulties, continued constant in
the enterprise. The Spaniards having first of all bereft the Half Moon which
stood before them, of all defense by their Artillery, got upon the Tenaglia,
and killing some, and taking other some of the defendants prisoners, they
became masters of it, and fortified themselves therein; the like befell the
Dutch, who likewise took the other Tenaglia: The Italians met with more
difficulty, as not being yet fully prepared; the Bulwark which fell to their
share yet overcoming all difficulties, they advanced unto the ditch, and
driving away the defendants betook themselves to the Bulwark, which not having
been played upon appeared impregnable; yet being masters of the ditch they would
not quit the enterprise; but dug a Mine, the fear whereof made the Bulwark
be abandoned the next day; and the assailants took it, and fortified themselves
there: the defendants were astonished at the loss of these three chief places;
the rather for that they saw it was done whilst the French Army looked on; who
without moving suffered these three so important Works to be lost; and yet when
those within the Town were offered fair conditions by the Governor, they
showed much courage and confidence in their answer: but, on the other side,
they acquainted the French Army with what they had suffered, and in how great
danger they were of being lost, if not soon relieved, not only in defending
themselves against assaults, and in sallying out, but for want of bullet, to
supply the which all the Pewter of the City had already been made use of; upon
which news the French Army advanced to within Musket Shot of the City on
Sandoval side, and intending to break down the enemies Bribge they sent a
Fireboat down the River, which being detained fell on fire to no purpose; yet
resolving to bring relief, they cast their eye upon the Island made by Servo
and Sesia; and thinking that, as indeed it was, to be the weakest part, they
resolved to pass by there; and to keep the Spanish Camp from re-enforcing the
Island, upon the coming on of night they made several seeming assaults upon
sundry parts of the Line: nor did the Stratagem prove vain; for the enemy
fearing that the succor would be attempted on a part which was guarded only by
the common people, they sent for some men from the Island, thither; though the
Marquess Serra, whose charge it was to defend the Island, did sufficiently
oppose it; so about the fourth hour of the night a Body of 1500 Foot advanced,
part French, led on by Colonel St. Andrea; and partly Savoyards and
Piedmontese, led on by Colonel Senantes. The Cardinal deputed Monsieur di
Castellano, a Marshal of the French Camp, and the Marquess of Pianezza, General
of the Dowagers Foot, to order the whole action; who had leave to cull out the
best commanded men both of the French and Piedmontese, to order the business,
to discover the foords, and to pass their men thorough them, whilst the rest of
the Army stood ready to keep off any diversion: the relievers waded over the
foord, which came up to their middle; and the Marquess Serra prepared for
defense industriously, notwithstanding his Forces were dismembered, they were
stoutly resisted every where; and the attempt would doubtlesly have failed, if
aguard of Grisons, who were placed between the Spaniards and Italians, had
fought as stoutly as the rest did; but no resistance being there made (for they
basely abandoned the station at the very first brunt) the relievers began to
pass over the Line. Serra who was employed elsewhere when the business began,
came to that place; and finding that the defendants had basely thrown away
their Arms, and were directly run away, he encouraged those few that followed
him, and gave in amongst the thickest of the enemy; where fighting with much
danger to himself, and encouraging others by his example, he stopped the current
of the relievers; and though he was shot through the Arm by a Musket, he
continued fighting, till Francisco Tuttavilla, Lieutenant to the Camp master
General, came in to his relief with a squadron of those who were under
Bolognino; and who having no certain place allotted them to defend, were
appointed to go where there should be most need: And Bolognino coming in with
the rest after Tuttavilla, those relievers who had not yet past the line were
repulsed. Moreover, the Horse which being distributed into several squadrons
stood in guard between the City and the line, were faulty also upon this
occasion; some whereof ran downright away, and part being deceived by the
succourers, who in the dark night cried Viva la Spagna, past by those Horse,
and stole into the City; and about 1200 of them entered with the succor, which
did prolong the life of the Town for a few days, but was not sufficient to do
so long: For the Enemy having possessed themselves of the chiefest outworks,
those of the Town were not able to recover them, though they endeavored it. For
they sallied to recover the Bulwark which was taken by the Italians; here the
conflict was greater then in other parts and it had been recovered, had not
Bolognino advanced with the most of his men; and, after a bloody contest,
forced them to retreat; and the assaults given for the two Tenaglia's had the
like fortune; from both which, after a fierce fight, the Assailants were beaten
back. The Governor being angry to see the Town relieved, made some Officers be
proceeded against and put to death; who thorough their carelessness were the
occasion thereof: And when he saw the Defendants beaten back from the recovery
of those places which his men had taken, he made that part of the Island be
better fortified and put more men into it, by which the Enemy had got in, and
made all the batteries be doubled, the approaches advanced, and all things
necessary prepared to give another general assault. And because a squadron of
Horse appeared beyond the River, which turned toward the foot of the Bridge
that was thrown over on the other side, he ordered some Horse to go out against
them, who forced the Enemies Horse to retreat, and slew many of them. The
French Army finding by these proceedings, the impossibility of advancing with
succor, they fell to battery, and placed 16 piece of Cannon on the side just
opposite against the City; which commanding the Island, played furiously upon
the fortifications wherewith it was munited. The like was done from the City,
not so much by Cannon, as by Musketshot; which being given fire unto nearer
hand, hurt many of the Garrisons of the neighboring works and Trenches. Those
who defended the Island did not only shelter themselves against these
batteries, but raised a counter-battery, whereby they did much prejudice to
some Regiments that were come to quarter nearer. In this interim, those of the
City made out a good and gallant sally with 600 Musketeirs, against a little
Fort which was raised in the Island, by which (if it had been taken) great
relief might have been brought into the City. And to this purpose Marquess
Villa, who held intelligence with those within the Town, was come to the River
side, and was ready to introduce it; but neither did this attempt succeed; for
those that defended the little Fort stood firm, and with-stood the first
affault, till fresh Horse came in to their assistance; who playing upon the
Enemy on the flank, forced them after a long and obsimate skirmish to retreat,
having slain above 50 of them, and taken eight of their Captains, whereof four
dyed, and four remained Prisoners; by reason of this misfo^tune, and for
because the Spanish Horse scouring the Country, kept back victuals, and keept
the Enemies Camp from forraging, the Cardinal, and Duke of Vallette, who had
made the battery only to satisfy the pressing desires of the Dowagers
Commanders, began to think upon giving over; they were hereunto incited by the
reinforcement of 4000 Swissers which were by the Governors orders newly come
unto the Camp; but they were compelled much more to abandon the enterprise
speedily, hearing that Cardinal Trivultio was come from Millain, with 8000 good
Foot, and that he was upon his march to assault them in their works; so as
growing cautious, and circumspect, according to their custom, they were
resolved not to be entrapped between the Cardinal and the Governor, who was
now reinforced with new men; they therefore removed their Artillery, and past
back over the Sesia, and going round the line by long marches, they intended to
fall upon the enemy on the opposite part of the line which was over against the
Pralvolo; which resolution, as it occasioned great consternation amongst the
besieged, who thought themselves abandoned; so did it much comfort the
besiegers, who were not long able to continue in that condition, by reason of
the prejudice they received by battery, from which they could not well shelter
themselves by reason of the stony and gravelly earth; and more by reason of the
thunder of Cannon, and hail of Musket Shot, which absolutely impeded their
works by day, and beat down those which they could make in the nights, which
were now grown short; and it was thought by the Piedmontese, and by the Spanish
Commanders, that if that battery had been continued a little longer, the Town
would undoubtedly have been freed, and the Victory gotten. The Lords of
Vallette, being freed from Trivultio's imminent danger, by passing over the
Sesia, sent some of their Horse a little lower, to the end that being past over
the Sesia at Palestre, by which way victuals were brought to the Spanish Camp,
they might block up that Avenue. Palastre was not only taken, but sacked, and
great booty was gotten there; these Horse quartered in the neighboring Towns,
thinking that by their yet further keeping the Spanish Camp from Victuals, it
would the sooner be forced to raise the Seige: they failed in this design, as
well because the Camp was already provided with as much as might serve them for
a fortnight, (in which time the enemies horse would have been forced to seek
new quarters) as also that though the passage by Palastre was blocked up, that
of Novara was open, by the enemies departure from the Abbey, which was more
commodious for the conveying of Victuals. There happened many Skirmishes between
these Horses and those who guarded the line on that part; and it being known
that the French Army, though it was past over the Sesia, would not give over
the business; but rather that being recruited by new Forces come from France,
they would quickly return, and joining with the Horse at Palastre, would resume
it with more vigor; therefore the quarter by the Abbey was better fortified,
whither that recruit of men were sent, who did defend the Island when it was in
greatest danger; nor did their provisions cease here; the Governor did greatly
desire to make use of this advantage of the enemies being gone, that he might
the more safely give a general assault, without danger of being fallen upon by
the enemy on the back: he therefore ordered all things with the greatest
diligence that might be; to this effect, he solicited all his men to throw
galleries over the Ditch; he made the battery by Cannon be redoubled, to make
breaches; and provided for all other things necessary. So as all their
endeavors were to get to the walls by the shortest way, though it were not
very safe doing so; and whilst they were intent hereupon they heard that the
enemy would quarter the next day at Prarnold, a Town on the right hand of the
river under Vercelli, not above a mile distant from the line; wherefore though
things were not very well in order, the Governor gave directions for a general
assault to be given the next day; the Italians battery had not as yet made a
sufficient breach in the Wall; and the Spaniards though they had sprung a Mine
between the Bulwark de Nobili and that of S. Andrea, yet it proved uneffectual,
by a strange accident; for twenty yards of the Wall which was blown up by the
violence of the fire fell down entire and whole into the same place where it
stood before, and did so join, as there appeared not any the least gap whereby
they might enter; the Dutch were only in somewhat a better condition; for they
had made themselves masters not only of the platform, but also of a half Moon
which was in the Tenaglia which they had gotten a little before; these three
Nations going, by the Governors orders, to the assault, they fought with more
courage then fortune: for the Italians, who under Count Iovanni Boromeo coming
with much courage to the breach which was made by the Cannon, and which was not
yet perfected, were sorely gauled both on the Front and Flank, by four pieces
of Cannon, by Musket Shot, and by stones, So as not being able so much as to
get over the Ditch, which was partly full of water, and partly full of stiff
Clay, they were forced to go about by the Gallery, at the Foot of the Wall, and
to go round about above fifty paces, to find the breach, to which not being
able to get without much prejudice (for they were every where exposed to the
enemies Muskets;) Don Carlo Della Gatta resolved to fall with his Brigade upon
the Bulwark from whence the assaulters were played upon; this Bulwark was made
of earth and Fagots, and was environed with a dry ditch; so as Gatta thought he
might easily gain it; which if he had done, he held for certain that, the
impediment ceasing, the breach might be easiy entered; but he was deceived: for
being shot in the leg by a Musket, he was forced to retreat; and though his
Sergeant Major Iovan Battista Brancaccio got, with some of the hardiest of that
Brigade, beyond the middle of the Bulwark, yet they were stoutly resisted, and
at last repulsed: as were they also who were gotten to the breach through so
many dangers, under Boromeo; nor did the Spaniards do what they intended; for
having in vain attempted that place where the Mine had played to no purpose,
and failing of their hopes by reason of the green bulwark, by which they were
played upon on the Flank, they sent 500 Foot to take it; who having fought a
long while, they sometimes thought to gain it; as they had done,
notwithstanding that it was stoutly defended, had not the Governor Dogliano,
who saw the danger, sent a body of French seasonably thither under Colonel S.
Andrea, a stout and understanding Commander of the same nation; who though he
fell being shot by a Musket; yet having together with the rest discharged the
part of a gallant man, the Assailants were forced to retreat; nor did the
assault given by the Dutch prove more effectual; who when they had gotten the
platform and the half moon, (as has been said) went to assault the breach
which they had made: For though it was noysed that the Spaniards had scaled the
walls, which made them desirous to appear no less forward then they, yet
finding the Defendants very ready and resolute, it was not possible for them to
advance. So as the Governor of Millain finding by the many disadvantages of
the unseasonable assault, and by the good order and resolution of the
Defendants, that it would be but loss of time to persevere in the enterprise,
and that it was impossible to do more; after four hours fierce and obstinate
fight, he ordered a retreat to be beaten, and that the assault should be given
over, by which there was nothing got but the platform and half moon which the
Dutch had taken, and the death of Colonel St. Andrea, which was reputed a great
loss by them within the Town. But neither did the Dutch keep that long which
they had gotten, for they were driven from thence within a few hours, being
assaulted before they were fully fortified. And notwithstanding that they
resisted stoutly, yet so furious was the assault, as (none coming to assist
them) they were but hardly dealt with, and many of the chief of them were
slain; amongst which, the Lieutenant of Prince Borso, who commanded them: The
reason why no succor was sent, was, for that the Enemies Horse hearing that
the assault was given came from Parvolo, and by falling upon the Line
endeavored to assist the assaulted City, at least by diversion, by drawing the
Enemy from assaulting the City, to defend their own Camp, as they necessarily
must do. The Assailants and Defendants having vied who should show most Valor
and Resolution, the Marquess of Caracena, with his Brigade of Spaniards, began
to sink a Mine under that wall which played, and the Italians sunk another
under the wall that was battered; and the Dutch, not being able to sit down by
the affront which they had received, endeavored the next day to regain the
works which they had lost; and going in a great body to assault them, after a
long contest, they lodged in the half moons parapet, advanced to the foot of
the platform, under which they sunk another great Mine: And when fire was
ready to be given, and that they were prepared for a general assault, the
Marquess of Caracena, as he was ready to give fire unto his Mine, and to fall
to an assault, might hear a parley beaten from within the Town, wherewith he
presently acquainted the Governor; who commanding that all offense should be
forborne, wished him to know of the Enemy what Articles they demanded? they
demanded that Hostages might be given, and then that the treaty might begin;
which being granted, the Treaty lasted long; at last the difficulty was reduced
to the time of surrender: The Town demanded eight days, and the Governor
would give but two hours, and both parties being stiff in their proposals; and
answers, it was at last agreed, that the Assailants should enter the works that
were yet in the Defendants hands, beyond the ditch, at two hours before sunset
next day, and that the Defendants should march out of the City at two of the
clock the next day, and deliver up the City to the Governor; with leave to
carry away the bones of Duke Victorio, who was there slain and buried: In
performance of which agreement, the works were presently quitted, and
afterward the City was delivered up unto Marquess of Caracensa, who took
possession of it, at the end of 40 days after the siege was begun. The
Soldiers marched out with their Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, Bullet in
mouth, Match lighted, and Colors flying, and carried with them three pieces of
Cannon, with a safeconduct, to convoy them (and necessary carriages) to St. Ia,
as was agreed upon by Articles. And they marched out, if not glorious for their
gallant defense and keeping of the City, at lest with much honor both to the
Commanders and Soldiers, for the singular Valor which they had showed in
defending the City. The Dowager was much troubled at the loss of Vercelli, she
being thereby deprived, at the beginning of her Regency, of so noble and
important a place, the very Bulwark and Frontier of Piedmont; and she was not
well satisfied with the Cardinal of Valletta; who being at the time of the
surrender in Parvolo, but two miles from Vercelli, if he had behaved himself
otherwise then he did, it was thought the City might have been preserved; for
he was taxed commonly with coolness and irresolution, in the whole carriage of
this business. Vercelli being surrendered, the Spanish Army kept there, busying
themselves in demolishing the line, and in repairing the walls which were
beaten down by battery. And at the same time the French and Piedmontese
retreated not far off to Costanza and Petegno, where they tarried till the
Spanish Army returned to the State of Millain; which they did not till they had
furnished Vercelli sufficiently with Victuals and Munition, and with a very
good Garrison; At whose departure, the French and Piedmontese Army went to the
parts about Cassalle, where they lay loytering all that Summer. For the
Governor fell fick of a Fever which he had contracted thorough his
pains-taking during the siege, and which made him keep his bed two months; so
as he forbore troubling the Enemy, and was not troubled by them. But Don
Francisco di Melo, who was gone long before into Spain, being returned into
Italy about the end of Summer, with the command also of Governor of the Forces
in the State of Millain, went not long after the beginning of September into
the Field with an Army; and passing over the Sesia at La Motta, made as if he
would go to Trino, that he might draw the Enemy into those parts; but turning
suddenly upon Bremi, he past over the Poe; and sending Carlo della Gatta to
take Pomaro, he kept in Giroli till the business of Pomaro was ended: which
whilst it was prolonged by the difficulty of battery, and by the necessity of
reiterating Mines, the Cardinal went out of Cassalle, together with the General
of the Horse, to spy what the Enemy did; and finding that they came to meet
him, he retreated to Cassalle, leaving the Gene^al of the Horse in the Field,
that he might seem to make some resistance, between whom, and the General of
the Spaniards Horse, some little skirmishes of very small moment past; and the
Spaniards being on their way toward Alessandria, the French and Savoyards past
over the Poe, and having taken Montemango and Rifrancore, they went to
Filizzano; where throwing a Bridge over the Tanaro, they tarried till toward
the end of October, daily skirmishing with the Enemy, till both of them, forced
by the cold weather, and for want of Forage, returned to their winter
quarters; the Castle of Pomaro being first taken, which was immediately
demolished: whilst affairs proceeded thus slowly in Lombardy, there happened a
Sea conflict, and that no small one, above Genoa, between fifteen French, and
fifteen Spanish Galleys: those of Spain were conducted by Don Roderigo di
Velasco, Captain of the Admiral of Sicily, whom all the rest were under; and
they were full of Foot, who were to land at Finale, and so to go for the State
of Millain; which being known by the French Galleys, which were come from
Provence in equal number under their General, Count Poncurletto, well provided
of rowers, and fighting men, and who keeping upon the Seas of Provence went in
pursuit of the Spaniards, but with intention not to fight them till they had
landed their men; it happened that the Spaniards, for some occasion of their own,
came to Anchor upon the shore of Finale; which when the French knew, they
thought that they had landed their men there, and that therefore they might
safely fight them, and take them whilst they returned empty to Genoa: the
Spanish Admiral, who was more courageous then considerate, being aware thereof,
refused not battle which he thought was presented by the Enemy, not considering
how much the Kings interests were concerned in that conflict: the French made
toward the Spaniards, full of fervor, and hope; but when they were come near,
and found them well provided of men, they were somewhat astonished; yet being
so near as they could not retreat, they must be content and fall to work; but
one of them which shut up the left wing, for mere fear, hoysed sail before the
fight began, and escaped the danger: they encountered some miles above Genoa, on
the first of September, the day being fair and calm; they fought a long while
with equal fortune valiantly on both sides: The Spaniards were more in number
of fighting men then the French, but came short of them in number and quality
of Mariners, who were all Volunteers, and well furnished with pebble-stones,
which (abandoning their Oars in the conflict) they threw in such abundance, as
the Spaniards not being able to hold their Muskets in their hands, and much
less govern them, they were for a while much impeded, and of no use: The French
exceeded the Spaniards also in Targets, and in certain little Castles which
stood on their Prows, lined some with course Canvas, some with Mattresses,
whereof they provided themselves well, as being come with an intention to
fight; whereas the Spaniards, who came casually to fight, were unprovided of
any such defenses; but the French had much more the better of the Spaniards, by
the shameful running away of four of the Spanish Galleys, who, the first Volley
of Shot being given, withdrew themselves, and in the heat of the conflict
abandoned their companions; and yet the eleven Spanish Galleys which remained
fought so valiantly, though upon such disadvantage, as when the hail of stones
ceased, they slew many of the French, and begun to have the better of the
business, had not a stratagem used by the French gotten them the victory; who
began to cry out liberty, liberty; at the hearing whereof, the Spanish Gally
slaves, who were partly Turks, partly people that were condemned to the O^r, or
sold for a prize, mutined and began to turn upon their Masters, who not being
able to resist their enemies at home, and abroad, after an obstinate and fierce
Fight were rather Conquered then Conquerours; and the French being but hardly
dealt with, the Fight was rather parted, then given over; where in an hours
space, there were slain 4000, between Soldiers, Mariners, and Gally-slaves;
the French took five of the Spanish Galleys; and the Spaniards took three of
the French Galleys; the French returned toward Provence, but with so few men
of any condition whatsoever, as they could hardly rid any way, not sailing
above 12 or miles a day; and set aside the greater number of Galleys that were
taken by the French, and the Spanish Admiral's being taken Prisoner, who being
sorely wounded died within two days, and that the French were Masters of the
Field; they got nothing of advantage by the Fight; and they returned so slowly,
as they left the Admiral of Spain by the way, not being able to carry her along.

Not long after this conflict the young Duke of Savoy died, in the seventh year
of his Age, on the third of October, 1638, within one year after his Father;
whose death was the last thing that happened that year, and made more way for
what happened afterward. Charles Emanuel succeeded him, the only remaining
male-issue of Duke Victorio Amadeo, being but four years old; wherefore the
Princes succession growing the nearer (for the women, according to the Law
Salick, do not succeed in Savoy) their pretentions increased the more; and it
seemed more justifiable that they should be admitted into the Regency with
their Sister in Law; that in case this their Nephew should die, there might be
no occasion of con^ending with her for succession; but that changing the title
of Guardian into that of absolute Prince, he of the two Princes who was to
succeed might remain Duke without any interruption of right. These ends and
intentions were corroborated by speeches that were quickly given out both in
Italy and elsewhere, that the Child, who was of perfect health, was melancholy,
and of a weak complexion, and like his Brother, not likely to live long, and
that he was subject to great sicknesses; that the Dowager joined closer with
the French; and did not only willingly keep them in Piedmont, but brought them
in; that she treated of putting Towns and Forts into their hands; and that
which irritated the people more against the Dowager, and took them off from the
good inclination they bare her before, was, that the King of France his first
Son being born a little before the Duke of Savoys death, the Dowager was in
treaty of a marriage between the young Dolphine and her eldest Daughter, with
the States of Piedmont and Savoy for her portion; as if the succession did
belong to her after the death of the two last Dukes, excluding her two Uncles;
and for the better confirmation of this rumor, it was also said, that the
Court of France had fallen upon the same consideration, as might be known by
certain printed Papers which were publicly sold in Paris touching this
business; and that the Dowager had put this case to her favorites, the
Civilians of Piedmont, which was very unlikely, not to say, a fiction; for, not
to say any thing of the disparity of ten years in age, which was between these
two young Princes, and of the various contingencies which might disturb this
match; it was more then certain, that the Dowager could have no such thoughts
during her Sons life; and in case he should die, her authority would be at an
end, whereby it would be impossible to effect it; and yet these rumors had
some impression upon the common people, who look not inwardly into things, and
upon such as though they consider them and know them to be very vain, are
notwithstanding born away with passion, and desire of novelty. The Princes
pretenses being favored by these rumors and new accidents, began to be
embraced and protected by the King of Spains Forces, whose Agents had been
hitherto deaf to all entreaties, and far from embracing them; and the people
having been found to be averse to those ends and intentions in the business of
Vercelli, wherewith they adorned the war already made against that State, they
began to believe, that if war should be made in Piedmont upon the score of
putting the Government into the Princes hand, the business would proceed the
better; and that if the Princes would appear therein themselves in person, it
would excite the people to be more fervent in driving out the French, and in
suppressing the Dowagers party; they therefore applied themselves to maintain
the Princes pretenses with their Forces, and to listen the more willingly
thereunto. The Prince Cardinal, hearing of his Nephews death, was once more
privately stolen from Rome, and was unexpectedly come to Piedmont; and because
at that very instant the Town of Carmagnuola was found to favor him, and soon
after the very Citadel of Turin, it was thought that he was come with a firm
belief to be admitted into them both; in which case, taking it for granted that
he should undoubtedly be favored by the people, and backed by the Spaniards,
he was sure that the Dowager would be able to do little, and that his
pretentions would be brought to a happy end; but such designs, being usually
fallacious, proved to be so very much in this case; for being come within a few
miles of Carmagnuola, he found the Treaty was discovered and prevented; so as
being kept out from thence he turned toward Cheri, as a fitting place whereby
to get into the Citadel of Turin: being come to Cheri he found there, that the
Treaty of the Citadel was also discovered and prevented. The Dowager was not a
little moved, when at the unexpected coming of the Prince she found so
important Treaties discovered; and much more when she saw the Spanish Forces
were advanced to the Confines of Alba and Asti; yet not at all dismayed, she
failed neither in Courage nor Counsel; but drawing the Piedmontese Garrison
presently out of the Garrison of the Citadel, she put thereinto a Regiment of
Lorreiners, commanded by the Signeior di San' Martino, a Gentleman well versed
in Arms, and an ancient servant of the Court of Turin, who had been often
employed by Duke Victorio in the Government of Vercelli, and of other chief
Towns; and she secured the former Governor, and the other accomplices of the
treaty; she got the Cardinal della Valetta, to convey them to Sommarina del
Bosco; she doubled the Guards of the City, and those of the Dukes Palace, and
put all the Soldiers in Arms; which being done, she dispatched away Count
Gabaleone, who was Commissary General of her Foot, to the Cardinal with
Letters, and with a Company of her Guard; who coming into Cheri, and making
himself master of one Gate, went to the Prince Cardinal; and giving him the
Dowagers Letter, he told him how much her royal Highness wondered at his
Highness coming in that manner to Piedmont; he acquainted him with her
jealousy, by reason of the circumstances which preceded, and accompanied his
coming, and with what had been then discovered; and finally, he let him know
how unsafe it would be for him to tarry there, in respect of the French Forces
threatening him with so imminent danger; he told him that, notwithstanding, he
was very loath that any thing of bad should befall him; to witness the which, he
offered him her Royal Highness Guard to wait upon him to some place of safety.
To all this the Inhabitants of Cheri's entreaties were added; who fearing to be
proceeded with severely, if they should be thought to receive the Prince,
desired him that he would not be cause of so much mischief to them by his
tarrying there; wherefore the Prince finding that his intelligences did no
good, that the Dowager was fortified and well provided upon all occasions,
himself unarmed, being accompanied only by two Gentlemen, a Secretary, and
three Footmen, he thought fit to give way unto the times, and to wait a better
occasion; wherefore staying but one night in Cheri, he departed thence the next
morning, and went toward Annone; being still followed at a distance by the
Dowagers Guard, conducted by Gabaleone; but with such respect, as he seemed
rather to be honorably attended by them to the confines of the State, then
compelled to go out; he tarried in the State of Millain, expecting the Prince
his Brother, who was to come thither shortly from Flanders; and being
displeased he writ back to the Dowager, that under vain pretenses, and contrary
to all Laws both Divine and Humane, he was banished from his Paternal Country
which God and Nature had given him; and complaining of the imputations
wherewith he was charged, that he held intelligence in the Towns of Piedmont,
and of his being threatened with the French Army, he added, that as the small
company which he brought with him into Piedmont did fully demonstrate the
vanity of the imputations which were laid unto him; so it showed how little he
feared the French Forces, building upon the peoples love and favor, against
any attempt of the French; he, finally, desired her not to credit such
imputations, and not to show any resentment upon those who were maliciously
blamed to have held treaties with him; but this his intercession prevailed not;
for being found guilty, they were by the Senate condemned to be put to death;
process was made against the Governor, who was kept prisoner in Turin, till
such time as he was set at liberty by the Princes when they took Turin, as
shall be said hereafter; and he died afterward of a natural death, whilst he
took up Arms in the Princes behalf, whose quarrel he embraced as soon as he was
at liberty. The Princes forbore not, for all this, to pursue their pretenses;
and being desirous that their justification might precede their taking up Arms,
they made use of the anger which the house of Austria had conceived against the
Dowager, for her having renewed the League, and for her having joined in Arms
with the King of France; and by the favor of the Court of Spain, which had
embraced their cause, they obtained a Monitory Decree, directed to the Dowager
from the Emperor, as from the Sovereign Lord of Savoy; wherein she was fairly
exhorted, to forego the League which she had renewed with France, and to appear
before the Cesarean Tribunal, to justify the Guardianship of her Son, and the
Regency of the State which she had taken upon her. The Senate, and Nobility and
people of Piedmont, were also ordered by the same Decree, to persuade the
Dowager that Cesars Orders might be duly executed; but all this would not do,
the Dowager would not admit of such Decrees or Citations; pretending them to be
novelties, and attempts upon the Sovereignty of the Piedmontese Principality;
no Emperor having ever formerly interssed himself in Guardianships.

This mean while Prince Thomaso, about the end of February, in the year 1639,
came from Flanders to the State of Millain, to prosecute his and his Brothers
pretentions; whither as soon as he was come, they agreed upon the manner and
way of making war upon Piedmont. The whole business was by the Emperor referred
to Don Francisco di Melo, the King of Spains Plenipotentiary to the Princes of
Italy, with whom, after many discourses, it was concluded; that war should be
made, to possess the Princes of Savoy in the Guardianship of their Nephew, and
in the Regency of the State; and amongst other things it was agreed, that the
King of Spain should assist them herein, and should work with the Emperor, to
declare them to be their Nephews Guardians and Regents of the State, to the
exclusion of the Dowager; that the Towns whereinto the Princes should be
received by the peoples free will should have Garrisons put into them by the
Princes; and that those which should be taken by Force of Arms should have
Garrisons put into them by the Governor of Millain: he being bound to restore
them to whom they should be decreed by the general Peace; and that howsoever
the Politic Government of Justice, and the Revenues, should belong unto the
Princes, as Governors of the State: but the Governor, who was to make the
war, refused to subscribe these Capitulations; for he said, he was ordered by
the King of Spain, to make the War of Piedmont upon his Majesty's account;
wherefore he could not alter the title without new Orders: but he assured the
Princes, that he would connive at, and underhand allow them whatsoever was
contained in the Capitulation. The Princes might clearly see by this, that the
Spanish Agents were not to fight upon their interests, but upon those of the
King of Spain; and that they were to make use of the favor and assistance
which the Princes had with the people, for the more happy progress of the Kings
Forces in Piedmont; and they might have known it better by the very substance
of the Agreement, though the Governor should have subscribed it: but the
necessity which the Princes were brought into made them care the less for
future danger, so they might escape the present; or were it that they did
assuredly hope, that all the Towns, even those wherein the strongest Garrisons
were, the Garrisons and Governors being Piedmontese, would willingly receive
them, when they should appear with convenient Forces; for they were so
confident of the peoples favor, as they thought it would be always in their
power to dispose of them as they listed; wherefore being desirous to forward
the business, they thought good to give way to what the Spaniards desired. The
Governor making use of the pretense of putting the Princes into the Government
of the State, did not only think to drive the French out of Piedmont, but to
make himself master of the chief Towns of that Principality; and so to make the
Princes, and all Piedmont, depend upon the King. Things being thus established,
the Princes plainly let the Dowager know their intention; which was, to come to
Turin, to keep there, to serve her, to take order for their own and for the
common affairs, to defend the Vassals, to free the State from the imminent
danger of Foreign Forces, and to preserve it for the Duke, to whose
Guardianship, as also to the Government of the State, they were chosen and
deputed by the Emperor, even to the exclusion of her the Dowager; and yet they
added, that they would be contented to take (...) in, for a third, in the
Guardianship and Regency; declaring finally, that nothing less would content
them, and that they were resolved to do their utmost, and to lose their lives,
rather then not compass this that was so justly due unto them. The Dowager, who
neither in respect of the King of France his authority, nor for her tie of
consideracy, could not only not receive the Princes who ad^ed to the Spaniards,
in part, nor in whole, into the Guardianship or Regency, but neither suffer
them to tarry in Piedmont, thought this answer to be an intimation of War; but
was not thereat any whit abashed, but gave order that Proclamations should
presently be made throughout the State, that the people should take up Arms for
the defense of their Lord the Duke, whose preservation was concerned in this
War; and for the defense of their Country, which was shortly to be assaulted by
Spanish Forces, led on by the Princes; she hoped by this means to prevent their
intentions, but she failed therein; for the people (as the sequel will
demonstrate) were much devoted to their natural Princes; and more inclined to
be governed by them then by the Dowager, who was not now so well beloved by the
people as she was before this innovation, by reason of her so great dependency
upon the King of France, by her renewing the League, and by her removing of the
Garrison and Governor of the Citadel. On the contrary, the people did much
compassionate the Princes, by reason of the hard condition wherein they were,
being banished their Country, deprived of their Revenues, and kept, as if they
were public enemies, from the administration of those State Affairs wherein
they were so much concerned. The Dukes unhealthfulness (as it was given out)
and the small hopes of his life, did much work upon the peoples affection, on
their behalfs; as on those whom they expected should quickly succeed in the
Principality; and the rising Sun having already found many worshippers, the
generality of the people thought they had but small reason to place any hopes
in the Dowager, and were more inclined to the Government of the rising Princes,
then to that of hers, which for the aforesaid reasons they thought would be
quickly at an end: they also doubted that very much which the Princes
themselves gave out, that in case the young Duke should sail, the Dowager had
resolved to make her Daughter Queen of France, giving her the States of
Piedmont and Savoy for her Dowry, to the irreparable prejudice not only of the
succession of the Princes, but also to the peoples liberty, wherein when the
Ducal-house should be debarred succession, they ran manifest danger to be
subjected to the French yoke, and be made slaves thereunto; wherefore thinking
themselves more concerned to adhere unto the Princes then to the Dowager, they
forsook her intrest, and past violently over to the Princes party; and yet many
others confiding in the Dukes health, and in the Dowagers authority, adhered
constantly to her: the people of Piedmont were therefore no less confused, and
differed no less in opinion, then were the Dowager and the Princes; between
whom no composition being to be made, War must necessarily ensue. The Governor
of Millain did, of all other things, chiefly design to end a petty business;
which though it was but a small one, was of no small consequence; which was, to
take Cengio, a little Castle in the Langhe, seated on the back of Savona, but
strong, and fitly situated, not only for the predomination of the Langhe, but
for the passage of Soldiers, who landing at Finale go into the State of
Millain; and of those who upon occasion were to be sent from the State of
Millain to Finale, in relief of that Marquisate, if it should be assaulted by
the French Fleet, as it was then doubted it would be: the Governor thought
also that the Princes would be much helped by this to enter Piedmont, assisted
by the King of Spains Forces: for this Castle was very necessary to Piedmont,
for the keeping of the Langhe, which the Duke of Savoy did formerly affect;
wherefore both the Governor and the Princes thought assuredly, that the
Dowager, who would be forced to succor this place with all her forces, would
be necessitated to draw out the Garrisons from out the more inward parts of the
State, and would leave them undefended, and open, to be assaulted by the
Princes; Don Antonio Sotelo was therefore sent with some Brigades to clear the
ways which led to that Castle, and to keep it from having new Garrisons put
into it; and after him went Don Martind' Aragona, who was intended to be the
chief Governor of this enterprise, with a good body of men; who at his first
coming there, as he was spying out the fittest places to plant his Artillery,
was shot in the head by a Musket, whereof he immediately died; in whose place
Sotelo was chosen by the rest of the Captains, who fell all of them very busily
to effect this business; but the Dowager, and Cardinal Valletta hearing
thereof, were not slow in providing to prevent it: The Cardinal marched with
his French from Cassalle, and Marquess Villa from Turin with almost all the
Dowagers Forces, and joining together they came within sight of the Trenches
which the Enemy had made; who kept themselves patiently therein, suffering the
Bravadoes which were often made by the others; but when the Enemy seemed to be
weary, and tired, they came unexpectedly with much fury, out of their Trenches,
and after a long Fight routed the assaulters, killing about 300 of them; and
having pursued them a while, they retreated; and those of the Castle seeing no
more succor appear, and finding the batteries already all in order, and that
the Enemy were prepared to give an assault, they surrendered the Castle, at the
same time that the Governor sent to take Cengio. Prince Thomaso went from
Vercelli with 2000 Dragoons, about Sunset, and having marched all night,
appeared about break of day before Chivazzo, a great Town upon the left side of
the Poe, twelve miles from Turin; he sent Count Serravalle before with eight
Horse, under pretense of carrying Letters to the Governor of that place, kept
there, till the Prince, who came after him with the Dragoons, became easily
Master thereof; there was then no Garrison in this Town; the gates were guarded
only by some few Towns men: for though it was a place of great consequence,
yet being far from the confines of the State, and almost within the bosom of
Piedmont, it was not judged to need a Garrison, the rather for that some
squadrons of Horse were placed to guard the banks of the Dora Baltea, which
were thought sufficient to guard all the places seated within that river: but
the Prince past a little below them, so they were no hindrance to him; but
passing succesfully on, he made himself Master of the Town; at which unexpected
accident the Inhabitants were much troubled; but when they heard [live Prince
Thomaso, cried,] they past from a great fear wherewith they were possessed to
great joy and gladness: and flocked unto him with much applause; and were the
first of the Piedmontese who rendered him ready obedience as Guardian of the
young Duke: the Inhabitants of Chivazzo were not they alone who seemed to
rejoice at this happy success, but even those of Turin did the like: wherefore
it was the common opinion, that if the Prince had presently marched thither, he
might likely enough have been received there with the same acclamation and
applause, and acknowledged for Guardian of the Duke, and Governor of the State;
the rather for that that City was wholly unprovided of Soldiers, they being
all gone to succor Cengio; the Dowager therefore apprehending danger sent in
great haste for the Cardinal, and Count Villa, from the Langhe, to provide for
the hazardous condition of Turin, which was much the occasion of the loss of
Cengio; for the relievers hearing of the Dowagers from Turin, went with all
speed thither, and quitted the relieving of that Castle; the Dowager when she
heard of what had happened at Chivazzo, sent the young Duke, and his sisters,
from Piedmont into Savoy, as into a place of safety; whereat the Piedmonteses
were much distasted. Marquess Villa's wife, who had formerly been the Dukes
Governess, went along with his person: and her children went along with her, as
play fellows to the young Duke, and his sisters; or, as others would have it,
as hostages for their fathers Loyalty; Chivazzo being taken, the Prince, no
occasion being known why, went not to Turin, but toward the City of Inurea,
which presently yielded; and the Prince Cardinal joining with him, they went
together to Biela; where they were likewise very readily received; then turning
toward the Valley of Austa, they found the people there also very ready to
render them obedience, wherein the Baron of Castiglione had a great hand;
though the Marquess di Broz, who was Governor of that Valley, and very
faithful to the Dowager, endeavored the Contrary; for which he was imprisoned
by the Princes: thus were they possessed of that Valley, and in a very short time
reduced likewise the whole Country of Biela, and of Canevese, to their
devotion; the Prince Cardinal tarried to carry on the acquisition of Piedmont,
whilst Prince Thomaso went to join with the Governor of Millain; who marching
with his Army out of Vercelli, was also entered Piedmont; and leaving S. ^a and
Pontestura behind him, he marched toward Crescentino, and by the way met the
Prince, who was come from Chavezzo to meet him: they agreed jointly to fall at
one and the same time upon Crescentine and Verrua; wherefore Don John di Garrai
being returned victorious from Cengio, was ordered by the Governor, not to
pass the Poe, but to affault Verrua, at the same time that they should sit down
before Crescentino. Verrua was affaulted by Garrai, and taken; and soon after
the Castle was surrendered by the Governor thereof, who presently past over
from the Dovvagers party, and sided with the Princes: and the business of
Crescentino succeeded as happily on the other side of Poe, where there was not
above 800 Foot in Garrison: some assaults were given, and the best resistance
was made that could be: but when they saw the Artillery ready to play upon the
Walls, they surrendered: the Walls were immediately thrown down by order from
the Governor, to avoid the lessening of their forces, which must needs have
been occasioned by frequent Garrisons: they resolved afterward to go to before
Turin; and therefore the Governor being past the Poe, and joined with the body
of the Army, they marched toward it, verily believing that the Dowager would
not stay to be shut up in the City, and that they should be the more easily
received by the Citizens, she being gone; and that the Cardinal of Vallette,
and the Dowagers Generals, Villa and Pianezza, would not continue to defend
the City which was ready to mutiny; against so gallant an Army: but they found
the contrary; for the Dowager, not at all dismayed at what had happened; and
knowing how necessary her presence would be to the preservation of that City,
which was the Metropolis of the State; and that it was only her presence that
kept the City from revolting, resolved to tarry there; the Cardinal of
Vallette, and Marquess Villa, were already come thither with their Forces from
Cengio; and though they heard that Verrua and Crescentino were besieged, yet
they went not to relieve them; thinking it necessary for them to preserve their
men to desend the Capital City, which they thought would ere long be assaulted
by the Enemy; but hearing that the Princes advanced with the Spanish Army
toward the City, they sent some French companies out against them; between
whom and the Spanish Army there passed some slight Skirmissies: the Army
marched toward Rivoli, Colegno, Grasasco, Bienasco, and other neighboring
Towns; partly, to know the situation of the City; partly, to give time for the
ripening of some intelligence which the Princes held in the City: as also to
observe whether the Citizens were better inclined to the Princes, or the
Dowager: persuading themselves that the abode of the Army wherein the Princes
were, thereabouts, would move the people to insurrection: to move them
whereunto the Princes Writ to the Chief Gentlemen, Ministers, and Magistrates
of the City, declaring that they would receive the Gaurdianship of the Duke,
and Regency of the State, from their hands, acquainting them with their
pretentions, and objecting many things, whereby to make the Dowagers power and
authority invalid. But nothing could persuade the City to favor them; for the
Dowager had made extraordinary provision to curb such Citizens as were
likeliest to mutiny; she placed Corpse de Guard in many parts, set forth severe
Proclamations against any one who should but offer to stir, she sent many of
those who were most suspected out of the Town, and imprisoned some: The
Artillery of the Citadel was also turned upon the City; and she her self coming
out amongst the people, with an undaunted and manlike Courage, did in her own
person animate some with the suavity of her speeches, and terrify others with
her bitter threats. So as the Prince, contrary to his expctation, finding such
quiet in the City, resolved to draw the walls, and to streighten the Town;
hoping that want of things necessary would sooner make it yield then force: He
did draw near the City, though he was shot at from the walls, and though many
Companies both of Horse and Foot sallyed out of the City, which he easily drove
back, and made himself mas^ of the Bridge, and Covent of the Capuchins. So as
the Horse passing over the ^oe, by means of the bridge, came to the new Ga^e,
from whence some Troops of French Horse came out against them, who were also
forced to retreat into the City; where the Citizens seeming very unwilling to
take up Arms against the Princes, there was no confusion wanting. And the
Dowager being to provide against inconveniences both within and without, would
not have been void of thoughts, if Affairs had continued long in that
condition; especially since Prince Thomaso was already drawn near the walls,
and was master of the field, and endeavored to succor himself by Trenches,
and by his approaches to come to grapling; having environed the Suburbs with
Trenches, he sent a Troop of Horse toward ill Ponte della Dora, to drive away
some squadrons of French Horse which were there to guard it, but they could not
do it; for they were kept back, and forced to retreat by the Artillery of the
Porta Palazzo. The Prince Cardinal came at this time to the Camp, who went to
quarter with his Brother and the Governor in the Vallentino, a Palace of
pleasure, within 400 paces of the City, upon the left side of the Poe, a little
above the Capuchins bridge, part of the Army quartered about this Palace, and
part quartered in the Suburbs between the Poe and the City. They then planted
two batteries; one at the Casetta Verde, against the Porta Nova, and the other
at Albergo, from whence they they began to play upon the City. But this was of
more terror then prejudice to the people, whom the Assailants did not desire
to harm very much, but to keep them well inclined to the Princes party. Whilst
things were carried on thus, before and about the City, the Princes and
Governor found that the Defendants minded only the safety of the City, for
the preservation whereof they had abandoned all out places; and being neither
willing, nor able to lie long idle there, wasting time more in expectation of
popular commotions, then in being intent upon taking the City by force; they
resolved to send Count Galleazzo Trotti with 600 Horse, and 600 Foot to take
Pontestura; who having easily mastered the Town, sat down before the Castle,
whither the French Garrison, who at the first appearance of the Enemy had
abandoned the Town, had retreated. And when the Governor of Millain found that
a great body of men were sent from Cassalle to relieve it, he sent Don Luigi
Ponse after Trotti, with a good number of Soldiers; who coming to Pontestura,
just when Trotti being gone to encounter the succor which came from Cassalle,
had repulsed them, began to pursue them, which he did to underneath the Walls
of Cassalle; and in that interim, the Castle seeing the relief repulsed,
yielded; from whence six hundred French marched out in good order, and went to
Cassalle: Some Treaties of agreement were had, whilst the Camp lay before
Turin; for though the Dowager were assured by her Captains and Officers that
she could run no danger, there being a competent number of Soldiers in the
City able to defend it, and by reason of the secure and ready refuge which they
had to the Citadel; as also of the succors which they might confidently
presume would speedily be sent from France; yet, were it either that she might
divide the Princes from the Governor of Millain, or that she might allay the
fervor of Arms by Treaty; she listened to the propositions of agreement which
were propounded by Monsignore Caffarelli, the Popes Nuncio then Resident with
her, in the Popes name, and they were these. That the Princes should
acknowledge her to be Guardianess and Regent; So as they might have some Towns
allowed them for security of their persons, and that each of them should
Governor of some Province; into which Towns or Provinces no Foreigners might
be introduced, as neither into any other part of the State. And that there
should no account be made of the League made with France; nor that any of the
parties should hereafter enter into Le^gue with any Foreign Prince or
Potentate, without reciprocal agreement.

These Proposals tended, as all men might clearly see, to take off the Dowager
from adhering to the French, to the end that being deprived of so great a stay,
the Princes Authority by the favor of the people might be greater then the
Dowager did now allow it to be. The Dowager was aware of this, who answered,
that they should have Towns, and Governments, and all reasonable advantages
allowed them, if being reconciled to the King of France, who she assured them
should very willingly receive them into favor, they would order things so as
she might have no occasion to fear the Spanish Forces. These Proposals being
diametrically opposite came to no conclusion; for the Princes perceived, that
as they had endeavored to separate the Dowager from the King of France, that
she might be subject to their authority; so she, by her answer, showing that
she understood their ends, did endeavor to separate them from the Crown of
Spain, so to reduce them under her Authority, which was maintained by the
French Forces; so as not being able to agree, and the Princes and Governor of
Millain finding at last, that by reason of the good order taken by the Dowager
the City made no commotion, and that they were there without will, or
wherewithal to force it, they after having stayed there eight days, resolved to
be gone, and to go against such Towns of the State as were neither well
provided, nor could easily be succored: The Prince Cardinal departed first,
and went down the Poe to Chivasso, and from thence to Inurea; and the Governor
of Millain leaving eight Brigades of Foot, the Neapoli^an Horse, the Dutch
Curassiers, and Dragoons, and four pieces of Artillery with Prince Thomaso
under Carlo della Gatta, passed with the rest of his Army over the Poe at the
Capuchins bridge, and went to Pontestura; and Prince Thomaso with the men that
were le^t him went by the bridge of Montcalleri, strait toward Villa nova;
whither being come about break of day with a thousand Horse en croupe, he at
the very first took a half Moon; and seeing the Sun was gotten well up,
wherefore he could not pursue his intended surprisal, he passed that day in
articling with Count Carlo Cacherano Governor of the Town, wherein he strove
to persuade the Count that he intended only to keep the State for the Duke
unprejudiced by the French Forces: But the Governor being firm, and not
consenting to any thing he could say, the Prince ordered an assault to be given
the next day two hours before daybreak; which was done unexpectedly, but with
such rigor, as though the Garrison, which were Piedmontese, and some French,
made stout resistance, yet the Prince took the Town, and made the Governor and
Garrison Prisoners: The Town was sacked; only the Churches and what was carried
thither was preserved: The booty was great; for the Town was great, rich, and
well provided of all things; and the Townsmen, not thinking to be so used, did
not much mind carrying their Goods into the Churches. The Prince leaving a
Garrison there of 1500 Foot and 3 Troops of Horse, under Don Michele
Pignarello, who was Camp-master, went with the rest of his men to join with the
Governor, who was gone to Montcalvo; whither being come both at the same time,
and John di Garray coming thither the next day, the Town was taken upon
surrender, the Captain retiring to the Castle, where he intended to make what
resistance was possible to be made; the which he valiantly did; insomuch as the
Governor of Millain seeing how obstinate defense was made, and being
solicited by the Prince to greater Enterprises, he left Don Luigi Ponse with
2000 Foot, and Marquess Caracena with 500 Horse, to continue the Siege; and
taking the rest of his men along with him, he went, together with the Prince,
to before Asti. The Commendator Balbiano was Governor of the Town, who being
placed there by the Dowager appeared to endeavor her service very much, but
was so careless therein, as he was suspected to hold secret intelligence either
with the Spaniards, whom he had served in the Wars of Flanders, or with the
Prince, whom when the Town was surrendered he served; for a Regiment of
Piedmontese, which was of the Garrison of the City, being revolted over to the
Prince, and the Citizens being either terrified with the sacking of Villa nova,
or by the revolting of the Garrison, or being given to favor the Princes, they
declared openly that they would not bear Arms against them; so as the Governor
not resisting so great a commotion retreated with the other Garrisons into the
Citadel, and left the City to do what it listed; and the Citizens sent the Keys
immediately to the Prince, who was not well entered the City when the Castle was
also surrendered. It fared otherwise with the Siege of Montcalvo, which held out
against Batteries, Mines, and Assaults, before it yielded; but when the
Captain, who was a Frenchman, was slain, the Soldiers yielded up the Town
after eleven days stout Siege.

This fortunate success encouraged the Prince and the Governor of Millain to
undertake the Enterprise of Trino; but the Captains of the A^my were against
it, fearing the success, by reason that it was so strongly munited as it was
thought impregnable: It was seated in a soil wherein was great store of water,
and little less then Marish; it was extraordinarily well munited and fortified
by Duke Charles Emanuel (who understood Fortification very well) when he took
it in the second War against Cassalle; it was walled about double, and doubly
ditch'd; the first and most inward wall was very high, and strengthened by
twenty great Towers, upon which 20 pieces of Artillery were placed; the second
circuit was a very large and high Platform, whereupon were eleven half moons;
and this did not only keep the inward Wall unprejudiced by battery, but kept it
from being seen by the Enemy: Between these two circuits there was a large deep
ditch, and beyond the outermost another ditch as large and deep; Count Rovero
was Governor thereof; but Monsieur Mer^lez was Captain of the Garrison, one of
the most ancientest French Colonels which had served the Dukes of Savoy, and
therefore of great esteem amongst the Piedmontese. All the Council of War,
hoping for little good by this, did dissuade from it; but the Prince and
Governor of Millain, who were much encouraged by their late fortunes, feared
not being forsaken thereby in this enterprise. The Dowager doubted that, Asti
being taken, the Enemies Army would come either upon St. Ia, or Trino, both
which were unfurnished of Garrisons; she therefore committed the charge of them
to Marquess Villa, who went immediately away from Turin with 800 Foot, and 1000
select Horse, intending to distribute the Foot in those two Towns: As he came
near St. Ia he understood that Don Ferrante della Monti waited for him upon the
way, who was sent into those parts by the Governor of Millain, with about 500
Dragoons, to keep out any relief that might be brought into Trino. The Marquess
hasted his march, desiring to encounter Don Ferrante; but he failed of his
desire; for he was retreated toward le Vertole, near to Crescentino; so as the
Marquess coming without any opposition to St. Ia, he left the 800 Foot there,
and two Troops of Horse, leaving order with the Governor of the Town that he
should keep half the Foot for his own defense, and should send the other half
of the Foot, and the two Troops of Horse that very night to Trino; and he
himself went presently toward Livor no, and Bianza, that he might find out
Don Ferrante; but missing him, he passed over the Dora, and came back to Turin.
The Foot and Horse were kept two days in St. Ia, before they went to Trino;
wherefore Don Ferrante, who had heard that Villa with his Horse was passed
over the Dora, made toward the Foot and Horse that were going to Trino; and
meeting with them in the Forest of Lucidio, assaulted them, slew many of
them, took many prisoners, and vvounded many; and those Horse which could
escape got into thick Woods; and those fevv that escaped death got into Trino.

This happy success being heard in the Camp just as they were consulting upon
going to Trino, made them resolve upon the Enterprise; for the haste of sending
these supplies did clearly show, that the Town vvanted Defendants, as indeed
it did; for the danger of Turin had drawn the flovver of all the Garrisons of
those parts to defend that Capital City: And the Prince and Governor of
Millain, taking this present victory as an earnest penny of happy success in
this so great Enterprise, thought themselves the more obliged not to refuse the
invitation which fortune made them; going therefore from Asti, and passing the
Poe at Pontestura, they marched to Trino, which they resolved to assault on
four sides; they took up four chief quarters; two of Spaniards, in one whereof
lodged Don Antonio Sottelo, Don Luigi di Lincastro, and the Marquess of Tavera;
in the other the Marquess of Caracena and Don Luigi Ponce; in the third, which
was the Italians, were quartered Marquess Serra, and the Counts of Bolognini
and Borromeo; in the fourth were the Dutch quartered, under Prince Borzo and
Colonel Lener; and 14 pi^des of Cannon being disposed in convenient places for
battery, they began to play hotly upon the Town, and at the same time to make
their appreaches; and by the diligence of the Pyoneers the approaches were
already brought to the b^ink of the ditch, over the which they threw two
Bridges; and the Neapolitans, under Marquess Serra, had already taken a Mill
that was very convenient for the assault, which was much desired to be given
both by the Commanders and Soldiers; at this time Colonel For^mestre came to
the Camp with 1000 Foot; and Don Michiele Pignarelli with a Neapolitan Brigade;
so as being encouraged by these recruits, though all things were not yet ready
to give assault, yet as if good fortune had governed all things, contrary to
all Military reason, assault was ordered to be given, which they thought it was
the more necessary to do, for that they heard that Marquess Villa, and the
Cardinal of Vallette, mustered men every where, wherewith they intended to
relieve the Town: all the Camp-masters and Colonels, which were twelve, had
places appointed them, where they were to fall on. The Prince, the Governor of
Mi^ain, Don John di Garrai, and Carlo della Gatta, assisted in the ordering of
Affairs; and the defendants apprehended by these preparations that assault
would quickly be given; and therefore endeavored to fire the Bridges which
were thrown over the ditches, and the other Works which did faciliate the
assault; they persisted in a resolution to defend themselves; grounding their
resolutions not so much upon the largeness and deepness of their ditches, and
the marishness of the ground by which the enemy must pass to give the assault,
as in the number of their Artillery; and yet all the assailants, as if they had
been assured of Victory, not considering these difficulties, went all of them
to assault the several places allotted them; and this they did with such brave
courage, as having overcome the Ditches and other Fortifications of the first
circuit, it was not hard for them to enter the City by the second; for all the
people being employed in defending the outward Fortifications, where the chief
resistance was intended to be made, the inward Walls wanted defendants; so as
the former being gotten where the most defense was made, it was easy to enter
by the other, where there were but few defendants; and therefore whilst
Marquess Serra and Don Michiele di Pignatelli, who were to fall upon two
Half-moons which fenced the Circuit, and which were better fortified, and
harder to be taken then the other Works; whilst I say, they were intent upon
what they had to do, the Marquess of Caracena, first, and Don Antonio Sottelo,
Don Lewis di Lincastro, and Count B^rromeo, who had on the opposite part
overcome the outward circuit, entered the City; and being entered assaulted those
on the back, who constantly and manfully opposing Serra and Pignatelli,
manfully persever'd in defense of the place; the defendants nor assailants in
these parts, not knowing yet that the Town was taken, and that the business was
done; the City was sacked and the booty was great, for many had brought the
best things they had thither, as to a place of safety, from the Towns of
Piedmont and Montferrat, and many were taken prisoners; amongst which Rovere,
the Governor of the Town, and Colonel Meroles, who yielded themselves upon
discretion, when they saw the defense grew desperate; and so confident was
Meroles, as being tempted before the assault was given, by the Prince, to
surrender the Town, he would not hearken to it, but made the Artillery be
discharged upon the Messengers; nor were the Citizens less confident, who
fearing nothing less then to be taken, did not carry their things of best value
into the Churches, where they might have been preserved from the fury of the
Soldiers; who though they spared nothing, were very observant of the Churches;
and bare great respect to what was thither brought, and toward those who had
refuge to them; the paucity of the besiegers death made the business much more
glorious, who were not in all 300, amongst which only two Spanish Captains; the
justification of their cause, in civil affairs, added much to the Princes good
success in what was Military; the Dowager being cited, as has been said, to
appear before Cesars Tribunal, did never appear, no not so much as by her
Proctors; wherefore the Emperor, by public Decree, named the Princes to be
the lawful Guardians of the young Duke, and Administrators of the States,
excluding the Dowager by name; which Declaration, as it encouraged the Princes
to continue the War, so made it the people adhere the more unto them: this
Edict of the Emperors being published by the Princes throughout all Piedmont,
they in the first place declared all that had been done by the Dowager as
Guardianess or Regent to be void and null; namely the League made with the King
of France; they commanded all the Magistrates and Officers not to tender her
any longer obedience; and that they should appear at Asti, to receive from them
the confirmation of the Offices and Charges confirmed upon them by the Dowager:
they commanded the people not to pay her any thing that was due to the Dukes
Exchequer; and the Senate, Counselors of State, and Magistrates, that they
should make no Confederate meetings, upon pain of losing their places, and
other arbitrary punishments; all these things being added to the so sudden loss
of so many principal places in Piedmont; whereinto Spanish Garrisons were put
by the Princes permission, made the King of France not only endeavor to
restore them to their former condition, but under this pretense to desire the
Dowager, that as the Princes had put all the places which they had won into the
hands of the Spaniards; so she would be pleased to put those that yet remained
in her possession, into his hands; wherefore that she might not distaste the
King, upon whose Forces she wholly did depend; and for that she did believe
that by putting them into the hands of the French, she might preserve them from
the Spaniards, the Dowager condescended to the Kings demands; and gave way that
Cherasco, Savigliano and Carmagnuola, should have French Garrisons put into
them, upon condition that the Revenues, Justice and Sovereignty of them should
belong unto the Duke, and that the Towns should be restored without any
pretense to be made by the King, for any expense he should be at by keeping the
Garrisons there, and that the like should be done with those that should be
recovered from the Spaniards, which should be restored immediately after their
recovery to the Duke, without any defalcation to be made for the expense of
their recovery; and it was, moreover, covenanted that no peace nor suspension
of Arms should be made in Italy for above one year, wherein the Duke should not
be restored to all Towns taken by the Spaniards, or held by the French. The
Dowager before these conditions were agreed upon, and before the Towns should
be assigned over, would acquaint the Princes with them, informing them how much
the Duke was prejudiced by bringing the Spaniards into his Towns, and exhorting
them to a good agreement, whereby all these evils might be rooted out; and she
offered them all fair dealing, with preservation to hers and her Sons dignity
and safety; but she received no other answer to all this, but the same which
had been made unto her at Valentino. The Spanish Army went from Trino to St.
Ia; where the Captain of the Town not awhit dismayed by the good fortune which
the Princes Forces had had, nor terrified at what had befallen Trino, refused
to accept of honorable proposals made by the Princes; and showed great
readiness and resolution to defend the Town, though he saw himself every way
begirt by Spanish Garrisons, and quite cut off from that part of Piedmont which
held out for the Dowager; therefore the Governor of Millain went with part of
his men to Livorno, and from thence to Pontestura, where he fell to fortify
that place, lest the French might succor Cassalle by that way, and the Prince
remained with part of his men before St. Ia, knowing that the place was in want
of victuals, wherewith it could not be full furnished from any part, so as it
would soon be forced to come to a Parley. He did, notwithstanding, so besiege
it at a distance, as the Dowagers Commanders despairing to be able to relieve
it, they resolved to try diversion; Marquess Villa went therefore out of Turin
with a body of Horse and Foot, and with 12 piece of Cannon he went to
Montcalleri, and from thence advanced to Asti, that he might make the Prince
rise from before S^. Ia: But finding that the Prince did not remove, and that
he had not Forces sufficient to take that City, he returned to Turin: where
joining with the Cardinal of Vallette, their joint Forces amounting to 8000
Foot, 4000 Horse, twelve piece of Cannon, and 40 cart loads of Ammunition, they
resolved to go directly to relieve St. Ia; marching at a slow rare, according
to Vallettes custom, they found the River Dora so swollen by rain as they could
not throw a bridge over it; so as they were fain to tarry there two days; in
which interim, the Prince coming with some Forces to the opposite shore, some
slight skirmishes past between them: And the Cardinal and Villa being hindered
by the River, and being stoutly opposed by the Prince; and hearing that the
Town was surrendered two days before the time prefixed, for surrender, in case
succor should come, the Cardinal of Vallette, to the end that his endeavors
might not prove altogether vain, fell upon Chiavasso, which resolution though
it was then thought to be but to little purpose; yet since it succeeded, was
very lucky for the Dowagers party. They sent to Turin for four other pieces of
Cannon, wherewith they planted their battery against the Gate which looks
toward Crescentino. The Prince and Governor of Millain were come to relieve
the Town with 4000 Horse, and 6000 Foot, and were gotten to the Chapel called
L' Eremita, within a mile of the enemies Camp; where taking up their quarters,
they put themselves in battle array; and began not only to annoy the enemies
quarters with their Artillery, and with slight excursions, but being come
within shot of Musket, they fell to skirmish, wherein some of the Spanish Horse
that charged were beaten back. And just as the battle was ready to be given, to
which both the French and Piedmontese prepared themselves with much Courage,
came the Duke of Longueville, whom the King of France had sent with 2000 Horse,
and 4000 Foot, when his Majesty heard that the Spanish Army was encamped before
Turin; a recruit which came very seasonably both to the Camp and to the
Dowagers whole party, which did droop very much. At the Arrival of these men,
which was just upon the coming on of night, and the Spaniards Courage cooling,
they retreated; the next day the Spaniards finding how hard it would be to
relieve the Town, by reason of the recruit which was come to the enemy, they
began to prepare to be gone, which they did without any disturbance. The
Cardinal of Vallette, and Duke of Longueville, did then send to Seback, who was
a Dutchman and Governor of the Town, wishing him, that since there was no
hope of relief, he would surrrender. To which he answered, that he desired
first to have leave to send to visit the Spaniards quarters; the which being
granted him, and he being told by those he sent, that the Prince and Governor
of Millain were gone; he promised to yield the Town, if it were not relieved
within three days; and no relief appearing within the prefixed time, he
surrendered the place, and marched out with 1500 Dutch, leaving such French and
Piedmontese there, according to Articles, as had fought against the Dowager in
the Princes behalf. The loss of Chiavasso, which being recovered, opened the
way to receive and send out any thing to Turin by the Poe, made the Governor
of Millain fortify Crescentino, which he had dismantled a little before; to
the end that Navigation by the Poe, which (Chiavasso being recovered) was free
from Turin to Cassalle, might be blockt up by fortifying Crescentino; but
whilst the two enemies Armies were busied before Chiavasso, the Prince Cardinal
was not idle, nor were his endeavors ineffectual: For coming out of Asti,
only with his own attendants and some others, he overran the other part of
Piedmont, where there being no foreign Garrisons, he was received by all the
inhabitants with great applause, Ceva, Cuneo, Mondoni, Beve, Saluzzo, Fossano,
Droueto, Busca, and Demonte, did willingly come in of themselves to his own
person, or to those that he sent to them; and all the chief Towns of those
parts and places of any condition, besides the mean people. All this was done
without shedding of blood, and without shot of Musket, merely out of the
peoples devotion, and by Treaty of the Governors of the several Towns: And
putting Governors and Garrisons into them, he retreated to Fossano, lest
Chiavasso being taken, the French might turn upon those parts, and retake the
Towns that had surrendered to him. Nor did he guess amiss, for the adverse Army
turning upon those parts, Saluzzo, at their very first appearance, sent
Commissioners to surrender it self in a friendly manner. The Duke of
Longueville went then with his men to Carignano, and from thence to Racconiggi,
ten miles from Fossano; but he had no mind to go to Fossano, thinking it
stronger then it was; nor would he meddle with it though Villa and Pianezza
strove to persuade him it was not so strong as he thought: They therefore left
him in Racconiggi, and went with the Dowagers men toward Fossano, to make
Longueville see the easiness of the Enterprise; who when they appeared, the
Inhabitants thinking that the whole Camp came, surrendered the Town that very
night; but the Prince Cardinal was first retreated to Cuneo, the strongest
place of all those parts, and peradventure of all Piedmont. From hence Villa
and Pianezza went to Been, which Town, though it were strong enough, yielded
the next day. The Governor Vargas, who was a Spaniard, retired with the
Garrison into the Castle of Been, resolving to hold it out to the last: Villa
and Pianezza divided the care thereof between them; Pianezza quartered in that
part of the Town which was nearest the Castle; and Villa kept in the field with
the Horse, to keep off succor. Pianezza began to make Trenches; and whilst
things were in this posture, Duke Longueville appears with his men; who leaving
the Castle to be taken by Pianezza, kept also in the field: The mean while
Pianezza, who was come with his approaches to the Castle wall, fell to make 2
Mines under 2 Bastions, whereunto, after nine days, giving fire, and a
sufficient breach being made, he fell to assault, which was withstood weakly;
for the Defendants thinking to save their lives, by retreating into the Keep,
minded getting thither more then fighting; but they were so hotly pursued, as
that most of them were put to the Sword; and Captain Vargas being wounded and
taken Prisoner, the Castle was taken with much effusion of blood. These two
places being taken Cuneo remained, which was separated from the acquisitions
made by the Prince Cardinal, and were likewise the worse for being separated
from it: Prince Thomaso fearing it, especially since his Brother was there,
went with a body of men from Asti to Mondovi, to try whether by lending some
help he might free them both from the imminent danger wherein they were: But
hearing that Duke Longueville was coming to assault him with Forces much
stronger then his, he retreated to Ceva, from whence he joined with the
Governor of Millain, who was with his Army in Asti: Wherefore Mondovi being
abandoned by the Prince yielded to the Duke, who without any opposition made
there a rendezvous of Arms for his own, and for the Dowagers Forces, which were
under her two Generals, joined with Longueville in that Enterprise. The French
and Dowagers Generals hearing afterward in what weak condition Cuneo was, they
resolved to go thither; they had great hopes of taking it; for the Prince
Cardinal would either go out of Cuneo, or he would not; if he did, Corvo, who
was Sergeant Major there, offered to yield the Town to them; and if not, they
were sure to take it, by reason of the small provisions that were there; and if
they should take it, it would put an end to the Civil War, since the Prince
Cardinal, who was the Head of the controverted Guardianship, would be therein
taken Prisoner; whereof Duke Longueville made himself so sure, as he writ
thereof to the King, as of a thing done; but they were much deceived, for Cuneo
was not taken, and Turin was lost, which the Prince Cardinal did cunningly
foresee; for Prince Thomaso whilst he was in Mandovi, going to see him at
Cuneo, and having earnestly desired him, not to suffer himself to be enclosed
in that unprovided place, which was not such as he ought to adventure his
person therein, and therewith the whole affair, he absolutely refused his
advice; for he held undoubtedly, that if he should go out, the Town would be
lost; and on the contrary, that the Governor of Millain would either come with
all his Forces to relieve him, or that else he would go to Turin, which he
might easily take, all the Dowagers and French Forces being now in these parts;
and the Siege of Cuneo being to be abandoned for the necessary defense of
Turin, the freedom of his person, and the like of the Town would ensue; but
these very thoughts falling into the minds of those who fought on the Dowagers
behalf, they likewise knew what dangers Turin, and the Citadel, and the Dowager
that was therein, would be subject to; if when they should go with almost all
the Forces of Piedmont to an enterprise so far off, the enemy making use of the
occasion should come strongly against Turin, whilst it was unprovided of
defense: it was therefore thought necessary that the Cardinal of Valletta
should go with all his men to defend the parts thereabouts; which resolution
was approved of, and pursued by the Cardinal, and was as good, as necessary;
and if it had been as well performed as it was plotted, it had quite
ove^throvvn all the Prince Cardinals Counsels; for both Turin and the Dovvager
would have been preserved from danger; and Cuneo would have been taken, with
evident hazard of the Prince Cardinals person; but the misfortune in
performance marred the design, and made good the Prince Cardinals opinion; when
the Cardinal Valletta was gone, Duke Longueville went to Cuneo; and on the
sudden, in the night season, assaulted the out Works, and forced the
defendants, with much loss to them, to forsake the Works and betake themselves
to defend the Walls and the Gates, which the assailants had well nigh taken as
they pursued them: he therefore had happily begun his business, and had fair
hopes of ending it successfully; but before the Trenches were begun to be made,
the whole thread of the business was cut off by a Letter of the Cardinal of
Valletta's, wherein he signified to Longueville, that the Enemy came very
strong against him, and that he could not possibly withstand them, unless he
were recruited with eight hundred more Horse; though the Duke was somewhat
amazed at this demand, yet he readily sent the desired Horse, that the Cardinal
might have no occasion to fail in what was by common consent agreed upon; but
the want of these Horse forced the Duke to abandon Cuneo, and to retreat to a
Town near to Fossano, called St. Albano; whereby one part of the Prince
Cardinals judgment was verified, that Cuneo would be abandoned to relieve
Turin; and the other part proved as true, not long after; for Prince Thomaso
having had speech with the Governor of Millain in A^sti, and having persuaded
him to relieve Cuneo, and his Brother, at least by diversion, got of him 600
Spanish Foot under Marquess Caracena, and 2500 Horse under Carlo della Gatta;
with express promise that all the rest of the Forces should immediately follow
him; so he went forthwith from thence, and came speedily to Villa nuova; where
getting 500 other Foot under Camp-master Tuttavilla, he past over the Poe about
the evening, and came by night to Vallentino. Villa nu^va, Carmagnuola, and
Turin, make a just triangle; wherefore when news came to the other two Cities,
that the Prince was come with a great body of men to Villa nuova, they were
both much terrified, and began to cry out for help: The Dowager sent Count
Piveas^ forthwith to the Cardinal of Valletta, desiring that he would hasten to
defend her and the City of Turin; and the Cardinal fearing, no less then she,
to be assaulted in Carmagnuola, not knowing what to do, did not stir. The
Prince kept in Vallentino till midnight, giving out fitting Orders for the
surprizal of Turin, and in maturing intelligence with those that guarded it;
and having ordered all things well resolved to assault the Town on four sides:
The Marquess of Caracena was appointed to assault the Castle Gate with the 600
Spanish Foot, which were the very best of that Nation; that beating it down
with a Petard, he might make himself master of it. Tuttavilla was sent to scale
the Wall between the Bastion of Sta Maria, and that of Citta nuova. Colonel
Alardo was ordered to fall upon the Posto di nostra Signora toward the
Citadel; and Count di Vich was sent to fasten a Petard to Porta nuova; and each
of them had sufficient Orders, Instruments, and Men, given them for what they
had to do; each of them did punctually perform what they were appointed, at one
and the same time, which was at fi^ a clock at night; and the darkness of the
season was a great furtherance to the enterprise; and yet Caracena could not
fasten his Petard; for he found the Bridge drawn up, and the Ladders wherewith
he was to scale the Walls were too short; he notwithstanding fell to break the
Steccadoes which lay along the Courtain toward the Bastion Verde; and entered
thereby into the Garden of the Pallazzo Ducale. Tuttavilla, who was abandoned
by his guide, who could not endure the noise of a Musket, marching alone with
his Squadron, and groaping in the dark, light upon a Half Moon which was
defended by 500 Soldiers; and after having skirmished a while with them, he at
last made himself master thereof; then entering the ditch, to fall to the
Scalado, he also found his Ladders too short; wherefore being called upon by
Caracena, he resolved to go to him, and being joined, they entered the City by
the Garden, and formed two Squadrons upon Piazza San' Iovanni. The Dowager
hearing that the enemy was entered the Town, withdrew with her Guard into the
Citadel, being waited upon by the Lord Chancellor, some of the chief
Magistrates of Turin, and by a great many Ladies and Gentlemen. Caracena and
Tuttavilla went to the Castle Gate, they broke the Portculles, and applied a
Petard to the Gate, which being thereby thrown down, the Horse entered, which
waited there to be let in. Fontana, Captain of the Gate was thought to hold
private intelligence with Prince Thomaso, as also Amerino, Captain of the
Swissers who were deputed to defend the Steccado; who being corrupted by moneys
made no resistance, but presently past over to the Princes party; for which he
was questioned by the Cantons. Count Vischio, by reason of the great darkness,
and opposition made by the defendants, lost his Guide, and his Petard; so as
not being able to execute his Commission, he entered the City by the Bastion
Verde; by which the Spaniards and Italians also entered, the Castle-Gate not
being as then opened; nor could Colonel Alardo do what he was appointed, being
stoutly opposed, but he entered by the Castle-Gate, which was now opened; so as
before full day the City was reduced into the power of the Prince, not any of
the Citizens appearing in defense; for the Dowager had commanded, that upon
pain of death, none of them should stir out of their doors; but when they heard
that she was retreated into the Citadel, and that the Prince was entered the
City, they ran out to the streets and Piazzas, with unusual expressions of joy,
and flocked about the Prince, with incredible applause; but their
congratulations, which lasted many hours, were not any hindrance to what was
necessary for defense; for they presently fell to block up the ways which led
to the Citadel, to keep the City from being from thence assaulted; which was
diligently observed all the rest of the day: at night Lights were put in all
the Windows, and the Citizens stood with their weapons in their hands, together
with the Soldiers, to defend the streets, fearing some sallies out of the
Citadel; and the Prince made the Rampires be raised, to keep the City from
being prejudiced from the Citadel. The next day things were better secured, by
the entrance of the Governor of Millain, with the rest of the Army; who,
together with the Prince, viewing all parts as well within as without the City,
by which the City might be entered, they munited it with Soldiers and other
necessaries. To end the work, complete the Victory, and to put an end almost to
the War, there remained the blocking up of the Citadel on the outside, and the
keeping it from any succor by continual circumvallations, which required not
the guarding of above three miles; for the Citadel was more then half begirt by
the City. Five days after the City was taken, the French and Piedmontese Army
appeared coming from Cuneo, who when they heard the sad news of the loss of
Turin, marched speedily to relieve the Citadel; and finding no Trenches to keep
them off, nor any Forces in the Field to oppose them, they secured the Citadel:
they quartered their men without, opposite to the City, toward la Porporata;
and none but the chief Commanders went into the Citadel, to kiss the Dowagers
hand, and to consult of what was to be done. The Dowagers affairs begun to
better a little by so seasonable a succor, and the French began to be much
encouraged; the Spanish Army was in the City, and all the Citizens that were
fit to bear Arms were very diligent to defend it; moreover, the Trenches which
were over against the Citadel were in good order, and did shelter the City
indifferently well from the shot which were made from thence. The Marquess of
Caracena having assisted therein with no less diligence, then danger; who
foreseeing how much the defendants might be damnified by the Garden of the
Carmelites which commanded the Trench and streets of the City, if they should
be possessed by the Enemy, prepossessed himself thereof, and munited it well,
and put a good Garrison into it; and therefore though both the French and
Piedmontese, who were in the Citadel, did much desire to assault the City, and
to drive the Enemy from thence; yet the Cardinal of Vallette opposed it, and by
his Authority of Supreme Command of the French Forces, curbed the general
desire; yet being overborn by the General order of Longueville and of the other
Commanders, and for that he would appear to have some hand therein, rather then
out of his own addiction, he consented that 300 of the best men of the French
Army should assault la Citta Vecchia under the Marquess Nerestano; who accosted
the walls, and fell on furiously; but being stoutly opposed were forced to
retreat, with the loss of many of them; amongst which the Marshal Nerestano,
and the Camp-masters Alincourt, and Valiaci, together with other officers, and
gallant Soldiers, and with little loss to the assaulted; by which, as well he,
as the rest of the Captains, having found by experience how much harder it was
then they had imagined to recover the City, and the Dowager being put to great
streights in the Citadel, they thought it fit that she should go from thence,
and should go, together with her Court, to Susa; which was so necessary as it
was presently done; she went out with an undaunted spirit, bearing in her bosom
two consolations amongst so many misfortunes; the one that if she had been
suffered to Govern according to her own will she had not fallen into such
misfortune; the other, that the King her brother, who had brought her into that
condition, would doubtlesly bring her out of it, at her departure she left the
Citadel in charge with the Duke of Longueville, who received it, as deposited
by her, in the King of France his name; for she confiding but a little, upon
this occasion, in the Piedmontese, and in so great perplexity, and cross
fortune, not having Forces sufficient to defend so important a place, threatened
by so near and powerful an Army, and not having wherewith to fight, nor to
subsist for above two months, she thought she could not do better, then to put
it into the protection of the King her brother; being come forth, and attended
by a competent number of hers, she came to Susa, where she waited, looking in
vain where this so great storm would finally fall; a treaty of Truce was
afterward introduced between the Abbot Vasques, in the Governor of Millain's
name, and Mousieur d'Argenson, on the behalf of the Duke of Longueville; which
was desired by Longueville, not so much for the scarcity of provision in the
Citadel, as for the precise orders which he received from the King at his
departure from Court, and which were often after reiterated; by which he was
enjoined that he should rid his hands as soon as he could of the Wars of
Piedmont, to the end that they being over he might go into Flanders, or
Germany; but Prince Thomaso was totally against it, thinking any whatsoever
Truce injurious to his cause, and to the whole business; and for that he knew,
for certain, that the Duke had orders to rid his hands of the business as soon
as he could; so as departing with the forces he brought, and Vallette's men
being diminished, the French Forces grew very weak; for there was great
scarcity in the Citadel; he moreover (that he might keep the Governor of
Millain from consenting thereunto) added, that the Truce would be destructive,
not only in relation to the Citadel of Turin, but to Cassalle; it being
certain that by the Truce some respit would be given to them both; and did
further allege, that the Truce would be prejudicial to the affairs of
Flanders, Germany, and Spain, as well as to those of Piedmont, by reason of the
aforesaid orders given to Longueville, to go to some of those parts; and that
the King of France, when he should have respite from the Wars of Piedmont,
would intend those other Wars the more; but the Governor, who did not believe
that Longueville had any such orders, desired to return to Millain, and be free
from the troubles of Wars, and perhaps also, being distasted, that such a
Garrison should not be put into the Citadel, when it should be taken, as he
would have; and that so the victory should not appear to be his, but another;
he therefore was for listening to the Truce; so they chose Deputies to Negotiate
the business; the Dowager chose Marquess Villa. Prince Thomaso chose Count
Messerati; the Cardinal of Vallette, and Duke Longueville chose Mousier d'
Argenson; and the Governor of Millain chose Abbot Vasques; all the^e meeting
in Vallentino, the Truce was concluded, which was to begin on the fourth of
August, and to end on the twenty fourth of October; the conditions to be these:

That the City, and Citadel, should remain in the Condition they were at the
present, with power to either of them to make what Fortification they listed;
so as that neither of them should advance their works beyond a Line, which
should be drawn by common consent between the City and the Citadel; that the
Armies should withdrew into their own Towns and Provinces, and should forbear
all Hostility; that none should go from his own quarters, into the others,
without a pasport; that Cassalle should continue in the same condition it was
in at the present; only that it might be Lawful for the French to change 600
sick and infirm Foot of the Garrison of the Citadel, for as many strong and
able men; and that it might be lawful to change Prisoners.

The Truce being thus concluded, Arms were forborne. The Governor retired to
Millian, carrying some of his Army along with him, leaving some in Piedmont,
and quartering some of them upon the Confines; Prince Thomaso was not only
unsatisfied with this Truce, but thought himself thereby injured, thinking that
the Governor of Millain had abandoned him when his business was at the
fairest, and when he was as good as in possession of the Citadel; nor were the
Emperor, and the Infanta of Flanders less displeased thereat then he, both of
them apprehending that when the affairs of Piedmont should be quieted
Longueville would come down with his Forces either into Flanders, or Germany;
so as they complained grievously thereof, all three, to the Court of Spain;
which being no less ill satisfied therewith then they, feared that when the War
should be at an end in Piedmont, it would for certain break out in greater fury
in Catalognia; wherefore the Governor of Millain was very hardly spoken of in
that Court; and the King of Spain being scandalized both for his own affairs,
and those of others, and the Governor roundly checked, and a strict account
required of him for it, it was generally thought, in Italy, that the contention
touching the putting a Garrison into the Citadel of Turin had made the
Governor of Millain make Truce fearing that it might occasion much strife; but
the Governor alleged nothing in his defense but the diminution of his
Forces, which was occasioned by the many Garrisons which he was necessitated to
leave in the Towns which were taken in Piedmont, whereby not being able to keep
the Field, he thought it better to desist with honor from that enterprise by
the way of Truce, then to do it with shame, as he foresaw he must ere long be
forced to do. But the expiration of the Truce showed how little justifiable
this his plea was; for though the French Army was recruited with new men during
the time of Truce, and that no supply was sent to the Spanish Camp, yet the
Governor of Millain march^d into the Field with more men then the French did,
as shall be said. But as the Governors plea in his own defense would not bear
water; so the Emperor and the Infanta's fear of Longuevill's Forces proved
vain. For those Forces were left behind in Piedmont, to the end that that
Country might not be unprovided of men; and Longueville was sent into Alsatia,
with only the Dutch Regiment, to succeed Duke Weymer in being General of the
French, which Weymer then dyed; and yet the King of Spain, either to resent
this action of the Governors, or to satisfy Prince Thomaso, commanded the
Governor that for the future he would be advised by Prince Thomaso. The Truce
was not well concluded, when the King of France, and the Dowager were held to
be the breakers of it; he by her will having brought French into Susa,
Avigliana, and Cavor: Wherefore 600 sick men of the Citadel of Turin being by
the Articles of the Truce to be changed for as many strong and able men, the
Governor of Millain would not allow of the change; against which the French
objected, that the reciprocal Articles of the Truce did not oblige one party
between themselves; they therefore said, that the King and Dowager making
jointly one of the parties, they might do any thing between themselves, without
offense to the League; and on the contrary, they complained that the Truce was
broken by both the Princes: for that the Prince Cardinal by authority of his
pretense had made no less acquisition after the Truce, then his brother had
done by all his Forces; since going without any Forces from Cuneo to the
Maritime parts, he had obtained Villa Franca and the haven thereof by voluntary
surrender; as also the Fort S. Sospiro, and the City and County of Nice, where
he was received by the people with much applause; and that driving out the
Governor of that Castle, which by art and situation was impregnable, he soon
after forced the Castle to surrender: And that all the people had sworn fealty
to him, as to the Dukes Guardian, which was verily a great acquisition; that
City, Castle, and Haven being one of the chief keys of Piedmont, upon which the
French had always an eye, and were always intent upon the recovery thereof,
as part of Provence, which of ancient right did belong to the Crown of France;
and this purpose 4000 Foot were at that time sent from Provence under that
Governor, and the Kings Fleet kept hovering upon those Seas; but that the
Prince Cardinal had subverted these designs, who without Arms or any
opposition, by the bare authority of his presence, and by the peoples ready
obedience, had obtained a Fort which had already wearied the Forces of France,
backed by a powerful Fleet at Sea of the Turks, which was sent to the taking
thereof.

The present conjuncture of times did assist the Cardinal much in this affair
for the French Fleet, which kept flo^ng upon those Seas, and the people of
Provence who came upon those Confines, made those of Nice much afraid that they
should lose that Fort, if it were not secured by some powerful Chiestain, in
those days wherein they could look for no help from Piedmont, by reason of the
great alterations that were there, and wherein the Dowager being necessitated
to assign over her principal Towns into the hands of the French, they feared
she would be forced to do the like with Nice: So as they thought they could not
do better for the House of Savoy, in these perilous times, for the
preservation of that important place, then to deliver it up to the Prince
Cardinal, who for his own concernment would not suffer it to fall into the
hands of others; and who by the assistance of the Spanish Forces might defend
it from the French. The people of Provence came near to Varo, where they did
and received some prejudice; but hearing of the Truce which was made at Turin,
they returned back; and the French Fleet which was feared would assault the
Town at the same time, either had no such intention, or, as the people said,
and thought, was kept from acting any thing by a thick mist. The French
pretended that this action of the Prince Cardinal in taking Nice after the
Truce was made, was undoubtedly a more open and manifest breach thereof, then
the Dowagers bringing in of French into Susa; especially since it was done by
one party, to the great prejudice of the other: And they thought that Prince
Thomaso had also broken the Truce; who when it was made, obtained a Declaration
from the supreme Senate of Piedmont, for the putting of Caesar's Decree in
execution, touching the Guardianship and Regency, to the prejudice of the
Dowagers Affairs which were chiefly in question; though she, in defense of her
right, and to keep her Sons sovereignty indemnified, which she thought was
entrenched upon by Caesar's Decree, made the supreme Senate of Savoy declare
both the Emperors Decree, and that of the Senate of Turin-hall. But because
the Governor of Millain, and the French, did truly observe the Truce, the rest
did nothing to discompose it, but only complained; all the time of the Truce
the Fortifications of the City of Turin went on, and the French furnished the
Citadel with whatsoever it wanted; during the Truce some composure was also
treated on between the Dowager and the Princes: For the Princes presupposing
that their advantage in Forces should make the Dowager willing to divide, if
not the name, at lest the substance of Guardianship and Government with them;
and being desirous also to make the people see by these overtures of Treaties,
that what they did was out of necessity, and not of choice, they sent
Messarati, a great Confident of theirs, to Sus^, ^o propound some terms of
accommodation to the Dowager; which were: That she should be Guardianess and
Regent, and they her Assisters or Coadjutors; that all writings and dispatches
should be signed both by her and them; that the Governors and other Officers
should be jointly chos^n by her and them; and that the public Revenues should
be also disposed of and managed by them jointly.

These Proposals were neither wholly rejected nor wholly accepted, but thus
moderated by the Dowager: That the signing which was desired by the Princes
should be granted them in things of greatest importance; as in Leagues,
Agreements made with Foreigners, Alienations, Marriages, in making perpetual
Leagues, and the like: And touching the choosing of Officers, that they should
have leave to except against any that they should not confide in, in the
Offices of greatest concernment: And as for the Revenues, that proposal was
totally rejected: No mention was made here, that the Dowager should quit the
League made with France, nor that the Princes should pass over from the King of
Spain's party to the French; a chief point, and which was the basis and
foundation of all agreement; from whence it might be seen, that these
Negotiations had rather semblances then substance. But the French, who saw how
hard it would be for them to maintain the Citadels of Turin and of Cassalle,
the one being in an Enemies Country, and the other far from any places which
were held by the French, and environed with Spanish Garrisons, they began to
bethink themselves how advantageous it would be for them, if they could win
over Prince Thomaso to side with their King; by which they should not only
secure both the Citadels, but should re-gain many places of Piedmont, by means
of the peoples favor, who they saw were much inclined to Prince Thomaso: They
thought therefore to draw him over to them by large gratifications; they made
very advantageous offers to him, wherein in process of time, and upon
occurrences, they enlarged themselves. The King was gone from Paris to
Dolpheny, the more to countenance his Sister, and the Affairs of Piedmont; and
when he was come to Grenoble he was desirous to speak with her, and sent for
her to come to him: She very willingly passed the Mountains, and went to see
the King, with great hopes of receiving comfort from him in these her so many
and so sad afflictions; but instead of comfort or consolation, she found her
self wounded with yet a more mortal accident then all the rest. Cardinal
Richelieu being (as he always was) desirous to improve the Grandezza of the
Crown of France, not content with such Towns of Piedmont whereinto the Dowager
had consented (as has been said) that French Garrisons should be put; nor
being content with the very Citadel of Turin, which was lately assigned over by
the Dowager into the hands of the French, made the King desire her that she
would permit that a French Garrison, under a Piedmontese Governor, might be
put into Mommiliano, the only refuge, and, as may be said, the sacred Anchor of
the Principality. She had no readier answer for this so unexpected demand then
her tears, which poured abundantly down from her eyes; which, as they mitigated
the Kings desire, so did they the more exasperate the Cardinal Richelieu's
acrimony, who was the Author of the demand; who treating thereof afterward
with the Dowager, tried first to win her consent thereunto by Reasons, saying,
That since she was to fear her husbands Brothers, and that she could not trust
much in her Subjects, she ought to resolve upon nothing but upon throwing her
self into her Brothers arms, and absolutely rely upon him: And when he saw he
could not work upon her by his reasons, and found that her denial proceeded
from her Counselors, who were by her, who persuaded her never to yield to any
such demand, he strove to terrify them with threats and angry looks, that they
might alter their minds, and persuade the Dowager to grant what the King
demanded; but his persuasions to her were in vain, and his threats and severe
looks as vain to the rest; for the Dowager not at all astonished or dismayed at
her former adversities, nor at this present demand, which was fuller of horror
then all the rest, resented the unjustness of the demand with a more then
manlike courage; and her Officers and Advisers, not daunted with the severe
threats of one that was likely to put them in execution, kept constant in their
Loyalty to the Dowager, and to their Duke: Moreover, the Savoyards, who had
some inkling of this business, being very averse unto it, entered the Town with
a Garrison, resolving to lose their lives rather then it should fall into the
hands of the French. The Cardinal being more then meanly incensed at this
denial, began to sit upon the skirts of the Dowager, and, in revenge, desired
occasion to ruin her affairs, which he was not long in meeting with; for
Prince Thomaso having sent Count Messerati to the Court of France, to treat
with the King and Richelieu upon the large offers which were made him, he found
them at Lions, in their return from Grenoble, and brought back word from the
Cardinal, That not only the offers which were made unto the Prince should be
confirmed, but promised greater things touching his pretentions with the
Dowager, and that he should be maintained and upheld therein, so as he would
drive out the Spaniards that were in Turin; and that even the Dowager should be
excluded from thence; for he would order it so as she should keep in Savoy, and
that she should be forced to all his pretentions, except such as the King could
not with honor consent unto: But all these offers would not prevail with the
Prince, were it either that he doubted they would not be made good, having
small reason to expect that more account should be made of his concernments
than what he appa^ently saw was made of the Kings own Sisters; or were it that
he was advised to the contrary by the Prince Cardinal, and by Messerati's self,
who was totally inclined to the Spanish party: But resolving not to break off
the Treaty altogether, the Prince answered, That he would not accept of any of
those offers, unless he might be permitted to remain a friend to the Spaniards,
or at least be a Neuter between the two Crowns; which not being granted him
(for the King of France his only end in making him so great offers was, that,
together with him, he might make War upon the State of Millain) the Treaty
broke off; and yet the greatness of these offers, which at the present seemed
to effect nothing, like seed sown in good ground, produced afterward new and
more high pretentions, which brought forth at last the fruit of those
dissentions and alienations which were at the present expected; for the Prince,
being proud to have such offers made him by the King of France, began to be
scandalized, that though he was a Prince, and Child of Spain, and had been
honored so in appearance, yet in reallity he was treated but as a private
Cavalier, without any settled allowance, whereby he might maitain his Court and
menial Servants, but was fain to use means daily to the Governor of Millain
for his maintaining of them; and much more, that the had no independent
Authority or Command, as became a Prince of his condition; and though when the
Truce was made, and wherewith the King of Spain was not well pleased, the King
had ordered the Governor of Millain that he should do nothing for the future
without consult^ng with the Prince: yet were it either that the Governor had
some private Orders to the contrary, or that he was tied by his Order only to
consult, but not to execute, or that he abhorred to have his authority bounded
by the Prince his pleasure, he acted not according to the Prince his opinion,
but as he listed best himself, from whence dis-satisfaction grew daily. The
Prince began to demand that he might have an Army depending upon none but
himself, which he might manage as he would himself; and that he might have a
certain perfix'd allowance settled for the maintenance of himself, and of his
Court.

These were high demands; and such as were not easy to be granted, the
scarcity of men and moneys in these times being considered, and the present
condition of affairs; but though the passages between the Prince and French had
made the Court of Spain jealous of him, yet they made him as necessary for
them, since they saw the French endeavored so much to draw him over to them;
so as neither the Agents in Italy nor the Court of Spain durst exasperate him
by denials: his demands were therefore referred by the King to Count Sirvela,
who going to the Prince assured him of the Kings good opinion, and said he was
very willing to give him satisfaction; but because the Prince, when he came out
of Savoy and sided with the King of Spain, had sent his Wife and Children to
the Spanish Court, as Hostages of his fidelily, and had given her Commission to
put him and his whole Family into the protection of that Court; and that his
Wife in performance thereof, by the consent of President Costa whom the Prince
had given her for her Counselor, had subscribed a public writing to that
purpose in Madrid, which the Prince would never ratify, though he had been
often desired to do it; therefore the Count who was very willing to give him
all satisfaction, demanded the ratification of that writing, before he would
enter into any treaty with him. The Prince, who when he had nothing to rely
upon but the King of Spains favor was slow in ratifying it, was now more
obdurate therein when he was so sought unto by the King of France; so as no
treaty was commenced, the Count thinking it stood not with the Kings honor to
proceed otherwise; and perhaps he had received such instructions from the
Court, to prolong the conclusion of the treaty by propounding such
difficulties. The Governor of Millains carriage to the Prince cooperated to
these proceedings, who was more liberal to him in furnishing him with monyes
then he had been formerly; and did more frequently follow his advice in the
managing of War; and granted more unto him then he had formerly done;
especially in things wherein the main business was not concerned, to the end,
that obtaining that in effect which he could not do by express covenanting, he
might adhere the more constantly to the Kings party; so as what by reason of
the better satisfaction which he received, what by the progress which the
Spanish Forces made in Piedmont, and by the yet greater which he hoped they
would make, he bare the better with it.

Let us now reassume the thread of Affairs which ensued, from which the
Treaties of Peace, and the Interests of Parties have a little deviated us.

The Truce being concluded, and the Duke of Longueville being gone (as has
been said) into Alsatia, the Cardinal of Valletta ^ed in Rivoli, being much
distasted and angered at the heart, by reason of the unfortunate success which
had happened in his Generalship, the blame whereof he saw was laid upon him; and
his Brother, the Duke of Candale, who was joined with him in the Government of
the War, died seven months before him in Cassalle; so the Arms of France in
Piedmont wanting a Commander in chief, the King of France sent Henry of
Lorrein, Count d' Harcourt, thither to be his General; he who by his Fleet at
Sea had happily recovered the Islands of Provence from the Spaniards; who being
come to Piedmont a little before the Truce was to end, being desired by the
Nuntio to prolong it, seemed very willing thereunto; yet the effects showed
that he dreamed of nothing less, then of consenting to any the least delay; but
he appeared otherwise, that he might lull the Governor asleep, and make him
negligent in making provisions; to the end that when the Truce should be
expired they might fall to War again, as he was resolved to do: his reason of
not proroguing the Truce, was, the necessity of relieving the Citadel of
Cassalle, which was ready to be lost if it were not speedily relieved. On the
contrary, the Governor of Millain, though by his Speeches and Demonstrations
he seemed to be wholly averse to the prorogation; yet he desired nothing more,
in his heart, then that the Truce might be prolonged, out of his thirsting
after the same Citadel of Cassalle; which being but weakly garrisoned, and
being every where begirt with Spanish Forces, he knew that by a long Siege it
would fall of it self into his hands; and thought that it was reduced even to
extremity: but Prince Thomaso who desired more to make the Citadel of Turin
sure, then to gain that of Cassalle; and who, contrary to his will, had given
way unto the Truce, was unwilling to have it prolonged, neither did he believe
it would be; for that the new General, as well as the Governor, foreseeing how
prejudicial the prorogation would be to the Citadel, he was sure it would never
be granted: he therefore admonished the Governor not to suffer himself to be
fed with vain hopes, nor to trust the enemies fair speeches, who as soon as the
Truce should be expired would assuredly march into the Field; wherefore he
exhorted him to be prepared, lest he might be assaulted at unawares. The
Governor was of another opinion, either out of his desire of seeing the Truce
prorogued, or being detained by the inconveniences which lying in the Field
bears with it, or by reason of the great expenses for necessary preparations,
which believing that they would be superfluous if the prorogation should
succeed, as he believed it would, he desired to spare; and finding that
Harcourt could not be rid of the Nuntio, who continually solicited him to
prolong the Truce, he argued that he had a good mind thereunto; but being at
last ascertained by the Prince, that the French who were quartered abroad in
several parts of Piedmont during the Truce, now that it drew near to an end,
went to join with their General, who lay in Carmagnuola, he began to be
un-deceived; wherefore going from Millain, he went, but not with all his men,
to Pavia, and from thence to Asti, where he tarried observing the enemies
proceedings; who giving still good words, and holding on the treaty more then
ever, would not suffer the Governor to despair of a good conclusion, which he
strove to make him believe was now nearer then ever: at last Harcourt making an
express Messenger appear at the very expiration of the Truce, who feigning to
be sent from the Court, brought him precise Orders from the King not to
prorogue the Truce, but to carry on the War, he bad farewell to all
Negotiations, and also to the Nuntio, who out of hope of obtaining a
prorogation did study it much. The French when this feigned Post appeared were
ready drawn out in order; so as the General, at the same time that he dismissed
the Nuntio, commanded them to march toward Montcalleri, they being about 9000
fighting men, whereof about 7000 Foot, and the rest Horse, those Piedmontese
being numbered in, who were come to join with him under Marquess Villa. The
Governor understanding (contrary to his expectation) that the Treaty was over,
went from Asti to Villafranca, where he heard from the Prince, that the French
marched to Cheri; and therefore he counseled him to draw near to St. Paolo,
and to the Towns within a mile of Villafranca, by the ne^ghbourhood whereof he
might secure Cheri, and oppose any design of the enemy, without exposing his
men to danger being so near Villanova; he sent him word that he would come out
of Turin with 2000 Foot, and 600 Horse, and that he would come to Cheri by the
way of the hills, so as the enemy being assaulted by one of them before, and by
the other behind, he might undoubtedly be discomfited. Cheri is a Town of large
circuit, abounding in all things, full of Inhabitants; and being one of those
which made up the circle of the siege of Cassalle, Harcourt having cast his eye
upon it, thinking that if he should take it, he might open a sure and fit way
to send relief to Cassalle, which was now his chief intent. There were but five
hundred Dutch in Cheri, who were sent thither, when the Truce was expired, by
the Prince under Colonel Formestre, together with some troops of horse, too
small a number for so great a circuit. The Governor of Millain sent the Prince
word from Villafranca that he would advance, and wished him to do the like from
Turin; to the end, that enclosing the Enemy between them, they might easily
rout them. But fortune often makes a laughing stock of the best grounded
designs; the Governor being come to the foot of a hill, which was the midway
between him, and Harcourt, and which kept the French and those of Cheri, from
discovering the Spanish Army: The Governor deferred passing over this hill till
the next day, which if he had done the same day, as undoubtedly he might,
Harcourt would not have dared to attempt Cheri, for fear of being assaulted by
the Governor, whom he would have seen upon his back; and the Inhabitants and
Garrison of Cheri, encouraged by the Governors being so near, would have done
more then they d d in their own defense: but no opposition appearing, Harcourt
came to the Town; from whence-six Troops of Horse issued forth, and skirmished
four hours space with 400 French Horse, which were the first that appeared. But
after a long fight, the main body of the French Army came up unto them, which
forced the others to retreat to Cheri, upon whom the Gates of the Town being
shut, lest the enemies Horse might enter a long with them, they ran as fast as
they could toward Turin, whither they got safe and unpursued. The French being
come to Cheri, were notlong in planting their Cannon against the walls, but it
was more then needed; for those of Cheri seeing none appear to assist them, and
wanting men enough to defend the Town, they feared to be plundered: So as the
same night, without the consent of the Dutch Captain, they by Marquess Villa's
means articled to surrender the Town; the next day Prince Thomaso, who marched
with his men toward Cheri, might see the Dutch that were come out of Cheri
come toward him, and the Governor who had past over his in another part,
heard of the surrender. They both were astonished at the news of so sudden a
surrender; and having lost the hopes of their expected victory, they halted
upon the Hills, expecting to hear from one another, what they were to do next;
But Harcourt hearing that the Governor advanced, left his baggage, artillery,
and all encumbrances behind in Cheri, and marched with his men into the field,
and advanced to fight him; which when the Governor heard, he made two
squadrons of Horse, and some Musketeers, advance, that they might fall upon the
enemies Van; and immediately ordered Don John di Garrai, to draw out the
Soldiers in order; and whilst the Horse which were sent before by the
Governor skirmish'd with the enemies Van, Carpano Captain of the Spanish
Horse, and Tavanes Sergeant Major of the French Army, were hurt; but Harcout
hearing that Prince Thomaso was fallen down from the hills and was come to
assault him on the back, lest he might be taken between them, made his Rear his
Van, and with speed retreated to Cheri, whose Inhabitants were doubly blamed
upon this account; First, for having been too hasty in surrendering, when two
reliefs were so near; Secondly, for not having advertised the Prince of the
enemies going out of the Town, when they went to encounter the Governor, for
then he might have advanced, and might have recovered the Town, might have
taken the baggage and artillery which were left therein by the French, and
might have fallen upon the enemy jointly with the Governor. The Governor, when
he saw the occasion was over, went to Santena, a Town within three miles of
Cheri, upon the way by which you go from Cheri to Carmagnuola; and mustering
all his men together he resolved to besiege the enemy, from thence, who were in
Cheri. And knowing by those that he had taken, that they wanted victuals very
much; he made account, that since they could receive none but either from
Carmagnuola or Montcalleri, he might hinder any from coming from Carmagnuola,
by his keeping at Santena, and might also keep any from coming from
Montcalleri, by sending a Garrison of a thousand Foot thither, and some Horse,
and that consequently the Town would quickly be relinquished for want of food;
which Harcourt foreseeing, he thought by one and the same means to free his men
from Famine, and (which was his main end) to send relief to the Citadel of
Cassalle, which stood in great need thereof. He therefore sent 400 Horse out of
the Town, with men en croup, who passing by the hills of Montferrat which lead
to Cassalle, met with no opposition, except at the village Gazzino, where some
Troops of Prince Thomaso's Horse were commanded by his General Don Mauritio,
who though they made some resistance, yet the French made their way valiantly
through them, and got with little loss into Cassalle; and Marquess Villa came
forth also with almost all the Dowagers Horse, and thereby not only freed the
Town from Famine, which began to be very great, but thought also to get food
for the Town; but he intended first to fall upon the Prince, who overran the
parts about Montcalleri, and raised contribution: And to the end that he might
not be hindered by the Enemies Army, the rest of the Horse marched out at the
same time and faced the Enemy, thinking by this means to keep them within their
quarters: But being met by the Enemies Horse, he was forced to retreat once
more into Cheri; nor did the same Horse fare more fortunately in the sally
which they made out by night not long after, with intention to fall at unawares
upon the Horse quarter, which being commanded by Gonzaga, lay in Poirino, a
Town not far from Santena; for the first Charge being stoutly withstood by
Aisaldo, who was Captain of the Horse guard, the rest of the Horse had time to
put themselves in order; who charging the Assailants, after a long dispute and
much resistance put them to flight, and took Aisaldo from them, who being
wounded in the head was carried away Prisoner by them. And for all this, those
that remained in Cheri wanted bread; so as the French were forced to go
elsewhere to get victuals, if they would keep there: They therefore endeavored
to get some from Chiavezzo, which though it was somewhat far off, and divided
from Cheri by the Poe; yet the water being then so low as that it was
foordable, they thought that by great conducts they might secure the passage;
and because Cheri suffered more in want of Grist then Grain, and Chiavezzo
wanting Grain, they sent Loads of Grain thither, and brought as many Loads of
Grist from thence; whereby they thought they might sustain themselves, and
prolong the Siege; which they might have done, if a provision had not been
found against it; for the Governor had sent before to break down all the Mills
of the parts thereabouts, and placed Garrisons in the Towns near the highways,
by which the Convoys passed, and made the Country people be ready with their
Arms in hand, to oppose any of the Enemy that should pass that way; so as the
Convoys being often routed, provision of bread grew very scarce in that Town;
yet Marquess Villa, according to his promise, brought some relief from
Carmagnuola to the great Famine that was in Cheri, which he did luckily and
without oppotion; for the Governor having removed his Quarters from Santena to
Poirino, the way which leads from Carmagnuola to Cheri was left almost open,
which whilst the Governor tarried at Santena was quite blocked up: But this
relief being but very slender, it being no more then what was brought en croupe
behind 600 Horse, and the French having no hopes of any more from elsewhere, it
was impossible for them to tar^y longer there, especially in respect of straw
which the horses wanted extremely. Almost all the French Horse which were in
Piedmont were in Cheri, which if they should be lost, neither the Citadel of
Turin, nor Chiavezzo, nor any Towns of Piedmont, could be longer kept; and the
very Citadel of Cassalle was held as good as lost if these horses, which were
the sinews of the French Forces, should be lost: And many things made against
the coming of new recruits from France; for the King, besides provisions made
for the Wars of Flanders and Germany, was wholly bent upon the Enterprise of
Catalognia, which was at that time in insurrection against the King of Spain,
and had sent all the Forces that he could raise in his Kingdom thither; so as
no wise man could dream of any supplies: To demand conditions of the Enemy was
the to^al ruin of the King of France his Forces, and of both his and the
Dowagers honor; for the Prince and the Governor knowing very well what
advantage they had would not have been satisfied with mean conditions; and if
they should have yielded to any conditions, they would have demanded the
Citadels of Turin and Cassalle, Chiavazzo, and whatsoever was then upon the
point to be lost; nay, they would hardly have pardoned the Soldiers lives; so
as they would have pretended to as plenary a victory by way of agreement, as if
they had won it by force of Arms. It therefore was more honorable to venture
life in maintaining the Towns they yet had, then ignominiously to abandon them
to the Enemy. Harcourt was thus generously minded; who being in these streights
would rather run the hazard of his life and fortune, then be forced to yield
to ruinous conditions: nor did this his Generosity prove vain; for Fortune,
which always favors the courageous, seemed to be desirous to preserve this
gallant Commander for more glorious Victories. He was to do one of three
things, to get from thence, and to escape an ignominious and ruinous surrender;
he must either get into Chiavazzo by the same way by which he had caused
victuals to be brought, and from thence to the Citadel of Turin; or else go
toward Bat^igliera, a Town which stands upon the skirt of the hill, and from
thence go through the Langhe to Alba; or else (which was the most dangerous
undertaking) get into Carmagnuol^ by the way of Santena, which the Governor of
Millain had lately abandoned: The greatest danger of the last lay, that whereas
if he should betake himself to either of the other two, he went still further
from the Enemy; by the third he should fall into his very jaws; yet Harcourt
liked the last best; for if he had endeavored to get into Chiavazzo by the
first way, he must pass through the narrow ways of the hill; and in case he
should be pursued by the Enemy, he must be forced to abandon his Cannon and his
Baggage; if he should go the second way, which was exceeding troublesome, he
could carry neither victuals nor ammunition with him; and being to march still
through an Enemies Country he exposed himself to apparent danger of being
routed, if the Governor of Millain should follow and overtake him: He
therefore chose the third way as the securest, though fullest of danger. And
because he had made a false March to be beaten when he stirred not, several
nights before his coming, it happened that when he caused it to be beaten the
night that he went away, the Enemy either did not hear it, or believed it to be
feigned, as were the former; so as he had time and convenience to be well
advanced with his men before the Enemy knew he was gone; but though he should
have pursued him he could not have speedily overtaken him, for several reasons:
But howsoever ^e sent his Horse after him to gall him on the Rere; but it was
late ere these got to him; and when they came they found the Enemy engaged with
the Prince, who coming from Montcalleri fell upon them, believing that the
Governor would do the like at the same time on his side. The Prince gave a
furious and gallant assault, with various fortune for a while; but the French
finding that the Spanish A^my was got up unto them, they placed their Attillery
loaded with Musketbullets, in the Rere, and turning them upon the enemies
horse, they hurt them not a little; and therefore being forced to forbear,
partly in expectation of the rest of the Army; partly to keep from being
further prejudiced, they advanced no further; the Prince his own person was
much endangered, by the valiant resistance made by the French; but at last he
made himself master of a Bridge which they had abandoned; the coming on of
night, which was very dark, and the Country being full of underwoods, and
Rivulets, kept the Governor from falling upon the French, whilst they were in
Fight with the Prince; for he thought it better to make the Victory sure, by
deferring the Combat till the next day, then to undergo those dangers and
disasters which battles by night are subject unto; but Harcourt reflecting upon
the danger he should be in, if (carrying till broad day) he should be assaulted
on both sides, he fell upon the Prince at midnight so furiously, as though he
was stoutly resisted, he got the better of the business, he regained the
Bridge, over the which he past his men before the dawning of the day, and
secured both them and himself; when day was up, the Governor found that the
assured victory which he had promised himself over night had escaped his hands;
which if it had fallen out otherwise, it had undoubtedly put an end to the War:
as this success redounded much to Harcourts. Glory; so did it occasion much
murmuring against the Governor, in general, and in particular, by your Prince,
who complained, as if the Governor out of private rancour and indignation, had
by affected delay and slow marching shunned falling upon the Enemy (who if he
had been taken in the midst between them, he must of necessity have been
overthrown) as if he had not only not cared to put an end to the War, so to
keep the Princes from obtaining their pretenses, which he seemed not to wish
well unto; but as if he had exposed the Prince his person to the Forces of a
more powerful Enemy, to the end that he might be defeated, and have his own
person endangered: the Piedmontese joined all, generally, with the Prince in
his Complaints, and not a few of the Captains of the Spanish Army; who could
not know why, when the Governor might have followed the Enemy in a straight
line, he had pursued him in an oblique one; and yet there wanted not some who
defended this action, alleging in excuse of what had happened, that the
Governors slowness was not to be ascribed to affectation, or to any sinister
intention to the Prince, but to a good rule in War, which says, it is better to
make a bridge of gold for an enemy to march away over, then by incensing him to
make him desperate, and put the whole affair in hazard; they praised him, for
that he had been contented to free Cheri from the Enemy, without unshe thing a
sword, or endangering his men; applauding the genius of the Spaniards, who are
known by so many experiences to shun pitched battles as much as they can, and
never to come unto any, but when forced by necessity; after this the Governor
sent toward Alba and Nizza, to drive all the French out of the lower
Moniferrat; and to this purpose he sent the Camp Master Emilio Ghilino, to
drive them from Vezzeme, and Bubbio, two Castles near this part of Moniferrat,
where the French were as yet; who defending themselves better then it was
thought they could have done, he sent the Marquess of Caracena thither
afterward with his Brigade, and with some pieces of Artillety; who drove the
French from both those places; and reduced them to his power within three days
space: thus the Governor having put strong Garrisons into the Towns of
Piedmont, and left 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse with Prince Thomaso, undercamp
Master Bolognino; the winter coming on, he retired with the rest of the Army to
the State of Millain; and having quartered them in several parts of that State,
he prepared all that Winter for the next years War; this mean while the
business was not given over between the Citadel and the City of Turin; for as
soon as the Truce was expired, those of the Citadel began to draw near the
Enemies Fortifications; by new Trenches, and works under ground; and having
sprung a Mine, a fierce Skirmish ensued, by which those of the Citadel advanced
to very near the Trenches of the City, and could not be driven from thence till
the next night, when the Princes Soldiers, having also sprung a Mine under the
Enemies new advancements, they also made a great assault; wherein though they
were stoutly resisted, and were repulsed more then once, yet they got the
better of the business, and made those of the Citadel not only forsake the
station wherein they were; but forced them to retreat a little more backward
then where they had been before: they then fell to make use of their Artillery;
those of the Citadel endeavored to beat down the great Tower in the great
Piazza, from whence they were played upon in the Citadel; and those without
strove to beat down the Keep within the Citadel, from whence the houses of the
City were beaten down by the Artillery of the Citadel; and each of them
obtained their ends, but not alike; for the Tower, after above 2000 Cannon
shot, was beaten down to the ground: and the Keep of the Citadel was only
beaten down so low, as the City could receive no prejudice from thence; but
notwithstanding, the City and Citadel continued plying one another with Musket,
and Cannon shot, whereby many were slain, and many hurt, and (amongst the rest)
Mounsieur di Cavogne, Governor of the Citadel, received a slight hurt in the
face; and in this manner did things continue here all the Winter; In which
interim they forbear not to fortify the City against the Citadel: Harcourt
being with them who were preserved at the Bridge gotten to Carmagnuola,
quartered his men in those Towns of Piedmont which held yet for the Dowager;
amongst which were Saluzzo, with all the Marquisate, Alba, Fossano, Chirasco,
Savigliano, Been, Carmagnuola, Chiavasso; and yet Harcourt was not idle; for he
furnished the Citadel of Turin with such things as were chiefly necessary, for
some months; and when the Governor of Millain was retreated, he vexed some
Towns which held for the Prince; he took Busca, a Town between Cuni and
Savigliano, and passing to Rossona, and Drovero, they yielded to him upon
conditions, before his men came to him: he went then to Rovello, which having
easily taken, he quartered there all that Winter; but the French were generally
hated by the Piedmontese, who taking up Arms denied to pay them usual
contributions; and abhorring their government, declared themselves for the
Prince; who that he might not spend that Winter idely, sent the horse which lay
idle in Turin to scour the parts about Chiavasso, where, together with much
other hurt which he did, he straightened that Town very much, which the French
desired to relieve, but could never do it; the Governor of Millain met also
with a no inconsiderable encounter, wherein he lost five Troops of Horse, which
were quartered in Constanza, and kept the territories of Canava from being
overrun by the Garrison of Cassalle: which Troops whilst they lay careles^
there, were assaulted, a^ unawares, by four hundred Horse* which came out of
Cassale, who slew some of them, took other some prisoners, and suffered but
very few of them to escape: and yet all this while, peace and agreement was
treated on between the Dowager and the Princes, not without desire to see it
Effected.

The End of the Sixteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
Book XVII.
The Contents.
YOu shall read in this Book the Treaties of Agreement between the Dowager and
the Princes; and the Interest between the Princes and the Governor of Millain;
how the Governor goes with a powerful Army to Cassalle; how it is relieved by
Harcourt; how he fought the Governor before he could bring in the succor, and
had the better of the Fight, and did not only relieve but perfectly free the
place. Harcourt, being victorious, goes presently to Turin; he takes the
Capuchins Bridge over the Poe; fortifies himself there; and afterward begirts
the City with a vast line, and endeavors to get it by famine, Prince Thomaso
being in it; but ere long he sees the Governor upon the Hills with a powerful
Army, coming to relieve the besieged Prince; the Governor finding it
impossible to bring the succor by that way, tryes to get a pass over the
River, toward Montcalleri: and having gotten it, he passes over the Poe;
where quitting the Hills, he takes up new quarters; and thinking to make the
French abandon the enterprise by famine, he possesses himself of the Avenues
by which Victuals were brought to the Camp; so as they would have been quickly
made to remove, had not Prince Thomaso, who was impatient of delay, made the
Governor to fall upon the Enemies Trenches, and to relieve him so; which
falling out unfortunately, and the Governor not thinking himself any longer
safe in his quarters beyond the Poe, returns to his quarters upon the Hills;
where he (...) assisting the besieged in what he was able, till the City was
(...) (...); which happened two months, and eleven days after the un^te (...)
given to the French Trenches, that the besieged City might be relieved Prince
Thomas^ comes (...) of Turin, and retreats to Inurea; (...) ^e it defined by
Monsig^ Mazzarini, who was come Ambassador from the King of France into
Piedmont a little before Turin was surrendered, to join with the Frenchie but
Count Siruela coming to him from the Governor of Millian, he makes new
capit^lations with him, to join with the Crown of Spains and the C^ns Della
Rivera, being sent by the same Governor, to the same purpose, to the Prince
Cardinal, the Ambassador Mazzarini having notice thereof, forc^th Prince
Thomaso to join with the French upon conditions; one of which was that the
Prince should go to Paris within one months space* which condition was not
observed; for the Prince instead of going to France, passes secretly to Nice,
where he and his brother ^e connfirm their union to the crown of Spain, to
Rivera, the Ambassador Mazzarini who went to Nice, to confirm the one Prince,
and to draw the other over to the French party, labored the contrary verymuch;
at the same tim^ the Governor of Millain it sent for into Spain, and is
succeeded in that Government by Count Siruela; the French go to Montcalvo, take
the Town as their first arrival, and afterward the Castle, which yields
without expecting succor.

THough the Princes saw their cause brought to an advantageous condition
through the assistance of the Spanish Forces, and by the Popular favor, and
that they had the better of the Dowager, who had not as yet been assisted by
the French, answerably to her need; yet finding it very hard to recover the
chief Towns of Piedmont, some of which were fallen into the French-mens hands,
some into the Spaniards; and the Citadel of Turin, which was the head and
foundation of the State, at the present possessed by the French, which if it
should be recovered was likely to fall, contrary to their will, into the hands
of the Spaniards; they did inwardly resent it, and began at last to find that,
by experience, which before these commotions it was impossible for them to
comprehend by Reason; that they were not likely to be concerned in the good of
any victories they had got, or hoped to get; and that by overcoming, they
overcame not for themselves, nor for the Duke their Nephew, whose protection
they pretended; but that they submitted themselves, the Duke, and the
Principality of their family to the disposal of others; they might also
conceive how little reason they had to rely upon the Spanish Forces which were
managed with ends differing from theirs, and aimed at things much more
differing; especially if that were true which the Prince complained of so
bitterly, that the Governor of Millain had abandoned him, in the dangerous
conflict which he had at the Bridge Dellarotta; they also seemed to have
reason, not only not to confide in, but to abhor the favor of, the Spaniards,
which looked more after their depression, then their exaltation; as they might
find, moreover, by the Truce concluded so unseasonably, and contrary to all
expectation, before Turin; and much more by their pretending to put a Spanish
Garrison into the Citadel of Turine these things did certainly cause much
greater Commotion in the Dowager, who was powerfully assaulted by her enemies,
weakly protected and defended by her friends, b^reft at the same time by both
of them of her chiefest Towns, and even of the City and Citadel of Turin:
besides, forced by the Cardinal of Richelieu to yield to unreasonable
conditions, or else to be fiercely prosecuted by his bitter malice: all wise
men thought therefore, that the frequent Negotiations which passed all Winter
long between the Dowager and the Princes, would have produced the desired, and
so necessary agreement; but they were deceived.

The Princes were at the present in much Authority and Grandezza, and were,
with no expense to themselves, brought by the Spanish Forces almost to what
they desired. The Prince Cardinal was possessed of the City, Fort, and almost
of the whole County of Nice, of Cunco, Mondovi, of the Marquisate of Ceva, and
almost of all Piedmont, from Carmagnuola to the Sea. Prince Thomaso had the
City and County of Asti, Trino, together with the Canevese, the Valleys and
Cities of Inurea, Biela, and Aosta, and the City of Turin: They executed all
Jurisdiction in all these places; they chose all Officers and Governors; they
received all usual Revenues and imposed Taxes; the people did not only freely
follow them, but readily obeyed them; they had moneys from Spain to maintain
the present Wars, and their Courts; and, what was most considerable in these
ruptures, they were much sought to by the King of France, by whom, before this
War, they were not only kept from the Guardianship and Regency, but banished
out of Piedmont, as public Enemies: Wherefore considering their former
condition, their present State, and what they were to be, if, abandoning such
noble acquisitions, they should submit to the Dowagers Regency; it was
impossible that they should forsake their present fortune, to receive
afterward, as a great favor from the Dowager, their Childrens Portions, which
were so short of the splendor they lived in now: Neither did their ends and
hopes cease here; for believing that the Governor of Millain would undoubtedly
put them the next Spring in possession of the Citadel of Turin, they thought
they should have achieved their utmost pretenses, and be become absolute
Arbitrators of all things; and that they should be in a condition, not only of
not receiving Laws from the Dowager, but of doing what they listed in Piedmont:
Neither did these their hopes appear to be idle; for besides that they might
hope well by what was past, they saw the French were very thin in Piedmont, and
that they had but small or no hopes to be recruited from France. On the
contrary, the Spanish Forces in Italy, by what recruits were already come, and
by what was expected the next Spring, were very powerful; so as not being
likely to meet with any that would withstand them, they promised themselves
assured Victory. And no comparison being to be made between what they were
offered either by France or the Dowager, and what they at the present enjoyed,
and might promise themselves for the future, from the peoples favor, and the
assistance of Spain, they could not parallel the slender hopes of what was to
come, with their present advantageous condition; so as they could not listen to
any accommodation; and if they did, it was but to feed the people with vain
hopes, to sell their conjunction the dearer to the Spaniards, and for other
particular ends of their own. On the other side, the Dowager, though it might
be thought that her unhappy present condition might make her accept of any
thing, yet, finally, she could not allow but of what stood with the joint
safety and dignity of her self and Son. Several Proposals and Articles passed
between them all the Winter, by which the Princes questioning her lawful
Authority, they aimed at bringing all to a Triumvirate, consisting of her, and
of themselves, to the Arbitriment whereof all things should be referred; a
specious Proposition in appearance, but which finally comprehended nothing but
the absolute exclusion of the Dowager from all Sovereignty and Grandezza, and
the bereaving her of all Liberty; for the Princes being sure to join in any
whatsoever resolution, she must necessarily be excluded from all choice, and
must submit to their joint opinion: What would her Authority be then in this
Triumvirate? What would her Guardianship and Regency be? How could she secure
her self of her own and her Sons Affairs? Was not this to put her self, the
State, and her Son, into the absolute discretion of the Princes, between whom
and her there were so many differences and diffidences? It was better for her
assuredly to be at her Brothers will, and to run any fortune together with him,
then to join with her Brethren in Law, who were her Rivals, and so bitter
Competitors. And as the Proposals made by the Princes were not in reason to be
accepted of by the Dowager, so neither could the Princes, being in so
advantageous a condition, allow of the Dowagers Proposals, though they were
more justifiable. The Dowager pretended, That as the Principality of Savoy was
Monarchical, so the Regency in her must be Monarchical; so as detesting that it
should degenerate into an Oligarchical Triumvirate, she would be sole and
Sovereign in the Regency.

The considerations wherewith the two Crowns proceeded in these Affairs, were
such, as no cure was to be found for these present evils, without a general
Peace; for the King of France pretending that Piedmont should be absolutely at
his disposal, his intention therein was to carry the War freely, and without
any let, into the State of Millain. On the contrary, the King of Spain,
endeavoring to keep the French Forces as far as possibly he could from his
Dominions, was necessitated to uphold the Princes pretentions, and to use all
means to exclude the Dowager and French from Piedmont; and so under color of
making War there in the behalf of the Princes, to make himself master of all
the chief Towns, and to keep the French from the State of Millain; and this
design proceeded so successfully, as the King of France, distrusting a good end
of his designs, by reason of the great obstructions he met with, forewent the
rigor of his proceedings hitherto against the Princes, and was induced to make
great offers to Prince Thomaso, to the end, that by his joining with him, he
might miss those oppositions which the people of Piedmont and the Spanish
Forces made to the progress of his Arms; and the King of Spain was forced to
consent largely to the will and interest of the Princes, and to command his
Agents that they should not distaste them, lest being distasted they might pass
over to the French party; and might bring the Arms of that King into the
Confines of the State of Millain; so as a general peace seemed to be the only
means to piece up all these rents; but though all treaties of accommodation
were in this desperate condition, yet the Dowa^er from the profundity of her
sad fortune found out so adequate an expedient, and so proportionate to the
present conditions, as if it had succeeded well (as it was very likely to do)
the Civil Wars had been wholly ended, and Foreign Wars, unfomented by the
Civil, would have been much ceased, if not quite extinguished: She was very
apprehensive that she should be wholly excluded all administration, if Prince
Thomaso should accept of the offers made him by the King of France and Cardinal
Richlieu; and foreseeing that that would be as displeasing to the Prince
Cardinal, she sought to close with him; wherefore telling him that he was the
more obliged to endeavor the quenching of Civil Wars, which arising from
domestic dissension would undoubtedly cease, when the others were at an end,
by his being nearest to succeed in the Principality: She therefore exhorted him
to give way to her just Regency upon fair and reasonable conditions; she
offered to give him her eldest Daughter, the Princess Maria Lodovica for Wife;
she who it was so much doubted might carry the succession of the Principality
to the Blood Royal of France, if she should be married to the Dolphine. The
offer was not mean, nor of small consideration; for the Prince Cardinal did not
only ascertain the succession of the Principality in his own person, which in
case the Duke should die, he feared might receive incumberances thereby; but
did assure to himself the favor and good will of the Dowager, who from being
his Brothers Wife, becoming his Wives Mother, was interessed in a nearer tie of
alliance with him; so as he might promise himself she would be much governed by
him, and that he should have a great stroke in the Regency, and in the
administration of the State. I is to be observed that the Ca^dinal was very
de^irous of issue, and no^ finding any Princess in these times more suitable to
his ends, he was very well pleased with the offer, and did readily entertain
it, which did much facilitate the Articles of Agreement; which being dictated
by him very conformable to the Dowagers intentions, were sent to her from Nice,
and were for the most part accepted of; and those whereof there was any dispute
were reduced to so near a composition, as there were great hopes all things
would be well agreed; for it was not very impossible but that the Prince
Cardinal might come over to the King of France his party, when by this m^rriage
he should be become his Nephew: But Prince Thomaso hearing of this Treaty was
very much incensed, and endeavored by all means to discompose it; he thought
that though in reason he had not equal pretense with his Brother to the
Guardianship, he was not yet inferior to him in authority, by reason of his
Military worth, by reason of the good will the people bore him, and by what he
had done in the present debates: they were both likewise comprehended in the
Emperors Decree; so as he thought it not fit to give way to any accommodation,
whereby he should be debarred all authority and command: it was also thought
that he liked not that his Brother should ma^ry; he and his Children being
thereby be^est of so^neer hopes of succession; be therefore took it ill that
any accommodation should be treated of without his cog^izance; and fearing that
if it should be concluded, he should sall to the ground between two stools, he
presently sent Marquess Bagnasco, and the Commendatore Pasero to Nice, to
dissuade his Brother from making any such agreement, by the same reasons by
which the Prince Cardinal had dissuaded him to accept the offers which the King
of France offered him; and to enter his protestation against it; in case he
should make it. When they came thither, they found the Prince Cardinal
absolutely resolved to embrace the Dowagers motion, the desire of quiet
prevailing with him, and marriage whereunto he was exceedingly inclined; but
being put in mind and made to see how fair a course of fortune, both to
himself, and Brother, he brake by that resolution; how great a prejudice their
disunion would be to the common cause: what great offers the Prince had
refused generously, to keep from abandoning him; how little reason he had to
confide in the Dowagers promises; and how little good he could expect from the
marriage, though it should succeed: they exhorted him to follow his Brothers
example, and to persevere constant to the Spanish party, by whose favor and
forces being so far advanced, he might hope that when the Citadel of Turin
should be gotten (as certainly it would be) they should be put into such a
condition, as he should not only obtain the marriage for certain; which was now
uncertainly promised him, but much greater things. The Cardinal being won upon
by these reasons, and professing that notwithstanding this, he would value his
Brothers interest as highly as his Brother had formerly done his; he began to
proceed but cooly in signing those very Articles of Agreement which he himself
had sent to the Dowager; excusing himself, that he had sent them to let her see
how well he was inclined to her, and that he would use all means possible to
bring his Brother to be included the^ein; but that it became him not to divide
the family further, whilst the uniting of it was in treaty. Thus he sent the
Articles to Turin; where they were reformed by the Prince, and much altered in
the most essential parts; for being desirous to have a share in the Government,
the Prince inclined to the Triumvirate, wherein he being to make one, he was to
have his share in the administration of the weightiest affairs; whereunto the
Dowager would not consent for the aforesaid reasons; and yet being desirous to
preserve the Dominions which he saw would be manifestly ruined by these
dissentions, she who was always a well-wisher to peace and quiet, strove to
keep the treaty on foot; which being handled with much patience and
accuratenesse would by her sollicitous endeavors have been brought to
perfection, had it not been sometimes interrupted, sometimes prolonged by the
Princes delays, who were not yet well resolved what to do. The occasion of the
delays and demurs made by the Princes was attibuted, by some, to their
constancy to the Austrian party, by whose favor and forces being so far
advanced they thought they could not in honor abandon them, as they must have
done if they should condescend to the Dowagers desires; others said it was
because the Princes could not give over their aforesaid advantages, nor their
yet greater hopes, if they should prosecute the common cause by Arms; which and
by what means it happened, it will not be far from our purpose to touch upon
briefly.

The Princes kept the Treaty still on foot with the French, and by their means
with the Dowager; and Prince Thomaso did publicly admit of Monsieur d'
Argenson, one in great authority with the King of France, who was often busy
about him, beating the iron whilst it was hot, that he might bring the Prince
to end the business. The Governor of Millain and the other Spanish Agents did
resent this; and many thought that this which seemed to be a wavering from the
Spanish party, would at last break out into an open alienation. But the
Princes, who did not much confide in the Spanish Forces and Counsels, did not
resolve by abandoning the Treaties with France to deprive themselves of the
favor and assistance which they had thereby; for they making their accounts
also, found that the same continuation was not only a great cause of keeping
the people faithfully devoted to them and their party, but served to show their
greatness, which certainly was the more conspicuons and resplendent; whilst the
world might plainly see, that at the same time that they were effectually
protected and upheld by the Crown of Spain, they were sued unto and entreated,
and had large offers made them by France, which they waged War against, to
adhere unto the Crown of France: and which was yet of greater importance, the
continuance of the said negotiations did not only serve as a curb to the
excessive power of those Arms which protected them, to keep them within their
due limits, but as a preservative against any machination, which might
peradventure be plotted against them and Piedmont by the Spaniards; and finally
the fear of losing them, made the Governor of Millain much more willing to
give them all possible satisfaction. The Princes therefore being neither able,
nor having reason to neglect such advantages, they excused the continuing of
the Treaty with the French, by the necessity they were in of keeping the people
constant to them by these feigned demonstrations, by the hopes which they
conceived of an approaching peace, and of the sorrows of a not far off War; and
to assure him the more fully of their firm intention of persevering constant to
the common cause, they used to communicate freely unto him all that passed
between them and the French; and telling him that they could ground no
certainty thereupon, they strove to make him believe it was impossible it
should be ever effected; and thus they endeavored to quit all jealousies, and
to make the Governor of Millain b^ar with their French negotiations; but their
freedom in communicating their occasions to him did rather irritate then
appease the Governor: For he thought that the exact notice which they gave him
of what great offers were made him, was a secret threatening of him that they
would embrace them, if at any time they should not be satisfied in their
pretentions; which partly concerned their private interests, partly the public
concernments; the private consisted in what has already been said; that Prince
Thomaso might have an Army given him, which might wholly and integrally depend
upon himself, which he might manage as he lifted upon all occasions; and that
moneys might be assigned to both of them for maintaining their Courts; and that
neither of them should have any dependency upon the Governor: the public
aimed at being absolute Arbitrators of the Regency of the States: As for the
first, though Prince Thomaso, by denying the ratification which has been
formerly spoken of, did himself hinder the resolution therein; yet the
Governor being desirous to satisfy him, took order for providing him speedily
with monyes, and was fully bent to consolidate him in that regency, wherein at
the present he had put him, and to advance it. But the Prince not thinking all
this sufficient, and thinking it unworthy of his own greatness to keep in the
Kings Army without command, several distastes did many times arise, by the
which the Prince appearing to be daily less satisfied with his present
condition, the Governor did not only desire to satisfy him in his own
particular concernments, but added a great willingness to content them in their
public pretentions, so to keep them from foregoing the King of Spain's party.
To this purpose, he added his yet more powerful endeavors to those great ones
which were used by the Princes; for finding that all the Princes ends aimed at
the taking of the Oitadel of Turin, he held them in hopes that that should be
the first thing that he would take in hand the next Spring; by which hopes
being sed and dazzled, they could not listen to the Dowagers proposals, nor to
those of France; neither of them being able to make them any such offers. So
these reciprocal hopes and jealousies continuing between them all that Winter;
when the next Spring of the year 1640. began, the Princes seeing the Governor
busy in drawing the Army into the field, they quit their pretentions of having
men and moneys assigned them, as inferior to their conceived greatness, and
minding this which was the public and greatest importance, they began to
solicit the Governor to make good his promised assault; who sometimes held
them on with the same hopes, and sometimes raised difficulties, which made
against their desired ends. But now that the Spring was come, not being able to
dissemble any longer, he declared his mind unto them, and showed them the
necessity of taking the Citadel of Cassalle first; that going with his Army to
Turin, he might not leave that place behind him, from which much mischief might
redound to the State of Millain; that otherwise he must divide his Forces, and
must leave part of them in that State, and go with the rest to the taking of
the Citadel of Turin; that they might see how prejudicial such a division would
be to both those enterprises; that they should suffer him therefore to acquit
himself first of Cassalle, which when it should be over, he promised them
faithfully he would apply himself wholly to the business of Turin Citadel. The
Princes strove by forcible arguments to make him alter his mind; showing him
that the good success of Turin would not only be a great furtherance to the
main of their affairs, but even to those of the King of Spain; they told him
that he who would make himself master of the Citadel of Cassalle must first
begin with that of Turin; which being lost, the other must needs be lost also
by the French; who being driven out of Turin could not keep in Piedmont, but
must be forced to pass back over the Alps, and leave not only Cassalle to the
arbittrement of the Kings Forces, but also the whole affairs of Piedmont; so
not only Cassalle, but Chiavazzo, Carmagnuola, together with all the other
Towns held by them, must be abandoned; that therefore many other greatly good
successes did depend upon this. They represented unto him the weakness of the
Enemy; who were reduced to a very small number; not exceeding 4000 Foot, and
2000 Horse, ill appointed, not able to keep the field, nor to defend the
Citadel of Turin, much less to cause any jealousy to the State of Millain from
Cassalle; moreover that the Kingdom of France, which was not only troubled
with the Wars of Flanders, but with those of Catalonia, and intestine risings,
was wholly diverted from the Wars of Italy; that Normandy was up in Arms
against the King, whose example would certainly be followed by many other
Provinces; that there was therefore no fear, that new Forces should come from
thence to Piedmont; and on the contrary, that the Spanish Camp being redoubled
by so great recruits which were coming from several parts, might easily compass
any whatsoever enterprise; much more that of the Citadel of Turin which was
already half taken; they therefore earnestly persuaded him to betake himself to
the taking thereof; but contrary reasons persuaded the Governor from the going
to take the Citadel of Turin, and to go to the taking of that of Cassalle;
first his jealousy of the Negotiations still continued between the Princes and
the French; to this was added the competition touching who should put the
Garrison into the Citadel of Turin; which not being yet decided, the Governor
foresaw that the Princes would bring it in play when the Citadel should be
taken; so as he was refractory therein, which when it should be taken would
afford occasion of disorders and dissentions, which might afterward make the
Princes go over to the French, when they should not be masters of the Citadel;
on the contrary, the felicity which he promised unto himself in the taking the
Citadel of Cassalle, made him believe that it became him not to weaken the
flower of his Forces, which he had assembled with so much trouble, and with
such expense to the Kings Exchequer, in the taking of the Citadel of Turin;
which Forces when they should be employed in the taking of Cassalle would
undoubtedly win unto the King a place of such importance for the safety of the
State of Millain; and by which acquisition so great preheminency and advantage
would accrue to the Kings affairs over the neighboring States; and (which was
not least to be considered) the acquisition whereof would make so fair a way to
the general peace; he was moreover dissuaded from taking that of Turin, lest
the Princes when they should be possessed thereof, assenting to their self
interests, and to the Common concerns of the I alian Princes, would do what
they could to keep that of Cassalle from falling into the Spaniards hands, and
that they would hinder it by underhand dealing; wherefore preferring the good
of the Kings affairs before that of the Princes, he resolved to employ his
fo^ces which were then fresh and entire in the enterprise of Cassalle;
believing that the hopes of being afterward assisted in that of Turin, might
keep the Princes faithful to the Spanish party; and make them cooperate in
that of Cassalle; and what was of mo^e importance, the Governor knew how much
the Court of Spain was concerned in the business of Cassalle; not so much out
of the desire of getting it, as for that they thought the French would have
slackned the War of Catalonia, for the preservation of Cassalle; or the Court
was not well satisfied with the orders given to assault Piedmont, and that they
were too exactly observed, and could have desired, that the Governor, contrary
to their orders, had begun with the enterprise (...) Cassalle, so to draw the
forces of France into those parts; so as though he was honored with the title
of a Grandee for the taking of Vercelli; yet he had some orders of Revocation
to the contrary, which Revocation not afresh to incur, and that he might at the
same time help to secure the State of Millain, and also free Catalo^, he could
not but prefer the business of Cassalle before that of Turin; amongst these
public reasons, there wanted not some private ones; arising from a certain
ambition in the Governor, to signalize his name in the Court of Spain, by the
acquisition of that place which he knew was so much desired there; and look how
much he saw that enterprise had proved unfortunate to his predecessors in that
Government, the more diligent he was therein, hoping that his glory would be
the greater in bringing it to a happy end, there were also certain other
private emulations between him and the Princes, which did not make the
Governor any thing at all well affected to their interests; for an being
Infanta of Spain they treated somewhat briskly with him, punctually expecting
from him all those observances and respects which are due to the Infanta from
the subjects of that Crown; to that height, that in the Campagnia where great
Princes use to keep open table, and to honor their Commanders with sitting at
meat with them, they never invited him to dine with them, nor ever did he
negotiate with them but bareheaded, and standing; and when he was indisposed in
his feet, he treated with them either by messengers or letters; this his
aversion was much increased by the Princes arrogating unto themselves all the
honor of the good that had succeeded; not attributing it to the Kings forces,
but to the love of the people of Piedmont; not to the Governors valor, or
Counsels, but to their own: alleging for proof thereof, what great
difficulties he met with before Vercelli, when he attempted it without them; on
the contrary, the Governor, who came not short of them either in counsel or
Military valor, alleged; that the peoples affection would have been curbed,
and kept back by the Dowager, without the assistance of the Kings forces; just
as befell the Prince Cardinal, when being entered into Piedmont, he would try
what the Authority of a Prince of the blood unarmed could do: and when the
Princes came first with a powerful Army before the Walls of Turin, the Dowagers
Authority was such, as she did so hold the people within bounds, as none durst
ever speak, much less declare themselves in favor of the Princes, or raise any
sedition, so as to let them see that he was able to undertake, and to effect
great enterprises without them, he was desirous to apply himself to this,
wherein the Princes not having any thing to do, the business might be
acknowledged to be wholly his: and consequently the honor which he undoubtedly
expected from the happy success thereof, might belong wholly to him, and not be
communicated to any others, private and public interests being thus joined,
the Governor having all things in readiness sent Carlo Della Gatta, general of
the Neapolitan Horse, at unawares to preoccupate the ways that led to Cassalle,
to keep the Monferrat Soldiers who were dispersed abroad in that State, from
entering thereinto; and he sent the Count di Monte-Castello after Gatta to take
L'occimiano, both which having observed their Orders, they appeared on Palm*
sunday, the year 1640 before that City; and took the Town St. Giorgio without
fighting, which had a Garrison in it only of 40 Soldiers under a French
Captain; and the Governor being recru^ed with new men from Germany and Naples,
came thither with the whole Army the next Eas^ day; his Army consisted of 12000
Foot, and 5000 Horse, to which soon after were added 2200 Foot come from Spain.
The Garrison of the place did not exceed 1200 Foot, and 300 Horse: The French
Army, which was that that could only ^lieve it, being very weak, was thought
unable so much as to attempt it; so as the Governor made himself sure of
Victory: To this was added the intelligence which was said to be held between
the Governor and some of the chief of the Town, not without the Dowagers
knowledge (as was thought) who was not well satisfied with the French Garrison;
being come within sight of the City, he thought to fall to work, to the end
that when he should have taken the City, as he thought he should e^sily do, he
might quarter his Army more commodiously under covert, and by a short line to
be drawn without the Citadel he thought to save the time and labor of making
large Trenches, as his predecessors had done, when they were to lodge their
Army in the Campagnia: he therefore made only two quarters; the one at the foot
of the Hill; and the other upon the Plain toward Frassinero, two good miles
distant one from the other. To the latter, whither he sent above 1000 Horse
under Carlo della Gatta, and 400 Foot, under the Camp-masters Serra, Trotto and
Gliglino, was added 900 Swissers; that of the Hill was divided into two bodies.
The Marquess of Car^ena, who succeeded Don Francisco di Selva in being General
of the Horse, commanded the one, and Don Lewis di Lincastro the other; and the
Governor, who lodged in one of them, commanded them both: here were eight
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse; they then began their approache against
the City, which was besieged on three sides; on two, between the Citadel and
the Castle; and on the third, near the Poe, which they called Degli Italiani,
entrusted to Marquess Serra, and they also took a certain House called la
Furnace, which proved very commodious for the Siege; but fortune which would
deri^e ^ssured hopes of the Governor and his great Forces, appeared very
little favorable to him from the very beginning; for the great rains which
fell for many days together, were of great prejudice to him, not only in the
commencement of his works, by which he was to make his approaches, but in
preserving those which we already made; for it destroyed them all: and the
water having sunk down the ways had also made the fields unmanagable; so as the
two quarters, which were far one from the other, could not communicate
together. To these hindrances was added many fierce sallies, which (though
they were with equal fierceness repulsed) they did not a little disturb the
Works and hinder the Workmen: Whilst the Army did thus little good, expecting
fairer weather, the Governor that the Soldiers might not be idle, sent
Thomaso Alardo with his Regiment of Dragoons, and 400 Foot to take Resignano,
who having at first taken the outworks, had also begun a Mine, which when it
was finished, he gave fire unto, and did thereby much good; for throwing as
much Wall as sufficed to give an assault, he went thereunto, but unfortunately;
for some of the Soldiers would not fight, and others were crushed by many
Gabbions of earth which fell from the earth-work of the Wall that was blown up,
falling down, when they hasted to get upon the breach; those who were
forwardest in advancing were repulsed with the death of the valiantest amongst
them; and many Spanish Captains were wounded, and Toby Palavicino, who fought
valiantly, though they were forsaken by their Soldiers. This mean while it was
given out, as it proved true afterward, that Harcourt, taking the greatest
number of the French Soldiers that he could out of the Towns of Piedmont,
accompanied by Marquess Villa, who brought 1500 Horse with him, and by the
Marquess Pianezza, who brought 2000 Piedmontese Foot, to whom also some
Montferrians were gorten, had got together a body way of an army, with which he
betook himself to bring succous by the of Villanuova, and that he brought with
him twelve pieces of Cannon, and some Carriages of Victuals and Munition. The
more unexpected this news was to the Governor, they made the greater
impression in him; calling therefore a Counsel of War, it was consulted whether
they should march out against the enemy, and fight him in the open field, or
rise from before Cassalle and go speedily to Turin; giving out that the
business of Cassalle was but a feigned attempt, to draw the enemy thither, so
to keep up the Soldiers reputation: The great advantage in number of
Soldiers, far more valiant then the enemy, who were said to be most of them
Vagabonds, driven from their houses by Famine and War, made for the first
opinion; that (therefore) Victory was not to be doubted, if they should come to
battle; and that body of men being destroyed, wherein were all the Forces which
the enemy could make in Italy, not only Cassalle, with the Citadel thereof,
would fall into their hands, but also the Citadel of Turin, together with all
the other Towns of Piedmont; which being unfurnished of Garrisons, and not able
to hold out, nothing could be imagined; but that they would yield at the very
news of the approach of the conquering Army. To the easiness and advantage of
this Course necessity was added; for the enemy not being far off, and the Army
which was before Cassalle lying in the open fields, divided into two quarters,
with a great interval between them, not fortified either by Trench or Rampire;
it was impossible for them to resist the joint Forces of the enemy, without
marching jointly out into the field; that therefore since the great store of
rain, and the shortness of time, would not permit them to fortify the Camp, it
was without all question necessary to join all their men into one body, to
march with them into the field, to encounter the enemy with their accustomed
bravery; being certainly assured, that not being able to withstand them they
would rather run away then fight, and so afford them occasion of a signal
Victory, which drawing many other Victories after it would put an end to the
War, and would render his Excellencies name immortal. Two things stuck with the
Governor touching this so good and glorious resolution; First, the doubt of
the conflict, that it might make way for the relief; presupposing that when the
conflict should be begun the enemy would send relief to the Citadel by another
way, and having gotten their intent would withdraw themselves from the battle;
whereby the taking of the Citadel, which was thought would be soon done, would
be prolonged; the other, the Governors own genius, who did naturally abhor
pitched Battles; and perhaps precise Orders from Court, which forbad coming
thereunto, when it might be avoided; both which were powerful occasions of the
loss of a famous Victory, which would assuredly have been gotten if they had
fought, and would have ruined the enterprise; for if the Governor presupposed
so much courage in the enemy, who were inferior to him in Forces, as they
might lessen their men, when the conflict was begun, to send part thereof to
relieve Cassalle, why had not he courage enough to send some of his men to
oppose the succor? and yet Harcourt made it be seen that dangers are overcome
by encountering them, not by avoiding them; and on the contrary, that to examine
dangers and inconveniences too narrowly, and to keep within Trenches expecting
that good fortune should fall into ones mouth, was nothing but to neglect the
fairest occasions of overcoming; to ruin enterprises and pull dangers and
dishonor upon ones self. The Governor being therefore not pleased to
encounter the enemy, nor shamefully to abandon the enterprise which he had
begun with assured hopes of compassing it; he chose a middle way, which though
frequently used in extreme ruptures is usually dangerous, and which in this
proved directly ruinous; and it was not to expect the coming of the enemy in
open field, that he might keep from being forced to fight; but within a line of
circumvallation, which he gave Order should be presently begun, and finished as
soon as possibly might be; so giving over making of approaches, the face of
affairs was in an instant changed; and this new work being to encompass
Mountains and Plains, it required many Pyoneers to bring it to perfection, and
more men to guard it; wherefore great store of Workmen were sent for from the
State of Millain, and the choicest of the Militia of that State; and all this
not seeming sufficient, those were sent for back who were gone to take
Rosignano, and 1500 of those who were left in Garrison in Turin; Prince Thomaso
was also desired to come and assist in the enterprise with his Cavalry, who
though he very much resented, that the Governor by going to before Cassalle
had deluded his expectation of going to take the Citadel of Turin, which he had
so faithfully professed all Winter long he would do; yet hoping for mighty
affairs by taking the Citadel, he held it not fit to break with the Governor
upon this occasion, nor by foregoing the Spanish party not only lose all his
future hopes, but all that he at the present enjoyed in Piedmont by means of
the peoples favor: taking therefore all things in good part, and making a
virtue of necessity, he suffered that the Kings business should precede his;
and not thinking it fit to abandon the City, he sent his bastard Brother Don
Mauricio of Savoy to him with 800 of his best Horse; who passing over, after
the taking of Turin, from the Dowager (who had made him Captain of the Dukes
Guard) to the Princes party, was by Prince Thomaso made General of his Horse:
all which diligence proved altogether vain and insufficient; for Harcourt made
such haste as he prevented the perfecting of the line of circumvolution; and
besides they had not men enough by many to defend the vast circuit thereof: it
is true, that the Hill above Cassalle being thought to be impassible, by reason
of the deep stiff clay, they were not over careful of minding the Trenches
there; nor were there sufficient Garrisons provided for defending that part,
for the Governor held for certain that the very situation thereof was enough
to keep the enemy from falling on that part. The Army being in this condition
before Cassalle, Harcourt comes with the two Generals Villa and Pianezza to
Rosignano; where mustering his Forces, he found them to amount to the number of
6000 Foot, between French, Piedmontese and Montferrians; and to 3000 Horse,
part French, part Piedmontese; and the Governor continuing in his opinion,
that the enemy could do nothing of moment by the Hills, and that therefore he
would advance by the Plain, he placed all his men to guard that part of the
Trench toward the Plain, where the Gatt^la falls into the Poe; where he
thought the enemy would come, thinking that being stoutly resisted there, and
desparing to make his way on that side, and much more by the Hill, he would
absolutely give over the business; for it being impossible for him to maintain
his Army, which wanted all manner of things in those parts, what could he do
else but return to Piedmont, but he was deceived; for Harcourt coming from
Rosignano, and appearing within sight of the Plain about noon, he made his Foot
tarry upon the skirts of the Hills, and being desirous to know the position of
the enemies Camp, and of the line of circumvolution before he did any thing, he
descended into the Plain, together with the Signeior della Turenna, della
Motta, Odancorte and di Plessi Pralin, with Villa and Pianezza, and with
Roccacerviera, Sergeant Major of the Battle, backed for his more safety by some
Troops of Horse, and advanced a little into the Plain, where he staid till he
had informed himself sufficiently, and so returned to the Hill, some
Cannon-shot were made at him, and he was saluted by some Dragoons, but received
no prejudice at all by them.

The night coming on, the Spaniards thought that the Enemy had found such
difficulties in the Plain as he would forbear attempting any thing; and they
thought themselves safe enough on the Hills side, for the Reasons already said:
Wherefore thinking that the Enemy despairing of any good success would attempt
nothing, they consequently held themselves sure of Victory; and applauding the
Governor for his wisdom and military wariness, they approved of his counsel,
who had chosen to sit still and overcome; so they minded nothing but reciprocal
congratulations: But Harcourt, not at all deterred by any difficulty he found
on the Plain, after some consultations, thought to assault the French toward
the Plain on three sides that very night, a good part whereof being spent in
consultations, and in ordering their marches, and one of the Guides b^ing run
away, who was to have guided them to the furthest place where they intended to
fall on; at last, when day began to clear up, changing his resolution, Harcourt
resolved to try whether the natural difficulties of the Hills would not be more
easily overcome, then the oppositions upon the Plain: he therefore made a
Bridge be thrown over the Gattola about break of day, in that Valley, by which
beginning his course, he afterward made his men pass over the Bridge before
day, thinking to make them ascend the opposite hill, and there to re-attempt
the enterprise: which design being soon discovered, the Governor sent the
Dragoons, with some Foot Companies, to desend that hill which the enemy strove
to get up; but the provision was but weak and in vain; for Harcourt finding
that he must either mount there, or shamefully give over the enterprise,
advanced almost all his Forces against those Dragoons, and succeeding therein,
drove them, after a long dispute, from the station which they had taken but a
little before; and being master thereof, endeavored to make twelve pieces of
Cannon be drawn that way. The Governor, by the bad success of his men began to
fear the worst; and going from his quarter, he commanded Don Mauricio to
advance with half his Horse, to defend a certain station beyond the line,
seated upon the hanging of a hill, behind an Hermitage, where 400 Musketeers
were placed, that he might oppose the enemy who was to ascend by that way, and
not suffer him to get any higher. Harcourt, when his Artillery was got up the
hill, made four batteries of them, wherewith he began from Sunrising to play
upon the opposite Plain, with much prejudice to the quarters which lay below,
and to the enemies Squadrons; then leaving the Piedmontese Horse and Foot under
Villa and Pianezza, to the end, that holding the enemy play there they might
diver them from succouring the hill when the French should ascend; he marched
by the climbing of the hill in this order. il Signore della Motta Odencourt
mounted on the left side with six Regiments of Horse, and as many Foot,
together with some Troops of Dragoons. Harcourt himself got up with the rest of
the Foot on the right hand, the rest of the Horse under the Vicount of Turin,
marched up in the Rere; they all got well up, having not only overcome the
difficulties of the situation, which the Governor thought was not to be done;
but the opposition which was made at the Hermitage, which was abandoned at the
very first assault; and then that of the Horse under Don Mauricio, which were
placed behind the Hermitage, which not being backed by any Musketeers, after
some resistance made, was at last forced to retreat; so Harcourt having
overcome this impediment also, pursued his march the more freely, and got to
above the Trenches. The hills were but badly fortified; for the line of
circumvolution not arriving at the height thereof, it was commanded by the part
above it; and the Work was made in such haste and disorder, as both the line
and the ditch which munited it were in many places overlooked by the ground
that was without; and there were but few defendants, for the Governor (as has
been said) thought that part sufficiently secured by its situation; but some of
the chiefest Spanish Commanders thought that the enemy would not adventure an
assault even from hence; so much did they confide in their own Forces, and made
so little account of the enemy; amongst which was Don Antonio Sarmiento, one of
no small authority, but better at the Gown then Sword; and yet he did not only
meddle in giving Counsel, but in issuing out Orders in the Camp; and thinking
that Harcourt durst not give an assault, but that he endeavored by feigned
attempts to divert the Camp from that side, by which he thought to steal in the
succor, he persisted so much in this opinion, as he would not alter his mind,
though he saw Harcourt gotten to the top of the hill: And seeing a certain
lower part of the line subject to be damnified, and not caring to defend it, he
sent the Soldiers that had the guard thereof, into the field, and placed them
in an eminent part without the line, thinking that defense might be better made
there; but he was mistaken, and it proved to be of very bad consequence.
Harcourt being gotten to the top of the Hill, and seeing his advantages, and
the disadvantages of the Enemy, he began to hope well, and that he should be
Conqueror that day, wherefore he cheerfully disposed of his men for an
assault; and he himself, and Count de Plessis Pralin, who commanded that
station, went to assault the upper part of the Trench; who having chased away
those who were placed by Sermiento to guard the more higher outward part, they
went to assault the upper part of the line, hoping to have the like success
there; but it proved otherwise; for two Brigades of veterane Spaniards, who
were long accustomed to War, being set to defend that place, the Assailants
were thrice repulsed; but at the fourth assault, which was more fierce then the
former, the Defendants were forced to yield; and at the same time that part of
the lower Trench which was unfurnished of Defendants by Sermiento (as has been
said) being assaulted by Turenna, was easily broke through; so as the line
being thrown open in two parts, the French, like a swift Torrent, (which having
broken down the bank does overflow the fields) burst in into the Spaniards
quarters; and at the same time, Villa and Pianezza, did not only assist by way
of diversion, in the plain, as they were ordered, but valiantly advancing they
also broke into the Trench in the plain, which was much better munited then
that upon the hill; a Fort munited with a good ditch stood opposite to them,
which without any defense made, was taken by the Foot. So as they having forced
the line below, at the same time that the other had broken into that upon the
hill, they entered the line; and speedily making a Bridge, with materials which
they found upon the place, to make the Horse pass over the ditch, which Villa
made them forthwith do; so they passed in, and Turenna joined seasonably with
them, who having but a few with him, pursued the disordered Enemy. The French
being entered (as has been said) on the hills side, divided themselves into
three parts; one, which was the greatest, and which was led on by Count della
Motta, fell on the left hand upon the Spanish quarters, which were upon the
skirts of the hill; the other two, which were led on by Harcourt and Count
Plessis, took to the right hand; and being come over against the Citadel were
met by part of the Garrison thereof, and by many young men of Cassalle, who
stood in ranks under the Artillery of the Citadel; and all of them jointly fell
to pursue the Enemy, who abandoning their Trenches in great confusion,
retreated partly because the French were entered the line of Circumvolution, on
the hills side, and the Piedmontese on the plain; partly, because the
Governor, hearing what had happened upon the hill, was gone to his quarters: So
as finding themselves abandoned by their Commander in chief, and hearing the
bad success upon the hill, they feared to be assaulted on the back, and
confusedly gave over all defense: And such was the confusion, as they did not
only not know what they had to do, but were so entangled within themselves, as
the Pikes, without any distinction, mingled with the Musketeers. So being
pursued by Villa and Turenna with their Horse, they were at first ill handled.
The Dutch and Burgodians who kept the lower Trench, the assault or confusion
not being yet come to them, kept their stations, and valiantly received and
answered the Enemy. Marquess Caracena helped much to the extricating them out of
this confusion, who coming in, where he saw the crowd of people intermingled
and in disorder, out of mere madness and anger fell upon the French on the
flank with a squadron of Horse that was at hand, routed them, and afforded
convenience to the others to rally, and put themselves in a posture of defense;
and having freed them from the Enemy, seut them to recover a certain station
which guarded a Bridge over the Gattola, and which was taken a little before by
the French: Nor herewithall content, he rallied together many others that were
scattered up and down the fields; and in the interim whilst he behaved himself
courageously, every where, amidst greatest dangers, he received a mortal shot
by a Musket through the left side, and was carried out of the field almost dead
to a poor Cottage. But two other Champions came in to the rescue of the
imminent ruin of the Camp; Carlo della Gatta, and Marquess Serra Gatta, being
sent for by the Governor from his quarters at Frascinero, a little before the
fight began, came in with a thousand Horse; and being come to the Camp when
things were in greatest confusion, he advanced with his thousand Horse, and
with some other that came in unto him, as near as he could to the Citadel, with
keeping without reach of Cannon, where he drew up a powerful squadron in the
open field, under the shelter whereof all that were disbanded and disordered,
had safe refuge; and Marquess Serra being with his Italians in their quarters
near the Poe, heard the unexpected news of the rout, and therewith received
strict and penal orders to retreat; and that since things were in disorder and
ruin past all remedy, he should go with his men to beyond the Poe over the
next bridge, so to keep himself from the danger of the Enemy, who would quickly
be upon his back. But he, though he were much astonished at the unexpected
advertisment, did not forego the field, nor did he despa^r of safety; but
encouraging his men, he drew them into a squadron, and made himself strong in
the field; and sending his Artillery to beyond the Poe, stayed with his men in
rank to keep back the Enemy who made toward him; so as many Soldiers who ran
away escaped death under the shelter of his squadrons, as others had done under
those of Gatta, not only Troops and Companies, but whole Brigades saved
themselves under these two refuges. The Camp-master General, Don Iovan Vasques
Conrado, came under the shelter of Gatta and the Neopolitan Horse; as also the
Brigade of Naples which was all Spaniards: Don Vincenzo Munsuriu's Brigade,
that of Lombardy, that of Martino Maxica, and Battavilla's Brigade of the
Burgondians, together with the Artillery which were drawn from off where they
played against the City, and those which defended a little Fort, not far from
the Burgondian battery; behind Serra came the Governor himself, with the
greatest part of his Court, and part of the Artillery, who in stead of his
threatened punishment gave Serra a thousand thanks for not having obeyed his
orders. Serra's own Brigade, those of Trotto and of Emilio Ghiglino, the
Regiment of Swissers, and a Brigade of Papenheim's Dutch: And those that came
under the shelter of Gatta went safe with the Artillery to Frassinero, and from
thence to Bremi, by a bridge which was thrown over there; and those who
received shelter by Serra past over the Poe with their Artillery by a Bridge
near his quarters, and got with all quiet safety to Allessandrino: so the
retreat amidst so great a discomposure proved safe, and honorable, even to the
admiration of the Conquerours; who doubting least those who were rallied under
these refuges might have regained the Victory, were contented with the relief
which they had brought, which was the chief end of that days action: and
ordered their men only to keep the Enemy from rallying, but not to provoke
them to battle; and truly the counsel was not bad, for when the confusion was
quieted, and the disorder over, the Spaniards had yet so many left alive, as,
though they had not been able to keep out the relief, they were sufficient to
have routed the conquerours, and to have taken the victory from them, so many
Brigades as have been named remaining untouched; besides those who escaped away
unhurt, and but little prejudiced, elsewhere; for the Dutch Regiment under
Prince Borso, and the two Spanish Regiments, who had fought so valiantly upon
the hill, were retreated safe and unpursued, making their advantage of the
night, to Pontestura; the like befell some 400 who were placed upon the hill,
without the Trenches, who rallied together in an upper plain near Saint
Georgio, under Don Alonzo Vargas; moreover the foot of Frassinero's quarter,
which had not fought at all, nor were not assaulted, were fresh, and untouched,
about 5000 of the Horse were also undamnified; so as the Victory being gotten
rather by industry, and valor, in having won the hills, then by much havoc
and ruin of the conquered Army, the Governor might have kept the field with
the remaining Forces, and have done what he pleased; but these things are
thought upon when the danger is over, and when confusion is past, which
bereaves the wisest of Reason; the Governor, who thought he had ventured too
much already, thought rather how to save his men that were not yet routed, then
to expose them to further hazard; out of these respects, the Governor chose
neither to reassume the enterprise; nor to do what was thought by many of the
Commanders would prove successful in the siege of Cassalle; who grounded their
reasons upon the coming in of many men into Cassalle, and but little victuals,
so as it must necessarily be brought soon to surrender: these advises were
therefore far differing from the Governors genius, who was cautious in all his
actions, and too much cowed in this; the quarters under the hill fared
otherwise, where there was no fighting, nor battle, but downright plunder on
the conquerours side, and running away on the conquered; the conquerours found
the Enemies quarters almost void of men, but full of booty: especially that of
the Governor, wherein were not only great store of Silver-plate, and of other
movables belonging to the Governor, and so many other Lords and Commanders
that lodged there; but also moneys, which were to be used in the enterprise,
which all fell into the hands of the French; so as the Soldiers who were
greedy of handling money, loved not to handle Iron, especially not having to
employ it, for all the Enemies were fled; the Governors Cabinet was also
Sacked, wherein many secrets were found, and amongst the rest the of King
Spains Cipher, with all writings of account; some of those that fled from hence
got safe into Pontestura, not being pursued by any; but many of those very many
which fled to the Bridge near Margherita, over the Poe, were drowned; for they
crowded so fast one upon another, as they fell by the sides of the Bridge into
the River; and the great number of men, and cattle, and some carriages, did so
overload the bridge, as one of the Boats whereon it was built, sank; and so
great was the number as well of men, as cattle, and carriages, that were there
drowned, as they filled up the vacancy of the Bridge; and those who were not yet
past over saved themselves by passing upon the dead Carcasses: there were not
above a thousand of the Soldiers slain in the battle; 2000 were wounded, and
taken prisoners, amongst which some of the chiefest of the Army; those who
perished in the Poe were most of them victuallers, and the poorer sort of
people who follow after the camp. Harcourt sent, generously, all the Governors
servant, who remained prisoners, to their Master; and Marquess Villa redeemed
all those that belonged to Marquess Caracena, and to Vasques, and sent them to
their Masters; the writings also were sent back for some slight rewards
disbursed, to those that had them in custody. Harcourt being victorious by so
happy and so important a relief to a place of such concernment, with a number
so far inferior to those that were fortified within their works, did not
forget himself with this happy success: but having scarcely refreshed his men,
and furnished the Citadel with some Victuals, he went two days after the
victory toward Turin; and being desirous to purchase yet more glory, he
thought he should have done nothing, unless he should also set the Citadel of
Turin at liberty, and put the Dowager into the condition she was in, as she did
earnestly request the King, his Agents, and Commanders, and as the King had
strictly ordered his Commanders: this could not be done without the perfect
recovery of the Citadel of Turin; whereunto he courageously betook himself, and
whereunto he was much enheartned by the smallness of the Garrison that remained
in the City, from whence the Governor had sent for a good part to before
Cassalle, and Prince Thomaso had sent away 800 Horse: and he thought that but
small succors would be brought from without for he held (for certain) that the
Governor, from whom succor could only be expected, would not hazard the
remainder of his men after having been so baffled and beaten in the relief of
Turin, to the so great prejudice of the State of Millain; he moreover was put
in greater hopes, by the scarcity as well of Victuals as of Warlike provisions,
which he had learned by discourse was in that City; for he calculated that the
French, Spanish, and Piedmontese, which one after another had been fed in that
City, must have consumed all the Victuals that were there; and the Poe being
blocked up all the Winter, on the one side by Chiavazzo, on the other side by
Carmagnuola, he thought it impossible it could be furnished by that river; and
much less by land, by reason of the great scarcity of Cattle that was in those
parts; he thought there was greater want of Warlike provisions, by reason of
the great profusion which necessarily must have been made thereof the preceding
Winter, in the many Mines, Batteries, Assaults, and Fights between the City and
the Citadel; he also built much upon the Citizens good will; not so much out of
the inclination which many of them might privately have unto the Dowager, as of
the meaner sort of people, who living upon their handy work, which was fed by
continual concourse and traffic, they could not hold out long, the Gates of
the City being shut up, so as it was thought impossible that they should hold
out a siege long; all which things though they had an appearance of truth, yet
the sequel showed that they were badly calculated; for none of them cooperated
to that Victory which was thought so sure; for the City (as was afterward
known) was provided with victuals more then needed; and as for warlike
provision, (which was that which they wanted most) they wanted not witty new
inventions, whereby they got enough thereof; they might want Defendants to free
the City from siege, but not to defend it; the people, and all the Citizens,
kept always constant in defense of the City, and stuck close to the Prince;
and, what made most for the main affair, the Governor of Millain, contrary to
Harcourts supposal, appeared within a few days with a powerful Army before the
City ready to relieve it; for having a little digested the misfortune at
Cassalle, he feared (as it fell out) that the Enemy would forthwith come before
Turin; and knowing how weak the Garrison was, and what scarcity of Warlike
provision there was in the City, he immediately sent 1500 Soldiers thither,
part Italians; under Marquess Sir, and Vercelline Viscount; and part
Burgondians, under the Baron di Vattevilla, all of them choice and Veteran
Soldiers; to which about 4000 others of several nations being added, which
remained under Bolognino in defense of the City, they amounted to well near
5500 Foot, who were all to obey Don Antonio Sotelo General of the Artillery of
the State of Millain; who was sent thither with supreme authority to command
all the King of Spains Forces; many loads of powder, and other warlike
tackling, were added to this succor; and the Governor Writ fervently to the
Prince, encourageing him to persevere in defending the Town, and promising him
that, to boot with these succors, he would come thither himself shortly with a
powerful Army to relieve him; and set him at liberty; and telling him that what
had happened at Cassalle was but a trick of Fortune, and had rather dispersed
then discomfited his men; that he stayed now to rally them under his Colors;
to the end that with them, and with others which he expected very shortly from
other parts, he might come and relieve him and the City; All those that were
sent by the Governor got luckily into Turin; and Don Mauritio got thither
also, who was returned with the Prince his Horse from Cassalle, though somewhat
lessened by Harcourts Cannon which thundered from the hills; but little powder
could be brought in for want of Wagon horses; and the ways being afterward
blocked up, and possessed by the En my, the rest could not enter without much
prejudice to the Enterprise; especially for that Prince Thomaso had sent 400
Horse before the ways were blocked up, to be a conduct to that Munition, which
Horse was not suffered to return for the aforesaid blocking up of the ways; so
the Prince was not only deprived of that provision, but also of those Horse,
which had he had them, he would doubtlesly have made greater impressions upon
the Enemy by sallies then he did; but now he was forced to be more circumspect
in his night Assaults: 3000 Citizens, able to bear Arms, were added to the
Kings men, who were employed in desending the City, and also many Country
people, who were come thither for refuge, who were a great help in their
handy-works; so as the Prince, though he wanted fighting men and warlike
ammunition, yet finding that the Governor was mindful of him, and of preserving
the City, and taking that assistance which he had already sent as a Token of
what he would do in the future, he was not wanting to himself, in doing what he
could, in so short a time, to defend the City.

Turin stands in a large and pleasant Plain, twelve miles Eastwards from the
Alps; the Poe runs almost within a Bow-shot of it on the East side, and on the
North the Dora comes almost to one Angle of the City; and a little beyond la
Dora runs la Stura, both which Rivers fall into the neighboring Poe: on the
South side runs the Sagone, rather a Torrent then a River, which falls also
into the Poe over against Cav^reto. The City thus situated is divided into
three parts, the new City, the old City, and the Citadel. The new City joins to
the old on the South, they are only divided by a Wall, but are both enclosed
within a Wall; and as the new Town advanced a little further then the old
toward the Poe, so not thrusting out so far toward the Alps it leaves a
spacious Plain, whereon the Citadel stands; which being further from the Poe
then the City wants not only the conven^nces which she might receive by the
neighborhood thereof, but not being able to command the River cannot debar it
from Navigation. The Citadel is a Pentagon: The circuit of both the old and new
City is flanked round about with Bulwarks and with Ditches. The Prince when he
was master of it did not believe he should be forced to defend it from without,
but employed himse^f totally against the Citadel, and neglected securing the
City on the out side, but learning, by what had happened at Cassalle, that
instead of minding the taking of the Citadel, it behoved him to take care of
descending the City, he fell with all speed and diligence to fortify it from
any assault that might be made from without; and leaving smaller matters, his
chiefest care was to defend the Bridge over the Poe, which, as whilst it was in
his hands it kept the way open for the bringing of succor, which he expected
would be brought from the Governor; so when it should be taken by the enemy,
it kept out any succor that might be brought by that way; for then the
reliever must find some other way to pass his Army over the River, which was
almost impossible to do in the face of a powerful enemy. This Bridge is made of
Stone, and is the best that crosses the Poe; at the left side of the foot
thereof, toward Turin, stands a little Borough; the other which stands on the
right side lies under a little hill, upon which there is a Church, and a Covent
of Capuchins; and this side being all hilly, other higher hills stand above
that of the Capuchins, one above another. The Prince munited this Bridge at
both ends with Trenches; nor herewithall contented, he munited very well the
aforesaid Church and Covent; and, Moreover, built a little Fort upon another
higher hill which overlooked the Monastery: he put 300 Foot into these
Fortifications, and Victuals, and Ammunition sufficient for fifteen days,
within which time he hoped the Governor would appear with his Army. These
Works were not fully finished, when the French Army appeared on three sides;
the first that appeared having blocked up the Passes of Susa, Lanza and the
Canevese, advanced to the City toward the Dora, and the new Park, which
answers upon that Angle of the City which is called the green Bulwark, and
which includes the Dukes Palace and Gardens, in defense whereof the Prince had
made a sudden Trench, formed like a pair of Shears; the other quartered on the
upper hill, above the Church and Covent of the Capuchins; and the third,
passing the Poe at Montcalleri by a wooden Bridge that is there, advanced to
the Palace Valentino; whereof, after a small Skirmish, making themselves
masters, they the next night took the Borough, which (as we said) stands
between the City and the Bridge; and not meeting with any resistance there,
they assaulted the Bridge where they found some resistance; but having mortally
wounded the Captain, who did defend it, they made themselves also masters
thereof: the Garrison retiring toward the Monastery, as to an advantageous
place; which was not able neither to keep there long; for the little Fort which
(as has been said) was built, and fortified by the Prince above the Monastery,
was at the same time assaulted and taken by those who had taken up their
quarters upon the hill which was above that Fort: whence playing upon the
Covent which was beneath, they easily took it, though they were manfully fought
with; for at a third assault the assailants entered the place, and from thence
went to the Church, whither the defendants had retreated; where, without any
respect to the holiness of the place, they put all to the sword that were
there, except the Officers; and sacking, moreover, not only such secular things
as were brought thither as into a place of safety; but without any distinction
laid hands upon such as were sacred, and dedicated to divine worship; by which
good success waxing more bold, and meeting with no opposition (for the Prince
being desirous to keep his men within the Walls, would not go out) they did not
only give themselves to better the Fortifications which they there found, but
joined another Fort which they themselves made, to that which the Prince had
erected above the Monastery; which commanded all the other Fortifications, even
those of the Bridge: they likewise fortified the heads of the Bridge better;
and extending their Trenches toward the Borough, they placed a very strong
Garrison there of 2000 Foot and 1000 Horse, which were commanded by Count
Plessis Pralin: the rest of the Army was distributed into several quarters
about the City; the Inhabitants whereof were the same day so enclosed within
their walls by theenemies Army, as they could not hear news of any succor from
the Governor; unless it were by various inventions which they found, and which
did often deceive them, by which they informed the Governor of what streights
they were in, and sometimes received hopes of succor. The Governor was much
troubled at the scarcity of powder that was in the City; wherefore he sent
Carlo della Gatta with 2000 Horse to Inurea, that he might endeavor by a
greater force to bring in that Ammunition which was left there, but it proved
in vain; for la Gatta being come with that Ammunition to Cassalle, five miles
from Turin, and having found convenience to inform the Prince of all things, he
was willed by him to retreat; for that it was impossible for him to get into
the City, he being first to overcome La Stura and La Dora, which were then
munited with strong French Garrisons; but in his return passing thorough the
Canavese, he found the Town of St. Mauricio taken again by the French, and
ready to be sacked, which he freed with the death of all the French, whom he
put to the sword. Harcourt kept this mean while in the Vallentino, expecting
that the people should rise in the City, as the Prince and the Governor did,
when they came first before it the preceding year. But this proved in vain; for
for all that he could do, there was not any one amongst the Soldiers who was
discovered to comply with the Dowager, or were blemished so much as with any
such thought, but all of them during the whole siege proved faithful to the
Prince. Wherefore Harcourt failing every day more and more of effecting his
desire by that way, he tried another; La Dora falls a little above the City, by
a cleft into a Channel which conveyes water to the Mills, which serve the
people with grist. He therefore gave order that that cleft should be damned up
with earth by night; so as the Mills not being able to go for want of water,
the City which abounded in Corn, began to want bread: For there were only two
hand-mills within the Town, which could not possibly supply so great a
multitude with grist; so as the City was in a short time like to be famished
for want of bread, though it abounded in Corn. Harcourt resolved to reduce the
City yet to greater extremities, and to make it altogether despair of succor,
with hopes whereof being fed, it patiently suffered all hardships: For at last
he began to draw a line of Circumvolution; which beginning from the bank of the
Poe, about a Musket Shot above the Vallentino, ran along the plain toward the
West, and came to the Church Della Crocetta, just over against the Citadel; and
then winding about the Citadel, came to the great Edifice called La Porporata;
and continued to the Dora, crossing with it came to the little house which is
called Bianchina; and then declining by the Madalene, to the mouth of the same
River; where being broken off by the source or course of water, it was
reassumed again, and terminated in the neighboring banks of Poe; a compass of
eight miles, which being furnished with small Forts and other works was divided
into six quarters; wherein the French and Piedmontese Armies were thus
distributed. Count Plessis Pralin, the first Marshal of the Camp, was quartered
from the bridge to the Parco. This quarter contained within it the Burgo, and
the fortifications of the bridge, and of the Capuchins hills: From Vallentino,
where the line began toward La Crochetta, and so forwards toward La
Porporata, La Dora, and Le Cassine divia d' Albera, was General Harcourt
quartered, and with him the Viscount Di Turenna, Camp-marshal of the French
Horse: The Circumvolution made a great bow from one bridge upon the Dora, to
another bridge below the Parco, and near the Poe; to which La Dora served as a
string: wherein Ill Signeior della Motta Odencourt, field Marshal, was first
quartered; who commanded a small body, part Foot, part Horse; who were left by
Duke Longueville, and were subordinate only to General Harcourt. But
afterward the Porparata was assigned him for his quarter, together with a good
part of the line on both sides, and with him were Villa and Pianezza quartered
with the French and Piedmontese Horse. The Citizens of Turin saw themselves
thus surrounded, and as it were imprisoned, and were not able of themselves to
break the line, which did not only threaten their liberties, but their lives
and fortunes. And in these great streights all their hopes lay in being
relieved by the Governor; which they were day by day informed should be ere
long: For he having rallied his men, and reinforced his Camp, was come from
Vercelli to Crescentino, and by a bridge thrown over the River there, marched
straight to Cheri, where having stayed some days to get his men together, he
endeavored by all possible means to get near the City, to free both it and the
Prince from fiege; in which time the Prince desirous either to try the Enemies
Forces, or to give a trial of his, sallied very strong both in Horse and Foot
by night out of the City, and fell upon La Motta's quarter, which was at the
Magdalene beyond the Dora; and charging him whilst they were all a sleep, his
men entered even into the Rendezvous of Arms of that quarter, wounding and
killing many before they could put themselves in a defensive posture; which
proved not such, but that after having done them much prejudice, the Prince
might get to within the shelter of the Cannon of the City, whereinto he
retreated with little loss to himself, and more to the Enemy. This action
revived the spirits of the besieged, and much more the bringing back of the
water of Dora to the Mills, which was done by the Citizens; a great band
whereof, backed by a squadron of Musketeers, went out of the City, and coming
to where the water was damned up, broke as much of the earth which closed the
orifice, as made way enough for water to turn four wheels; and the next night
the current of the River broke down the rest, so as the water came plentifully
into the Channel, much to the comfort of the City, which thereby got bread
enough.

To these two happinesses, which amidst so many evils appeared to be great
ones; a third, yet greater, was added at the same time. The relieving Army
appeared at the last upon the highest of the Capuchins hills, on the twentieth
day after the Enemy appeared, and the one and thirtieth after the business of
Cassalle. In this Army were 4000 Horse, 700 Dragoons, and 12000 Foot; to whom
were added no small recruits both of Foot and Horse, sent by the Prince
Cardinal, and 600 Mountainers, who being by the War driven out of their houses
had desperately taken up Arms. This so goodly Army was not only a terror, but
a wonder to the French; who (thinking that the whole Spanish Forces had been
defaced by the Victory gotten at Cassalle) could not believe that they could be
so soon got together, and brought to dispute the business with them; and being
but few in number themselves, and not sufficient to munite so great a
Oircumvolution, they much doubted what the success would be; the Governor was
fully resolved to do nothing herein, but was furthest out of the reach of
fortune, and what might be gotten with least danger and effusion of blood.
Wherefore be resolved to bring the relief by that part of the hills which was
situated a long the River of Poe; and particularly there where the Enemy had
fortified above the Covent of the Capuchins and the bridge; and where when they
should have taken the Fort which was built by the French, and which was above
them all, they might command all the lower fortifications and the bridge; in
which case he might have an open way to come with his men to the City, and not
only bring what relief was requisite to the besieged, but by discomfiting the
Enemy would have raised the siege; and would have largely revenged himself for
the blow he received before Cassalle. This design would have succeeded happily,
if the Governor had been so diligent in executing it, as the Prince was in
assisting him: For guessing by the appearing of the relieving Army from those
hills, and the rather by some lights, that the Governor would assault the
upper Fort that very night; he went out when it grew duskish, with all his men,
out of the Town, and drew near the bridge, intending to assault it when he
should hear the assault given from above; by which being likely to make a great
diversion, he might have much assisted the Governor in his assault. But the
Governor who would consult with his Commanders what was to be done concerning
the main affair, before he would do any thing, put off the execution till the
next day; by which delay the Prince being frustrated in his expectation,
retired to the City; and the French were very careful to lay bare the Fort,
that very night taking the earth from it toward the Enemies Camp, and so made
it unacceffible and impregnable. And because they saw all the Enemies force
drawn up thither; they called all the best Soldiers and Commanders of the
Camp, as if Harcourt foresaw how much the getting or losing of Turin lay in the
keeping or loss thereof. The Governor seeing, the next day, how hard the
taking of that place was made by that nights work, he forbore assaulting it,
and kept four days upon those Hills, upon which having raised some batteries,
he played upon the lower fortifications; and the French, that they might free
themselves of that molestation, sallied out one night very strong upon the
Enemies Works, to the end that if they got no other good else thereby, they
might at least cloy the Ordnance, and free themselves of the mischief they
received thereby; but meeting with stout resistance, they were repulsed with
loss, and forced to retreat to their own fortifications. And yet the Governor
knowing that the laying of them level with the ground made but little for the
main business, and that to beat down Forts, which would be continually repaired
by the neighboring Army, was to no purpose; and that the City being
straightened on many sides, he resolved to change his quarters, and to go to
Montcalleri, which is a great Town upon the right hand of the Poe, a little
above Valentino, where there is a wooden bridge over the River, which is strong
and safe enough; which the Governor thinking to make himself master of, that
he might pass thereby over the River, when he could not do so by that of the
Capuchins; he when he came first upon the hills, sent a Regiment of Dragoons to
take the Town and Bridge. The Town was abandoned at the first appearance of the
Dragoons, and the Bridge was at the same time burnt; so as the taking of the
Town made nothing at all for the Governors purpose; for he must find means to
make another good and solid Bridge, whereby to pass over his Army, if he would
effect the intended succor; he therefore ordered Carlo della Gatta, to go with
a good strength of men to Montcalleri, and to throw over another Bridge a
little above that which the French had burnt, where two Islands were made by
the Poe, which were very commodious for the passage. La Gatta went thither, and
past over 500 Soldiers in boats to the other shore, under Sergeant Major
Lomelino, by which those who defended the further shore being beaten back, he
began a Fortification upon the bank which he had won; that it might serve to
keep back the enemy, if they should oppose the throwing over of the Bridge; but
as soon as Harcourt heard of the enemies being past over, and of the
Fortifications which they made there, considering of what importance it might
be, if the enemy should enter on that side, and accost their Trenches, he
forthwith sent the Viscount di Turenna to disturb the Work; who went with a
great body of Musketeers, and was followed by Harcourt's self, with a great
strength of men to back him, if there should be occasion. The place where
Lomelino fortified himself was environed, for the most part, with a great ditch
full of the water of the Poe; the Soldiers being afraid, and not daring to
pass over it, Turenna, to upbraid their cowardliness, threw himself, with some
of the chiefest that were about him, into the ditch, and undauntedly past over
it, though the water came up to his breast; the Soldiers being thereby
encouraged did all follow him; and surrounding the enemy who were busy in
fortifying themselves, and others coming in by where the ditch came short, a
fierce Skirmish began, wherein the assaulted, not able to save themselves by
retreating fought stoutly; but Turenna, who fought amongst the foremost,
receiving a slight hurt in the heat of the conflict, was reported to be dead,
at which the assailants grew so enraged, as being recruited by new men which
continually came in, they began to fight desperately, killing not only those
who fought, but those who yielded; and being superior both in number and in
force, they slew them all, part whereof perished by the sword, and part were
drowned in the water. Lomelino's self, who was taken prisoner, could find no
mercy with the enraged rout, who refusing great sums of money to save his life,
allaid their anger in his death; by which cruel action the Spaniards being
highly incensed, they likewise grew cruel, so the conflict began to be very
bloody. The French were much rejoiced at this happy success, who having already
kept the Spaniards twice from passing over the River thought themselves sure of
Victory; and made public fires of joy in the Camp, witnessing it with three
Vollies of Muskets, and with discharging their great Guns; but the City was as
sad, and the Spanish Camp grew very diffident, both of them finding how hard a
business it would be to pass over the River; wherefore it appearing impossible
for them to relieve the City as they intended, they began to consult how to do
it by diversion, by going to Carmagnuola, thinking that the French would not
suffer Carmagnuola to be apparently lost, for the uncertain hope of taking
Turin; and the Prince himself, seeing how hard it would be for them to pass
over there, advised them to go higher up, toward Villa franca, 22 miles above
Turin, where the River being foordable, they might throw over a Bridge without
any opposition; but Villa franca was judged to be too far off, and that the
march would prove incommodious, as well in their going, as in their returning;
and so great a march so near the enemy was not likely to be made without being
forced to fight; wherefore that resolution was not taken; and yet the Governor
had so great a desire to relieve the Prince, as he attempted to pass over once
more, a little below Montcalleri, where the Poe dividing it self into three
branches makes other two small Islands, more commodious for passage then the
former two above Montcalleri, which had been unfortunately attempted; and
though the River was much swollen by the fall of waters, and that the further
shore, over against these Islands, was well munited with Trenches and
Garrisons; yet he resolved to send the same Gatta, with greater Forces then
before, to make a trial. Gatta, being come to the shore side placed some pieces
of Artillery there; and embarquing some Soldiers in some Shallops, he past
them over by night into the Islands; who when the Soldiers were landed, they
began to send over materials for Fortification in the same Sciffs; so as they
made Trenches, with great diligence, in the second Islands, before day break,
and before the enemy were aware; but at last being awakned by the going off of
a Musket, which unfortunately took fire, they presently put themselves in
defense. This going off of the Muske^, instead of disturbing them in their
Works, made them work the harder; so as, about break of day, the Islands were
wholly covered with Trenches, and in a good posture of defense: both the
Generals hasted immediately to the two several shores, to provide against so
sudden and so unexpected an accident; upon which the main affair of the whole
business was thought by both parties to depend; by the Spaniards, for
encouraging the enterprise; by the French, for the disturbance thereof. The
French strived five times to fortify their shore with new and better
Fortifications; but were still beaten off by Musket Shot from the Islands, and
by Cannon, charged with small bullets, from the opposite shore, with great
slaughter to their men; notwithstanding that the chiefest of the Army were sent
for thither to defend it; nay, though Soldiers were drawn thither out of the
Citadel, and the Governor of the Citadel invited to come and hinder the
passing over; but, at last, giving over the defense of their shore, Harcourt
withdrew his men so far inward, as they were out of the reach of the Spaniards
Muskets which were placed on the side of the Island, and made them stand ready
to play upon those whom they should see first appear upon the assaulted shore.
The Spaniards, when they saw the shore abandoned, failed not to throw over
their Bridge, and to fortify the head thereof; where they began a Half Moon;
about the making whereof whilst a hundred Soldiers were very busy, a good
strength of Horse and Foot appeared on the shore to hinder the work, and to
drive away the Workmen; who according to Orders which they had r^ceived
retreated over the Bridge back into the Island; and the Bridge not being yet
well fastened, broke, so as 25 of them fell into the River, and were
unfortunately drowned; yet a h^il of Muske^-shot, mixed with the thunder of
Cannon, continuing from the Islands, which made much slaughter amongst the
French who were upon the Plain beyond the River, Harcourt was forced to cause a
Retreat to be beaten, and not only to abandon the shore, but even the Plain,
which was full of dead bodies; and retreated to within the line of
circumvolution, leaving the Passage free to the enemy; who fastening the Bridge
better, past over the Poe victoriously, and became masters of the Plain, which
they had valiantly won, and much to their glory; as many of the French, if not
more, were here slain, as were Spaniards in the first attempt; and many of them
were wounded, amongst which the Governor of the Citadel, and many of the
Soldiers of the Citadel were slain; so as expecting to be assaulted within
their Trenches, the French fell diligently to finish their line of
circumvolution, making new Forts thereupon for their more safety; and Harcourt
having found by experience what scarcity of bread the besieged underwent by
taking away the water from their Mills; he attempted once more to take it away
by a greater diversion; he therefore immediately caused greater banks to be
thrown up against the mouth of the Channel; which being the worst of evils that
the City could undergo, the Citizens, and the Prince endeavored to disturb
that work; and to put the water into its wonted course: but they could not do
it, for a great many of the French assisting in the work defended the Workmen,
and kept the enemy from hurting them, and from impeding the work; but going
thither afterward with greater forces, they made a gap which brought water to
three Mills; but this lasted but a while, for the bank was quickly made up, and
the Mills went dry as before; yet some Hand-mills being in this interim made,
the scarcity was by continual labor lessened; and the City was somewhat better
provided of bread; but the people were more afflicted, when hoping by the
Armies so glorious and so victorious passage over the River, to see it apply it
self presently to their relief and freedom, they saw it lie idle in the Plain
which it had won, and that it did not any thing to show that it c^red for the
welfare of the besieged, which made them all complain grievously. That which
kept the Governor from acting, was, that he might fortify himself in the
place which he had taken, against the ^allying out of the enemy; and that it
might not be in the power of the enemy to draw him out to battle there, where
having the Poe upon his back, he had no where whereby to retreat, in case of of
ill fortune, but by that narrow Bridge, which he had caused to be thrown over;
but when he had fortified he was not over diligent in assaulting the enemies
Trenches, as if he intended not to hazard his Army under the enemies
Fortifications; preferring therefore cautious, before courageous counsels, and
the preserving of the Kings Territories before the^e re^et of Turin; he aimed
at keeping the French Army from Victuals, and at forcing it to quit the siege
rather by Famine, then by the Sword: and thus, without adventuring or hazarding
the Kings Forces to free the City, and the Prince, and yet to preserve his Army
against any unthought of accident which might happen, the French Forces being
in Piedmont. The Princes intentions were diametrically contrary to these; who
thinking it reasonable that for the preservation of himself, his Sisters and
the City, all the Kings Forces and Interests were to be hazarded, held it also
necessary to be done so for the safety of the State of Millain; for all
Piedmont being to be lost by the loss of Turin, he held that that State would
be but badly preserved after such a loss; and he the Prince not being a bare
Captain or Governor of a Town, he thought he ought not to suffer himself to be
reduced to such extremes, as that he might afterward be necessitated to beg
his life, or at least his liberty, of the Conqueror; that therefore it became
him, when he might see from a far off that it was impossible for him to hold
out, and that he could not be relieved, to prevent surrendering, by Articles
suiting with his condition. These complaints went accompanied with tacit
protestations, that he would accept of the large promises made him by the King
of France, if he would yield to the treaties of agreement which were yet on
foot; alleging and giving out, that if the Governohr would carry on affairs,
aiming only at the Kings private interests, he ought not to wonder, if he the
Prince, passing by the common concerns, should advise and govern himself,
according to his private ends, and those of his house. These were the debates
and altercations which past between the Prince and Governor during the whole
Siege, whilst the Prince complained that he was abused in his expectation, not
seeing any effect of so many promises, nor of his hoped for succor; and the
Governor, that he was drawn into precipices, as concerning the common cause,
by the Prince, and by the too courageous attempt propounded by him; which
tended not to the good leading on of the succor, but to the apparent ruin of
the Army, and of the whole enterprise; which would certainly be brought to a
good and honorable issue, by safer and more cautious Counsels. Thus the
Prince, who was naturally stout and courageous, detested the Governors
comportments, and accused him of timerousness, and sometimes of double dealing;
and the Governor, the more he saw the Prince desirous to hazard all, upon the
fortune of a general assault, the more he thought his Counsels and Proposals to
be destructive: he therefore would not be drawn from his resolution of
delivering the almost famished City, by famishing the French Army: he therefore
sent his Cavalry to overrun the Country, and forage the highways by which
Victuals might be brought to the enemies Camp; and he found his counsel to be
good; for he daily heard news of the intercepting of Victuals. This his design
was also more authenticated by Letters written from the Dowagers Agents to the
General, which were intercepted, wherein he was told that he was not to build
much upon any help from Savoy, unless he would keep the ways open for succors
from else where; and the sequel did approve of the Governors counsel; for
Victuals growing very scant in the French Camp, their Soldiers would come to
the Walls of the City, and beg a piece of bread, which sometimes was given them
even by the Prince his permission; and for that the City wanted Grass and
Forage for Horses more then bread, a bartering was agreed upon between the
besiegers and besieged for Grass and Straw, for bread; a great sign of the
extreme want the besiegers were reduced to. The Prince complained grievously of
the Governor, and propounded sometimes one thing, sometimes another, that he
might be once free of the misery he was in; but he was not at all moved
therewith; he was more moved by the treaties of agreement which were still kept
on foot between the Prince and the French Agents, and with the great offers
that were made the Prince, if he would adhere to France, and forego Spain, and
if he and his Brother would quit all claim of Regency to the Dowager; wherefore
it became the Governor to be very careful of distasting the Prince, lest being
allured by the French offers, and scandalized at his proceedings, he might
embrace the former; wherefore the Prince proposing, finally, that since he
continued constant in overcoming the French by famine, it would be better for
him to leave a competent Garrison in Montcalleri, which might secure that
Bridge, which kept the way open between his Camp and the parts beyond the Poe;
and to go with the rest of the Army to Giuliascho and Collegno, Towns three
miles on the back of Turin, upon the way which leads to Pinarollo, and Susa;
for that by residing in Collegno, which is situated upon the Dora, he would not
only block up the aforesaid ways of Susa and Pinarvole; but those of the
Canavese and of Piedmont; by which the enemies Camp would be formally besieged,
and would be forced for fear of famine to rise in a short time.

The Governor, were it either that he approved of this advice, or that he
desired to like whatsoever the Prince proposed, (provided that he were not
thereby to hazard his men;) resolved to follow it, the rather for that he was
counseled so to do by the Count Sirvela, who was Ambassador in extraordinary
from the King of Spain, to the Commonwealth of Genoa; a Gentleman of excellent
parts, and who was then in the Camp, and by whom the Governor was much ruled;
and who, having by the Kings appointment been ayding to the carrying on of the
main affair in all this Campagnia, had had his share therein. The Governor
therefore had already constituted Don Luigi Ponze, Di Lion, Commander of 2000
Foot and 800 Horse, who were to be left for the safety of that quarter, when he
should go with the rest of his men to those Towns: This advice was also
furthered by news from France, that the King being at last moved by the
imminent danger of this enterprise, if speedy succor should not be sent, had
taken order to send good recruits both of men and victuals to the Camp in
Piedmont. But on a sudden, (nor was it known upon what occasion) the Governor
cut his resolution in two, which certainly would have been better for the full
accomplishment of the enterprise, if it had been entirely executed as the
Prince advised: He sent Don Carlo della Gatta with a good number of Horse, and
with about 4000 Foot to Collegno, to the end that quartering and fortifying
himself there he should do what* the whole Camp was to have done if it had gone
thither, which was, to block up all the avenues from succor and victuals.
Gatta past succesfully on with his men to the place appointed, by the way of
Mill Fiori; though a thousand Horse went coasting along by him, which came out
of the line of Circumvolution: For the Prince sallying at the same time out of
the City, had fallen upon the Enemies quarters toward the Dora; and the Governor
was gone to give a feigned Alarm to Vallentino; and the Garrison of Cheri,
being recruited by the Tradesmen, had at the same time assaulted the
fortifications which were above the Capuchins. So as the French being diverted
into many parts could not much impede Gatta in his passage; who coming to
Collegno, drove out the French Garrisen, and being master thereof, began
immediately to fortify it better: The Governor also instead of taking
Grugliaseo, look Bianesco, which stands upon another way which leads from
Pinarvolo, but a little lower then Graliasco; and consequently nearer the
quarters of Montcalleri, by which the besieging Camp was somewhat more
straightened, and almost as much besieged as the City. The taking of Collegno
caused much jealousy in Harcourt, who apprehended that his Trenches might
rather be assaulted on that side then elsewhere; and they being weaker then the
rest, he put stronger Garrisons into them, and fortified them better toward
Collegno; the same day that G^ta came to Collegno he met with a fair occasion
of intercepting a great conduct of Victuals, as he did; and of routing a
Regiment of the Dowagers which served for a Convoy thereunto: he also defeated
500 Horse, and 500 Foot of Count Verrua's; which were coming from Susa to the
Camp, and either slew almost all of them, or took them Prisoners, except the
Count, who got safe with some Horse to the Camp Vincenzo della Marra, a
Neopolitan Gentleman, took also 60 load of Corn and utterly defeated the
Convoy; and the Governor having sent the Horse of his quarters toward
Millefiori had a gallant Skirmish with the Enemy, where the Corpse de guard,
which were therein was totally put to the sword; at the same time, or a little
before, the French having thrown a Bridge over the Dora, between the Meadows
called Vanchiglia, and the New-Park, which made very much for Communication
between the quarters of the Burgo, and of the Capuchins, with those beyond the
Dora, the Prince took a fancy to try whether he could deprive the enemy, or no,
of that convenience, and free the City of the inconvenience which might result
by the communication of those quarters by means of that Bridge; he to this
purpose Sallied out by night very strong, both in Horse and Foot; and though he
cut the Ropes in sunder which fastened the bridge on this side, yet the enemy
easily mended it, and put it into it is former condition, and made some
fortifications for the safety thereof; the Prince being desirous to attempt the
same again, he sent Don Mauritio with 300 Horse, thither, and Marquess Serra
with two squadrons of Foot, one Spanish, one Italians; these sent Fra. Iovan
Pallavicino with some Foot to discover the Bridge; who finding it newly
fortified, whilst some slight Skirmishes past between him and the Enemy, they
might see five companies of Horse come from the Borgo, and advance toward
them, to cut them off from joining with their companions; against which Don
Mauritio's Cavalry advancing, Fra. Iovanni had convenience to withdraw to a
place of Safety, and incorporated himself with Serra, who went not only to
shelter Don Mauritio's Cavalry with his squadrons of Musketeers, but to fall
upon the enemies Horse, which were forced with much loss to face about, and get
into a place of safety: and though some other squadrons of Horse came from
Vallentino to relieve him, yet they came not time enough; for they were de
ained by the Cannon which played from the works of the City, and by musket shot
which poured down from the Walls; but the Bridge not being ruined neither by
this second attempt, the Prince threw another Bridge over the same River, that
he might pass over to the other shore when he pleased, and receive any succor
that might come by that way; a difficult business; for all the Bank beyond the
River was defended by a Battery levelled against the Mills; but the knowledge
that Marquess Villa (who together with Pianezza was quartered there) was gone
with most part of the Piedmontese Horse elsewhere; and the Enterprise being
intended at the third hour of the Sun, when the night Guards being relieved
grow remiss, encouraged them to the Enterprise, which was wholly given to
B^lognino, who going forth with Horse and Foot, threw over the Bridge with
little loss, over which the Foot passed the next day; part of them were sent
toward the Park, against some Foot which guarded a Redout, which was over the
against the old broken bridge of the Park; which Redout being assaulted, and
the Defendants cut in pieces, was taken; the other part went to assault a body
of men who guarded a half Cannon, placed over against the new bridge; who being
routed, the half Cannon fell into the assailants hands, which they began to
draw toward the Dora; but Pianezza hearing thereof strove to repair the loss.
He therefore headed two squadrons of French Horse which were in that place, and
the ordinary Troop, and spurred on a pace to assault the Enemies Horse; and
skirmishing fiercely with them, (the half Cannon and those that carried it away
put to flight;) the Foot with some of the Horse past back over the Dora, the
rest were chased by Pianezza toward the Park; yet were the takers but little
prejudiced; for the Enemy having in the heat of the pursuit left the half
Cannon behind them, they immediately took it again, and brought it to the banks
of the Dora, where it was under good shelter; and being impossible to be
recovered, it was carried in triumph into the City. But the French were as well
damnified by the Garrison within the City, as by the Army without; for together
with the continual pressure of victuals, the Garrison of Collegno having
ransacked the Country as far as Pinarvolo, had spoiled the mils which were not
far from that Town; and put the Town in such a terror, as it kept the Gates
shut for many days. And Gatta going with 1000 Horse afterward into those
parts, fell upon St. Secondo, a Town near Pinarvolo, where he killed 200
Dragoons, and took their Captain Prisoner.

The Prince Cardinals Horse likewise, which were sent (as has been said) to
the Spanish Camp, being come from Beinesco under Count Broglio, fell upon
Rivalta, cut the Garrison in pieces, and made themselves Masters of the Town;
by these successes affairs proceeded well for the relief of the City, and but
ill-favor'dly for the besieging Army; which was yet much more straightened by
famine, and which was very grievous within the time of Circumvolution, no
victuals being possible to be brought thither, so closely were all the Avenues
blocked up; insomuch as they were forced to make use of that small remainder of
Victuals which was in the Citadel, whereat the Governor thereof complained
much, who being forced to obey the Generals command protested that he would
give over his charge merely for want of victuals, and that he must be forced to
surrender the Citadel, when the Army through famine should be necessitated to
raise the siege; but Harcourt cared but little for all those words and
protestations, as knowing that if the siege should be raised, the Citadel must
inevitably be lost; ^nor herewithal content, he laid hand upon the victuals
which were le^t for the sustenance of the Garrison in Chiavazzo which did but
ill supply the want of the famished army; so as Harcourt who thought to have
furnished Turin by siege, did famish his own camp, the the Citadel, and
Chiavazzo; and had he continued long in this condition, the City had not only
been freed by famine, but the Citadel and Chiavazzo would have been taken by
the relieving Army; and the Camp was already brought to that low condition, as
the daily allowance of bread ceasing, some few ounces of Rice taken from the
Citadel, were in lieu thereof distributed amongst the Common Soldiers; nor
fared the Captains any better; and yet Harcourt persevered constant in his
resolution of taking the City; nay, being offered composition by the Nuntio, he
would not listen to it: but as if he had been Conqueror, demanded that the
City might be absolutely delivered to him, which he would keep in the Dukes
name during the Dowagers Regency; and as if he had been certain of what was to
ensue, he protested he would continue the siege, till such time as the Horses
that were in Turin should have eaten all the Hay and Forage that was in the
City, and the men all the Horses; he moreover continued making great offers to
the Prince: in so much as such constancy being altogether contrary to the
Genius of the French, who are impatient of suffering, it caused much wonder in
all men, who confessed that the French did therein not only outdo themselves,
but did even outdo the Spaniards, who are excellent good at suffering; but it
was now almost impossible that the business could hold out any longer: for the
Soldiers having undergone all the extremes which it was possible for humane
nature to tolerate, many of them fell sick, many died, and many ran away, some
into the City, some into the Spanish Camp: and every one of them relating their
share of the great extremities that the besiegers were in, they occasioned
(which was miraculous) so various, differing, and contrary opinions between the
Prince and the Governor, as the result thereof proved almost the utter ruin
of the common affairs, and the safety of the French: the Prince, who grew daily
more and more impatient of delay, and infinitely desirous to see himself freed
from siege by a general assault, thought it was now high time to assault a body
of an Army which was languishing, afflicted, and macerated by famine,
sufferings, and assiduous labor, and which seemed not fit to manage Arms, and
could but ill bear with the Governors phlegmatic patience, who ruling rather
like a Cunctator then Dictator, persisted the more in his resolution of
overcoming by sitting still, for that he saw the Enemy reduced to the utmost
brink of necessity, and that the main aff^ir consisted in having patience for a
few days: But the news which was divulged of the great succor both of men and
meat which was sent from France, and was already arrived in Piedmont, troubled
the Prince above all things else, fearing that if it should come before the
Siege was raised, all the Governors calculations would be subverted, and the
siege would be reduced to its former condition, with little hopes that the
Governor, who would not move when he had so fair an occasion of overcoming,
should hazard his men in keeping off the succor, or in relieving the City,
when he should see the Enemies Camp recruited with men, strengthened, and
invigoured by the great supply of victuals. The scarcity that was in the City
of gunpowder, did make the Prince more desirous to see an end of so great
anxiety before so necessary a sustenance of defense should fail: And amongst
all these agitations of mind, great jealousies and suspicions were not wanting,
making him believe, or lest doubt, that the Governor by whom he thought he was
abandoned at the Ponte della Rotta, should be as careless of relieving him at
the present; not out of any wariness, or any mystery of War, but rather for
that hatching his accustomed tancour in his breast, he looked with an ill eye
upon his weighty interests, not caring to assist him in his so great streights.
These considerations made the Prince impatient in expecting what the issue of
the Governors designs would be. But it was thought he was most grieved to see
how happily the Governors designs proceeded, which was no less hateful to him
then to the Enemy, and was more mad thereat then Harcourt; foreseeing by the
manner of his proceeding his own utter undoing, the ruin of his family, and
the loss of his peoples liberty for which he fought. The Prince knew as well as
Harcourt, that if he the siege should in any way raised, that if the siege
should in any way be raised, the Citadel would undoubtedly be thereupon
surrendered. He also knew that if the siege should be raised by famine and not
by the sword, the Governor would enter into the City victorious, with his
forces entire, and would doubtlesly use such supercheries as Victors usually
do; and would set forward his pretentions to the Citadel, which he the Prince
being so short of him in forces, could not obviate. Therefore not only he, but
all the Piedmontese was so filled with horror, as they were in doubt whether
that it would be better for them, that the City should be relieved by that way,
or not at all relieved. And not knowing what to do in so great extremity, they
could think of no better way to evade it, then by using their utmost means that
the Spaniards and the French might be brought to fight together; hoping that if
the French should be beaten, they might be masters of the City; and that if the
Spaniards should be worsted, they might be masters of the Citadel; and that the
Piedmontese, who were in the midst between them, might be able to oppose the
Victors, and to preserve their Ducall Family and their own liberties; in which
bustling the Prince might probably promise himself, that the remainders of the
French Army, as also those of the Citadel, being of Enemies become his Friends,
might join with him in excluding the Spaniards; and he was almost certain, that
the Governor, to shun greater inconveniences, would give way that the Citadel
should rather remain in his hands, then in those of the French. The Commendator
Pas^ro, one of much experience, and in great authority with the Prince, was
cried up for the Author of these counsels; which being divulged about the Court
were approved of by the Piedmontese nobles, as those who being naturally more
inclined to the French then to the Spaniards apprehended, that to fall under
the Spanish Empire; was the worst of evils that could befall them. They
therefore thought that, to keep from that misfortune, they had best embrace any
thing how slender so ever, and expect better fortune. The Prince being
oppressed by the nearness and by the greatness of the danger, which though it
was foreseen when a far off, yet was it never so inevitable nor formidable as
now. Being therefore resolved to do all that was possible, he sent a Letter to
the Governor on the seventh of July, wherein he signified unto him, that he
could hold out no longer, and that if he were not relieved within four days at
the furthest, he would without more a do accept of the French offers, and
would surrender the City: Which Letter was very unfortunate for the Prince, and
for the business in order to the relief, and to the raising of the siege, was
the ruin of the common affairs, did overthrow the Princes cause; and on the
contrary, raised the French Army out of the extreme precipice and danger
whereinto it was more then manifestly brought. The City was not effectually in
so great streights as the Prince would fain have made it been believed to be;
for it had great store of Corn, nor did it want grist as before, that default
being much supplied by hand-mills which were daily made: And though, in
conforminy to what the Prince had writ, the Governor was also informed by Don
Antonio Sotelo, of the aforesaid wants, who though he was chief of the Kings
men, and affairs that were handled in the City, had upon many occasions
appeared ap^e to please the Prince, then careful of the Kings concernment; yet
the Governor had received contrary intelligence from other Captains, and in
particular from Marquess Serra; who looking more narrowly into affairs, knew
that the City might hold out longer; and woe his mind freely to the Governor,
and did assure him that there were those who had offered to maintain the City
with bread for two months, at no exorbitant rates: Which offers the Prince
refused, as thinking them impossible to be performed; and though there was more
want of powder then of bread, yet it was found that the City held out, and made
stout sallies upon the Enemies quarters, twenty days after the eleventh of
July, and yet had received no recruit in powder; and the danger of the French
succor, which was said to be very near, proved vain; for La Gatta being
stronger in Collegno then the relievers, who were not above 4000 Foot, and some
Horse, it was impossible for to pass that way, or to force the Garrison. The
Governor seeing himself taken off from continuing his designs, and bereft of
the victory which he so longed after, and was near getting, by the Princes so
precise pressures, and resolute pro^estations, he was much astonished, and was
the more confused, for that by letters, which he received at the same time, he
was informed (as has been said) that the City was in a far different condition
from what it was represented to be in by the Prince; so as suspecting the
Princes pressures must needs aim at some hidden end; amongst many things which
he thought upon, at last he light upon one or two; either that the Prince had
closed with the French, or was upon agreeing with them. And that therefore,
that he might the better honest his surrounding of the Town, he put him upon
the point of speedy relief, that so he might provide for himself, abandon the
King of Spain, and b^ake himself to the King of France; or else that he would
revive his claim to putting of a Garrison into the Citadel. The Governor had
always proceeded so reservedly with the Princes, as without either assuring
them of his intent, or making them despair, he had still held them in
expectation that they should be pleased; and they were always confident to have
what they pretended unto either with his will or against it; wherefore he was
forced to vary his determination in the Enterprise, though it proceeded on very
successfully, and to put the certainty of Victory upon the uncertain chance of
a Dye: He therefore began greatly to doubt what peradventure was true; he knew
no better way how to avoid this exigency then by feeling Paseroe's Pulse with
offering him six thousand Pistols to procure the Prince to delay his
expectation of succor for fifteen days, to the end that he might the better
attend the keeping out of that relief which was expected by the enemy from
France; hoping, nay firmly believing, that if that succor could be kept out,
the Siege would be raised before the desired time of delay should be expired;
and that by this means he should not need adventure his Forces in relieving the
City. The care of this was committed to Marquess Serra, who was chiefly trusted
by the Governor in carrying on this Siege; but this Negotiation not being to
be ended so soon, by reason of the difficulty of giving and of receiving
advertisement, and for that it becomes those that negotiate in such affairs to
wait the conjuncture of times; the eleventh day being come before the
Negotiation was ended, the Governor, who had precise Orders from the King not
to give the Prince any occasion of foregoing his party, he suffered himself to
be pulled on by necessity, and by the Prince his inclinations, (as one does
sometimes who rides an unruly horse) and resolved, to please him; he therefore
agreed upon the doing of it in this manner. The Governor was to go from his
quarters of Montcalleri, and Gatta from his of Collegno upon the break of day,
on the eleventh day, upon the sign being given by certain fires, and should
fall upon the enemies Trenches. Gatta was to assault those which were between
the Porporata and a certain Channel which is called Martinetto; and the
Governor, those which do terminate on the banks of Poe near Valentino: that
the same night 1000 Horse should be sent to the Prince by a Foord over the Poe,
which being joined to his Horse might enable the Prince to sally strongly out
of the City that same night, and face the enemies Horse. The Prince was to go
with this recruit of Horse, and with the Spaniards which were with him, toward
Valentino, to facilitate the Governors entrance on the innerside; and to the
end that these three, which were the chief, actions might succeed the better,
the Governor was to place eight piece of Cannon upon the hills beyond the Poe,
and to play therewith upon the tops of the Trenches, and drive the enemy from
thence, and so facilitate the assault that was to be given on that side. Diverse
provisions also were made to the same purpose, thus; The Dragoons and Croats
were to be sent to scour along the other parts of the Trenches, to keep them
in aw with feigned assaults, and intent upon defending themselves. Don Silvio
of Savoy was to advance toward la Stura, with the Horse that were without, and
was to fall upon the Quarters beyond the Dora, or at least to seem as if he
would do so. The Mountainers beyond the Poe were to assault the Forts upon the
Capuchins Hills, with the Horse which were of the Garrison of Cheri. These
three diversions were to be made at one and the same time, to the end that the
besiegers being assaulted on these three sides might not come to assist the
Trenches which were to be assaulted by the Governor and Gatta; things being
thus ordered, an accident happened which made the Governor alter the hour
appointed for the assault; he heard that the succor from France was come to
Giavenna, a Town five miles from Collegno; and searing that if Gatta should go
to give the assault by break of day he might run danger of being fallen upon by
the French, who were the Convoy for the succor, on the back, he ordered him to
forbear falling on till noon; when if the French should not move, he should;
and according to Orders should give the assault; but if the French should be
already moved, he should keep within his quarters till he should receive new
Orders. Gatta heard, by his Scouts, that the French would not move that day;
whereof he advertised the Governor; and being come four hours before Sunset
to the Trenches, he fell courageously upon them with 4000 Foot, and 2000 Horse;
his first assault was bravely received, and at last he was repulsed, and had
some of his men slain, amongst which Camp-master Emilio Ghiglino, la Motta, who
was in defense of that part with his Regiment discharged the part of a valiant
Soldier, and judicious Commander; but coming with more vigor to a second
assault, the Foot scaled the Trenches, and making way for the Horse, the Horse
and Foot jointly entered, who, had they been more considerate, this very action
had freed the City; for the breach which was made being made good by Garrisons
and Fortifications, the Line was open, and at the disposal of the Governor,
who without forcing the Trenches at Valentino might have entered by this breach
and have destroyed the besiegers, and broken the line of circumvolution; and if
he had not resolved to put himself to this hazard by keeping that breach in his
possession, he might have sent what succors he had pleased into Turin; so as
the besiegers losing their hopes of the Siege would have risen of themselves,
and have given the business over; but whilst Gatta, when he had broke into the
Trenches ran with his Horse toward the City, according to his Orders received
from the Governor, to join with the Prince, and cared not to guard the breach
which he had made, and whilst some of the Foot that were entered fell to plunder
the enemies Huts and Pavilions, and other some to pursue in disorder those that
fled; the French who were driven from desending the Trenches had time to get
under the shelter of the Artillery of the Citadel, and to rally, and re-order
themselves; and being assisted by many others who were come from other parts of
the line to help here, they made a good body, and turned upon the enemy, who
were in disorder and busy in plundering, whereof they slew and wounded many;
and it happened that Don Michele Pignatello, Captain of the Rere, who entered
therewith, when those that were entered before were ill handled by the French,
was assaulted as he would have defended himself; and though he resisted
stoutly, yet having no Horse, for they were all gone toward the City, he found
he could not well keep the field; so spying a little Fort not far off, between
the City and the line of circumvolution, he entered thereinto with the best of
his men, thinking to defend himself there; but the Fort not being able to
receive so many men, those who got in resisted as long as their powder lasted,
and afterward betook themselves to their Pikes; but the defendants valor was
overpowered by the multitude of French, who still increasing in numbers took
the Fort, and put all the defendants to the sword, except Pignatello, and some
Officers, who were taken prisoners; what with these, and some others that were
amongst the Tents, 500 of the Spanish Army were slain, but not without revenge;
for many more French perished, amongst which two Camp-marshals, twelve
Lieutenants, four Captains and seven Officers, and Colonel St. Andrea was taken
prisoner. The worst that befell the besieged was, that the French making use of
the error committed by the relievers presently made up the breach of the
Trench which Gatta had abandoned, and kept out 70 load of powder, part whereof
fell into the hands of the Enemy, and part was carried to Collegno. The Prince
had no notice given him that the hour of assault was altered; for the shortness
of time and difficulty of giving advertisement could not permit it; he
therefore waited all that night in Arms with his men, expecting an assault
should be given at break of day, and that the re-inforcement of Horse by
Vanchiglia should appear; he continued in this posture till noon; but failing
at last of his so long expectation, and not expecting that any thing that had
been promised should be performed, he much unwillingly retreaed to the City,
and dismis'd his men who were very weary, that they might repose themselves
after their long watching, and p^ins which they had taken the preceding right:
when not many hours after he heard of the assault given by Gatta; and not long
after he might see the Soldiers appear victorious, who brought him certain
news of the succors being entered; wherefore he suddenly summoned all his
Soldiers to their Ensigns, and though he had not above 300 Horse with him, he
notwithstanding resolved to go toward Valentino, to facilitate the Governors
entry on that side, according to agreement; he took Tavora's and Serra's
Brigades along with him, and the Burgondian Soldiers, and advancing with his
Cavalry toward the Trenches be took the hedge which encompassed the Fort which
shelters the way that comes from Montcalleri and Pioppi; he sent others to get
ground upon the Fort which defends Valentino toward the City; and a number of
Ci^izens, who went out with the Prince, joining with some of Serra's men, took
a redoubt first, and then got in even to the Palace of Valentino, which they
took and plundered. Gatta at this time joined with the Prince, together with
2000 Horse which were entered before; so as being thus strongly recruired he
advanced toward the Trenches which were then assaulted by the Governor on the
out side, or ready to be assaulted; and being gotten to Pioppi he took a
Farmhouse and a neighboring Chapel which environed the Fort which was
assaulted on the out side; and though he saw the soldiers very desirous to
fall upon the same Fort on the inside, yet he held it better to restrain their
forwardness, till he might see the succourers Ensigns ^dvanced in that Fort;
for the Governor, at the same time that Gatta assaulted the Trenches, was gone
from his quarters to Montcalleri, and went to assault Valentino; but not with
any intention of adventuring the rest of his Forces the^e: his chief end was to
entertain the Enemy in desending that part, so as they might not oppose Gatta,
who when he should have broken into the line of circumvolution was to join with
the Prince, and fall jointly on the Trenches on the inside, and assist the
assault from without, to the end that the Trench being thrown down both within
and without, they might raise the Siege, and ruin the besiegers. The eight
Cannons on the Hill beyond the Poe had from the break of the day played
uncessantly upon the Parapets of the Trenches about Valentino, which were to be
assaulted; and having broken down a Bulwark which was near the banks of Poe,
toward which the Governor sent Don Lewis di Lincastro, with his Brigade and
with many Ladders, Bridges and little Huts, after whom he also sent the other
Camp-master Don Iovan Artiaga, with his Brigade, and with some of Prince
Borso's and Don Iovan Pignatello's Brigades, against a Fort which flanked the
way from Montcalleri, and which was the same upon which the Prince expected to
see the victorious Ensigns set; but these and the rest being somewhat at a
loss, they occasioned some confusion: yet they went on to an assault; but
though the assault were twice reinforced they could do no good upon it, but
were at last forced to retreat; wherefore the Governor, finding that the aids
from within were not answerable to his Forces without, began to apprehend
Gatta's success, since he could not hear that he was entered; so as night
drawing on, and having lost 500 Foot in that assault, and six Captains, he
caused a retreat to be beaten, and gave over the enterprise; a more unfortunate
or disastrous succor then this has not been read of; for it ended very
unfortunately, not only for that Gatta had no ways aided the Governor in his
assault, nor for that he had not guarded not kept open the breach he had made,
and whereby he entered; but for that having carried neither powder nor victuals
with him, it served to no purpose; for without these those that were entered
were neither able to force the Enemies quarters, nor to defend the City; so as
their entrance did but little good, nay rather harm, since they were to be sed
by the Cities Victuals; those who entered, being as it were so many imprisoned
Sampsons, employed in nothing but in turning about Handmills, to supply
themselves with Victuals and the City with Grift: nor did the mischief cease
here; for the Governors Army being deprived of so noble a part of his men, who
being broken into the Trenches were there shut up, was rendered unable for
bringing any more succor; and on the contrary, the French Army was hereby
freed from all danger; it languished before for hunger, and was only sed with
slender hopes whether the succor which was expected from France would force
its way, or no, through the Pass, and opposition which was made at Collegno;
where their fear was certainly greater then their hopes: but Gatta's assault
removed all difficulties; for that he might give, it he had left but a small
Garrison in Collegno, and the Gates almost open; so as the French succor made
use of the occasion, and almost beyond all expectation came the next day after
Gatta's entrance to the Enemies Camp, and having recruited it with Victuals and
Men did in an instant free it from the misery it was in, being almost ready to
ask mercy of the Enemy, or to retreat as it did at Cheri, and made it frollick
and courageous, and of being almost conquered it became Conqueror; and having
no cause to fear the Spanish Army, it became doubly formidable; as well by the
increase of its own Forces, as by the weakening of the Spanish Army. The Scene
of affairs being thus strangely altered, new and more fervent rancours and
reciprocal complaints arose between the Prince and the Governor, and between
their Soldiers and Captains; each of them laying the fault of this disaster
upon other. The Governor, that he was too much importuned to this action by
the Prince, and said that if he had continued a few days longer in his own
course he had assuredly gotten a famous Victory, without effusion of blood; he
also complained that the Prince had not assisted from within the assault which
he gave without, which was the occasion of all the misfortune; on the contrary,
the Prince exclaimed horribly upon the Governor, for that he had not sent him
any Horse by Vanchiglia, that he came not really, and with all his Forces to
assault the Trenches; that he had altered the time appointed without giving him
any notice; and he also complained of some lesser failings, which he said did
concur to the misfortune of the success. It would be too tedious to relate the
bitter accusations which they laid one upon another, or rather the redargutions
which past between the fautorers of them both; to insist upon which too
accurately belongs not to the Office of a good Writer.

The Governor, seeing this unfortunate success, and the loss of those men who
were entered the City without Ammunition, bit his fingers ends for madness, was
grieved at the very heart, and blamed himself for having suffered himself to be
removed from his first resolution; and considering that the mischief would be
yet greater, and irrecoverable, unless he could find some means to send
Ammunition of War into the City, he cast about how he might do it; and having
long thought upon the business, he could not light upon a better way then to
convey it over by the Ford of the Poe called Margerita, over against
Vanchillia; he therefore sent some loads underneath the Hill, which coming into
the Valley which answers upon that Foord, they came to the River; but the
Governor having made signs to the Prince by some fires, that he should send
Horse to the River to receive them (for all commerce between the besieged and
the Spanish Camp was so blocked up as they could not converse but by such
signs) that now happened which does often times fall out, that the signs not
being understood, but very little good was got thereby; so as none appearing
from the City at the Foord, the Carriages returned back by the same way that
they went: And on the other side, fearing what might ensue if no help were
found out against this default, got together as much Saltpeter and Sulphur as
he could, whereby he provided, though but in a scant measure, for the necessary
and daily defense: But the Governors Forces being so dis-joyned as they could
not be of any help one to another, and finding that the Enemies Forces were not
only refreshed, but recruited, he began to bethink himself rather how to secure
those men which he yet had, then how to relieve the City, or how to recover his
losses; so as giving over his first design of famishing or besieging the French
Camp, nay, doubting the safety of his abode at Montcalleri, he would provide
himself of a more secure quarter: Repassing therefore back again over the Poe,
over the which he had passed a little before with such glory and honor, he
went to his first quarters upon the Hills, where he thought he might keep more
safe from being assaulted, where he might better defend himself, and watch any
occasion which should be offered of relieving the City; which Harcourt
perceiving he took a course, that fearing less to be assauted on the other side
beyond the Poe, he might draw many of his Forces closer together, and joined
them almost all in defense of the bridge and Capuchins Forts, where he made new
Forts and new Trenches, that he might the better resist any attempt that the
Enemy might make upon those confining parts: Nor herewithal content, having by
experience known how easily the Enemy had made way to relieve the City, what
danger his Army had incurred by Gatta's entrance, he strove to prevent the like
disasters for the future: He therefore began a second line of circumvolution,
which was two thirds lesser in compass then the former; which though it needed
a lesser number of Soldiers to de^end it, yet he drew a good part of the
Garrison out of the Citadel to guard this second line, which beginning from the
furthermost angle of the Citadel struck strait toward la Dora, and crossing the
Dora ex ended it self a little further, and then falling toward the Poe
enclosed the new Park, and then crossing the Dora again drew near the banks of
Poe, and running along thereby to Valentino joined in a crooked line to the
Citadel, from whence it began. The Citizens were much afflicted at this second
line, whose numbers being increased both in Men and Horse, they were forced to
let them partake of that Bread and Forage which was hardly sufficient for
themselves: Finding therefore, for certain, that things could not continue long
in this condition, they began to think of a remedy: Many entreated the Prince
to attempt getting out of the City, and to get with a good strength of Horse to
the Governor; and to try whether he could prevail more with him by his
presence then by his Letters, to do some gallant action for the freeing of the
City more then he had yet done: They wished him also to consider, that when his
person should be safe, come what would come, the common Affairs would not be so
much damnified as if he should meet with any misfortune in his own person; and
out of this respect only he was solicited by Letters from the Governor. But
the Prince re^used absolutely to do so, not being able to abandon his Sisters
in the common danger, who had followed their Brothers fortune with such
constancy; nor to forsake that Country where he was born a Prince, nor those
people who to maintain his Cause had put themselves into those troubles: And
this Proposal being absolutely denied, it was resolved that Gatta (who whilst
he kept idle in the City, by reason of the Soldiers and Horse that were entered
with him, was rather an encumbrance then a help) should a tempt forcing the
Line with the same Horse that he brought with him, at the same place of the
Porporata by which he had entered, and should go join with the Governor;
whereby the City was to receive a double advantage; which should thereby be
eased of the great burden of maintaining so many Horse, and the Relievers
should be made better able to assist it. This motion was presently embraced,
and put in execution, every one thinking that it might be easily effected; for
the Enemy having drawn almost all his Forces toward the hills had left all the
other parts slightly guarded. Gatta went out in the dark of night with the
Neapolitan and Dutch Horse, being guided by some Troops of Croats, and one of
the Prince Cardinals Troops, led on by Count Broglia, which carried spades and
mattocks to throw down the Trenches, and which might level the way for the
rest, who kept with Gatta under the Bastion della Consolata, expecting News
when the way should be levelled. These went out, and luckily threw down the
first Line, and afterward (though with some more difficulty) the second; but
they met with a very great impediment beyond it, which was a great ditch newly
dug behind the Trench, whereinto the water of Dora was brought; and for
their further misfortune, the earth of the Trench which was beaten down falling
into the Ditch, and mingling with the water made it muddy, and harder to be
passed over: Wherefore being astonished at this difficulty, which they saw was
not to be overcome, whilst they were thinking what to do, they were discovered
by the Enemy; and though some of them escaped by wading through the ditch,
many, notwithstanding, who attempted the same stuck fast, and not being able to
recover themselves were taken Prisoners, or were stifled in the mud, amongst
which Captain Lamas was one of the first; the greatest part fled toward the
City, some whereof saved themselves, some were slain, or taken prisoners by the
Enemy. Gatta seeing this misfortune gave over his intended voyage, and went
into the City again; which not being any ways eased by its disgorgement
returned to its former streights; which the Citizens endeavoring to get out
of, and finding that the scarcity of Grist, which was increased by the many
mouths which were added to the eating thereof, was that which would hasten
their deaths, they attempted to open another channel to the Dora, a little
below the old and accustomed one, which was notwithstanding much hindered by the
Enemy. The Engineers disputed very much whether the lowness of the Dora would
not hinder the design, but it proved easy; though not without much danger and
labor, and expense of time; for they could not work but by night, by reason of
the Enemies Musketeers; yet in a months space they perfected the work, but
could bring water only to four Mills, which was a great consolation to the
City; but this comfort lasted not long; for the Enemy after having endeavored
by diverse Batteries to beat down the Mills, which were notwithstanding
frustrated by the diligence of the besieged; Harcourt made an outlet for the
water on the opposite side of the River, by which the water was turned away and
the Mills were left dry; it remained that some provision might be found out to
furnish the City with Ammunition of War, since by the abundance of Hand-Mills
which were made they provided sufficiently for Grist. The Governor agreed with
the Prince to send him 200 load of Ammunition at a certain hour of night, which
was to be conducted by Don Vincenzo Gonzaga, accompanied by a good body of
Horse, which was to bring the supply to la Motta's quarter; whither the Prince
was to send Horse to receive it: but neither did this design prosper; for the
nights being very short, and Gonzaga being to foord over la Stura and la Dora,
after he had foorded over the Poe, before he could come to the place appointed,
he knew he could not get thither before the Sun would be up; so as perceiving
day break a little after he had gotten over the Poe, and fearing lest he might
be met by the way, he returned back. This night the Prince was come in his own
person out of the City to receive so necessary and so desired a recruit; and
with him was Don Antonio Sottelo with all the Horse, backed by Marquess Serra
with Foot; and being come to the place appointed he was discovered, and
assaulted by the Enemies Horse. The Prince withstood the assault manfully, and
after a sore contest repulsed the Enemy, wherein la Serra behaved himself
gallantly, who sheltering the Horse with his Musketeers afforded them
convenience of forcing the assailants to wheel about, who being pursued left
above 200 of their men behind them, and five Captains wounded; not above ten of
the Prince his Forces being left behind, amongst which a Dutch Captain, who
being stripped was, to the admiration o^ all men, found to be a woman; who having
always kept company amongst Soldiers in man's habit, was never known to be what
she was, but always conversing like a man, and fighting as valiantly as any man,
was in a few years gotten from being a Foot Soldier to be a Captain of Horse;
when she was taken, her life was offered her if she would demand it; but she
scorning so low a behavior, chose rather, with an undaunted spirit and high
words, to die honorably, then to live a life which she should have obtained
unworthily. The day beginning to clear, and the Prince seeing no Ammunition
appear, he ordered a retreat, which was orderly and gallantly made even in the
face of the Enemy, though not without much grief for not being succored by
their long expected Ammunition; but ere long the besieged were provided of
Powder and all things necessary for defense, by an unusual and never before
practiced or known way, conveyed with safety and speed from the Camp to the
City. Commerce being blocked up, as has been often said, between the Camp and
the City, so as there was great trouble of giving and receiving advice upon
reciprocal occurrences and necessities; a certain invention was found out, by a
hollow Bullet, whereinto Letters were put, and the hole stopped up with a
stopple made of a piece of Wire; which being put into a piece of Artillery, was
shot from the Camp into the City, and from the City into the Camp, the sign
being formerly given by a great smoke, to them who were to receive it; that
they might watch where the Bullet fell: by this means the Prince and Governor
conversed freely, such conveyance being to be sent hourly; which were
afterward, by way of mockery, called flying Posts; and as it is not hard to
add to things which have been formerly found to succeed well, this lucky and
useful invention was improved in the conveying of Ammunition for War in bigger
Bullets, capable of fifteen pound weight of Powder, which being more carefully
squeezed together and put into a Mortar-piece, were by the force of fire blown
into the City over the Heads and Trenches of the besiegers who were very angry
thereat; and finally, this invention served to furnish the City with
Saltpeter, and with Salt, for want whereof it suffered much; especially, since
men being glad, for want of other meat, to eat the flesh of horses, this food
eaten without Salt caused much sickness and mortality in the City: above a
thousand of these Balls or Bullets were thrown into the City, which furnished
the besieged with above 15000 pound weight of Powder. Thus did the besieged
behave themselves, sparing their Victuals by parcimony, and increasing their
Grist by Hand-mills; and provided for their defense by this new device of
flying Bullets, comforting themselves with hopes of being one day freed from so
many afflictions; amongst these adventures it fell out, that Monsieur d'
Argenson, and Monsieur di Govone, who was Governor of the Citadel, as they
went from the Camp to Pinarvolo were taken prisoners by two Troops of Horse,
carried to Cheri, and were by order from the Governor sent to Millain.
Argenson was President of the Senate at Grenoble, a Gown-man, but very well
credited in Affairs both of Peace and War; and of such authority, as little of
any moment was done without his approbation, not only in the Camp, but neither
in all Piedmont. The Prince and Governor were very well pleased with the
taking of these two Gentlemen; for having it in their thoughts to surprise the
Citadel, which was but weakly garrisoned, a good part of the G^rison being
drawn out and placed (as has been said) in guarding (...) ^ard Line; they
thought that the Citadel would be the more ea^ (...) now that it wanted a
Governor; and now the competition (...) ^he Garrison, which had formerly been
the occasion of all the scandal, and of the ill Government of the present War,
and which, as it were, spoiled and disordered all the common designs, could be
no longer an obstacle; for the Prince having upon this occasion desired the
Governor, that he would give over his pretentions. The Governor, who saw all
things in so desperate and ruinous a case, was better content that it should
fall into the Prince his hands, then into those of the French; and resolved at
last, though too late, to please the Prince therein; but this too late remedy
served but little to the expiring enterprise. The Prince when he had obtained
his desire, said (for what reason it is not known) that it was not now time to
make the in^ended attempt; which made the Governor interpret the proposed
enterprise in a sinister sense, as if the Prince, verily believing that he
should have his desire denied, had intended to take some fair pretense of
concluding the treaty of agreement with the French, which was never yet laid
down; so the design of surprising the Citadel vanished, diffidence and
mis-understandings did daily increase; all was full of jealousy, which
discomposed all Negotiations: Yet the Governor took no notice of any thing, by
reason of the precise Orders which he had from the King; he continually
provided the Prince with all things necessary; and particularly with Powder,
though not without great expense; he listened willingly to any thing that the
Prince propounded touching the relief of the City; but he interposed such
difficulties in all attempts, as retarded the execution till the occasion was
over; nay, to seem no less desirous of relieving the Prince, then the Prince
was of being relieved, he would sometimes propound other courses which might
appear better and more convenient then those proposed by the Prince; which
afforded matter of dispute between them, which of their opinions were the best;
so as whilst the business was arguing, the opportunity of putting either of
their opinions in execution was let slip: by which it might be conjectured that
the Governor being unwilling to adventure more then he had done on the
eleventh of July, enter^ain'd the Princes proposals more in words and
appearance, then in reality; not so much doubting the weakness of his own
Forces, as distrusting the Prince his corresponding with him in the executing
what should be attempted, as he had experienced in his assaulting Vallentino.
Amidst these diffidences which past between the Prince and the Governor, a sad
accident happened in the City, which might easily have ruined the whole business,
had not a sudden remedy been found. The Soldiers began to fail of their pay,
and it was impossible for the Governor to pay them; so as the want of pay
being added to their necessitous living, many began to speak big; the Grisons
being more seditious then the rest gave apparent signs of Mutiny; and the other
Nations were likely to have followed their example, had not the prime Author
and Head of this sedition been imprisoned by his Colonel, condemned to die, and
presently made to pass the pikes in the presence of them all. The terror of
which example, though it did for the present quiet them all, yet the same
necessity remaining, more univerversal sedition was likely to have arose: But
the mere fame of Marquess Serra's wealth, which won him credit thorough all the
Towns of Europe, did the like in Turin; so as the mere news that he desired to
take up money upon interest, brought him in all the ready money that those of
Turin had; who thinking it more secure in his hands; then in their own houses,
lent it him, to secure them from the Soldiers sedition, and from firing the
City. He having by this means borrowed about 150000 Ducates, did by making
ready payment pacify the Soldiers not only for that time, but during the
whole siege; but the jealousies did still increase between the Prince and the
Governor; who finding himself daily pressed by the Prince to new undertakings,
and being threatened by him that he would close with the French, unless the
Governor would do as he would have him; he bethought himself also of treating
with the French, so to make the Prince jealous: He held the imprisonment of
President Argenson to be a good expedient herein; in whose writings which he
had with him, when he was taken prisoner, an instruction was found from the
King of France, sufficiently contrary to both the Princes interests, and in
particular, to Thomaso's person: And this President being one who knew most of
the secret practices belonging to Italy and Piedmont, the Governor sent Abbot
Vasques to treat with him in the Castle of Millain, where he was prisoner: The
Abbot was wary and quick-witted, and very fit to carry on such a business, and
a great Confident of the Governors; and (which was most requirable in this
present occurrence) very ill inclined to the Princes, and to the House of
Savoy; and it was known, that Argenson being in Vallentino the year before,
when the last Truce was there treated on and concluded, and wherein Argenson
was employed on the behalf of France, and the Abbot on that of Spain; the Abbot
in some familiar discourse which past between him and Argenson, said (were it
in jest or in earnest) that it would do well for the two Kings, and for the
preservation of peace and common union, if they would destroy the House of
Savoy, and divide the Territory thereunto belonging between them; since it was
found by experience, that the Princes of that Family were the fomenters of the
continual War and Dissentions between the two Crowns. To which speeches though
the President answered somewhat roundly, that his Kings intention was not only
to maintain, but to support and further aggrandize that House; yet it was
thought that the Governor being encouraged by these instructions which were
found with the President, failed not to sound the business, and to introduce
some Treaty which might not be very good for the Prince; if for nothing else,
yet that he might at least deal with the Prince, as the Prince dealt with him.
What the result thereof was is not known, the business being wholly
conjectural, and which had no foundation but only the Abbots going to the
President. But it may well be affirmed, that the Prince did contract no small
jealousies by this expedition, which he thought tended much to the prejudice of
his interests; which he did manifest by taking away the mannaging of the common
concernments from the Nuntio, who was a great Confident of the Governors,
which he put into the hands of those that adhered unto the French, all things
necessary for bodily sustenance growing this mean while daily more and more
scarce in the City; and the Forces in the Spanish Camp decreasing, affairs were
brought to great extremity to both of them: And though about 2500 Foot were
come to the Spanish Camp from the Maritime parts, yet did this recruit last but
a while, more falling sick then were well; and the number of those that ran
away being added to those that were sick, the Camp was in a short time much
lessened. On the contrary, the French Camp did daily increase in numbers and
Forces; and though there was much mortality amongst them also, yet was the
arrival of new recruits greater then the mortality. The news of Harcourt's good
and generous actions being divulged in France drew many noble men and Gentlemen
from that Court to Piedmont; many Lords came nobly attended thither at their
own expense, and many greater recruits came thither. Marquess Villeroy with
1500 Burgondian Foot, and 400 Horse, Count Tonniere from Dolpheny with 400
Horse, all of them of the noblest of that Country, which he commanded under the
title of Constable; and Monsieur di Castellano from Provence with four Foot
Regiments, and 400 Horse. So as in so great a dis-equality of Forces, it was
thought impossible to relieve the City: And yet the Prince, who was
indefatigable both of body and mind, and very vigilant upon all occasions,
having by several night sallies found the Enemy to be dowfie and negligent in
their guards, did likewise observe a wooden bridge, which was newly thrown
over the Poe by the French, between Vallentino and the Capuchins bridge. And
judging it very convenient for his ends, he designed to bring in succor by it;
this bridge was guarded by only two small Forts, near the foot of the bridge
which was on the left side of the River toward Vallentine, the other end being
totally unguarded. They therefore that would come thither from the City must
make way by the lower Valley, and then take some little works not far from the
aforesaid petty Forts, and afterward the Forts themselves. These difficulties
did not at all trouble the Prince, who thought they might all he overcome, if
all the Forces which could be raised in the City would go o^ unexpectedly by
night and fall upon them: He therefore desired that when he should have
overcome all those difficulties, and should be master of the bridge, that the
Governor should be ready with all his Forces, on the other side, to pass over
the River by that bridge, and join with him in suppressing the French Camp;
wherein he did not doubt of success. And to the end that the weakness of the
Governors Camp might not keep him from taking this resolution, he ordered Don
Silvio to join with the Governor with 1000 Foot and 600 Horse, and that the
Marquess Bagnasco should do the like with a thousand other Foot; by means of
which recruits, and of 2000 Foot that were come from Millain, he thought the
Governor could not under pretense of weakness refuse the proposal. He
therefore acquainted him with his advice, with his reasons for it, and with the
manner and form how it should be put in practice, desiring and exhorting him,
that he would assist him on his side with all possible force and punctuality,
and join freely in this attempt; which, as it might justly be thought to be the
last, so he did promise unto himself it should prove the happy end of the siege
and of the war. He also writ unto him what was to be done for the happy conduct
of the enterprise, which was, that he was to come privately with all his men
about the going down of day, and that he should be two hours before day at the
foot of the hill, that was nearest the Bridge, where he should tarry till he
saw the six squibs fly, which he would give fire unto when he should be master
of the bridge, that then he should advance to the bank, and join with him by
the bridge; concluding that he should let him know sometime that day, whether
he would do this or not; for otherwise he protested he could hold out the siege
no longer, but was resolved to close with the French. This proposal, to boot
that general diffidences made against it, and the Governors wonted aversion to
hazard more then he had already done, seemed full of difficulty and danger, and
impossible to be effected, and destructive to what both the Governor and the
Prince was to do. For as for the Prince, he being to fight by night against an
Enemy, recruited by new and gallant Forces, and many of the Nobility, against
several Trenches and Fortifications, the attempt would be more then rash; and
as for the Governor, though fortune should so favor the Prince his bold
attempt, as that he should make himself master of the bridge; yet the other
misfortunes remained, which were to be met with in passing over the River; for
the bridge by which they were to pass over was not made of sound timber, but
only sustained by small rafters, and so straight, as not above three foot
could march over it a^brest, without sides or parapetets, exposed on the one
side to the Muskets of the bridge near the Capuchins, and behind to the
Arillery placed upon the Capuchins Covent. So as give it for granted that the
bridge were both sound and firm, those that should pass pass over it must needs
be torn in pieces by the Musketshot and by the Artillery; and those few who by
miracle should get to the other shore, not being sheltered by those very little
Forts, they must necessarily be welcomed over by the Enemies Musketeers, who
would undoubtedly be come thither and would kill them; so as they should not
come to relieve others, but to be slain themselves. Out of these Reasons, the
Prince his design which was carried on rather out of a great desire of freeing
himself, then by any well weighed reason, was not approved by the Governor:
But because the closing with the French, and surrender of the City, was added
in case of refusal, the Governor resolved to satisfy the proposal rather in
show then in substance. The Prince was therefore informed, that he should be
satisfied according to his own manner; and to this purpose the Governor moved
the same night with his men toward the place appointed. The Prince believing
in the Governors correspondency betook himself cheerfully to the business; he
gave order that a thousand Dutch, who guarded the Trenches opposite to the
Citadel, should at the sign of going off of a Cannon assault the Citadel; to
divert the Enemy in so important a place, he disposed of the Ecclesiastics,
and others of the weak vulgar, in defense of the Walls; he went out of the City
himself with the rest of the Garrison, and with such Citizens as were fittest
to manage Arms; and being full of hopes, he appointed several parts for falling
on to his best experienced Commanders; he deputed others to defend those ways
by which the Enemy might break in to disturb them: all these Commanders did
their devoire; the line of the inward Circumvolution was broken, and the other
Fortifications taken; then coming to the Bridge, they also easily mastered the
other smaller Forts; so as the Prince seemed to have wholly p^rformed his pa^.
The last thing that was to be done was to give fire to the squibs, whereby to
call in the Governor; but he came not; some said, because he was killed who
was to fire the squibs; but this appearing to be too unlikely, others said,
that the Prince knowing that the Governor was too far off to come in time
enough with his men to his succor, thought it was superfluous to give fire to
the squibs; which appeared to be less likely then the former alleged reason;
the truth was, that the little Forts were not well taken, when all the French
flocked in so fast as they were abandoned as speedily as they were taken; those
that defended one of them ran away; and those of the other, who made some
resistance, were cut in pieces, so as there was no time to call in the
Governor by firing; the squibs, who had he been come to the Bridge which was
recovered by the French; could not have gotten thereby over to join with the
Prince. The whole French Camp moved at the first going off of the Cannon, which
was the sign given by the Prince to his men to fall on; and General Harcourt,
accompanied by a good body of men, hazarded himself in the business; but being
entertained by Marquess Serra, who was appointed to defend that station, though
he met with stout opposition, yet more men coming in unto him, he made his way
through the Enemy; in which conflict Serra fought valiantly; but having lost his
Serjeant-Major, six Captains, and many of his best Soldiers, he was forced,
for safety of his life, to throw himself down headlong into a Valley that was
below.

General Harcourt did at this time also run great hazard of his life, being
shot with a musket-bullet through the brims of his hat, and through the lock of
his hair; and yet having rid his hands of Serra, he hasted to recover the
Bridge, whither at the same time came also Viscount Turenna, Plessis, Pralin,
the Dowagers two Generals, Count Tonniere, and the chiefest of the Camp, from
several places, who presently recovered the little Forts; and when it was clear
day, the Assailants being played upon by the Cannon from the Capuchins Covent,
the Prince, after a long and stout resistance, got gallantly out of the
Conflict, and retreated with his men toward the City, having left behind him
about 250 of his men, (whereof some were slain, some taken,) and having slain
as many of the Enemy. Thus the attempt which was so orderly, so vigorously, and
so hopefully made by the Prince, vanished: But the Prince not at all dismayed
by this unfortunate success, quitted not the Enterprise; he invited the
Governor to make the same attempt the next night, either after the same
manner, or how the Governor should otherwise please; but he foreseeing the
unlikelyhood of the attempt, was further from it then before; wherefore the
Prince not having received an answer suitable to his mind, seeing no hope of
succor, but that his condition grew daily worse, to keep himself from being
reduced to the utmost extremity, resolved not to defer surrendering the Town any
longer, but yielded it up at last upon these Conditions: That on the 22. of
September the Prince should put the City into Count Hancourt's hands, who was
to receive it in the King of France his Name, who would re establish it in the
Regency of the Lady his Sister, under the Sovereignty of her Son the Duke of
Savoy: That the Prince should be permitted to go whither he would; and, That it
should be at the Infanta's will, either to tarry, or go out of the City, and
follow the Prince: That the Spanish Garrison might have leave to return to the
Governors Camp: That the City should enjoy her Privileges; and, That Justice
would be therein administered as formerly, in the Dukes Name: That the Citizens
should peacefully enjoy their Goods and Fortunes; and, That Hostages should be
reciprocally given for the performance of what was agreed upon.

Nothing was concluded touching the differences depending between the Dowager
and the Princes, notwithstanding that during the Siege it was tr^ated on by the
Marquesses of Pianezza, and Villa, the Dowagers Lieutenant General in Piedmont,
and Abbot Mondino, General Gunsiero, and by Count Muzane, in the Names of
Prince Thomaso, and of the Cardinal: Nor was there any mention of the Princes
their adherence to the Crown of France: But three months were appointed for
the discussing and concluding of these things.

Cardinal Richelieu seemed not to be any ways satisfied with this Agreement,
when he heard thereof, being desirous that Harcourt should never have conseted
that the Prince should have had his liberty, without obliging himself to join
with the King of France his party: But Harcourt, were it either that he found
his Army much weakened, or that he was transported with the greediness of
Victory, or that, as a Prince of Noble descent, he commiserated the misfortune
of a Prince as highly descended, and with truly generous and singular
moderation, he thought it greater glory to use a mean in Victory, then to
triumph fully, after the dangers and troubles which he had undergone in this
Siege; he shunned delay, and deferred the discussion of this point, which
peradventure was of more importance for his Kings Affairs, till another time.

The Articles being concluded, such abundance of rain fell, as the Rivers
overflowed the Campagnia, and hindered commerce; so as the delivering of the
City was necessarily deferred for two days: but it was resigned on the 24 of
September, four months and fourteen days after the fiege was begun.

The Prince marched out of the City, if not gloriously, yet worthy of praise,
being rather content to let fall so principal a part of his pretentions, then
to dispute it further, to the manifest danger of his State, and of the
Principality of his house, it being certain, and afterward confessed by the
Prince himself, that though he might often have taken the Citadel, he cared not
to do it, left (as it was very probable) it might fall into the hands of
others, whereby the exclusion of the Duke his Nephew and of his whole Family,
might ensue; the Infantas, his sisters went along with their brother; who
though they were very much desited by the Citizens, and by the Nobles of
Piedmont, as also by the French, and particularly by Harcourt, to tarry in the
City, with profers and promises to be honorably treated, yet they would, as
they had still hitherto done, follow the Prince in his Fortune; almost all the
Nobles that were in Turin, and an infinite number of Citizens, accompanied the
Prince when he went out, witnessing the like obsequiousness and constant
devotion toward him at his departure, as they had done during the siege. He
went that night to Rivoli, and the next day to Inurea, where he intended to
reside. The Spanish Garrison went to the Governor to Cheri, he being retreated
thither with his men from the hills, who parted soon from thence to Asti,
resolving to make a Magazine of Arms there: and he quartered his Horse, and
part of his Foot, in the parts about Montferrat, to refresh themselves after
their sufferings in the siege. Many of the French Nobility went into France,
and part of the Soldiery were distributed in the Towns near Piedmont, and part
kept in Turin, whereof some few Horse and Foot were sent to reinforce Cassale.
The City of Turin remained under Harcourts Government; who after having
governed it two months with much equity, moderation, and satisfaction to the
people, resigned it over to the Dowager; who coming from Savoy into Piedmont
made her solemn entry into Turin, on the 18. of November; where she was
received not only with triumphant Arches, and new Gates of Stone made in the
Walls, but with unspeakable and universal applause of the People, who had not
forgot the clemency and benignity of her Regency. A true example of the
instability of popular affection, which feeding always upon novelty are as
exactly cloyed with the present Governors, as ready to embrace new ones: nor
was the Dowager wanting to her self upon this occasion; she received them all
graciously; and as if she had forgotten all that was past, she conferred her
favors indifferently upon them all. The first thing she did after her return,
was, to abolish the Decree of the Senate which was made in favor of the
Princes their Regency, alleging that it was extorted contrary to all right
and reason, by the violence of the Spanish Forces; and the Cesarean Decrees
were also declared null, as repugnant to the Sovereignty of the house of Savoy,
which was never wont to receive Laws in the like case from the Cesarean
Tribunal: and successively she was, by the joint Vote of the same Senate, sworn
Governess of her Children again, and Regent of the State. For the entire
establishment of Affairs, it remained that the differences between the Princes
and the Dowager, and King of France, should be agreed, which in the surrender
of Turin was reserved to be treated of during the Truce which was then agreed
upon, a little before the said surrender. Monsieur Iulio Mazzarini was come
from France with Title of the Kings Plenipotentiary; who having been often with
the Prince and his Agents, in Valentino and Borgo, during the siege had handled
these Treaties long. The Ambassador propounded that the King of France should
forthwith restore such Towns as were in his possession to the Dowager, as
Regent, if the Spainiards would do the like with their Towns which they had
taken of hers; and that if the Spaniards should not do this, the Prince should
oblige himself to adhere unto the King of France his party, upon very
satisfactory Conditions which should be given him, and this was wholly agreed
unto by the Prince before he went from the City, upon condition that he should
first give notice to the Spanish Agents of the offered restitution, and that he
should desire them to restore what they had taken; which in case they should
do, the Prince should not be bound to forgo their party. He further protested,
that he would first send to Spain, to demand his Wife and Children which were
kept in that Court as Hostages of his fidelity; and it was agreed, that all
this should be carried on with much secrecy; lest being known it might prove
an impediment to his re-having his Wife and Children from that Court. The
Prince going out with this clogged and conditional agreement informed the
Governor of Millain, immediately, how ready the King of France was to restore
what he had taken: and desired him that he would do the like on his Kings
behalf: and he sent Count Messerati into Spain to make the same request for the
restoring of the Towns, as also of his wife and children; the Agents in Italy,
and the Spanish Court, were much troubled to hear of this restitution; and it
was conceived that the Prince was absolutely agreed with the French, which it
was always doubted he would do; Count Sirvela was sent by the Governor to
speak with the Prince in Inurea; to sound his inclination, and to feel his
pulse; who though he were greatly scandalized with the Governor; yet being
moved by his loss of Turin he could not forget the great hopes which by reason
of his former successes he had drunk in; not that he had already agreed with
the French, but, though he appeared otherwise, was far from it; and could not
think of foregoing his former hopes of so great a part of Piedmont, which he
enjoyed whilst he adhered to the Spaniards, nor yield to the Dowagers absolute
Sovereignty, as if he had agreed with the French he must do. The Ambassador
was sure the Prince Cardinal would be of the same mind; who was possessed of the
so important places of Nizza and Cuneo, and of so large and fruitful a Country:
he knew, on the other side, how highly the Court of France was offended with
him, what Orders had been issued out from thence against his person; how
Cardinal Richlieu had abused others; wherefore not holding it fit to confide in
that Court, after several complaints past at the first meeting between the
Prince and Count Sirvela, and much dispute touching their particular interests,
it was not hard for Sirvela to induce the Prince to persevere in adhering to
the Spaniards; but, because Sirvela would come to no agreement with the Prince,
before he should ratify the Writing which was subscribed in his name by his
Wife at Madrid, whereby the Prince put himself and his whole Family into the
Kings protection, swearing fealty to him: The Prince made the said
ratification; and for what concerned his private interests, he was content to
stand to what should be agreed upon by the Prince his Brother at Nizza. The
Affairs of Spain went well by this Negotiation of Sirvela; for though the
Princes did not assist much in the present War, but occasioned great expense by
their adherence, yet by their union they kept Piedmont a friend to Spain: The
Towns which were therein held by the Spaniards required lesser Garrisons, and
(which imported more,) this Union kept the French Forces from the State of
Millain. The Governor therefore sent Count Riviera to Nizza to treat with the
Prince Cardinal; but Sirvela had not negotiated much, when the French Agents
growing apprehensive, began to press hard upon Prince Thomaso to declare
himself for their King, since the Spaniards were very backward in restoring the
Towns they held; and the French accompanied, these their pressures with
threats. The Prince procrastinated this business as much as he could,
pretending that he was to wait the resolution of the Court of Spain, as well
touching the restitution of the Towns in Piedmont, as also the like of his Wife
and Children; pretending likewise that to hasten this business too much was to
ruin it: but two months and more being past; the French being impatient of
longer delay would admit of no more words, but were so continually buzzing in
his ears, as the Prince seemed enforced to yield to their importunities, or
else to break with them; and being in a weak place, not provided to defend
himself, and not finding the Spanish Forces in a condition to protect him, nor
believing that the Governor would adventure any further in maintaining him
then he had done formerly; and on the contrary, not finding any great certainty
in Sirvela's proposals; he knew he was but in a bad posture to withstand the
imminent thunder of the French, in case he should not yield unto their wills;
whereupon not knowing what better course to take, he came to this agreement
with them, about the beginning of December. That he would put himself into the
protection of the Crown of France; that he would come himself in person to
Paris, by the middle of January, at the furthest, to wait personally upon his
Majesty of France, and to assure him of his readiness to serve him, with leave
notwithstanding to return; That he would send to Spain to demand his Wife and
Children, and the restitutions of the Towns of Piedmont into the hands of the
Duchess, as Mother and Governess of the Duke her Son; which if the King of
Spain should refuse to do, he would join with the Forces of France in Italy
against the Spaniards; That if restitution should be made that obligation
should cease, with a salvo, notwithstanding, to his protection from France, and
his adherence thereunto; The King of France should be bound to preserve the
succession of Savoy and Piedmont in the Male-line of the house of Savoy; That
he should restore the Towns held by his Forces for the Duke under the Regency
of the Dowager; so as the Spaniards should do the like with those Towns which
were in their possession; That he would help to make a match between a Son of
the Princes and a Daughter of the Duke of Longevile's, one of the richest
Ladies of France; and that he would cooperate in composing the differences
between him and the Dowager, together with many Pensions to be given to him the
Prince, to his Wife and Children. Upon which account some moneys were disburst
unto him in present to prepare him for his journey: moreover, some promises
were made him, that he should have some Territories given him out of such Lands
as should be gotten in Italy, whereby he might have where with to maintain
himself and his posterity in a condition becoming their qualities; it was
agreed, out of the same respects, that this Convention should be kept secret;
and the Truce was prorogued for all February next. The Prince also promised
(but not under his hand) that he would cause the Castle of Asti to be delivered
up to the French; and he was not permitted to acquaint the Prince his Brother
with any of these agreements, so severely did the French press him in this
agreement; but his aversion to observe this agreement was as great as was their
urging him thereunto, to witness which the Castle of Asti was not delivered up,
though 500 Horse with men en Croupe came to it by night to receive it; who
having told the Sentinels that they brought Letters for Don Emanuel, Brother to
the Prince, and Governor of the Castle, were not admitted, but were bid to
come when it should be clear day; when being discovered they were saluted as
enemies by Cannon-shot both from the Castle and Citadel; and the Garrison of
the Castle, which were Piedmontese, was recruited by the Spaniards. The Prince
Cardinal having heard how great a blow he had received by the loss of Turin,
and how little the Governor had done toward the preserving thereof, desired
to find some way to preserve himself from ruin, which he saw was not far off:
he therefore sent the Abbot Soldato, one in whom he did much confide, to the
Court of France, to lay the foundations of an union there, which he thought to
make with that King; offering to join with him upon some conditions. The chief
whereof were three; That a Lieutenancy might be permitted him, in the County of
Nizza, and to keep the Towns thereof without any dependency upon the Dowager;
that the Guard anship and Regency should be absolutely in the Dowager, except
in matter of Peace and War, Confederacies, Alienations, and the like; That his
Majesty should be bound to restore all the Towns to the Duke which he held of
his, within three years space, together with any others that he should recover.
The other conditions were of lesser concernment, and such as reflected only
upon the Prince Cardinals own occasions.

The King abhorring that the Princes should hold so principal places, whilst he
should be prescribed terms of restitution, denied both the Articles, not
without some disdain; so the Abbot returned to Nizza re infecta; and the King
having quickly notice of the Agreement made in Piedmont, not doubting but that
they would be made good, was very well pleased therewith, as was the whole
Court; and desired very much to see the Prince come; who sought nothing more
then to evade the performance of those Agreements, which he professed he had
unwillingly consented unto; wherefore the time prefixed for his going into
France being come, he did not much mind the taking of that Journey, though he
was much solicited thereunto by the Ambassador Mazzarini, and by the other
French Agents; but in lieu thereof, he past through the States of Millain and
Genoa, to Nizza; where being equally distasted, as was his Brother with the
negative which was brought from France, they treated of the common affairs.
This so sudden departure of the Prince, and so contrary to the late made
agreement, did, and not without reason, in^use jealousy into the Ambassador
Mazzarini; who presaging the sinister influences, which that conjunction, as an
ominous Constellation of so great Planets, would cause, went to Nizza, to see
whether he might prevent the imminent influence which he foresaw. But all was
in vain, for the Princes were already almost agreed with the Spaniards; so as
being pressed by Mazzarini, the one of them to persevere in, the other to enter
into convention with the French; they answered, that the Spanish Agents were at
last persuaded to restore the Towns; but that as the King of France offered to
restore those that he held to the Regency of the Dowager, so the King of Spain
offered to restore what was held by him to the Regency of them the Princes. The
King of Spain had not really done this, nor was there time enough past to have
a positive answer in the point come from Spain; nay, it was at this very time
agreed upon between the Princes and the Spanish Agents, that the Towns should
be garrisoned by the Spaniards in the same manner as they were at the present,
till the general peace should be made. The Proposal was an artificial trick
agreed upon between the Princes and the Spanish Agents; for that all of them
believing that the French would not accept of it, the Spaniards might shun the
odium which would be laid upon them for desiring to keep what they were
possessed of; as also for that the refusal might make the Princes adhere the
more constantly to the Spanish party. And on the behalf of the Princes, to the
end that the same refusal might serve the one for a pretense of foregoing the
convention which he had entered into; and the other from thereinto entering. The
Ambassador as soon as he was come to Nizza, hearing the proposals, perceived
their ends in it; wherefore he immediately answered, that it was ridiculous,
impossible, and a thing procured by the Princes themselves. Many were the
debates hereupon; the Princes endeavored by fair words to persuade the
Ambassador to what he could not believe; and if the Ambassador should not
agree to the restitution out of his mistrust of them, they might have occasion
not to confide in him, who would not trust them; but that if the business were
rightly weighed, it must needs by very advantageous for the Duke, for thereby
the Towns would be taken out of the hands of Foreigners, and put in those of
the Natives, and would so come to be possessed by the Duke: A chief essential
point, which so it might be done, the manner mattered not; for means would not
be wanting afterward to accommodate that touching which the form of estitution
appeared now strange. And therefore if he could think of any middle-way which
might satisfy both the Crowns, they desired, him to propound it; for they
would be ready to part with any thing that should of due belong to them, so as
the restitution might be made to the Duk^; at last, adding entreaties to their
reasons, they endeavored by all means possible to persuade him not to give
over the Treaty, which was almost already brought to a conclusion, showing how
much the King did not only study to preserve the Dukes Grandezza, but to
increase it. Wherefore the Ambassador, who was the King his Plenipotentiary,
ought not, nor could not differ in opinion from his Majesty, but was bound to
observe it; all these persuasions could not work upon the Ambassador, who knew
that the King would not permit that the Princes should have any thing to do in
any of the Dukes Towns. For this would not be to compose differences, but to
occasion greater dissentions, to fortify factions, which the King thought made
against his Nephew the Duke, to foment discord, and rather to increase then to
appeal War in Piedmont: To shun which inconveniences, the King desi^ed that
the restitution should be made by himself, and by the King of Spain, into the
Dowagers hands as sovereign Governess and Regent; which being the groundwork
wherein the Dukes Grandezza and safety did consist admitted of no allay; much
less of what was propounded by the Princes, and held to be diametrically
opposite to the safety of his Nephews Dominions. Wherefore the Ambassador not
thinking that the business would admit of a reply, said, that since the King of
Spain would not restore the Towns into the Dowagers hands, according to
agreement, the Prince was absolutely obliged to join with the King of France,
in the recovery of them: He therefore parted from Nizza incensed, and with but
little hopes that the agreed capitulations should take effect. The Princes were
not at all dismayed at his departure; but as if they had had the better end of
the staff, and had justified to the world that the agreement had not been
impeded by them, they made use of the Ambassadors backwardness and departure,
to justify their inclination to peace; to which purpose they published
Manifestoes, and endeavored to lay the fault of breaking the agreement upon
the Ambassador; alleging that when the Spaniards made no mention of
restitution, the French were wholly for restitution; but that as soon as the
Spaniards mentioned restitution, the French had nothing to say. At last the
Princes seeing the State of their Affairs reduced to the condition they
desired, thinking all Treaties broken with their advantage, and to their
reputation, and all conventions made with the French abolished, they agreed, on
the fifth of May, the year 1641. in Nizza with the Ambassador Riviera, and
drew up in writing what they had spoken of; the sum whereof was;

That the King should keep all the Towns he had in Piedmont till the ge^ral
peace should be concluded, which should not be made without including the
Princes: That Prince Thomaso should have an Army raised for him of 4000 Foot
and 500 Horse, whereunto he should be bound to add 1500 Horse more, and 2000
Foot of his own: That the Prince should be General of this Army in the Kings
name, to whom he should take the same Oath that Generals use to do: That this
Army should be paid by the King, by the hands of his Officers: That the Prince
should be bound with this Army to join with the Governor in defense of
Piedmont, the State of Millain, and Montferrat. That the Prince Cardinal should
have a thousand Spanish Foot given him to defend the County of Nizza, and 7000
Crowns a month allowed him for the maintenance of another thousand, which the
Cardinal should raise of his own men. That neither of these Princes should
treat directly nor indirectly with the French, with the Dowager, or any others,
without consent of the King or his Agents: Together with many other Heads which
concerned their own private Interests.

This Agreement being confirmed by Prince Thomaso with Count Sirvela in Segli,
a Village five miles from Genoa, as the Prince returned from Piedmont, was
afterward ratified on the 15th of April in Gaila, a Town of the NOvarese, by
the same Sirvela, who was chosen Governor of Millain. The first point,
concerning the restitution of the Towns, was moderated in a writing apart, in
point of the time of retention; wherein it was agreed, that in case the general
peace should not be concluded within six years, all the Towns except Vercelles
should be delivered up to the Emperor, who was to keep Dutch Garrisons therein
until the general peace. The change of the Governor of Millain did much good
in the making of this agreement; for whilst it was in treaty, the Princes
having made several complaints to the King of Spain against the Marquess of
Leganes, the King sent for him into Spain, and had appointed Count Sirvela to
succeed him in that Government; who was as great a confident of the Princes, as
Leganes was the contrary; and the Princes confidence being much increased by
the change of the Governor, they betook themselves more heartily to the
Spanish party; and the rather for that at the same time Count Harcourt returned
to France; and not long after Ambassador Mazzarini and l' Argenson, all of
them the Princes chiefest Enemies; and after them many other Commanders; so as
the French Army in Piedmont was not only much lessened in Authority, but in
Forces; so as that fear ceasing in the Prince which had compelled him to that
Capitulation, he thought he was now in a better condition of safety and
liberty, and that he might dispose better of himself and of his affairs; he and
his Brother being therefore resolved to join with the Spaniards who sustained
them, and to part from the agreement made with the French, which reduced them
to nothing; Prince Thomaso gave over holding intelligence with the French about
the end of the Truce, who solicited him to go to Paris, and declared that he
could no longer stand to the Capitulation, out of many reasons; particularly,
for that the things agreed upon were not kept secret, they themselves having
divulged it in the Court of Spain, to the which he attributed the detaining of
his Wife and Children; and to aggravate their omissions the more, he complained
that that divulging was a trick used by them, to the end that he the Prince
being the more irritated against the Spaniards, for that their denial, might
adhere the closer to the French; but that the King of Spain being contented to
restore the Towns, notwithstanding the publication of what was to be kept
secret; as also to the restoring of his Wife and Children; so as he would still
adhere to him, he could not forego such an occasion without offending the Laws
of Nature, which obliged him more straightly to so dear pledges, then any thing
else could oblige him to the King of France; that it would certainly be too mad
a resolution, and for which he deserved to be for ever blamed, if when he might
rehave his Wife and Children, and the Towns without any noise or trouble he
should choose to recover them by force of Arms, by a thousand dangers and
calamities, by the tedious dangerous and uncertain delays of War; to the
irreparable prejudice of the Duke, and to the desolation of the people, and of
his Country, to the preservation and welfare whereof, he as a Prince of the
blood was bound by all Laws both Humane and Divine; that therefore there was no
place left for the French Convention, seeing the King of Spain was ready to
deliver up unto him his Wife, Children, and the Towns; and that if the offered
restitution should not, for some circumstances, be liked of, there was place
left for some accommodation; wherefore utter breach was not to be desperately
run upon: with these and the like reasons the Prince endeavored to honest his
cause, and to justify his foregoing the former Convention; he complained also
that the Ambassador Mazzarini had waylaid him in his return from Nizza to
Piedmont, to take him prisoner; which he also discovered was plotted in the
Court of France; not so much by what was discovered in Argensons instructions,
as by the rumors raised by Cardinal Richlieu, when he heard that Turin was
surrendered, with his the said Princes freedom, and by many complaints which
had thereupon been made against General Harcourt; the same Cardinal appearing
to be more troubled at his the Princes freedom, then joyed at the taking of the
City; for greater proof of his distrust in Cardinal Richlieu, he also alleged
that he had received advertisements from many Princes that were his friends, at
Paris, to be well advised^ere he came thither; for that when he should have put
himself into other men's power, he should not easily know how to get out of it.
And, moreover, that he had found by the Negotiations had in that Court,
touching his adherence to that Crown; that the Cardinal was absolutely
determined utterly to ruin his Kinsman, the Count of Soisons, who was then
accused of having plotted some novelties against the Government of that
Kingdom; whereof the said Prince being found neither conscious, nor complice,
he had reason to doubt, that since the Cardinal durst dare so much against a
Prince of the Blood Royal, he could not expect more safety for his own person,
nor for the interests of his Nephew the Duke; for which reasons he thought he
had just occasions not to go to that Court.

Amidst these debates, Count Turenna, chief of the French Forces in Piedmont,
and Marquess Villa, head of those of the Dowager, fell both of them before
Montcalvo; and having easily taken the Town, they betook themselves to take the
Castle, whither the Spanish Garrison having forsaken the Town, had withdrawn
themselves. The taking whereof rested wholly on Marquess Villa, for Turenna was
retired to Piedmont; and though the enterprise was thought would prove long and
dangerous, by reason of the strength of situation, multitude of defenders,
abundance of Ammunition and Victuals which were in that Castle, yet, contrary
to all men's imaginations, Marquess Villa had it surrendered to him within a few
days; which had it been a little longer held out by the Captain would have been
relieved by the new Governor, who was raising men to that purpose: whilst
these things were adoing, the Governor took about a thousand Foot from his own
Army, to give a beginning to that of Prince Thomaso's, that they might be at
the Princes disposal, they being to be defrar'd by the Governor; part of these
were sent to garrison Inurea, under the command of Count Vercelline Visconnte,
where it was thought the French would first fall on; the rest were sent to
quarter in the State of Millain, for the ease of Piedmont; moneys were likewise
given him for the increasing of his Horse, and for raising the 2000 Piedmontese
Foot; and as, on the one side, the Prince turned the moneys given to this
purpose to other uses, not making his obligation good; and did also refuse to
take his O^h unto the King; so neither, on the other side, did the Governor
supply the rest of the men which he was to g^e unto the Prince; were it either
in respect that the Spanish Army was so small as that he could not make his
word good to the Prince, without almost wholly disbandoning it, or for the
Prince his breach of Articles, particularly in refusing the Oa^, the Governor
not thinking it safe to trust the greatest part of the Kings Forces in ^his
hands, who refused to take the accustomed Oath. And yet each of them did bear
with the other in their equal unobservance; and the Governor kept the Army
ready to defend the Prince, and did apply himself to please him, as he could,
in the carrying on of the War; yea sometimes to the prejudice of the
common-cause. The thousand Foot were also sent to the Prince Cardinal,
commanded by well experience^ Officers, and the 7000 Crowns a month were
readily paid him, for the raising and paying of the thousand Piedmont which
were to garrison Nizza, the Castle whereof, as all the rest of that Country,
was abundantly provided with victuals, munition, and with all things necessary
for their defense from Naples; with promise that they should, upon all
occasions, be so still. Moneys were paid to both the Princes, notwithstanding
the present necessity thereof to keep the Courts, which they did in greater
luster then ever their Father had done.

The End of the Seventeenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF ITALY.
BOOK XVIII.
The Contents.
THe Crown of France and French Commanders being but badly satisfied with
Prince Thomaso, for his non-observance of the Capitulation made by him, go to
drive him out of Inurea; which being better defended then assaulted holds out
till the Governor sends succor: who going afterward to before Chiavasso
forces the French almost to quit the Enterprise, that they may relieve
Chiavasso; and Don Vincenzo Gonzaga coming to the French quarters before
Inurea, forces them, much to their prejudice, to give over the Enterprise
wholly; and the Prince enters joyfully into the City. The Dowagers Generals
recover Ceva, Mondovi, and the Castle of Carru, and then joining with the
French go to before Cuneo, and take it. The Spaniards take Montcalvo. The
Prince of Monaco drives out the Spanish Garrison, and introduces the French,
to the great prejudice of the Spanish Affairs; the misfortunes whereof are by a
short digression related. Cardinal Richlieu dies. The Conde Duca falls from all
authority and greatness in the Court of Spain. The differences between the
Dowager and the Princes are at last composed. The Princes for sake the Spanish
party and adhere unto the French. Prince Thomaso joining with the French, after
some small actions done to the prejudice of Spain, goes with the Duke of
Longuevile with a strong Army to before Tortona, which after a long time is
taken; but some months after is re-taken with much ado by the Spaniards: in
which interim Prince Thomaso recovers Asti, and all the Towns that were held by
the Spaniards in Piedmont, except Vercelli.

THe not observing of the Agreement made with so much study and industry
between the King and Prince by the Ambassador Mazzarini angered not only the
French Agents and Commanders in Piedmont, but also the Court at Paris; which
being held on by the long hope and desire of seeing a Prince appear as a Trophy
of the Kings Grandezza, who had been so totally alienated from him, and finding
themselves abused therein were much unsatisfied; and Cardinal Richlieu, who it
was not known whether he would receive him graciously or not, was not only
offended to be so basely deluded, but thought it a great affront, to that he
should be seen by the world to be so much mistaken in his trust; and that he
had thereby failed of removing that obstacle which had been so repugnant to the
happy concourse of the Kings designs: Likewise the King not being able to
tolerate that his favor and protection should be so little valued, was
scandalized, that a Prince who had neither Towns nor Territories, nor any
Authority but such as had been obtained by Treaties, and which was dependent
should so neglect him and his protection; when in all reason he should have
held it his greatest happiness to be received thereinto, as into a safe
Harbor; he did also much resent it, that the Prince in defense of his breach
of word, should allege the anticipical publishing of the Agreement made in the
Court of Spain; he termed this conceit an abortive product of the Intellect,
and a show of his sinister affection who had formed it. The French Forces were
(as has been said) much diminished at this time in Piedmont; but General
Harcourt was shortly expected to return from France with a gallant
re-inforcement of Foot and Horse: those few French who were yet there were
quartered about Chiavasso, not far from Inurea, at which their aim was; and
though the Commanders, to cloak their design, feigned some other intents; yet
the Prince being jealous of their neighborhood, as conscious of the wrong he
had done them, went to Millain, and endeavored to have from the Governor
(upon whose favor he did much build) a certain number of men, which being
added to his own Forces might be sufficient to assault on the sudden one of the
French quarters, which lay in disorder beyond the Dora, not far from Inurea,
hoping, as he gave out, to rout it with a dry head.

Turenna, upon the absence of the Prince, took occasion to assault Inurea. To
effect the which, he sat down before it, not waiting for General Harcourts
return, who was come near Piedmont: it was generally thought that he was put
upon this by the Ambassador Mazzarini, who having boasted in his Letters sent
to Paris, that he had brought the Prince over to throw himself at the Kings
feet, was troubled that he was cheated in his chiefest Negotiation. Turenna
having past over la Dora at Montalta, about the midst of April, 41, took up his
quarters upon the neighboring hill which commanded the Town; and the Horse
passing over not long after, and the rest of the Foot, they took up another
quarter toward Vercelli: Don Silvio di Savoy was Governor of the Town, who
was left there by his Brother the Prince, when he went for Millain; as soon as
he saw he was assaulted, he gave notice thereof to the Prince; who was not then
well satisfied with the Governor of Millain, who had denied to send him the
men he had desired, wherewith to fall upon the French quarters: but finding now
how necessary it was to defend a place of such importance to the Prince, he
needed no entreaties, but was very ready to assist him; he therefore sent for
his men immediately from their quarters, which whilst they were assembling, the
oppugners having notice thereof caused some Cannon to come, and played upon the
City for two days space on three sides; and having made 400 shot, they gave a
fierce assault; there was but few of the Prince his Soldiers at this time in
the Town; the chief burden of the defense lay upon the stout Garrison which
was brought thither by Count Vercelline Visconte, Camp-master, and a gallant
Soldier; it consisted of Italians and Spaniards; the latter under Don Pietro
Gonzales, Lieutenant to the Camp-master-general, a gallant and well experienced
Soldier, subordinate to Visconte; by whom the assault which was five times
re-enforced being stoutly withstood, it was five times more reassumed in the
space of four hours, and as often repulsed; wherein there died about 600 of the
assailants, amongst which many of the Nobility; and about 100 of the
defendants. The Governor advanced this mean while with the succor; and the
Van of the Army being come to Bolegno, three miles distant from the French
quarters, Harcourt, who was now come to the Camp, hearing thereof, resolutely
resolved to encounter it before the main body of the Battle and the Rere should
join with it; he therefore went toward them with the most of his men, and they
being fewer in number, he would easily have scattered them, had not the
Governor and Prince Thomaso commanded Cavalier Aiazza to go with four Troops
of Horse, and some Foot, from the Village Birvolo, whither he was come to fall
upon the French on the flank, charging him to do all he could to entertain
them, till the Artillery and the rest of the Foot should come up, who were not
far off; but Marquess Villa coming out against Aiazza charged him so home as he
forced him to retreat to Birvolo, where through the advantage of the situation
the Foot who were pursued recovered Aiazza, whom Villa had taken, and the rest
of the Spanish Army coming in very seasonably this mean while, the face of
affairs altered; for the French being played upon on the one side by the
Artillery, and fiercely fallen upon on the other side by Prince Thomaso, and the
Marquess Caracena who was arrived with fresh men, they were forced to retreat
to their quarters. The Fight was fierce and bloody, wherein above 400 of the
French were slain, of which many Officers and Captains; about 50 of the Spanish
Army were slain, and as many hurt, whereof four Captains; it was thought that
if the French had assaulted the Van one half hour sooner, they had certainly
routed them; and had the day lasted but one half hour longer, the Spaniards
would have gotten a famous Victory, and have ruined the Enemy totally; for they
were in great confusion when the night parted the Fray.

Governor Sirvela sent a relief of 800 Foot into the Town; and being desirous
to make himself master of Chiaverano a Castle two miles distant from Inurea,
and as far from Colegno, he sent men to take it; who beating down the gate with
a petar'd met with such resistance as they were at first forced to retreat; but
afterward re-inforcing their assault they took the Castle; the Prince desired,
and pressed very much that they might go to assault the Enemy in their
quarters; but Sirvela, Caracena, and the rest of the Commanders, were of
another mind, intending to carry on affairs with more safety; but that somewhat
might be done whereby the Town might be freed, and the Prince not seem to be
abandoned, they resolved to try whether it might not be done by diversion, they
therefore went to before Chiavazzo, the loss whereof would be of greater
importance to the Enemy then the getting of Inurea; so as it was likely they
would give over the one to defend the other; this counsel was so well taken as
that Inurea being reasonably well relieved, they might spin out the defense
thereof, and not endanger the loss of it by their going to Chiavazzo; the
design did not fail, though the Prince was not much pleased with it, being
loath that the other Town which was of so great importance to him should be
endangered; but finding the Spaniards loath to hazard all upon one chance, he
consented to the diversion; passing over the Dora therefore at Rivarotta, the
Army marched to Chiavazzo, the Prince going foremost with 1000 Foot, and Don
Vincenzo Gonzaga with 1000 Horse; being come to the Town, the Prince desired to
try the taking of it by Scaladoe, whereunto the Governor was hardly persuaded,
yet he gave way unto it, that he might not seem to reject all the Princes
proposals: but it succeeded not well, for the Assailants were repulsed, and
many of them were slain, and wounded, to the number of above 400; so as the
enterprise proving harder then was thought, they began to repent their
diversive resolution; but knowing that if they should give it quite over they
would be laughed at, and that the enemy would not rise from before Inurea when
that Army should be gone from Chiavazzo, they began to make approaches; whereby
they came in three days to the Ditch; which being full of water, they found it
redious and troublesome to pass over it; yet they got over upon galleries and
planks; and coming to two Bulwarks they fell to mining; the Defendants Sallyed
out upon them stoutly, but were beaten back, leaving many dead behind them, and
some Prisoners, amongst which the Governor of the Town's Lieurenant, who led,
on the Sally; the Horse were not this mean while idle, but scouring the Country
they took the Victuals and ammunition which were bringing to the Camp before
Inurea; as, on the other side, those which were brought to the Spanish Camp
were hindered by the Cavalry of Cassalle, which passing over the Poe; made
inrodes oftentimes as far as to S. Ia, and Vercelli, when the Spanish Army was
gone to Chiavazzo, the French being out of fear of being assaulted on the back
began to make several assaults upon Inurea, and to play with their batteries
upon the walls; but so valiant were the Defendants, as they rendered all their
attempts vain; nor being content with defending themselves they made out
several Sallyes; one whereof was done so resolutely as they past on even to a
battery of three pieces of Artillery, which they had takes, had they not been
assaulted by the French, whose Horse was come up to them when they were come to
the Battery: and then seeing it would be rashness to oppose so great a Force,
they retreated to within their walls, still fighting, and in good order;
whereby the French finding how hard the business would prove; and hearing that
Chiavazzo was very near being taken, and that it would be assuredly lost unless
it were speedily succored, Harcourt was forced to abandon the one, that he
might not lose the other; so as after 35 days fiege, wherein he had lost about
3000 men, he resolved to quit it, and to go relieve Chiavasso; the Prince and
Governor perceiving that the French Army was marching toward them, and that
they had therefore obtained all that they had pretended to by their diversion;
they past over the Poe upon a bridge of boats which they had purposely
prepared, and retreated with their Artillery, baggage, and with all their men,
cutting the bridge behind them, and dragging the boats to the other shore, to
the end that they might not be pursued by the Enemy: all was done in good
order, without the loss of one man through the great diligence and skill of
Prince Thomaso, and of the Marquess Caracena, to whose care the retreat was
committed; but understanding whilst they made their retreat, that Harcourt,
when he went to Chiavazzo, had left the bridge over the Dora, before Inurea,
well munited, that he might return to his former quarters, when he should have
freed Chiavasso, and reassume the in^e mitted siege; or else that he might
withdraw his baggage and ammunition which he had left in his quarter, to the
end that he might the more speedily relieve Chiavazzo; to keep him from doing
either of these, Don Vincenzo Gonzaga was sent with 500 Horse toward the
bridge, that foording over the Dora at Verolengo he might get speedily into
Inurea; nor was this in vain; for Gonzaga was not well come to Inurea, when he
might see the enemies Van upon return, and make toward the bridge; part
whereof being already past over was assaulted by Don Gonzaga's Horse, which
were enforced by many choice Foot of the Garrison, and after a long and stout
dispute, he forced the Enemy to give back, and to forsake their quarters, with
the loss of much victuals, munition, and instruments of War, which were found
there; which being brought into the Town, Inurea was well furnished with what
they wanted most, at the cost of the Enemy; wherefore Harcourt thinking it
impossible to reassume the siege, gave order that the bridge should be broken,
and retreated to Visea and to other neighboring Towns; the Spanish Camp
passing over the bridge at Verva went to Livorno, where hearing of Harcourts
retreat, the Prince went joyfully to Inurea, and the Governor, with Cardinal
Trivultio, and other Commanders, to Millain: whither being come they sent their
Army to their quarters: Harcourt being gone from before Inurea, though his
Forces were weak by reason of the men that he had lost there, and because the
recruits which were usually sent from France, every spring, were not yet come,
he applied his mind to the surprisal of Alessandria, which was proposed unto
him by Seignior Covogne, Governor of Cassalle, as an easy enterprise; and
which now that the Enemies Army was sent to their quarters, might be effected
with a few men, and maintained by small Forces; he therefore sent Marquess
Villa toward it about the end of June with the Dowagers Horse, which amounted
to about 800, and with 1000 French Foot which Harcourt gave him of his men: and
Harcourt to back him went to Battigliere a Town in the territories of Asti, and
from thence to Cerisola: where hearing that the business was not to be
attempted, for that Cardinal Trivultio was entered that City with a good body
of men, and that therefore Villa was gone toward the parts about Alba, he fell
to consider what was next to be done; he aspired after great actions, and such
as might equal his former; but he wanted Forces equal to his desires: Marquess
Pianezza, General of the Dowagers Foot, propounded the taking of the Fort of
Ceva, alleging that it would require but a few days, and small Forces, and
was notwithstanding of great consequences, to pursue the rest of the Campagnia;
with more considerable progress; and that notwithstanding Harcourts self might
be free with the whole body of his Army, fit to oppose any attempt of the
Enemy, and to secure the Country the mean while, till supplies might come from
Frances whereby when he should be recruited, he might be^ake himself to more
important enterprises; he said moreover that Marquess Villa would approve of
it, by reason of the great advantage that would thereby redound to the Dowagers
affairs; and for that being already upon the way to Ceva, he would advance
thither the more easily with his Horse, and with the French Foot which were
with him; and lastly, he p^ofer'd to go thither himself in person with 1500 of
the Dowagers Foot; 'desiring only one Regiment of French, and three small
pieces of Artillery, assuring him that without further incommodating his Army,
he and Villa would speedily dispatch the business. Harcourt was pleased with
the proposal, and gave way unto it; so Pianezza went toward Alba to join and
settle the business with Villa; who approving of the design took upon him to go
with 800 of the choicest Musketeers, and with the greatest part of the Horse,
but without baggage, to prepossess himself of the Town, and of the victuals
that were there, and to block up all Avenues from the bringing of any succor
to the Fort, whilst Pianezza should advance with the Foot, Artillery, and
Munition; Villa at his first arrival made himself master of the Town, and of
some neighboring places, which might have been a hindrance to him in taking the
Fort: and Pianezza having overcome the difficulties of the ways which were bad
enough for the bringing of Artillery, came within three days to the Town of
Ceva, and joining with Villa the next day, which was the fourth of July, began
to attach the Fort; their men were divided into two parts: Villa placed himself
with one part under a certain Tenaglia which had been abandoned by the Enemy;
and Pianezza with the other part, on the right side of the said Tenaglia
against a bulwark which was near the gate; and ordering their Cannon they
betook themselves to take away their defenses, and then to fall upon the wall,
and to make mines; whilst these things were doing, Harcourt kept about Alba to
oppose any succor which should be brought to the Fort, or to prevent any
design that the Spaniards might have, of falling upon any other place: but it
was more then needed: for (...) Governor keeping still in Millain, and the
Prince in Inurea, thoug^ Cardinal Trivultio was gone to Allessandria, where the
chief Heads of the Army were met, and where the people of those parts being m^t
were ready at any beck of the Commanders; yet the many provisions which were
there taken proved to no purpose; they being to expect resolution from Millain,
which not being according to the Prince his Genius, the time for action was
spent in sending and re-sending the consultations, answers and replies, between
Millain, Alessandria and Inurea. Wherefore the siege continuing without
disturbance, Marquess Pianezza had been very diligent in working the Mines on
his side; and though he had met with some obstacles, yet he overcame them and
went on. So as his Mine being per^ected, before that of the other side, he
feared lest the Enemy might blow it up; be summoned them to surrender,
threatening that otherwise he would give fire to his Mine, which when it should
be once done there would be no more place for parley: And answer being made
that they desired first to see some effects, Pianezza drew up his men
immediately that they might fall on, as soon as the Mine should have played;
which having made a breach of 25 paces br^ad, the besiegers made a furious
assault; which being manfully with-stood by the Defendants, order was given for
redoubling it with greater vigor: But the Defendants having done their best at
the first, they feared what might ensued if they should be re-assaulted.
Where^ore seeing all things ready for giving a new assault they did beat a
parley, and articled to surrender; whereupon about 200 Spaniards and
Piedmontese marched out, and were according to Articles convoyed to Bagnasco.
This business was of great consequence to the Dowagers affairs; for to boot
with the great advantage she got from that whole County, the taking of this
place drew after it the like of the City, Citadel, and County of Mondovi: For
the Fort of Ceva being taken, and afterward the Town of Mulasana, the
Marquesses resolved to go to the taking in of Carru, a strong Castle in those
parts which held still for the Princes; and Pianezza marching thitherward, with
some squadrons, advanced towa^ds the City of Mondovi, in^ending rather to
frighten it, then out of hope to take it; nor did this prove amiss, for those
Citizens being terrified when they saw the victorious Forces advance toward
the City they f^ared they were come to take it; they therefore threw open the
Gates, and willingly surrendered it. He pursued his march afterward toward
Carru, which despairing of re^ surrendered within twenty fours. Ceva, and the
City and County of Mondovi being taken, all the neighboring Country returned
to the Dowagers obedience, together with the Fort Carru: Whereby the City of
Conio, being almost quite separated from all the other Towns of Piedmont, which
were ^eld either by the Princes or Spaniards, it was thought it would not be
hard to take i^; especially since it could not be succor'd by the County of
Nizza, on which it confined; not so much for that the Prince Cardinal had no
Forces to draw into the field, as though he had had any, or that he should be
furnished with any from Spain by sea, yet the ways were so bad which led from
the se^ side to Pie^mont, and the passages so difficult, as it was impossible
to convey men thither: So as no Forces were to be feared from that side; and
Harcourt being willing to make use of the occasion threw himself immediately
before it, with his own and with the Dowagers men. The enterprise was very
hopeful, nor of less advantage and consquence, by reason of the situation,
which being placed at the foot of the Apenine, where being cut off from the
Alps it divides the County of Nizza from Piedmont. Conio is seated in an
eminent place, enclosed between two Rivers, which falling down by two Valleys,
formed by the Apennine, and running some few miles by the plain which lies
beneath, enclose that Town between. Of these two Rivers, the one, which is
called Ghez, runs so close by one side of the Town, as it serves it for a safe
and deep ditch, and by the height of the steep banks makes it unaccessible; the
other, which is called Stura, being about a bow shot from the Town, is not of
so much safety to it; wherefore the Fortifications are the stronger on that
side. These Fortifications, according to the ancient custom, were very great
and good; but being much ruined by time, they were well secured by many
Rampires, with some half moons and outworks, after that the Duke of
Longueville (as has been said) had been before it: So as, at the present, it
was sufficiently well fortified. In the uppermost part of Conio, there stands a
Citadel, which is well munited by the nearness of the two Rivers, which join
together a little beyond it, and by Fortifications; the Garrison consisted of
1400, part whereof were paid by the Prince Cardinal, part by the Spaniards. The
first were commanded by Count Broglio, the others by Leiutenant Colonel
Catteneo; to these were added all the Citizens, and many of the Country people
who were fit to bear Arms. Count Iovan Baptista Vivaldo was Governor of the
place, which was sufficiently provided of Ammunition and Victuals; it was much
esteemed for the opinion which was held of it, that it was not to be taken;
this Fame it had gotten, not only by the situation thereof, but for its
having withstood four Royal Armies, led on by excellent Champions. Wherefore
Harcourt, who thought the glory he had won in his former action, somewhat
eclipsed by his unfortunate success in the siege of Inurea, aspired not only
to regain his former reputation by this action, but to purchase much greater,
if he should effect that which many famous Commanders had failed in: He ordered
Marquess Villa to prepossess himself of the avenues, taking with him 1500 of
the Dowagers Horse, and 1500 of the Kings Horse; who at the very first rou^ed a
Corpse de guard of Carbines, commanded by the Commendadore Pagliero; then going
to St. Dalmatio, to block up the ways which le^d from Nizza, and passing
within Cannon-shot of Conio, 300 Horse from the City fell upon his Rere; which
facing about, and being led on by Count Camerano, Son to General Villa, a young
man, but of great expectation, beat them back to beyond the River Ghez. The
like befell 400 Country people, who as they arrived at the Town fell upon them
behind; but being pursued by the same Camerano, they were routed, so as Villa
quartered safely in Borgo St. Dalmatio; the next day as he would have passed
over the Stura, so to go to Nostra Lignora del l'Olmo, he found the Bridge
prepossessed by about 400 of the Country neighbors, who broke the bridge and
defended the passage; but Villa causing the bridge to be re-made before their
eyes, made his Horse pass over thorough a foord not far off, and his Foot over
the bridge, and fell upon the Country people, slew many of them, and went to
quarter at Nostra Lignora d' Olmo, and at the old Town. The mean while General
Harcourt advanced with the whole Army, and within sight of the City; where he
taking up his quarters before he began his siege, he heard that the Prince had
mustered all his men together in the Canavese, and the Governor his in
Alessandria, whereby they caused apprehension in Chiavasso, Turin, Carmagnuola,
and in the neighboring Towns; wherefore he ordered Marquess Villa to go to the
parts about Turin with the Dowagers Horse, and some French Foot Regiments, not
so much to oppose the Enemies attempts, as for the safer and easier conduct of
the Artillery, which were to be brought from thence to Conio; which when they
came to the Camp, they began to make Trench es. The first was drawn on against
the Bastion di Nostra^ Signora d' Olmo, where Castellano, Camp-Marshal, was to
fall on, the second against the Bastion del Caraglio under Count Plessis
Pralin; against whom those within the Town made a fierce sally, which proved
very bloody, and prejudicial to the besiegers, and wherein they lost many men,
amongst which two prime Gentlemen, Leva and Fausone. H^rcourt caused a third
Trench to be afterward opened against the Bastion St. Anna, whilst Plessis
Pralin's men were already got to the Counterscarf of the Ditch to lodge there,
but he was valiantly repulss'd by the Desendants. Wherefore Motta's men joining
with Pralin, after a long and bloody fight, they took the place, where Seignior
della Moretta was slain; yet the Defendants lost no Courage, nor the oppugners:
They sprung several Mines in several places, and many sallies were made by both
parties, to hinder each others works; wherein the Defendants showed much
valor, particularly Count Broglio; the business was very doubtful on both
sides, and dangerous; which was increased on the besiegers side by news of
Prince Thomaso, who pressed the Governor of Millain extraordinarily for speedy
succor, and who, it was said, would speedily appear with powerful Forces.
Treaties of Agreement were therefore willingly listened unto, which were
introduced by Ripa, Bishop of Mondovi, with the Prince Cardinal, whom by
Letters, and by the means of Abbot Soldato, he advertised what danger Piedmont
was likely to run, if the French should become masters of that place. He
therefore moved that the Town might be surrendered upon fair condition to the
Duke, under the Dowagers Regency; which would be much better for the Family of
Savoy, then to suffer it to fall into the French hands. The Cardinal was not
averse to the Proposal, he therefore sent Abbot Boschetti immediately away from
Nizza to Limone, the furthermost Confines of the County, to hold on and to
conclude this Treaty, which could not but be very acceptable also to the
Dowager; since thereby the Princes and the French should be excluded from
possessing the place, which without any hazard should fall to her and to her
Son. Wherefore she sent Instructions to her Referendario Philippo, who was in
the Camp, to hasten the conclusion thereof; and not only the Dowager, and
Prince Cardinal, but Harcourt, without whose consent the Dowager would do
nothing, gave way willingly thereunto; thinking that the case being so
doubtful, much glory would redound to him by the surrender of the Town, though
it should not fall into the Kings hands, since by his means it should be taken
from the Prince Cardinal, and be put into the Dukes hands.

Many were the debates and many the Proposals which were made to the Prince
Cardinal, to make him condescend to the surrender; but he would accept of none,
being assured by the besieged, and by many of his Court, that the siege would
finally prove vain: Harcourt therefore wished it might speedily be concluded;
for when the Town should be ready to surrender he would hear of no Treaty, but
his threats were in vain; for the Prince Cardinal was resolved not to admit of
any treaty, not so much out of the strength and impregnability of the place, as
out of the great hopes he had of powerful succor. Prince Thomaso, who was as
desirous to preserve the Town, pressed the Governor of Millain exceedingly for
forces to relieve it; but could never get him to come directly to the relief of
Conio; for the Spanish cautiousness would not permit him to hazard so great a
strength of men so far within Piedmont, and leave so many of the Enemies Towns
on his back; especially being to pass over so many Rivers with Artillery,
Baggage, and Victuals, to overcome difficult passes, to fight continually, and
to defend himself from being infested by Marquess Villa, who beating the
Campagnia with his Horse, would gaul him, now on the one side, now on the
other, and would continually incommodiate him; and, which was of greater
consideration, he was to affront an enemy, stronger then himself, and who was
entrenched; wherefore the Governor and other Captains, not thinking it fit to
hazard themselves in so dangerous a business, they resolved to try whither they
could free Conio, or no, by diversion, as they had done Inurea; they therefore
gave the Prince a good strength of Horse and Foot, who went from Asti, together
with the Marquess of Caracena, to Ceri, whereby they infused jealousy into
Carmagnuola, and Chiavasso; but Marquess Villa marred these designs, who either
foreseeing, or fearing these drifts, put forces into both those places; so as
the Prince being frustrated in his intention, turned back upon Chirasco, a
place of greater concernment, and fitter to relieve Cenio by reason of the
neerness thereof. Cherasco is one of the strongest places of Piedmont, not so
much by nature as by art, but not equally on all sides, and which had been long
neglected, as being no frontier Town, and wherein was at this time but a weak
French Garrison, it being one of those Towns which were assigned over by the
Dowager to the King of France, in the year 39. so as the Prince thought he
might securely take it; but Marquess Villa did here also deceive him; for
fearing that the Prince being kept out of the other two Towns would come before
this, he sent word immediately to Seignior di Savigni, who was Governor
thereof, that he might call in all the Country people thereabouts; and he also
sent him a Troop of Dragoons, and 500 foot were sent to him from the Camp; nor
did Villa's diligence cease here, for fearing also Savigliano, and the quarters
of the Camp, in case the Prince should adventure to fall unexpectedly upon
either of them, he sent men into Savigliano, and went himself at the same time
into the Campagnia with the rest of his men, advancing so near Cunio, as he
could not be kept from thence, if it should be needful for him to go to the
Camp; the Prince going from Cheri with 1500 choice Foot, and with all the
Cavalry of the Camp except the Neapolitans, marched toward Chirasco; and not
having notice of the new recruits sent by Villa, he betook himself with much
courage and hope to the enterprise; he divided his Foot into two parts, and
making the greatest part of his Cavalry get off Horseback, he ordered assaults
to be given by night on sundry parts; but all the Squadrons which were sent met
with such hindrances as they could not fall on at the same time; so as they
did but little good, and gave the defendants opportunity to make the greater
resistance where they were assaulted, and the Townsmen who showed themselves
faithful to the Dowager took up Arms, and ran courageously to make defense; so
the Prince being repulst, not without much loss, retreated to Sommariva, where
he tarried some days; but being egged on by honor, and by the prejudice which
would redound to their party if the Town should be lost, he would try his
fortune once more, which, the place being newly re-enforced, did not favor
him; yet both parties fought valiantly for many hours, the assailants mounted
the Walls several times, and were still beaten back: they sometimes entered the
Town, and were repulsed; and in these interchanges of fortune, the defendants
having the better of the business, about break of day the Prince was forced to
retreat having lost above four hundred men: The more unfortunate these
diversive attempts proved, the more successfully did the Siege of Conio
proceed; for Harcourt not being at all diverted by these the Enemies attempts,
and joy'd that Chirasco was out of danger, which otherwise might, peradventure,
have made him forego Conio, to relieve it, he continued more constant in the
Siege; he therefore laid aside all treaties of agreement, and betook himself
more roundly to the taking of Conio: but neither were the Prince nor Governor
discouraged for their bad success, nor did they forbear attempting to relieve
the Town by diversion. The Governor sent Don John Vasques, Camp-master-general
with the Foot, and Don Vincenzo Conzago with the Horse to assault Rossignano,
who when they were come near it, hearing that above 200 Montferrians were
entered the Town, forbear doing any thing there; and went by Order from the
Governor to Montcalvo, where whilst there was fair hopes of doing good, the
Prince, who was with almost all the Horse, and with 600 Foot, in the parts
about Villanuova, advertised the Governor that he heard there was not above
600 Foot in Chiavasso, wherefore he thought it fit to attempt the taking of it;
for it being a place of almost as great concernment as Conio, it was not
unlikely but that the Enemy might forego the one, not to lose the other; but
the Governor who had oftentimes found the Princes Forces to be more forward
then fortunate, was not willing to yield to the proposal; the rather for that
he was very near taking Montcalvo: yet being much solicited, he (though much
against his will) bad the Prince take up his quarters about Chiavasso; and that
if he should hear that no new recruits were entered the Town he should send him
word, and he would come in to his assistance with all his men; hoping that in
the mean while he might take Montcalvo. The Prince upon the Governors promise
went with 600 Foot which he caused to come from Inurea, and together with him
went the Marquess of Caracena with the Horse, and took up their quarters; and
finding that the Town was not re-enforced, he advertised the Governor thereof,
desiring him to join with him in the Enterprise. The business of Montcalvo was
not yet perfected, though it advanced prosperously every day; wherefore the
Governor, who that he might not prefer the certainty of the business of
Montcalvo before the uncertainty of that of Chiavasso, had against his will
permitted the Prince to go to before Chiavasso, the more he saw the Siege of
Montcalvo draw near an end, the less fit he thought it to abandon the one, for
the uncertainty of the other; wherefore feeding the Prince with delays, he
entertained him so long with words, with sending and re-sending Messengers,
till he might see Montcalvo taken; but the Prince being frustrated of all
hopes, and finding that the Governor continued his delays, arose from before
Chiavasso, and retreated to Inurea; being sufficiently scandalized that the
Governor should rather suffer him to ri^e from before Chiavasso, then Vasques
from before Montcalvo, which he alleged did not only redound to the prejudice
of his the Princes honor, but to the like of the whole present War; for he
said that the streightning of Chiavasso would certainly have forced Harcourt to
abandon Conio, whereas the loss of Montcalvo, being of much less importance,
would have contributed nothing thereunto. The Prince being gone from Chiavasso,
the Marquess of Caracena foorded over the Poe with his Horse, and went to St.
Sebastiano, were he quartered his Horse in the Towns of Montferrat near Verrua.
The Siege of Conio was not in this interim at all intermitted, but continued
with more vigor on both sides: Sallies, Assaults, Mines, Galleries were made
use of; great were the endeavors of the Assailants, and great that of the
Defendants; neither yielded to other in courage nor valor; their vigilance and
diligence were equal; every one was so ready to die, as death it self being
afraid at their countenance seemed for very terror to shun them; but Harcourts
singular fortune, which appeared averse unto him in the enterprise of Inurea,
and which was not undertaken by his advice, would make him an amends in this,
which was done by his consent: being therefore very much gladded that neither
the business of Chiavasso nor of Chirasco, had necessitated him to forego the
Siege of Conio, he endeavored the more to put an end to that enterprise, that
he might come time enough to relieve Montcalvo; he therefore placed a Battery
on the edge of the Ditch, ordered a Mine at the Bastion del Ulmo, solicited
Count Plessis to finish another Mine which was begun against the Bastion of
Madonna; which when they were perfected, he caused a parley to be beaten for
the surrender of the Town; but the defendants being resolved to see the effect,
25 Foot of Wall was presently blown up; and yet the besiegers could not come
conveniently to the breach, for the Bastion was Plat-form'd wit sand and
stones; so as it was not without blood that they quartered themselves at the
foot of the Wall that was blown up. Harcourt not being here with dismayed, would
gain the top of the Bastion by a new assault; and the other Mine at the Bastion
del Olmo being ready to play, the defendants resolved to parley; and after some
debates Articles were drawn up, and Hostages were given; and after 53 days
Siege, on the 15th of September, Harcourt entered the Town triumphing and
victorious. The Victory was the more singular, for that this Town had not been
taken in many age^: it was surrendered upon honorable conditions, and the
Garrison marched out, which was reduced to the number of 400 Foot and 200
Horse. Harcourt having dispatched this enterprise went speedily to relieve
Monicalvo, which he would without doubt have done, had it not been surrendered
two days before his arrival. Conio being taken, the Dowager ordered Marquess
Pianezza to go with all speed to recover Rovello, a strong Town, and held by a
Garrison of the Cardinal, as Conio was. This place confined upon the County of
Pinarvolo, and was very convenient for the French interests, by reason of their
desire to dilate that Confine; and the Dowager thought it necessary to the
prevent the French from throwing themselves before it; nor was she therein
deceived; for Orders being come from the King that Conio should be restored to
the Dowager, Harcourt, knowing how desirous Richlieu was of getting that Town,
detained the Kings Order, and used several pieces of cunning that the Siege
might not succeed, or that it might be deferred; but Pianezza's diligence
prevailed, who made himself master thereof, and put a Garrison of Piedmonteses
into it; so as the restitution of Conio, as it was ordered by the King, was not
disturbed: by the demolition of this Castle, it was assigned over to the
Dowager the next year by the Duke of Bullion, who succeeded Harcourt in the
place of General; and not long after Demont was likewise assigned over to her,
a Town in those parts, which was possessed by the French; which actions being
glorious to that King, who shared not therein in what his Forces had done, nor
in the arbitrament of fortune, but did all out of his goodness and Royal
Magnanimity; it is incredible what gladness it caused in the Piedmonteses, and
in all the Italians; and these ^ctions serving as a testimony that he would
restore all the other places which were held by his Garrisons, in Piedmont,
there was none that doub^ed but that he in his own time would restore all ^e
^est.

Conio, and the two other adjacent Towns, being taken, the Princes authority
was totally excluded from out this side of the Mountains; and their power being
confined to the County of Nizza, it was thought it would not be of any long
consistence; not long after the Armies were retreated to their quarters, the
Prince of Monaco, having driven the Spanish Garrisons out of that place,
brought in the French; and deprived the Spaniards of that station situated in
the utmost Western Liguria upon a Rock, which thrusting out into the Sea shapes
a kind of Haven which is of great consequence and convenience to the Spaniards:
The occasion of so great a novelty and alteration is diversely related. The
Prince thereof complained of the subjection he was held in by the Garrison, of
the little account that the Spanish Agents made of him, of the losses which he
suffered by adhering to that Crown, not having received those emoluments from
the Kingdom of Naples which were assigned unto him for his adherence to the
Spaniards, which he formerly was used to receive; and, moreover, that when the
Garrison wanted their pay, he was sometime forced to appease them by satisfying
them out of his own purse, and to shun the plunder which was threatened by the
Soldiers, as also to avoid the danger of the place, which being by occasion of
the present Wars much diminished in the Garrison thereof, the Kings Agents
minded not the re-inforcing thereof, nor the putting a sufficient number into
it for necessary defense; especially at this time when the King of France his
Fleet lorded it over the Mediterranean, and lay not far from Monaco; and
whereby he found the designs which the French had upon that place, it being ^o
weakly Garrisoned; so as out of these respects he was forced to free himself
from these apparent injuries and damages at home, and from the imminent
dangers threatened from abroad; on the contrary, the Kings Agents, partly,
denying the blame that was laid upon them, partly lessening it, and excusing
it, partly by the calamities of the present times, pretended that all this had
happened by the Prince of Monaco's own instability; they complained that both he
and his predecessort having enjoyed privileges and ^enenues for above 120
years from the King of Spains liberality very punctually; that he, now when he
saw the Crown reduced to such streights, should without any occasion abandon
it, and betake himself to the French, merely to better his condition; and that
when in reason he ought to bear with some inconveniences of the present times,
considering what great affluence he had formerly received, and ought to show
himself more constant in his devotion to that Crown, he was past over to the
Enemies party, not without prejudice to the Crown of Spain. But these are
things, the verification and discussing whereof would require more time, and
the decision thereof not appertaining to the Author of this History, it will
suffice to have lightly touched upon the accusations and excuses. Yet the same
Agents who had some knowledge of the fact before it was done endeavored to
prevent the danger; but the success was so sudden, as all provisions and
remedies came too late; and truly the more unexpected this blow came, the
soarer and more insufferable was it: But greater blows then this, which the
Crown of Spain received at these times, both in Italy and elsewhere, made this
appear the less; for the Kingdoms of Spain we^e so shaken, first by the
Insurrection of Catalonia, and afterward by that of Portugal, a^ they never
were the like since that Crown arrived at so much greatness. The Catalonians
after their Insurrection had recourse to the King of France, and by submiting
to that Crown had got assistance against the King of Castile, whose Forces were
entered Catalonia to reduce it: So as the French Forces entering that Province
also, they often routed the Castilians, and having finally made them almost all
retreat to the neighboring Kingdom of Arragon, they rendered the recovery of
Catalonia very difficult, which was almost wholly lost; and the King not being
well provided of men to quell the Catalonians, and to drive the French out, who
had almost made themselves Masters thereof, he was forced to make use of the
Portugal Garrisons to subject the Catalonians. So the Portugueses being quite
rid of the Castrlian Garrisons, made use of this occasion to withdraw
themselves from the Castilian Empire, which was to them so hateful and so
insufferable. They thereto made Don John, Duke of Braganza, their King, who was
descended, by the Mothers side, from the ancient Kings of Portugal; and the
Castilian Forces not being able to subdue both these Insurrections, they were
necessitated to insist first upon that of Catalonia, whereinto the French
poured in men at their pleasure; wherefore the Portugal Insurrection was but
weakly withstood, so as it grew daily greater. The new King was better
established in his new Kingdom, as well by reason of the peoples love, as of
the friendship and favor of other Princes; who out of Emulation to the Spanish
Grandezza fomented the Insurrection of the Portugueses: So as what by the
natural Forces of Portugal, and by what he received from foreigners, the new
King kept the Castilian Forces conveniently from the Confines of Portugal. To
the loss of the Kingdom of Portugal was added the loss of all the Kingdoms and
Provinces of the East Indies, and of all the Seas and Islands belonging to that
Crown, and in the Western parts of Brasil; for being governed and garrisoned
only by the Portugueses, and none but Portugueses being suffered to sail
toward those parts, nor to tarry there by the way of Traffic; as soon as the
news of the new Kings exaltation to the Crown, who was of the Royal lineage,
was come into those parts, they all jointly and with great applause
acknowledged him for their King, and readily swore Allegiance to him. The
Spaniards also at this time lost many considerable places, and battles, of no
small consideration in Flanders; the Fleets of the said Crown were almost
dissipated by naval Conflicts, by contrary Winds, and by other casual
disasters; their Forces being afflicted by several misfortunes in Lombardy and
Piedmont had lost their former luster The Austrian Empire suffered also very
much in Germany; and not being able to hold that mutual correspendency, nor to
receive such aid as had wont to pass between it and the Crown of Spain, both
those Crowns lost much of that Authority and Grandezza whereby they had made
themselves so considerable, and so formidable with the greatest Princes of
Christendom, for almost one whole age; and because Germany being lacerated by
continual Wars, and impoverished in people, could not furnish the Wars of
Italy, and the State of Millain, with Soldiers, as it had wont to do; nor
Spain whose Exchequer was exhausted could subminister that quantity of monyes
to the Germane Empire as it formerly had done, nor take order for great Levies
of Dutch for Italy; the Spanish forces in Lombardy and in Italy were
necessarily reduced to great weakness and discredit; insomuch as the
Potentates of Italy, to whom they were so formidable before, as doubting
nothing more then to be overrun by them, they were wholy bent upon pulling
them down: being now totally free of that fear, and as much terrified with
the apprehension of the French forces, which they saw were gotten to a fatal
greatness in Spain it self, in Flanders, in Italy and in Germany; they studied
how to maintain that Spanish Empire which they endeavored to suppress so much
before; all of them holding it for undoubted, that the lessening thereof would
prove the lessening of their own States; amongst these the Venetians, who
formerly had always been more averse to the ends and interests of the Crown of
Spain then any others, changing their counsels with the alteration of affairs,
began to be their first and most zealous protectors; they being the only bank
which could keep out the stood of the French fortune from overflowing and
drowning Italy, and their own Dominions; which they willingly hazarded some few
years before, when the Duke of Rohan falling down by the Valley of Sarfina from
the Valtoline into the State of Millain, when the Duke of Savoy and Marshal
Cricqui being past the Tessino infused such terror into the State of Millain;
the same Rohan being now to pass over a little patch of the Venetian State of
not above two miles long, before he could come to the State of Millain; the
Commonwealth which had been so favorable to him before in the getting and
keeping of the Valtoline, were so averse unto him, upon this occasion, as they
would by no means permit him to come over that very short space of Ground;
which had they done it would have much increased the danger of that State; not
only the Spanish Agents, but all the Potentates of Italy, were very well
satisfied with this action; who knew not so much by her present, as by her
past, nay, contrary carriage, how intent and watchful that Commonwealth was
over the welfare and preservation of the public peace, and liberty; the same
respects made the Governor of Millain more wary in engaging themselves in
battle, finding that by the want of ready leavies of men in Germany they wanted
the convenience of supplies to their armies, when they shall by any accident be
routed, or otherwise worsted; to this was added, that Spain it self by reason
of the Wars that were then very hot there, required men both from Germany and
Italy; so as not being able to send men into Italy, the Spaniards were doubly
weakened in Lombardy; both by the want of those Soldiers which they could not
expect neither from Germany, nor Spain, and by those which they being to send
into Spain, could not employ them in the Wars of Italy.

Let us return to the affairs of Piedmont, where the Armies being retired to
their quarters, the cessation of Military actions afforded opportunity to the
concluding peace between the Dowager and the Princes, which had been often
broken before, and often reassumed: but the occurrences of affairs having taken
away many difficulties which had formerly obstructed it, both parties grew
weary of the War; which the Dowager saw grew daily more prejudicial to the
people, and to the Duke her sons State; and the Princes likewise found that
their hopes grew daily less; the Prince Cardinal who was naturally more
inclined to peace and quiet then to the troubles of War, desired daily to
marry, out of the great desire he had of issue, whereby he might continue the
Principality in case of succession, which appeared not to be far of, if not by
the conceived weakness of his Nephew, at least by frailty of humane condition;
and not knowing any Princess in those times more conducible to his ends, then
his Niece, he desired very much to have her for wife; and the Dowager, who had
formerly promoted the treaty thereof, forbear not to allure him to peace and
union by this alliance. Conio being lost, and therewith all that part of
Piedmont, from whence he received so much revenue, and seeing himself confined
to within the confines of the County of Nizza, he doubted he could not maintain
himself long in that State, notwithstanding that he was possessed of the
impregnable Fort of Nizza, and of those of Villa Franca, and S. Sespiro; all
which were sufficiently provided with Warlike provisions from the Kingdom of
Naples; and that he might hope they might daily be supplied therewith from
thence; yet the present Agents being very slow in furnishing him with moneys,
(which he wanted more after the loss of Conio, then before) he began also to
fear, that he might want provisions when he should need them; and which was of
more concernment, he being to introduce foreigners into them in case they
should be assaulted, and particularly Spaniards, there was such reciprocal
distrust between him and the Spanish Agents, that he held the Forts to be as
good as lost, if ever he should be compelled to bring them in; wherefore to
free himself from the imminent danger that he foresaw both he and his family
was in, and to obtain his ends, which were inclined to peace and marriage, he
earnestly desired agreement; on the other side Prince Thomaso, who knew the
Genius and inclination of the Prince Cardinal, feared lest the marriage might
be made, whereby he should be excluded from all pretentions: which if it should
so happen, he could have no pretense of taking up Arms against the Dovvager
when she should be united to his brother; so as he had but small certainty of
his present condition, and was very doubtful of the future; Moreover he was
ill satisfied with the assistance of Forces which he received from Spain; but
he was chiefly terrified at the prosperous success of the French, and the
contrary of the Spaniards; who failing in all men's expectation, as much as the
French bettered, did prognosticate the unfortunate fall of those who thought to
better themselves by them; these auguries and prognostications did so work upon
the Prince, as the dangers, and ruins which were yet far off seemed to him to
be present; he therefore thought it better to secure his fortune on that side
which was uppermost, and to get at last free from the slavery and danger which
he foresaw he must undergo by adhering to the losers; it was also thought that
an accident which happened at this time in France weighed down the balance of the
Prince his resolution; some Princes of France, who were not well pleased with
the present Government of that Kingdom, and consequently not with Cardinal
Richlieu's Authority, were gotten into Sedan, a very strong Town of the Duke of
Bullion's; the first whereof was the Count of Soisons^ (...) Prince of the
blood, betwixt whom and the Cardinal there had been (...) disgusts; this Prince
thought to kindle such a fire in France, by the (...) of other discontented
Princes, and by the assistance of the Span^ Forces who were to come from
Flanders, and join with him in this enterprise, as that thereby the Cardinals
authority should undoubtedly b^ ^d in the dust; the business which had been
long a framing there broke our at last, and a battle insued thereupon in open
field between the Counts Forces and those of the King; those of Sedan had the
better of the Kings men in the conflict; and by a very famous victory the
conspirators were likely to have compassed their ends, had not the King and the
Cardinals fortune exceeded the Victory, by Count Soiso^ death who was slain in
the battle by a Musket shot which defeated the Colleagues; for the rest of the
Princes of that faction wanting that ^eaning-stock; and being dismayed at his
loss who was their Chie^n, and of the Blood Royal, stood no longer to the
business; but running, some one way, some another, abandoned the Comm^ cause,
and every one endeavored their own safety.

(...) Soiso^ was Brother to Prince Thomaso's wife; and leaving no (...) (...)
him, the succession fell to his sister; wherefore the Prince was thought to be
conscious of Soisons conspiracy, and that he expected what the event thereof
would be, and accordingly would dispose of himself in his adherence either to
Spain, or France; and that it had been the Counts persuasions which had
prevailed with him to forego the Capitulations made with Mazzarine; wherefore
when he saw the unfortunateness of the success, and that his brother in Law was
slain, he was forced to take new resolves; either because he could build no
more upon the conspiracy of Sedan, so to join with the Spaniards; or else for
that his half-brothers estate being fallen to his wife, he could not forsake so
great a Fortune, but close with France, from whence he continually received
great offers; nor was the Dowager wanting in promoting the business; but making
use of what had happened in France, she represented unto the Prince with what
opportunity to advantage his interests with that Crown, and desired him that he
would not injure his wife and Children by refusing it; to this was added, that
the Spanish Agents, either for want of money, or by reason of the news that was
given out, that the Princes who were ready to conclude with France, were
somewhat slow in disbursing moneys, fearing that they might not only be ill
employed, but to the Kings prejudice; the Princes were therefore forced to
agree with the Dowager, not being able to maintain the Towns they were
possessed of from being taken either by the French, or Spaniards, to the
irreparable loss of their Family: and, which was worse; if the French, whose
fortune they feared, should become masters of the Towns which were possessed by
the Spaniards in Piedmont, they saw they must be exiles from their Country, and
rely upon the Spaniard for maintenance: Prince Thomaso being out of these
reasons resolved to agree, made: his mind be known to the Dowager by the
Protonotory Bergera, who was after Archbishop of Toledo, desiring that the City
of Inurea might be assigned to him for the security of his person, and that he
might be Leiutenant General of that Province, and of that of Biela; upon which
he promised her to remit the Dukedom of Aosta freely unto her; and for what
concerned the guardianship, and Regency, he would not differ from what he had
agreed unto, and that he would absolutely join with the French; the treaty was
readily reassumed with the Dowager, and with France; President Leone, the Count
di Mussano, and el Patrimoniale Moneti, were chosen Deputies by the two Princes
to treat thereof in Turin, and Moneti was chosen President; the businesses as
far as concerned Prince Thomaso's interest, were as good as adjusted: greater
and almost insuperable difficulties arose touching the interest of the Prince
Cardinal, who though he desired agreement more then his brother, who being
unwilling to dispossess himself of the Towns in the County of Nizza, persisted
in his pretentions to the Lieutenancy of that County totally, and wholly
independent upon the Dowagers Regency, together with the retention of all the
Towns therein, and particularly of the Castle of Nizza, a place of great
consequence; which pretentions being too repugnant to the Dowagers Regency
(whereunto she would not by any means consent) there was much a do to salve
all. At last, but after many months debate, the Princes condescended to the
Dowagers Regency, so as all things were accorded upon these Articles; that the
Dowager should be Governess of the Duke, and sovereign Regent of the States of
her Son Don Charles Emanuel. That she should choose a Council of State,
consisting of such persons as were worthy and capable of such an honor,
wherein the Princes might intervene when they pleased: That in the Letters
Patents wherein it was wont to be said, with the opinion of our Council, it
should be said, with the assistance of the Princes our Brothers, and with the
approbation of our Council: That in business of great concernment the Princes
should likewise subscribe, that the Prince Cardinal should be the Dukes
Lieutenant General in the County of Nizza, and Prince Thomaso in that of Inurea
and Biela: That the Governors and Officers of Justice, War, and of the
Finances, should be chosen by the Dowager, such as should be Subjects to the
House of Savoy, and capable of those employments; but those of the County of
Nizza, such as the Prince Cardinal might confide in: That those who were
already chosen by Duke Victorio, by the Dowager, and by the Princes, should be
confirmed or removed as the Dowager should please; but so as the Princes should
be therewith satisfied. And to this purpose, there was a writing made a part,
declaring that all those who had adhered to the Princes should be provided for,
excluded, or changed: That the Oath of Allegiance to the Duke should be
renewed, with an expression, that if the Duke should die without issue Male,
the Prince Cardinal should succeed, and so successively the Heirs Male; and
that the said Princes should take the Oath of Allegiance to the Duke: That for
what concerned the order of the Annuntiata, and of the religious orders of St.
Mauritio and Lazaro, the accustomed constitutions and rules should be observed:
That the goods and reprisals should be interchangeably restored, and that all
the Subjects should be received into the Dowagers royal favor, and into the
grace of the Princes: That to boot with what has been said, two thousand Foot,
and a thousand Horse, should be allowed to Prince Thomaso, for the Garrison of
Inurea, and for the defense of the Provinces allotted him; to boot with these
Capitulations made between the Dowager and the Princes jointly, there should
another agreement be made, in particular, between the Dowager and the Prince
Cardina^; the Articles whereof contained in a writing a part were; the Marriage
between the Prince Cardinal and his Niece the Princess (...) Lodovica: That the
Dowagers Goverours should come into the ^owns of the County of Nizza, with a
competent number of Soldiers: That the Governors who should enter should be
permitted to dismiss as many of the old garrison as they should please: That
the new Governors should, notwithstanding, swear unto the Prince that they
would not admit of any successor in the Government of the Town, who should not
be a Subject of the royal House of Savoy, and that the successor should do the
like in the charge committed unto him, before he should enter the Town, and so
should those do in the Government of the Town; that as well the Governor, as
his successors, should swear not to restore the Town to any but him the Prince,
or to the Heirs Male of the House of Savoy, in case the present Duke should die
without Heirs Male lawfully begotten. The Prince Cardinal not contented with
all this, demanded 30000 Ducates of the Dowager, to distribute amongst the
Spanish Soldiers, whom he was to cashiere, and many other advantages for those
Officers who were to go out of the Forts. The Dowager, though she were reduced
to great streights by the present time granted all unto him readily; not only
out of Princely Liberality, but out of singular Wisdom, as not aiming at any
thing, but at the assuring those so important Towns to her Son upon any
whatsoever conditions, and to reunite the House of Savoy, which was so divided
within it self, to real peace and agreement. The same day the agreement made by
the Princes with the King of France was confirmed and subscribed by the
Princes, and by Monsieur d'Aque Buone the Kings Ambassador; whereby the Princes
were received into the favor and protection of the Crown of France. And the
Marriage being approved of between the Prince Cardinal and the Princess Maria,
and the Princes gratified with pensions and donatives, the King of France upon
the making of a general Peace was to cause Prince Thomaso's Wife and Children
to be restored unto him, and to approve of the allowing Prince Thomaso the 2000
Foot, and 1000 Horse, provided that he should be obliged to serve the King
therewith. And that the King should assure both the Princes of his assistance
in their successi^ ^n case the Duke should die, and keep his promises made to
the Pope^ ^ents, and to the other potentates of Italy, touching the restitution
of the Dukes Towns wherein he had any Garrisons. On the other side, the Princes
promised and obliged themselves to dismiss the Spaniards which were in their
service, that they should openly declare themselves to be of the Kings party,
and to renounce all treaties with the Spaniards, and that the Prince Cardinal,
in particular, should renounce the protection of the Empire, and that Prince
Thomaso should be bound to serve the King in person, in War, against the
Spaniards, as his Majesty should be pleased to appoint. All the other Articles
which were to be agreed upon, on the 14th of June, the year 42, together with
many other writings which were signed the same day, were forthwith sent to
France, that the King might approve of those which related to the agreements
between the Dowager and the Princes; and ratify those that were made between
the Princes and his Ambassador. By these Capitulations (which were afterward
performed with satisfaction to all, as shall be said) an end was put to the
Wars of Piedmont.

In the Articles which were made between the Princes and the French Ambassador
the Princes were bound to dismiss all the Spanish Soldiers that were with
them; but it was not expressed when; whereunto they thought themselves engaged
after Ratification made with the King. But this was the hardest point of all
others to execute, and which caused much trouble, especially since the whole
Garrison in Inurea were Spaniards; yet Prince Thomaso found means how to be
easily rid of them.

At the same time when these Affairs were upon concluding, instead of General
Harcourt the Duke of Bullion was made Commander in Chief of the French Forces,
he who had hatched the aforesaid Rebellion in the Town of Sedan; but after the
Battle, and death of the Count Soisons, upon humbling himself to the King he
was pardoned, and was taken into the Kings favor, who when he was come into
Piedmont; and had joined with the Dowagers Forces, marched into the field, and
passing into Alessandria was come as far as Filizzano, and Corniente; Don John
Vasques, who was Governor of Alessandria, and who was retreated with his men
into that City, fearing that he would pass over the Tanaro, sent all his
Cavalry, and 1000 Foot, under Don Vincenzo Gonzaga, toward that river to oppose
the Enemy; some skirmishes past betvveen these and the Enemy on both sides the
river; but Bullion making as if he would go somevvhere else, which was said
would be either to Pontestura or Trino, the Governor went from Millain to
Vercelli, to hinder any design of the Enemy, and to keep him from sitting down
before either of those places. Upon this occasion, Prince Thomaso advised him
to take up one quarter before Pontestura, wherein he might put 2000 Foot, and
1000 Horse, offering him his Spanish horse and foot, which, as he said, lay
idle in Inurea: The Governor accepted his offer, being unwilling to disfurnish
other places; wherefore the Prince sent both Horse and Foot from Inurea,
toward St. Ia, but ordered the Horse that when they should be come to such a
certain place, they should hault, and suffer the Foot to advance. But it being
quickly known that Bullion was retreated from Tanara, the Governor sent back
the Foot to Inurea, and the Prince refused to receive them, under pretense that
there was a Truce made between them (the Princes) and the Dowager, and that to
shun that this reception might seem a novelty, he did not think fit to let them
in: They therefore retreated to Vercelli, so that by this cunning trick the
Prince quitted his hands of the Spanish Garrison. Nor did the Prince Cardinal
want means to free himself from the like encumbrance; for either having
received, or seeming to have received notice, that Don Francisco Tuttavilla,
Captain of the thousand Spaniards which were granted him for the defense of
himself, and of the County of Nizza, had treated with the Garrison of the
Castle to his prejudice; he sent for him into the Castle, and seeming to resent
the action he commanded him to go immediately out of the Castle, together with
his men, who were there ready to depart, and that he should go out of Piedmont;
which being done, both the Princes were masters of themselves; and might the
better make good their agreement. This dismission was done very seasonably; for
had it been longer delaid, it had hindered not only the execution of this so
important business, but had hazarded the whole agreement, by reason of a sudden
accident which happened in Cassalle. Bullion, who after he could not get over the
Tanaro was returned to Montferrat, had quartered his men in the Towns
thereabouts, and going himself for pastime to Cassalle, out of a desire to see
that Citadel, which was held to be impregnable, when he was come into the
Citadel, contrary to his own expectation, and the like of all others, was by
order from the King seized upon by the Governor of the Citadel, and sent back
well guarded into France. This happened just ten days after the agreement made by
the Princes, and five days after they had cashiered the Spaniards; which made
it be generally conceived that this was done by way of resenting what had
happened at Sedan, notwithstanding the Kings pardon: this seemed to be an example
to the Princes, who did always distrust that the Articles made with the Court
of France would not be made good unto them; and it was commonly conceived that
had not the Princes declared so absolutely in the behalf of France, by
dismissing those men, they would have demurred upon those Conventions; but
being quite deprived of the Spanish assistance, though they knew not what might
succeed, they were forced to rest contented, and to expect from whence this
blow proceeded, and what it aimed at; but all doubts and apprehensions soon
ceased, it being known that the Dukes imprisonment proceeded not out of any old
account, but out of ^ew jealousies, that he was complice in a new conspiracy
made against the Cardinal Richlieu, by Monsieur St. Mark, Grand Escuyer de
France, and favorite to the King; so as all occasions of diffidence ceasing,
and the Kings ratification being come from France, with satisfaction to all,
they fell to do what was at the present to be done; but there was a knot found
in the Prince Cardinals business which was hard to be untied, which proceeded
from whether the Marriage should precede the resignation of the Towns in the
County of Nizza, or the resignation the Marriage; whereof there being great
distrust on both sides, some solution must be found for it; which after much
discussion, was; that the Marriage should be celebrated in Nizza, by a Proxey
to be of purpose deputed by the Princes; which Proxey was to swear, upon pain
of life, that the Marriage should be consummated as soon as the Towns should be
resigned; and that the Governors who were to receive them in the Dowagers
behalf should swear unto the Prince, before they entered the Towns, to
re-deliver them to the Prince, if they should find the Princess her Proxey
backward to celebrate the Marriage. Things being t^us adjusted, the Prince
Cardinal sent Iovan Dominico Doria, Marquess of Cerie, to Turin with sufficient
authority to celebrate the Espousals by words, for the future, between him the
Prince, and the eldest Daughter of Savoy; after which celebration, the Marquess
Pianezza was chosen Proxey by the Princess to celebrate the Marriage by words
in present; and the Dowager deputed Carlo Vittorio Scaglia, Count di Verrua, to
receive the Castle of Nizza; and Iovan Baptista Solaro, Count di Monestervolo,
to receive that of Villa franca; and Count Alessandro Borgarello that of St.
Sospiro. The Proxey and the Deputies went from Turin toward Nizza; and with
them went Monsieur Zecchinelli, the Popes Nuntio, who carried the Popes
dispensation with him, for the celebration of the Marriage, and power to
receive the Cardinals-Cap from the Prince; when they were come to Nizza, they
all took their solemn Oaths to observe what they had sworn to in the
Capitulations; and subsequently the Towns were delivered up, and the Marriage
was celebrated on the 21 of September, the year 1642, with infinite
satisfaction to all parties concerned, with incredible applause of the people,
who being over-joyed to see the Princes joined in a good peace and hoped that
being freed from the calamities of War they should enjoy the fruits of peace.
Count Verrua being entered into the Fort and Castle of Nizza, and the others
into the others of that County, they dismissed all the old Garrisons which they
found in them; so as they remained in the full and absolute power and dominion
of the Duke and Dowager; and the Princes when they had dismissed the Spaniards,
before they published the agreement which they had made with the Dowager, and
with the King of France, they sent to the Governor of Millain, demanding the
restoral of the Towns that had been taken to their Nephew the Duke; and the
Governor being desirous to know from them, before he gave his answer, if when
restitution should be made, they would continue in Peace, or in War, with the
Duke, he could receive no clear answer, but one that was uncertain, and very
dubious; and the Princes thinking that if he should not be sure of peace ^e
would make no restoration, and that he would be hardly brought to do it when
he should be assured of it, wit^out waiting any longet for answer from the
Governor, nor from the Court of Spain, from whence resolution was to come,
they published the agreement; and Prince Thomaso marching into the field as a
Soldier of the King of France began to manage those Arms against the King of
Spain which before he had managed for the King of Spain against France; he
therefore headed the French who remained in those parts after Bullions
imprisonment; and being followed by Marquess Villa with the Dowagers men he
fell to recover the Towns which were held by the Spanish Garrisons: he began
with Crescentino, where he met with grea^er resistance then he expected; for
the Governor seeing that the French Army after Bullions imprisonment was
retreated into Piedmont, and that being divided into several quarters it lay
about Verrua, feared Crescentino: wherefore he sent the Marquess of Caracena
with all the Horse, except those of Naples, to recruit it with Men and
Munition; which Caracena having very well performed, passing over the Poe at
Pontestura, he went by Orders from the Governor to St. Salvadore. Sergeant
Major Alonso Vasques was Captain of the Garrison, who did not only vigorously
sustain the Siege, but troubled the Enemy with many sallies; and though the
place were not much fortified, nor very hard to be taken by him who should be
master of the field, yet it held out stoutly for 15 days, in which time the
Governor doubting Trino, and St. Ia, he had time to put good Garrisons, and
other (...) into them, the charge whereof he committed to Marquess Caracena,
who stealing secretly out of Vercelli re-enforced Trino twice by a way which
leads not far from Crescentino, whilst the Prince was hottest about it: The
like he did in St. ^a, where he found no opposition. These provisions were very
seasonably made; for the Duke of Longueville appearing at last, after mid
August, in Piedmont, who was appointed to succeed Bullion in the place of
General of the ^rench Forces; and having brought many men with him, wherewith
he was to carry the War into the State of Millain; now that the Princes were
past over to the French, it behoved the Governor, who had not equal Forces to
face him in the Field, to munite the Towns of the State, and those of Piedmont,
with good Garrisons; and yielding the Field to the French, to watch where this
great cloud would settle at last: it was generally conceived that Prince
Thomaso was drawn to side with the French, by strong promises that they would
get him some Territories in the State of Millain, which should be peculiar to
him and to those that should descend from him; and the sequel showed that the
County of Tortona, and peradventure that of Alessandria, together with all on
this side Poe, toward the State of Genoa, was promised him; that, moreover, he
was intended to be made General of all the French Forces in Italy: but that
Court not thinking it fit to bestow upon him a charge of so great importance at
the very first, especially the Hostages of his Wife and Children being
considered which were in Spain, it was judged more convenient to give that
employment to the Duke of Longueville, who was joined by affinity and
correspondency to the Prince: wherefore that Court thought fit to mitigate the
Prince his pretentions by that choice, whereby they had sufficiently provided
for his interests; especially the Orders being considered, which, as has been
said, were given unto Longueville, to carry on the War according to the Prince
his designs and ends; but the Prince not being content with these provisions,
and expecting better satisfaction, to the end that the Soldiers might not lie
idle in the interim, in a time proper for War, the Duke whilst the Prince
remained in Inurea, went with his own men only, to the taking of Nizza and
Acqui; to the end that when those places should be taken, way might be made for
the intended design upon Tortona; which when it should be effected, the State
of Millain was to be assaulted, according to the Prince his ends and interests.
Nizza was not much stronger then Crescentino, and whosoever was master of the
field might easily take it; nor was it very well garrisoned: Wherefore Baron
Batteville was sent to recruit it with 200 Soldiers, who entering the Town,
after the places thereabout were taken, the Garrison was increased to the
number of 450, an insufficient number to defend it, and yet Batteville did all
that was to be done therein; but a greater breach being made in six hours space
then the Enemy intended, by reason of the bad condition of the earth, and
several Mines being ready to play, they began to treat of surrender; and
Longueville being resolved not to yield to any other conditions, then those
that were granted to Count St. Paul, by Marquess Leganes, when he took it the
year before; the defendants were en^orced to accept of such conditions as the
Enemy was pleased to impose upon them; which were, that the Garrison should be
sent, thorough France, to the County of Burgondy, which was under the King of
Spain. ^he Governor had intended to relieve this place another time, by
sending 100 Horse, and as many Dragoons, thither before the surrender; but the
resolution being divulged, and the Conductor, who was no friend to Batteville,
carrying the business but ill-favour'dly, it succeeded not; for the relievers
being come near the Enemies Camp, they found the Enemy ready to repulse them;
so they returned to Alessandria, from whence they were come, not having done
any thing: a greater disaster befell a Regiment of Horse which were sent to
Montaldo, (a Town within six miles of Nizza) to incommod^ate the Enemy in their
Forage; for being fallen upon by a greater number of Horse, it was routed with
loss of seventy Horse, and the Captain had much ado to save himself. Not long
after Nizza was taken Don Mauritio of Savoy went with a good Body of Horse, and
some Foot Companies, by night, from Inurea to Arbo, a Town in the Territories
of Biela, near the Sesia, whither 500 Horse were sent to be quartered, under
the Lieutenant General of the Millain Horse, whom he assaulted three hours
before day on two sides; the quarter was put into great confusion; and though
the Lieutenant General, with some of his best men, made head against them, yet
the rest fled awa^, and saved themselves by foording over the Sesia: The
Lieutenant having but few with him, and being abandoned by the rest, got over
also by the same foord into the State of Millain, leaving all his baggage, and
many of his Horse, behind him to the Enemy; there were not many slain, for the
foord being near the quarter, saved many of them. Don Ieronymo Salvaterra was
taken prisoner, and Don Luigi Benavida, both of them being wounded; and if Don
Mauritio had been aware to have placed some to have guarded the foord, the
victory would have been much greater: The Marquess Caracena, who was then in
Vercelli, thought to have served the Enemy with the like sauce; for hearing
that the Princes Horse were quartered in five places above Biela, he rallied
the Horse that were run from their quarters, and joining them to those that
were in Garrison in Vercelli and St. Ia, he marched with them and with 400 Foot
about Sunset, thinking to fall upon the Prince his Horse which lay about
Biela. But he fared not as did Don Mauritio, by reason of the disparity of the
Countries through which they marched; for Caracena marched through an Enemies
Country, and Mauritio through his friends quarters. Wherefore the latter past
with great silence and secrecy, whereas Caracena found the Country up in Arms,
and the bells of the Towns by which he marched ringing aloud; so as not being
able to get to the place he intended before noon day, his resentment proved
vain, save only that he light upon 60 Horse which were given to Biela, which
he routed, and took some of them prisoners. Nizza being taken, Longueville sat
down before Acqui, which he within a few days took, and went to quarter at Gui,
intending, as was imagined, to go to the taking in of Tortona; but he was
dissuaded by Prince Thomaso, who thinking to succeed in the surprisal of
Novara, as he had plotted it, invi^ed the Duke to join with him in that
enterprise. Wherefore the Duke returning to Cassalle joined with the Prince,
who staid for him at Balzola and Morano; and passing together over the Sesia,
they marched toward Novara: But whether it were that he could nor come at his
appointed time to the Gates of Novara, by reason of the excessive rain which
had fallen for two days, or that they had heard that the Marquess of Caracena,
fearing what the issue of this march would be, was entered Novara with above 500
Horse, and a great many Foot: And that the Governor of Millain, who was then
in Alessandria, had sent some foot from Garrison to Garrison by Valenza and
Mortara, so speedily as that these recruits coming before the Enemy arrived,
the Prince began to doubt his design; he and the Duke retreated to Confienza,
and passing over the Sesia distributed their men in Constanza, Dezava,
Carenzana, and in other Towns thereabouts. Where having tarryed a few days, and
moneys being sent from France, they went to the former designed enterprise of
Tortona. The French Forces, and those of the Dowagers in this Camp, rose to the
number of 5000 Horse, and 10000 Foot: Marquess Villa led on the Van,
Longueville followed with the Body of the Battle, and Prince Thomaso brought up
the Rere; and passing over the Poe to Cassalle, and over the Tanaro to
Filizzano; Villa advanced presently to possess himself of all the places near
the City, to keep out Men, and Munition; which when it should be done; this so
important City would undoubtedly have been reduced within four days: For
Tortona being far from Piedmont, none could imagine that the Enemy should leave
the Towns unrecovered, which were held by the Spaniards in the heart of the
State, and advance to this, especially since the winter drew on, and by the
difficulty of bringing relief which was to be brought so far through an Enemies
Country; wherefore as if it had been out of all danger, it had in it a Garrison
of only 100 Soldiers, and no Commander of note. But the enemies diligence was
prevented by the Governor Siruela, who not knowing what to think of the haste
which the Enemy made, and not being able to comprehend where they intended to
go, though he wanted Foot to secure so many places, subject to be assaulted by
so great Forces; yet after having sent succor to Allessandria from Valenza, he
sent 800 Foot to pass over the Poe at Bassignana, and to keep in Piovera; and
ordered Don John Vasques Coronado, who was in Allessandria, that if the Enemy
should tarry in those parts, he should send for those 800 Foot, and with them
succor Annone, Rocaurano, and Aste; but if he should see them make toward
Tortona, he should forthwith send them to assist that City; which was wisely
foreseen by the Governor; and being punctually observed by Vasques, excellent
effects did the^eby redound to the Kings Affairs. For these 800 Foot being
luckily got into the City before Villa's arrival, some few of them only who
were near in the Rere, not being able to escape Villa's diligence who took
them, the Town was enabled to hold out the siege long, which consumed more then
the moiety of that flourishing Army; which if they had quickly taken, they
might easily have made themselves Masters of all on this side the Poe, toward
the Apennine; and would, (their Forces being entire) have had opportunity to
have effected the Prince his vast designs: Not long after Bernardine Galeotti
a Neapolitan, and Prestino, who was an excellent Enginier, being sent by the
Governor, stole into the City; passing over the Mountain which was not as yet
guarded nor possessed by the Enemy, and were both of them a great help to
defend the City. The Army being drawn near the City, and having at the very
first taken the Suburbs, they planted their Artillery against the walls, trying
if the Citizens would willingly surrender, which they not doing, they began
their battery; wherewith having made a breach, Galeotti found the City was not
to be defended, wherefore they retired so hastily to the Castle, as they had
not time to carry their victuals along with them, nor to break down the mils
which were near the walls, things which did afterward much accommodate the
enemy, who entering the City the fifth day, when the Garrison had abandoned it,
and the City by the Bishops interposing, surrendered upon condition: So as the
Enemy began immediately to begirt the Castle with Trenches, and possessed
themselves of the Church and Monastery of S. Dominico, which stood between the
City and the Castle, the Garrison not having fortified it, to keep from (...)
men in the defense thereof, having hardly enough to defend the Castle: And yet
either foreseeing, or already finding how prejudicial the taking of that
Convent would be unto them, they ^ndeavoured to recove^ it the next day by a
stout sally, but were forced to retrea^. The Duke sent the Horse afterward to
scour the Country, who without resistance took the Castle Nuovo di Scrivia,
which Prince Thomaso chose for his quarters, and having placed a quarter also
in Pontecurone, he took Voghera, which threw the Gates open; then turning upon
the Towns and Villages there^bout, he got good store of Victuals, and brought
it together with much more booty into the City: but those who dwelt upon the
hills resisted, and preserved their goods and persons, with much prejudice to
their opposers; the first and most important resolution of the opposers was to
take Serravalle, a Town situated upon the way that leads to the Sea, which
being a place of great consequence, whereby commerce with the Sta^e of Genoa
was either blocked up, or maintained, the business was committed to Marquess
Villa, who going from the Camp with the Piedmont Horse, and five French
Regiments of Foot, which in all made 1500 Horse, and 3000 Foot, he marched
thitherward; and took first Stasono which did willingly surrender, and came
afterward to Serravalle, where taking the Town without resistance he betook
himself to the Castle, whither the Garrison was retreated, and where there was
not any provision; and yet it held out, and afforded the Governor Siruela time
(who was very desirous to preserve that place) to get together as many men as
in so great streights he could from the Garrisons of the State of Millain and
of the Towns in Piedmont, having called Count Galliazzo Trotti from Asti, and
Don Vincenzzo Monsurio from Vercelli, who by reason of the neighborhood of the
State of Millain got into Allessandria without any hinderance, with all their
men: Fra. Iovan Pallavicino, Camp-master, met with more difficulty, and danger,
who was sent for by the Governor from Villa nova, with order, that leaving
men and munition sufficient to keep that place from surprisal, he should come
into Allessandria with the rest, where the Governor stayed expecting him: to
which purpose he sent him ^00 Horse to be his convoy.

Villa nova is near upon 40 miles from the City of Alessandria, in the midst of
Piedmont, near to Towns strongly Garrisoned by the Enemy; so as he was to march
through the Enemies country; which Pallavicimo did with much valor and speed;
and though he past very privately to keep from being discovered by the Enemy,
yet was he pursued by the Garrison of Carmagnuola, which overtook him at the
bridge of Villa Franca, and strove to keep him from passing over it; hoping to
effect their desire by reason of 200 carriages which he brought along with him
laden with warlike ammunition, and also one Cannon, so as they promised
themselves clear victory, with the slaughter of all his men, and the getting of
all his munition; but Palavicino not at all abashed at their approach placed
himself with his ranks in order before the carriages, and facing about made
head against the Enemy, and held them play till the Carriages and the Cannon
past over the Bridge, after which his men began to march in good order, with
their faces still toward the Enemy, and still fighting; who passing over after
them did still pursue them, till Pallavicino being come with his men to
Gombino, a Town two miles distant from the Bridge, made himself master thereof,
and fortifyed himself in an advantageous place, where he stayed with his men in
order, expecting that the Enemy should advance; but they not daring to assault
him upon such disadvantagious terms, left pursuing him, and retreated toward
Carmagnuola, suffering Pallavicino to pass freely into Allessandria, whither he
came safe with his men and carriages; this so great recruite being so luckily
come to the Governor was of great consequence; for with them, and with some
other men that he had, he made up a body of 5000 Foot, and 300 Horse; with the
which marching into the field on the eighth of Octber, he came to Fregarvola, a
Town near Bosco, intending to go from thence to Serravalle, whither he had sent
some Foot already, that they might endeavor to get one after another into the
Castle; and though his men were fewer in number then the Enemy; yet the Enemy
being distributed into several quarters, the Governor doubted not, but that he
being more in number then any one of the Enemies quarters, his design might
take effect: Nor was he therein deceived, for it fell out better then was
expected; the Duke of Longueville who was before Tortona with but a few men,
hearing of this expedition, and fearing that the Enemy might fall upon some
part of the Trenches which were ill provided of Defendants, and might enter
into the Castle, and so into the City, and cause some important mischief, sent
speedily back for all the Horse which were dispersed abroad in several parts,
and brought them nearer Tortona; and moreover sent for Marquess Villa from
Serravalle; who writ back that he thought it better to quit Tortona, and be
masters of Serravalle, then to abandon Serravalle, and come to before Tortona;
for that the way by Sea being block up on that part to the State of Millaln,
Tortona would not be able to hold out long, and way would be made to further
progress; he therefore advised him to give over that Siege, and to join with
him in the taking of Serravalle; but Longueville persisting in his own opinion,
redoubled his order with more efficacy; Wherefore Villa leaving Serravalle,
though unwillingly, forewent that Castle, and the Town which he had already
taken: So the Governor having by the mere fame of his march luckily freed
Serravalle, which was held as good as lost, he sent a sufficient Garrison
thither to guard it, and furnished it with munition; keeping afterward in the
Town of Bosco, he stayed there, to keep the victuals and munition from coming
to the enemies Camp, which were sent from Piedmont by Montferrate; believing
that the Enemy not being able to maintain that siege long for scarcity of
victuals and munition, must of necessity give over the enterprise; and to this
purpose, he acquainted the Commonwealth of Genoa, how unjustly they intended to
invade the State of Millain, and how prejudicial that would be to the Genoeses;
wherefore he exhorted that State not to afford any conveniences to their
enemies; the Commonwealth hereupon took into consideration, how that all the
Castles which she held beyond the Apenine were open, except it were Novi, which
was only environed with old we^k walls; and that sharing more of the sterility
of the ne^ghbouring mountains, then of the fruitfulness of the valleys of
Lombardy, they are of themselves not only unable to feed Foreign Armies, but
even not only to provide for themselves, and that they ^eeded to be provided
with victuals from their neighboring Towns. Wherefore since they were more
furnished with victuals from Novi then from home, the inhibition desired by the
Governor would be superfl^ous, and no ways helpful to his pretended end, but
would be very prejud^cial to those people, who would be thereby provoked to
Military Licentiousness, by the pillaging and plundering the whole Country in
resentment of the affront; nor would the mischief cease here; for the King of
France would be offended with the Commonwealth for this action, which
peradventure he would esteem little less then Hostile; wherefore the
Commonwealth having acquainted the Governor with these reasons sent a
competent number of Soldiers to Novi, under Philip Palavicino, one well versed
both in Civil, and in Military affairs; and enjoined him that he should
endeavor the quiet of those confines, and to keep them from the inrode of
disbanded Soldiers, and not to suffer any innovation whereby the liberty of
that market might be prejudiced; so the French whose quarters lay near that
Market, coming thither to buy victuals at any rates, the prises rise to such a
height, as it drew great store of Victuals from the (...) of Millian, which
was no little ease to the French Army; which the Spaniards not being able to
suffer, who were for the most part quartered beyond Tortona toward the Poe,
could not make use of that market, as the French did; they complained of the
Commonwealth, as if she had favored the French more then them; not seeing, nor
being willing to see, that almost all the victuals which were brought to Novi
came from the State of Millain, and that they not being able by any means their
own scourers of the Country could use, to keep their own subjects from bringing
victuals to Novi, they were cause of that mischief^ to themselves which they
pre^ended to receive from the Commonwealth; thus the French Army, without loss
of any time, continued to besiege that Castle, about which having taken up
their quarters, and drawn a line about it, they made four approaches toward it:
two toward the City, and two toward the Mountain and Turenna's Regiment being
quartered over against a certain half moon, he was forced by a gallant sally
which was made to quit it; the like to which befell another Regiment which was
quartered upon the edge of the Ditch, it being bea^en back by another fierce
sally: several other sallies were likewise made with various Fortune, but for
the most part with advantage to the opposers. And Bosco being inconvenient to
the Governor Siruele, by reason of its ^ar distance; for he could not from
thence hinder a convoy of powder which was sent from Cassalle, though he had
sent the Marquess of Caracena to intercept it; he thought he might keep out
relief better by removing to Pozzola, which lay upon the rode way to Tortona
from Novi, and Monferrate, not above six miles from Tortona, which was divided
from thence by the Scrivia; he therefore went thither with all his men; but not
being able to tarry there long by reason of the scarcity of water and forage,
and because he thought the Castle could not hold out long, he thought it
necessary to give over the thought of bel^guering the Enemies Camp, and to
relieve it by open force; he therefore resolved to go from Pozzuolo, and to
march toward Sale, which lies a little lovver toward the Poe, on the
le^hand of Scrivia; he marched in battle array, in case he should be assaulted
by the Camp from before Tortona, as he was threatened to be; he was also moved
to remove his quarters, hearing that Marquess Villa was gone from the Camp, and
having past over the Scrivia was marched toward the Tanaro, to receive there a
good quantity of powder, which he knew was to be brought from Cassalle; which
the Governor (...) of, he had before sent order to Valenza that they might be
careful to intercept it; and those of Valenza were not negligent in observing
his Orders; for having assembled both Horse, and Foot from the neighboring
parts, they went in pursuit thereof; and lighting upon the Convoy, they fell so
furiously upon the Convoyers, as to save the^r lives, and not being able to
save the Powder, they threw a great part of it into the Poe; and being come
near Bassignana, they left the rest upon the banks of the Tanaro; and Marquess
Villa being come to that River, and seeing the Country people busy in sharing
the rest, he set Musketeers along the shore, for fear of whom the Country
people fled, and left the Ammunition; and Villa spying a Barque which lay
hulling in the River, without any Boat-men, he made some of his men swim
toward it, who took it, and brought over the Ammunition in it; and laying it
upon carriage-horses which they had brought to that end, they brought it safe
to the Camp before Tortona, whither Villa came safe also before the Governor
of Millain got from Pozzuolo to Sale; who since he had mist of meeting with
Villa in his return, as he intended to have done, he sent some of his men to
recover Cas^el nuovo di Scrivia; from whence a Troop of Horse that lay there in
Garrison going out to discover the Enemy, they skirmished with them, and were
repulsed by them; and the keeper of the Castle at his return found the gates
shut upon him by the Townsmen; so as failing of that refuge, he went to
Pontecurone, to join with the Horse which were quartered there; and the
Governor passing over the Scrivia with the rest of his men, went to Castle
nuovo; which made all the Country toward Tortona on this side the River be
abandoned by the Enemies Horse and Foot which were quartered in those parts,
who came all to the line of circumvolution about the Castle: whereupon the
Governor went to Pontecurone, and finding it empty he made there a Rendezvous
of Arms, and placed some Troops of Horse there which were newly come from the
State of Millain; and hearing that there were only 100 French in Garrison in
the Castle of Voghera, he sent Forces to drive them out; which was done without
any difficulty; for the French at the very sight of the Spanish Colors
surrendered the place, and retired, as the rest had done, to the ^renches about
Tortona: all on this side the Scrivia toward Tortona being taken, and the
Governor being master of the Field, he betook himself wholly to relieve the
Castle, the Condition whereof he could by no means hear, so diligently we^e all
the Avenues guarded; which made him much doubt the preservation thereon, not
knowing how long it could hold out; and it was given out by the Enemy that it
would soon be surrendered: And yet because he would not be failing to himself,
nor leave any thing undone which might make for the presesvation of so
important a place, he was very diligent in getting provisions, whereby to keep
the Castle from ^urrendring; wherefore he hasted to relieve it; he knew he
could not effect his design by any way but by that of the Mountain, wherein he
was to meet with two great difficulties; the first, that the Enemy foreknowing
it, would fortify the Trench on that side the more strongly, and would place
his whole Forces there, since he could not apprehend fear in any other place:
The other difficulty proceeded from the inconveniences which were found in the
situation of the Mountain. The Castle of Tortona stands upon the top of a
Hill, which being severed from higher Hills declines gently for the space of
three miles on the East side of the City, which lies just at the Foot thereof;
so as the Governor, if he would relieve the Castle, was to begin from the
highest and furthermost tops of the Hills, and by the ridge thereof appro^ch
the well munited Trenches which shelter the Castle on the Hills side: Nor was
this all the difficulty; about a mile before you come to the line of
Circumvolution, the Hill declining by degrees shapes out a gutter, which falls
into a Valley, whither he who will advance must fall down, and then climb up
again to the opposite top: This gutter or slit was very incommodious and
dangerous, if the Enemy should have munited the edge thereof, as it was
probable they had done; therefore the resolution of bringing relief was fuller
of danger then hope: But the Governor, who thought the loss of this Castle to
be the worst of evils that could befall, was resolved to try his Fortune; he
therefore took up two quarters on the very top of the Hill, and possessed
himself of Montgualdone and Sarzano; and falling down from thence, he came
without any opposition to the Gutter or Slit; where he found Longueville and
his men on the opposite height well prepared to defend that Pass; nor
herewithall content, he fortified himself with a good Trench, and with
Artillery, upon the edge of the top of his hill; so as from thence he commanded
all the Enemies Troops, and all the avenues by which he might be assaulted. The
Governor being come to the slit, began also to fortify the top of his hill;
and contemplating the Enemies advantageous position, he began to find, that he
could not send to assault it, but by ways which by the fall of waters were made
slippery, and which were so (...), as but a few could march on front; so as to
attempt an assault against a long, stout, well munited row of men, would be a
great piece of folly; there remained but one thing to be done, that he might
not seem to have moved in vain, and to have done thus much to no purpose; which
was, to send some men to try an assault upon some Corpse de guard which were
without the Trenches, placed upon the hanging of the slit, near a little
solitary Chapel which was there, to see whether the Enemy being provoked
thereby would forego his advantages, and fall rashly down into the Valley,
whereby fighting in an equal place, way might be made for the intended succor;
as this conce^t was idle, so proved it unuseful; for though Marquess Villa came
out of the Trench with his Horse, backed with some Squadrons, and falling upon
the assaulters, bent them back to a certain little house which they had
formerly possessed themselves of, and which stood in the middle between the two
Camps; yet no more was done; but all the Corpse de guard being sent for back,
returned to the Trench; and the French Commande^s showed themselves more wary
in maintaining the advantage of their (...), then ready to hazard the
unce^tainty of Ba^tle either upon equal or unequal terms; and therefore the
Governor finding that the Enemy was not minded to forego his advantage, he
attempted, but in vain, to put 300 men by night into the Castle. Both the
Armies kept their stations that night, the next day the rain increased; so as
the Spanish Army not being able to convey in their Victuals, and their
Soldiers being exposed to the rain, the Governor was forced to think of
retreating; he therefore made his Horse advance, and left Don Vincenzo Gonzaga
with a good strength of Horse and Foot, to keep the station where his Army was
quartered till his Soldiers might be marched off: who met with many great
obstacles in their retreat; for being to pass over the Gru, (a little rivulet
at other times, but which ran now with very much violence being much swollen by
the fall of waters,) they were fain to climb up a hill beyond it, and to draw
up their Artillery by it, which by reason of the rain was become hardly
passable; wherefore they resolved to march both Horse and Foot by the current
of the Gru; wherefore the General of the Horse, Marquess Caracena, sent some
Horse that night to guard the lower part of that rivulet, to defend the Army in
its march, by whom he was afterward informed, that many Horse were come out of
the City of Tortona, marching toward Vighizvolo, by which the Army was to pass
with their Artillery; wherefore the Marquess doubled the aforesaid Guards,
charging them to mark well the Enemies way, and to give notice of every the
least proceeding: The Guards returned, averring their former advertisement,
and, moreover, that the Horse and Foot marched toward the same stations that
the Spanish Army had left; whereupon the Spanish Army haulted, to consult upon
what was to be done: the joint opinion was, that they should continue their
begun march, for that the advertisement might be false; and if otherwise, they
might by continuing their march get to Vighizvolo before the Enemy; only
Caracena opposed the general resolution, averring that the Horse which marched
in the Rere should be so long held skirmishing by the Enemies Horse which
advanced by the Valley, as the rest of the Enemies Horse which marched by the
hill might come up unto them, and fall upon them, and that not being able for
want of Foot to defend themselves, they the Spaniards would be routed, that the
Enemy would pursue their Victory, and advancing forwards would also rout the
Foot: he concluded therefore, that it would be better to bring all their men
into one body, and keep in that station which was very strong, as being between
two hills, which were higher then those on which the Enemy was; and that
keeping the Gru before them which ran between the two Armies, it was impossible
they could fight them upon such advantage without passing over the Gru, which
he desired the Enemy would dare to do; for by so doing their utter ruin would
undoubtedly ensue, and the loss of all their men, whereby they the French might
obtain a signal vi^tory; and if, as it might be believed, the Spaniards might
think this too dangerous, and so keep idle where they were, they might draw up
their Artillery; which might be done in one day or two, and the Baggage might
march securely in the Rere. This advice was generally disliked, all of them
persisting in their former resolution of marching along the Gru; but the
Marquess knowing the certain danger they should run into by that march, said
resolutely he would not go that way, and gave order to the Horse to march the
way he should direct them; and was so resolute therein, as the rest changed
their minds, and came over to his opinion; and ere long, by an accident that
happened, his opinion was clearly found to be the best, and the only safe one; a
thick cloud arose upon daybreak, which took away the sight of the Campagnia and
of the hill; which vanishing away a little after Caracena's opinion was
approved of, several Troops of the Enemies Horse and Foot were discovered on
the hill; which made them all aware, what imminent danger the Army would have
incurred had not Caracena persisted in his opinion; wherefore the whole Army
very much applauded the Marquess, as their deliverer from so great a danger,
and acknowledged themselves infinitely obliged to him; and not long after they
might see the French Troops which lay toward Vighizvolo join with those upon
the hill, by which Caracena's counsel appeared to be the sole safety of that
Army, which was at that time of such importance for the preservation of the
State of Millain. Both the Armies kept their stations, not acting any thing:
the French not daring to assault the Spaniards began to retire toward the
Camp, two hours before Sunset; which the Spaniards perceiving they also
removed, and went toward Pontecurone, whither it came without any encounter,
but weary; the Artillery was drawn by the Dutch of Prince Borso's Regiment, and
by some others of the same Nation, by strength of Arms, up the hill, and safely
brought to Pontecurone, for which they had good store of drinking money given
them: a retreat, which the fuller it was of danger and difficulty, the more
praiseworthy was it. The Besiegers thinking that the Castle would immediately
be surrendered, now that the relieving Army was gone, whereby they were
deprived of all hopes of relief, sent to demand the Castle; but it was manfully
answered, that affairs were not yet brought to terms of surrender. In this
interim a great supply of Victuals and Ammunition was brought to the French
Camp by the way of Acqui; nor was Piedmont content only to send considerable
succors to the enterprise of Tortona; but the Dowager making use of this
occasion designed to take such Towns from the Spaniards as they were possessed
of, and to free Piedmont absolutely, whilst it was unprovided of requisite
Garrisons. To this purpose she got together a considerable body of men,
composed of the Military remainders in Piedmont, and drawn out of the Garrisons
thereof, and of Montferrat; to whom she added those that were sent by Marquess
Villa, when he parted from Serravalle; and this was approved of by the French
and Piedmonteses; for by sending of these men into the field, one of two things
was likely to result: either the recovery of ^e Towns, or the withdrawing of
the Spaniards from defending ^ortona; and because the recovery of the Towns was
the thing chiefly intended by the Dowager, her opinion was approved of by
Marquess Pianezza, who propounded the enterprise of Verrua first, and next that
of Vercelli; not so much in consideration of their slender Garrisons, as for
the safety and convenience which would redound to Piedmont thereby, and for
that nothing else would more div^rt the defending of Tortona. And the manner of
effecting both these enterprises being discussed, the French Ambassador who
could hear no more acceptable news then the recovery of Verrua, which opened
the way to France for the relief of Cassalle, joined willingly with Pianezza in
his opinion: Wherefore some Horse were sent to Verrua, to possess themselves of
the Avenues thereabouts, that they might keep out the Spanish succor which
might be sent thither from the confining Towns of Trino, Pontestura, or
Villa-nuova. The good success of this enterprise consisted in expedition;
wherefore Pianezza having sent men by the Poe to this intended enterprise, and
ladders and other necessary instructions along with them, he marched toward
the Town; where he applied ladders that very night, by which he forced the
Defendants to fly unto the Castle, so he easily became Master of the Town,
which did facilitate the taking of the Castle. But before he would attempt it,
he would try how the Defendants minds stood; he therefore beat a Call,
summoning them to surrender: whereupon they par^ed, and the next morning
yielded upon honorable conditions, by which the place was restored by the
Spanish Governor to Pianezza, who received it in the name of the Dowager and
the Duke. Verrua was a place of great consequence, by reason that it commanded
the Poe; which when Marquess Pianezza had so easily gotten, he bethought
himself of greater enterprises, as to recover Verce^li, where the Garrison was
much diminished, by reason of the necessary defense of Tortona the Marquess
cast his eye upon two Tenag^ias, that of St. Andrea, and that of the Citadel;
which not being guarded answerable to their great^ess seemed easy to be taken,
if they should be attempted by night; and when they should be taken would be a
safe quarter against the City. But this business required more men, wherefore
it had been forme^ly thus ordered in Turin, that all the French should join
with Govognes, Governor of the Citadel of Cassalle, who coming from thence
with part of the Garrison should take the Tenagl^a of the Citadel, and Pianezza
with his P^edmontese was to take that of Sr. Andrea; but whilst this enterprise
was in hand, it was inter^upted by no slight accident: The French Ambassador
^earing that Verrua was surrendered to Pian^zza, who held it in the Dowagers
name, began to complain, pretending that since the French concurred in the
enterprise as well as the Piedmonteses, the French were to have entered there in
Garrison; where^ore he much resented that Pianezza should do so great an injury
to the King of France's Forces: Whereunto the Marquess answered, that he was
the Duke of Savoy's Soldier, not Soldier to the King of France, that the Town
appertained to the Duke, that the Spanish Governor had surrendered it to him,
as to a servant of the Dukes, as ^e had done in other the like cases,
particularly in the recovery of Ceva, which was recovered by the joint Forces
of France and Piedmont; wherefore he ought not have done otherwise upon this
occasion; but some distasts falling out hereupon, the Ambassador sent Monsieur
di Malici, Marshal of the Camp, and Governor of Pinarvolo, to command the
French that were with Marquess Pianezza; who being disgusted at this affron^,
turned over not only the French, but the Piedmonteses also, to Malici, and
r^turned himself to Turin: For which Longueville was angry with the Emb^ssador,
and told him that this change of Commander was contrary to his instructions.
Pianezza before he departed, acquainted Malici and Covognes, with what was
resolved upon Turin touching Vercelli, who being advanced with their men to
within five mile of that City, suddenly altered their minds, the cause not
being known, and turned upon St. Ia, hoping to take it by a Scalado; but they
failed therein: for Monsuri^, Camp-master and Captain of the Garrison, having
had notice thereof, was vigilant and defended himself manfully, not only
against the Scalado, but against several assaults, and repulsed the Assailants
much to their loss of blood: Who not knowing whither better to go, marched
toward Tortona, to bring that real help thither, which they could not do by
diversion, being sent for thither, as they said, by Longueville; which
resolution though it proved not so prejudicial as the assaulting of St. Ia, yet
it did no good; for being come to Acqui, where they heard that Don Vincenzo
Gonzaga was come from Bosco to oppose them, and to keep them from going to
Tortona, they haulted, waiting for an answer from Duke Longueville, to a desire
made unto him by Marshal Malici, that he would send him a Convoy which might
conduct him safe thither. Longueville and Prince Thomaso, were not well pleased
(as was said) with their coming, for they despaired of good success in this
enterprise, which proved every day more difficult; and therefore desired any
just occasion of quitting it with honor: They therefore were no sooner
acquainted by Marquess Pianezza of what was resolved in Turin concerning
Vercelli, and with what ease they thought they might take it; but they thought
they had light upon the occasion which they wished for, of changing the^r
languishing hopes of taking that Castle, with the recovery which they for
certain promised themselves of the Citadel of Vercelli, upon which they pitched
their thoughts, and were resolved to fall upon it when they first heard the
City was taken; and they were troubled that the others leaving Vercelli were
coming toward Tortona: Wherefore they writ to the Marquess, wishing him to
keep still at Acqui; the Governor Siruela growing apprehensive of that City,
by reason of what had happened in Piedmont, and by the advancing of the French
and Piedmonteses toward Vercelli, he sent some Forces from Pontecurone to
strengthen it; he had also sent Don Vincenza Gonzaga, with a body of Horse
toward Bosco, to fall upon the succor and munition which past from Montferrat
to the Enemies Camp; who when he was come to the place intended, and heard that
Colonel Mauzino was past over the Scrivia, and that he was gone with some
Troops of Horse to seek forage, went to meet him, and lighting upon him at
Bazzaluzza, gave order to assault him; which Don Diego di Villaroi, Captain of
the Horse, who marched in the Van, presently did. And the Governor coming
after with the rest, a fierce skirmish ensued, wherein many of those that were
assaulted were slain, many fled, and many were taken prisoners; amongst which
Colonel Manzino himself, with many Officers and Soldiers, to the number of two
hundred; few of the Assailants were slain; but Don Carlo Caracciola a Captain
of Horse, whilst he was fighting valiantly according to his custom, was shot in
the head by a Carabine, and killed. The Castle of Tortona, this mean while, was
straightly besieged, and the besiegers being fallen into the ditch, and got to
the wall, fell to make Mines, and the workmen were very much pressed by the
Commanders, fearing lest being much lessened in men, and despairing of succor
from Piedmont, by reason of opposition made by Gonzaga, they should be forced
to give over the enterprise; and the approach of Winter, against which they had
no defense, made them despair the more; another no small inconvenience befell
them by Serravalle Garrison, which fell by night upon the nearest and greatest
of the mi^s which furnished the Camp with Grist; and though they were played
upon by a neighboring company of Musketeers, yet they at last wan the Mill,
and slew all the Musketeers, set fire upon the Mill, and retreated with little
loss to Serravalle; the strong defense which was made by the Defendants made
the taking of the Town be much doubted; and the Governor not being able to
make the Enemy remove, did what he could to incommodate them by keeping away
succor, by turning the water from their Mills, by sending in slender succors
secretly to the besieged, that they might hold out the longer; hoping in what
the Enemy feared, that the approaching Winter which began to be very bitter, it
being now the midst of November. would keep the enemy from working: but the
besiegers diligence did much obstruct the stealing in of succor into the
Castle; so as though some relief was stolen in, yet being discovered by the
Scouts they were forced to fl^e; at last, the Mines being ready to play, the
enemy were wished to yield before fire should be given to them: who returned no
answer, but that they expected commands from Spain; fire was therefore given to
the Mines; some of which, particularly those which were toward the City,
wrought good effect; so as a strong assault being given, wherein many of the
assailants perished, they at last lodged in the breach which was made in the
Bulwark by the Mine: yet the Engeneer Prestino's diligence rendered that
advantage vain; who caused a defense of boords and rafters to be made, which
cut off the Bulwarks on which the enemy were lodged from the Castle; and the
Defendants having munited that work on their side with a trench began to stand
man for man, and to fight the oppugners upon equal terms; which they might the
better do, for that the Mines on the outside the Castle did but little hurt.

Three hundred of the choicest Foot that were in the Spanish Camp were at this
time convoyed into the Castle, conducted by Don Diego Alvarado, Sergeant Major
of the Neapolitan Brigade; by which recruit the Defendants being encouraged,
and furnished with ammunition, which every one of those that came in brought in
a Wallet ride about their necks, sallyed stoutly out upon the enemy, and forced
them to abandon the breach whereon they were; the oppugners seeing so good a
succor got into the Castle began to despair of the enterprise, gave over
mining, which they saw did but little good, fell to their batteries again, more
out of rage, then out of any good they expected thereby; but it so happened, that
as they had got but little good by all their attempts which they had hitherto
advisedly made; so by this, from which they expected little or no advantage,
the whose victor was occasioned; for they made one shot against the Keep of the
Castle, which beat down part of it, and the ruins thereof fell upon the
remainder of the victuals, contrary to all expectation; so as the Defendants
having lost all their victuals, nothing but surrender was to be thought upon;
thus forced by necessity they parlyed, which ended in a surrender upon
honorable conditions, having leave to carry away five piece of Cannon; a thing
not heard of upon the yielding up of places furnished with greater store of
Artillery; and it was also expressly covenanted, that they might have five days
allowed them to expect if any relief or succor should be sent them; which time
being expired, and no relief appearing, they marched out in number above 1000
Soldiers, with Arms, Baggage, Colors Flying, Match lighted, and with their
five piece of Cannon, which served to trumpet forth their valor, and they were
attended to the Confines of Allessandria, being very well received in all
places, and much praised for the resolution they had showed during the whole
Siege; Galleotti, in reward of the great valiour he had showed in defending the
Castle, was made Camp-Master; which honor he did not long enjoy; for he was
unfortunately slain not long after with a Musket shot; the Spanish Garrison
marching out, the French entered on the 26 of November, which was the day of
surrender; who found the walls so torn and rent by the Mines and batteries, as
not being easily able to mend them, they made what shift they could to defend
them, with fagots, rafters, and other things; the Conquering Army retreated to
the neighboring Towns, where having tarried some days, they at great rates got
all the victuals they could from the neighboring parts, wherewith they
furnished the Castle, and departed to Piedmont, but were much wasted and
consumed; and as they marched through Monferrat, they were yet more lessened by
the great store of rain that fell, and by other sufferings; a good part of the
Horse being gone to the Confines of Montferrat, were stricken with a pannick
fear at the meet same that the Governor of Millain was with an Army upon their
backs; So as running directly away they light upon a path that led to the Orba,
a little rivulet, which being swollen by the fall of waters ran very swiftly;
those who came first to the water side, not being able to go back (so fast were
they followed by those that came after) were forced into the water, where
entangled amongst themselves, both the first and the last were miserably
drowned; the foot fared no better for being dispersed, some here, some there,
they were pilladg'd, and slain; the few that got to Piedmont were quartered in
several quarters, and rallied; so as, were it not for the getting of a deserted
City, and a Castle which was half beaten down, the business proved prejudicial
to both sides, and reciprocally ruinous. But it is true, that the taking of
this City, and the recovery thereof by the Spaniards, was the occasion of the
Piedmonteses recovery of many places which the Spaniards had taken in the
former Wars; which was no little advantage to the French and Piedmonteses; for
otherwise it would have been more troublesome and chargeable for them to have
done it: The Governor of Millain, though he had done all that was possible for
the preservation of the Castle that was lost, so as the loss the eof could not
be ascribed to any default of his; yet being very much troubled that it should
fall out in the time of his Government, and that that had befaln him which had
not happened to any of his Predecessors, since the State of Millain was joined to
the Spanish Empire, he was grievously vexed, and being desirous to repair so
great a loss he minded nothing but how to recover it; he therefore thought
every hour a year till the Winter were over, that he might wipe away that stain
which he thought lay upon him for that loss; which he the rather hoped to do by
the death which befell in France to the Cardinal Richlieu, whose Authority and
Counsel, as they had kept the Enemies of France in terror whilst he lived, so
they ceasing with his death, every one thought that so excellent an Architect
failing to the good Government and prosperous conduct of the Affairs of that
Kingdom, they would decline apace from that height to which they were brought
whilst he lived. He died about the end of November, in the year 42, of a
natural death, after a long and noisome or troublesome disease; he was very
stiff for the advancement of the Regal Sovereignty, as also of his own
Authority; and this to that degree, that so he might arrive at any thing which
might advance either the one or the other, he did not abhor doing any thing,
though it were not clad with honesty nor justice; so as he knew, better then
any other, how to make use of that saying of Julius Caesar; That if reason were
to be violated, it were to be violated for reason of State; and therefore he
was termed by some the new Tiberius of our times: he rose to such authority in
the Court, and had so great a power over the Kings genius, as he was to have
many encounters, and to shock not only with the Princes and Grandees of the
Kingdom, and with the Queen Mother, but with the Kings only Brother, who was
then Heir to the Kingdom: insomuch as the Queen Mother not able to tolerate
such preeminence and authority, which did even outdo hers, went out of the
Kingdom, and would never return, unless the King would remove the Cardinal;
which the King not doing, she lived an exile from France many years, and died
in Cullen, a little before the Cardinal; whither, having run through many
Countries, she at last retired her self; and the Brother, having gone several
times out of France, for the same Reasons, and several times returned, not
able to bear with so great a predominancy in the Cardinal, conspired often
against him; and how much the Princes and Grandees of the Kingdom were
distasted with this transcendent authority, was shown by frequent Conspiracies
against it, and against the Government of the Kingdom; not without danger
sometimes to the Kings person. The people also, and the Provinces of the
Kingdom, not able to bear with the many grievances which were laid upon them,
for maintaining the immoderate expenses of War abroad, did often rebel; but all
these Conspiracies and Seditions did rather increase, and confirm his
greatness, then any ways lessen it; and the King himself was not able longer to
endure it; because all the Lords and Office^s of the Kingdom, as well Gown-men,
as those of the Sword, either dazzled with the Cardinals so great splendour, or
attracted by hopes of favor, or drawn by fear of hatred and revenge, which
they saw they could not shun, followed the Cardinal, and did, as it were,
worship him; it was thought, that the last Conspiracy of the Grand Escuyer de
France was not plotted without the Kings tacit consent, as being desirous to
be rid of that over-shadower of his Regal Majesty; and though the vanity of
this opinion may be convinced by how easily the King might have suppressed him,
if he had listed, and by that the Conspirators held intelligence with the Crown
of Spain, and had been promised assistance from thence; yet it is very certain
that the King being weary of such a Minister of State would, have been well
enough contented to have had his wings clipped, had not the managing of the great
affairs which past at the present through his hands made his service too
necessary to his Majesty at this time; howsoever it was, the Cardinal died, if
not in the greatest voluntary and free favor of the King, which he had so
abundantly enjoyed before; yet in his forced and necessary favor, which did
the more authorize it; Foreign Princes also, who were Friends and Confederates
with the Crown, had no less reason to complain of his rigorous actions, then
the French: he having made them prove the acrimony of his genius, which was
inclined by all means to his Kings advancement and greatness, as if not fully,
may, in some sort, be comprehended by the context of this History; and yet all
things succeeded so prosperously both within and without the Kingdom, as that
though he entered into the conduct of public affairs when they were
sufficiently full of trouble, variety of Religions, Factions and Contumacies,
as well of the Princes as People; and consequently in a tottering and dangerous
condition, he restored the Catholic Religion fully, and suppressed Heresies, and
restored the Kingdom to perfect peace; won credit to Military Discipline; and
re-ordered the public Government excellently well in order; he kept all
Enemies not only out of the Kingdom, but assaulted them vigorously at their own
homes: he did not only secure the Confines of the Kingdom, but did much dilate
them by the acquisition of considerable Provinces; and finally, he rendered the
name of France glorious, and remarkable above all other Nations; he died full
of glory, and worthy to be honored for his singular service done unto the
Crown, with the glorious Title of Pater Principis, and Patriae. Many attributed
the felicity of so many actions to his extraordinary good fortune; but because
her wonted inconstancy repugns such continual good success, we must needs
confess, that Cardinal Richlieu's actions were not carried on by the will of
Fortune, but governed by a more then humane wisdom. The King, not without
reason, bewailed the death of this great Minister of State; for he said well
who said, that the bounds of the Forces of the Kingdom consisted in the
Authority of his every where credited and feared Counsels; and doubtlesly, the
effects of so great a loss would soon have been felt, had not the same
Cardinals providence, whilst he was yet alive, repaired so imminent a danger,
by leaving a new successor to that Government which was like to be vacant after
his death; which was Julius Mazzarini, whom we have often mentioned, who being
at the Kings intercession created Cardinal not long before; and brought by the
said Richlieu, whilst he was yet alive, into the Government of the most
important business of the Kingdom; which showed that he knew him to be the
ablest man, and most capable of all others, to enter upon the conduct of
Public Government; and therefore preferring the public good before his
private conveniences, and before the interests of those that were nearest to
him in blood and alliance, he propounded him to the King for his successor,
though he were a Forreigner, and an Italian by birth; who after Richlieu's
death, having by the Kings good will, taken the Reins of Public Government
into his hands, with fortunate presage, and more fortunate success, gave proof
that the Kingdom wanted not Government neither at home nor abroad, nor found it
any change of Governor; so uniform do the Affairs of the Kingdom run now, as
they did before (as shall be said in its proper place) and, if it may be lawful
to say so, not only equally well, but advantagiously better.

Two months after Cardinal Richleiu's death, the Conde Duca fell from his
grace of being Favorite in the Court of Spain; wherein he had continued for the
space of 22 years in absolute authority, but with universal hatred: which
hatred, added to the great misfortunes with befell that crown under his conduct,
was the occasion of his fall; for the King, moved by the exclamations of so
many people, who were discontented with the Government of this Favorite, and
with the blame laid upon his public and private comportments, from whence they
professed all their disorders and misfortunes had proceeded, resolved at last
to remove him; and taking from him the management of public and private
Affairs confined him to Locches, not far from Madrid; but not long after he was
confined to Thoro, a City in old Castile, where after some years he died. Truly
it cannot be denied, but that this Gentleman was very zealous of his Kings
greatness, and was extraordinarily accurate in ordering public affairs,
wherein, foregoing all Sports and Pastimes, he was very assiduously diligent
and careful. Moreover, he was not to be bribed; nothing in him was vendible; he
seemed wholly intent upon the Kings grandezza, and upon the good Government of
public Affairs; but these excellent gifts were, I will not say, corrupted with
as many vices, but distempered by the excess of the same virtues; for he,
taking the advancement of the Kings and the Crowns Prerogative to be the most
refined Maxim, and the end of all good and perfect Government, seemed so
intent thereupon, as not at all minding the peoples satisfaction or interest,
he cared for nothing else: not knowing that the peoples satisfaction is the
true basis and surest founda^ion of Principality; and that no Empire that is
violent is long lived; so as this, which he thought to be the true and perfect
Rule of Government, did degenerate* into manifest Tyranny. Hence proceeded his
immense desire of extinguishing the Liberty and Franchise which the Spaniards
call Fueros, by which the Kingdoms and Provinces of Spain, under pretense of
liberty and exemption, have always been willingly obedient to the Crown of
Castile; whereof they do boast much, and have been always careful exactors: but
this State-minister not caring to distaste them in this which was the
foundation of their ready and willing obedience, as Vassals to his Majesty,
endeavored to annul those their Customs or Fueros, and to reduce the people of
Spain into the form of mere Provincials, absolutely as subjected to the Crown
of Castile; which did so embitter their very souls, as made them fall into
rebellion. Many have said, and it is generally believed, that this Minister of
State did use the Catalonians with all extremity of rigor, purposely to make
them rebel, to the end that upon that pretense he might deprive them of all
privileges as guilty of High Treason, and reduce them to mere subjection, till
by his continual vexations he wrought his ends upon them, and gathered the
bitter fruits of his Tyrannic^l Counsels. The like be^ell the Kingdom of
Portugal, which being by rigor and bitterness compelled to rebel, chose the
Duke of Braganza, the only branch of Regal blood in Portugal, for their King;
which when the Conde Duca heard of he hasted joyfully to the King, as rejoicing
at this rebellion, and c^aved thanks from him for the good news he brought him,
that he was now become absolute King of Portugal, and Master of all the
Territories and Fortunes of the Duke of Braganza, which were very great in that
Kingdom.

Nor did this his tyrannous ^allon confine it self only to the people and
Provinces which we^e subject to the Crown, but it extended to confederate
friends and Princes; who having been treated by the former Kings with all Love
and Respect, and allured by benefits and honors largely con^er'd upon them; he
began in an imperious manner to distaste, and af^erwards to whip them soundly:
His Government was grown so hateful to the very Castilians themselves, as he
grew detested and abhorred by them all; the Grandees of Spain being in several
sorts distasted and ill tre^ed were not able to endure it, went voluntarily to
the Court, and retired themselves from their own jurisdictions, so as the King
was almost left solitary alone at Court; it was observed that the two greatest
Princes of Christendom were, at the same time, and by several ways, deprived
of their chiefest favorites, and almost robbed of that luster and splendour which
Princes use to receive from the numerous attendance of the greatest Personages
of their Kingdoms. One of them by the excellency of Virtue, which drew them
after her possessour, and with drew them from the King; the other, by the
hatred which all men bore to the Favorite, which made the great ones keep far
from Court. Wherefore when the Favorites fall was hea^d of, as the King
returned from the Escurialle to the Court, he was met by ten Grandees a league
before he came to Madrid, which caused the King who had not for a long time
before been so attended, ask what the matter was, and if any strange accident
had happened at Madrid? to which Don Melchior di Borgia answered, in all their
Names; that now the time was come wherein his Majesty should know the true
devotion which the Grandees Spain bo^e to the Crown and to his person; and that
if they had not waited upon him formerly as they ought, it was out of those
reasons which were well known to his Majesty. Nor were they the Grandees only
that were distasted with the grea^ness of the Conde Duca, but the Nobility and
all other inferior persons lived discontentedly, by reason of their hard
usage; and those few who enjoyed any favor at Court came so hardly by it, as
they thought it hardly thanks worthy. So as the Fountains of Regal bounty being
shut up, and those of hardship and ^igor only open, the public Government was
become nothing but severity, which made men only not dissatisfied, but mad and
desperate; and though he were not ignorant of all this, yet did he not alter
his way of proceeding; but being sure that all this happened for his being wholly
intent upon the Kings service, he did rejoice and glory in it; and if the
Castilians fell not into rebellion, as did the Catalonians and Portugueses, or
into conspiracies as did the French, it must only be attributed to their great
continency, and to their obsequious devotion toward their King, which made
them, by a singular example of Love and Loyalty, rather suffer the indiscretion
and unbridled Will of the State-Minister, then under pretense of reforming the
public Government venture upon disturbing the public Peace, to the prejudice
of all men. All men, and himself acknowledged that fortune crossed all ^his
undertakings; and just as he was far from favoring other men's desires, so
fortune appeared to delight in thwarting his. But though it may be true that
his unfortunate Genius had a great part in ruining his designs, yet it cannot
be denied that much of his miscarriages proceeded from his choice of those whom
he deputed to work his own and the public ends; for he always preferred his
own confidents before those that understood more then they; and depriving
himself and the Kingdom of their worthy parts, he commonly committed the
carriage of the most important Affairs to the hands of unexperienced men, as
may be seen by some unfortunate successes by us related. And so faulty was he
herein, as having not long before his fall, declared one Iuliano to be his
natural Son, and Heir to his County of Olivares, and Dukedom of St. Lucar,
whom, as if he had been born again, he called Henry by his Fathers name; and
never having made any the least account of this Iuliano before, had suffered
him to live a Vagabonds life in Taverns and Bawdy-houses, exposed to all those
miserable adventures to which men that are so given are subject, even till by
good fortune he had escaped an ignominious death, to which for enormous faults
he was adjudged by Law; this his declaring of his Sonship was publicly
confirmed by Regal Authority, to the loathing and detestation of all men, but
more particularly, to his nearest of Kin: Which hatred and detestation grew the
greater, for that this new Henry having gotten nothing by his formerly led life
but customs answerable thereunto, he had nothing in him of gentile or handsome,
but a rusticity of manners, and an incapability not only of what was Lord-like,
but even of what was civil, or like a Gentleman. To this his Declaration that
this Henry was his Son, was added the undoubted succession of his Paternal
Inheritance, which contained very large Territories and Titles, deriving from
the supreme dignity of Grandee, together with an infinity of riches. So as this
new Henry was raised to the highest pitch of greatness in Spain; and being
desirous to match him nobly, he endeavored to marry him to one of the prime
Ladies of the Court, to the Daughter of the Constable of Castille, a chief Lord
of Spain, who boasts himself to be descended from the race of five Kings; and
not being able to effect his desire, by reason of the Constables detestation of
the match, not thinking that the immense wealth, nor the great titles honors,
which this new (...) had accumulated, was a sufficient recompense for the
sordidness of his past life, and of his unhappy inclination, by which his blood
and those that should descend from him should be contaminated; which the Conde
Duca pe^ceiving, he got the King to command the Constable to consent to the
Marriage without reply; which the Constable would not give way unto, unless it
were absolutely declared in the Matrimonial Covenants, that he was compelled
thereunto by the Kings Command. Nor did Olivares his vast ends and desires
cease here, for he was ambitious to introduce him into the management of the
principal Affairs of the Crown, albeit that his said sordidness, and the
incapacity of his Genius was unfit for any employment: So as at the very first
step, he destined him to be President of the Indies, removing the Count of
Castriglio, a worthy Gentleman, and meritorious State Minister, of much Power
and Trust, from that place. He aspired also to procure him the honor which the
Spaniards call Aio del Principe, to whom the Government of him that is to
succeed, to be King of so many Kingdoms, and the instructing of him in noble
and generous Sciences, belongs. Thus he by degrees aimed at the making him his
Colleague, and to succeed him in his place of Favorite, which he could not
believe that himself should ever fore-go, no not when he was even upon his
downfall; an example very unlike to that of Cardinal Richlieu.

This Favorite being removed, the King would take the Government of the
Kingdom upon himself; which though all men were infinitely glad of, yet did not
the change prove very happy, but the remedy came too late applied to the malady
with which it was already gangrened, and become almost incurable.

Let us now return to the Affairs of Italy, which we have left off by so many
digressions of Affairs in foreign Courts. February, in the year 1643. was not
well begun, when the Governor of Millain march^d into the field with his Army,
which consisted of 5000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, and going out of Alessandria went
to quarter in Figarvolo and Bosco, and sent the Marquess of Caracena from
thence, with 2000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, by Pozvolo, to possess himself of the
passes above Tortona; who coming before day to the Scrivia, over against
Tortona, advanced two files of Musketeers, whereby he made himself Master of
the Capuchins Covent, which stands a little without the Gate that leads to
Serravalle; the French not being aware of him, by reason of the thick mist
which kept them from discovering the Enemy, but finding, when the mist was
over, that the place was taken, they presently endeavored the recovery
thereof, but in vain; for Caracena advancing with 200 Horse, and with some
Musketeers, drove them back into the City; whither Don John Vasques Coronado
being come by the way of Castelnuovo with the other 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse,
he possessed himself of some houses near the opposite Gate which looks toward
Millain; and not long after, the Governor came thither with his Guards, and
Don Vincenzo Gonzaga with the Neapolitane Horse: here they called a Council of
Wa^, whither Caracena was called for from his quarter, which was on the
opposite side: in which council they took not only into consideration how they
were to carry on the enterprise, but whether they should begin it or no; in
both which points the Captains of the Army did disagree: but the Governors
desire prevailing, and for that they had already proceeded so far as there was
no away left to avoid it, all other considerations were laid aside; the rather
for that Marquess Caracena, opposing the difficulties and delays which were
objected, touching only the taking of the Town, cleared all that could be said,
by assuring them that he would give the City into their hands within less then
two days. The quarters were therefore disposed of; that of the Capuchins which
was already taken was assigned to Caracena, and to Vasques that on the opposite
side over against the Gate that leads to Millain, to which two Spanish Brigades
were added. Caracena was also appointed to choose a place for battery; which
being chosen he began to batter; and a great part of the Wall being beaten down
within two hours, the City capitulated. The Garrison which was left in the City
by Longueville, and Prince Thomaso, were fifteen hundred Foot; amongst which
were many good Officers; Monsieur di Frolenville, Governor of the City,
commanded over them; a Gentleman well experienced in War, who not finding
himself able to defend the City with so few men, abandoned it; and keeping the
Covent of St. Dominico in his hands, retreated into the Castle: four Batteries
were immediately erected by the Governor against this Covent; from which the
defendants not being well able to defend themselves, they tried to free
themselves of that trouble by sallies; in one of which the assailants had well
nigh taken that station of St. Eufemia, from whence the Covent was most annoid;
but the frequent sallies did not incommodate the opposers so much as the
season. The Country was laid desolate by the former Siege, from which no
Forage was to be had for horse, for the space of twelve miles, and there was
great scarcity of all things necessary for humane life; and, moreover, the
store of rain that fell, and the earth being covered with Ice and Snow, hindered
the making of provision; and the excessive cold weather made the Soldiers
unable to work; they seemed to be more besieged by the season of the year, then
the enemy was by them besieged. The Governor had foreseen these difficulties,
and had in a great part provided against them, having made all things necessary
be brought to the neighboring places, and brought them commodiously to the
Camp by Mules, which were provided on purpose; he sheltered the Soldiers from
the cold by store of clothes which were already prepared for them; he had made
great provision of Hay and dry Straw for the Horses, of Bread and Ammunition
for the Soldiers; and what was wanting in these provisions was supplied by the
constant suffering of hardship, which could not last long. The Army was not a
little comforted by provisions of Victuals, and other things which they had
from Novi, from whence and from the State of Millain victuals were sent in more
abundance then formerly, as also from the State and City of Genoa; which did
much pacify the anger of the Spanish Officers, who complained of the
Commonwealth, for not keeping the like assistance from the French Army the year
before; and served to let them see that the Commonwealths good will was not
lessened toward that Crown: Wherein the dexterity and discretion of Gasparo
Franzone, sent in Commission at that time thither from the Commonwealth did
much good, who behaved himself to the satisfaction of all parties, for the
Spaniards were sufficiently provided with all things necessary from Novi; and
the French were also the like upon many occasions which they had of stealing
succor into the Castle; and upon many other occurrences, they found the
Commissary not averse to their Interests. The Enterprise therefore (though with
many and infinite difficulties) was continued till a better season, which they
might prosecute more commodiously, according as the several inconveniences
lessened; and this the rather for that they were comforted in these their
sufferings by being certain that they should not be disturbed by any
considerable succors: they knew that there were no Forces in Piedmont to draw
into the field; and the last years Army (as has been said) was almost quite
extinguished; and the same rigor of the season withstood bringing of new
supplies from France, to boot with the urgent occasions of Wars in Catalonia,
Flanders and Germany, wherewith that Kingdom was oppressed. Moreover, the
Governor judging that the Castle was not over-well provided with Victuals,
thought rather to take it by Famine (after the first skirmishes and batteries)
then by the sword; and the defendants were of the like mind; who being left by
the Duke of Longuevllle, and by Prince Thomaso, in great hopes of being
relieved, and wanting Ammunition wherewith to maintain fight they held it
better to spare those few that yet were left, till such time as the undoubted
succor should come; to the end that they then might assault the besiegers on
their backs, and facilitate the succourers approach to the Castle; so as the
Governor forbore batteries, and they forbore sallies. Thus a kind of tacit
truce and suspension of Arms seemed to be agreed upon between them. The
Governor when he first resolved upon this enterprise, though he could not be
disturbed by new succors from without, for the aforesaid Reasons; and
therefore though he had begun the line of circumvolurion on the outside, yet
thinking it better at the present to streighten the Castle with Trenches, so to
keep them from sallying out, he gave over the line, and applied himself wholly
in muniting, and fortifying himself against the Castle: but he failed in his
account; for the Governors falling upon Tortona being known in Piedmont and in
France, both th^se places resolved to prepare for defense of that place which
they had gotten; wherefore they began to make ready a great and gallant
succor: Men and Moneys were sent by Sea and Land from France for this
enterprise; those which were sent by Sea landed in Oneglia, that they might go
from thence to Piedmont, where in a short time there was a strong and well
munited Army put together, which caused the Governor to alter his mind, who
thought that the Victory would consist chiefly in keeping out succor;
wherefore he began to re assume the working of the other line of circumvolution
which was already commenced (as has been said) about the Walls of the City,
which was full four miles in compass, and was begirt with Ditches, flanks, with
Forts munited with Stoccadoes, and Fortifications both within and without; the
Work surrounded both the Castle and the City, serving to keep the City from
being ass^ulted from without, and the Castle from relief, if any should be
brought: the outermost houses of the City toward the Castle were well munited,
and the Streets mouths which led unto the Castle were stopped up with earth,
which served for a fence against the Castle on the inside; and not content with
all this diligence, and provision, the Governor strove to keep succour^s far
from the Castle as he could. To this purpose he sent 500 Horse toward the
Frontiers of Montferrat, not only that they might keep back the succor which
might come by Piedmont, but also that by laying the Country waste, they might
keep the relievers from accommodations, if they should advance by that way; nor
did these diligences prove vain, for Monsieur Plessis Pralin, the King of
France his Lieutenant General in Piedmont, and the Marquess Villa appeared
together about the midst of March, in the year 43, with 2500 Horse, and 5000
Foot, and advanced to St. Salvadore, within five miles of Alessandria; and
Prince Thomaso passing over the Dora with 1000 Horse, and 2000 Foot, threatened
Novara, and the adjoining parts; wherefore the Governor, for the better
security of those parts, had sent the Marquess Caracena thither, with a good
strength of Horse and some Foot, most whereof were taken out of the meaner sort
of people of that State, that he might observe what way the Enemy went, and
cross his designs; but the Prince returning quickly to Cassalle, and joining
with the French and Piedmontese Army, told them they must cast a Bridge over
the Tanaro; wherefore Caracena, by Orders from the Governor, went from the
Novarese to Alessandria, to open that way, and to keep the Bridge from being
cast over; but the Prince finding himself opposed by Caracena desisted from his
design; and passing back over the Poe at Cassalle, he went with the joint
forces toward Palestre and Vespolano, and Caracena went to Mortara, where some
skirmishes past between the Horse of either party, in one whereof Cavagliere
Aiazza being engaged with 150 Horse was taken prisoner; but Caracena fearing
lest the Prince, to relieve Tortona by diversion, might fall upon some Town in
that Marca, past back into the Lomelina and the Novarese, in pursuit of the
Prince, to oppose his proceedings in those enterprises, whereunto he saw him
most inclined. The Prince knowing that he was followed and observed by strong
Forces approached sometimes near Novara, sometimes near Bremi, sometimes near
Mortara, as if he intended to fall upon all, or some of these places; but durst
not fasten upon any: but fell to overrunning the Country, where plundering and
pillaging the best things that were there, he much prejudiced the Inhabitants,
and took away much Corn and Cattle, which for the most part he sent to
Cassalle. Caracena being somewhat inferior in Forces, durst not face the
Prince, who having more men was master of the field, and seeming as if he would
march along the left side of the Poe to Giarvola, threatened to pass his men
over there to the other side; and so to go to the relief of the besieged
Castle; which the Governor having notice of, he got as many men as he could
from Serravalle, and other places, dissolving the quarter at Pontecurone, and
sent a great body of men, with six pieces of Artillery toward the shore over
against Giarvola, to resist the Prince, if he should venture to pass over the
River: which the Prince perceiving, he retreated again to Cassalle, intending
to make way for relief by the Tanaro: which the Governor doubting, he sent
Caracena and Gonzaga, with almost all the Horse, and between three and four
thousand Foot, to defend that River; wherefore the Prince resolving not to
venture upon that Pass, threw himself at last before Asti, imagining that the
Governor would either quit the Siege of the Castle, and come with all his
Forces to defend Asti, or else would not at all move from the Castle: if he
should not move he assured himself he should take Asti, by reason of the
weakness of the Garrison, and the Inhabitants inclination to love him; and if
he should move, he should certainly relieve the Castle, and City of Tortona,
and might peradventure take Asti also; there were but 1000 Foot, and 200 Horse
in Asti, under the command of Captain Pietro Gonzales, a valiant Commander: the
Governor fearing the loss of that City, left a competent number of Soldiers
before the Castle of Tortona, and recommending the care of that Siege to Don
Iovan Vasques Coronado, went with the greatest part of his Forces into
Alessandria, that he might offer at relieving Asti at a nearer distance; the
Prince at his drawing near that City endeavored to steal over the Tanaro; and
to this purpose having got a barque which served to pass travelers over the
river, and a Mill which was fitted to the Haven, he by means of these past some
Soldiers over to the Abbey of S. Bartholomew; that they might raise a little
Fort to guard that shore, where he left four Companies in Garrison: the
Governor having notice thereof sent Don Vincenzo Gonzaga that way with 3000
Foot, and 200 Horse; who when he came to the Abbey slew some of the Defendants,
and drove other some away, took and destroyed the Fort, and made himself master
of the Ba^que, and of the Mill; and the next day the Governor came to the same
Abbey, and clim'd up a hill together with the same Gonzaga, and the Marquess of
Caracena, and Serra, from whence he discovered the City, and the Prince
encamped before it; and having by the consent of his companions sent 400 Horse
over the Foord of Tanaro, to relieve Asti, giving the Captain express order,
that as he went toward the Foord he should observe what signs should be given
him from the hill; and perceiving that the Prince marched with all his horse to
withstand their passage over the Foord, the Governor made signs immediately to
the Captain of the Horse, that he should retreat, who obeyed him; the Governor
by this unfortunate attempt lost all hopes of relieving the Town; and not
daring to forgo Tortona, wherein he was so much concerned, for the preservation
of Asti, which he could not possibly effect without coming to a battle; which
Gonzales foreseeing, or as some others say, being advised by the Governor so
to do; and finding it impossible for him to defend so great a circuit of Wall
with so few men, after some shot was made, he agreed with the Prince to abandon
the City, retaining the Cattle, and the Citadel, so as 200 Horse which he had
with him might be suffered to pass safely into Alessandria; which being agreed
upon, and performed, the City came into the Prince his power, who presently
fell to make Mines under the Castle, and Citadel; so as the Castle being played
upon by the Artillery, and molested by Mines, and some assaults, which were
valiantly withstood, surrendered after three days space, upon condition that
Gonzales might go with 200 men which he had with him into the Citadel;
whereupon the Prince got the Castle, and fell to besiege the Citadel, which not
being able to hold out for want of Victuals did ere long sur^ender upon
honorable conditions, by which Geonalea with the Garrison went safe into the
City of Alessandria, and the Prince by the full victory of that City became
also master of the Tanaro; the Governor foreseeing that Asti being taken the
Prince would presently fall to relieve Tortona, and to that purpose that he
began to send quantity of provision into Nizza, and Asti, ordered Marquess
Caracena to go with Horse and Foot to the taking in of Acqui: whereunto
Caracena thinking that it was needless to use Cannon by reason of a breach that
was in the wall, which though it were filled up with earth and bavins, he went
to give an assault on that part: but not being able to force it, he tarried
there till Cannon were brought from the City of Alessandria, which as soon as
the Citizens saw they surrendered Acqui, their lives being saved, the women's
honors preserved, and respect being born to Churches: that the Citizens might
suffer less prejudice, only the Spaniards were suffered to enter, who sent
much of the meal that they found there into Annone, and much whereof during the
Siege was carried into the Castle: about which Caracena not willing to busy
himself, especially since he had sent back the Cannon into Alessandria, he sent
Colonel Stoz with great part of his men, to oppose a body of Horse which was
sent by Plessis, and Villa, to relieve the besieged place; which relief being
repulss'd by Stoz, Caracena past on to Rivalta in Montferrate, where he fell to
lay the country waste, as well to feed his Horse with the unripe corn, as to
incommodiate the succorers in their march, as much as he could: 800 Neapolitan
Horse were at this time come unto the camp, which the Governor sent to
Pozzvolo, and the parts adjacent, that they might keep off whosoever should
come to relieve the place besieged: he moreover caused deep ditches to be
dug about the line of circomvolution, and, finally, ommitted not any thing
that was necessary for the obtaining of the victory, which he so much desired.
Soldiers came also daily to within the line from the States Militia, and many
Millainese Lords, amongst which Prince Trivultio, who in the siege the year
before came to the camp with 1500 Foot and 200 Horse, all of them being his own
Vassals, and at his own charge conducted; and not at all wearied with so great
an expense, he was one of the first that came now to the recovery of the lost
City: Prince Thomaso came also with so numerous a succor, as was thought could
not be withstood; and foording over the Scrivia four Miles beneath Tortona, he
came to within four Miles of the City; and kept his men in the Towns of
Alvernca, and Castellari, which are at the Foot of the hill; the next day being
accompanied by Marquess Villa he went up the hill with four hundred Horse, to
discover the most convenient stations, which when he had done, he caused his
men to come up the hill with the Artillery, and placed them in Ranks, together
with the Artillery against the Line, and made as if he would presently fall to
an assault, but did not; the Spanish Army was ran ked on the other side, with
in the Line, with their Artillery, ready to receive and repulse the threatened
assault, but resolved not to stir out, nor to forgo their advantage, nor to
hazard that victory which they thought they were sure of as long as they kept
within the ^renches; at last after four days, the Prince drew off, and
foregoing the thought of relieving the City, and consequently the victory which
he had so much striven for, he came down the hill on the same side that he had
come up, making his Rere his Van, and his van his rere; being come upon the
plain, he made some shot toward the Castle, which served for a sign to the
Desendants to wish them to surrender; which they did the same day upon
Honorable conditions, of carrying with them four pieces of Cannon; they
marched out to the number of 1300, and were convoyed to Rivatella whither the
Prince was retreated. The Prince retreated some days after toward Asti, and in
his passage much prejudiced the parts of the S^ate of Millain through which he
went; the Soldiers sacked the Noble rich temple and Covent del Bosco, erected
formerly by Pope Pius the fifth, who was born there, and had endowed it with
many ^ich revenue^, and had furnished the Vestry wonderful richly; The Prince
lay idle with his Army some days in l'Astigiana to refresh them; and finding
how prejudicial it would be to make any acquisition in the State of Millian, he
thought it would be better to rec^ver the Towns of Piedmont which we^e yet held
by the Spaniards; and to join with other Forces which the Dowager then raised
to recover her own Towns: for when she saw Prince Thomaso gone with the Army to
relieve Tortona, she gathering together all those that remained to defend
Piedmont, sent them under Count Broglio, together with her own guards, and
those of her Sons, to recover Villa nova; which was reinforced, by orders from
the Governor, by two hundred Horse, which were sent thither from Trino and
Pontestura, as soon as he discovered the Dowagers intentions: so as it seemed
to be sufficiently secured; wherefore the Dowager, as soon as the Prince was
returned with the Army from Tortona, sent Marquess Villa thither with his own
Cavalry only, to keep the French from concurring in the enterprise; Villa when
he was come to the camp weighed the condition of the place, which being seated
in a plain, far from any woods, from whence only he could have bavins to make
Trenches, that place appeared untakable; being therefore content to besiege it
at a distance, he employed himself in keeping out succor, and in laying the
Country waste, so to bring the Townsmen to surrender; and the Commander of
the Town coming within a few days to Parley, the surrender was agreed upon, on
condition that the Articles should be allowed of by the Governor of Millain;
and being commanded by the Governor to make good the Town, for that he would
come quickly to relieve him, the treaty broke, and the siege continued; during
which time the French Army was recruited with new men brought by the Viscount
Turin; so as those being added to the Dowagers men, the Army was made 15000
Foot, and 5000 Horse. Prince Thomaso was to command them all, for Longueville
was already returned to France; wherefore the Prince, hearing that for certain
there wa^ but 600 Foot in Garrison in the City, of Alessandria, and his own
recrui^es considered, thought it not fit to let slip the opportunity of making
himself master of that City either by Scalado, secret intelligence, or by
storm; for he thought his Forces so far superior to the Garrison, as he should
meet with no resistance; and hoping that when he should have taken it, it being
almost upon the confines of Piedmont, he might keep it more easily then
Tortona, which was far from thence, he joined his Forces to those of France,
and of the Dowagers, in the plain of Cassalle, and betook himself to the
enterprise with firm opinion of good success; being come to the Walls of
Allessandria, he quartered himself in the Orchard near thereunto, on both sides
of the Tanaro, and sent Viscount Turen to take up his quarters on the East side.

The Governor Siruela began ^o doubt Valenza, by reason of the joining of the
Forces in the Plain before Cassalle, and by the Prince his sp^edy march;
wherefore he went from Pavia where he then was thither ward, giving order to
his men to follow him: But having heard before he came to Valenza, that the
Prince was gone with all his Forces to before Allessandria he was much more
surprised, by reason of the small Garrison which he knew was in it; wherefore
he sent for Count Galliazzo Trotti and ordered him that he should endeavor by
all possible means to get quickly into Allessandria with all the Horse that he
could muster. Trotti failed not in obeying his orders, and having gathered
together about 1500 Horse, went about it, he knew that it was not safe to enter
by the Gate which was nearest Valenza, because the Prince was encamped before
it; he therefore resolved to enter by the Gate which looks toward Genoa, on
the opposite side. But doubting Count Turen, who he knew was encamped on that
side, he marched toward Tortona, seeming as if he went to guard that City; and
when he was advanced so far by that way as none could observe him, he returned
on the right hand and went toward Castellazzo, where he past over the Bormio,
and deceived Turen, who conceiving that ^is march toward Tortano was but
feig^ned, and that he would soon return by the same way* and foording over the
Bormia there would endeavor to get into Allessandria, set himself to guard the
foord over Bormio, which is usually fr^quented by those which pass to and again
from Tortona, which foord lies four miles below that of Castellazzo, hoping to
light upon him the^e in his return. But Trotti who had past over Bormio a
little higher ^ame without any obstacle, about break of day, to the walls of
Allessandria so unlooked for, as he was played upon by the Cannon as an Enemy,
till Colonel Stoz, who was very well known, advanced, and assuring the
Defendant that it was succor, was received with infinite joy and Jubi^e.
Trotti being entered with so great are inforcement, Don Antonio Sottello,
Governor of the City, being as it were revived from the dead, went out and
fell upon the Prince his quarters, where there happened a long and bloody
skirmish, which continued till the coming on of night; when the Prince finding
for certain that so great a succor was entered, and consequently failing of his
hopes, thought it best to make use of the obscurity of night, and to retreat;
so the City of Allessandria was miraculously freed. Count Siruela ended his
Government honorably with the recovery of Tortona, and the freeing of
Allessandria from so near and so imminent danger, who was succeeded by the
Marquess of Velada, who was come from Flanders, where he had been General of
the Horse, and was therein succeeded by the Marquess Caracena; who having
qui^ted the place of General of the Horse in the State of Millain, wherein he
had succesfully served, went to take the like charge upon him in Flanders. As
the beginning of this Government met with no favorable succe^s ^o fared (...)
not much bette^ afterward, Villa nova was surrendered to Marques^ Villa; not
without some imputation to the Governor of the Town, who being cited to
Millain to give an account of 3000 sacks of Corn, which together with the Town
were delivered to him, by which he might have maintained the Town longer, he
durst never appear; wherefore he was thought guilty of fraud in delivering up
the Town: This loss was ere long followed by the like of Trino; for Prince
Thomaso retreating from Allessandria to Cassalle, after having stayed a while
in those parts, causing no little jealousy in the Towns of the State of
Millain, confining upon Piedmont, he at last sat down before Trino, the
Garrison whereof he knew was lessened a little before by the new Governor. But
having quartered his men at his first arrival in the neighboring Towns, and
keeping as it were idle for three days, he gave occasion for the entering of
two succors; the one of two Companies of Horse, and one of Foot from Vercelli,
the other of 300 Dragoons from Bremi; so as the Prince beginning to believe
that if more relief should be suffered to enter, the enterprise which he
thought would have been easy would prove otherwise, he began to begirt the
Town at a nearer distance, and drew his line round about it; and whilst this
was in doing, the opposers advanced by a covered way to a half moon, who being
repulsed by a fierce sally made by the Governor Batteville, were forced to
retreat a little with much loss: But the line being afterward perfected, the
Prince, with his Brother Don Mauritio, and Viscount Turen, divided the
out-fortification between them, and fell to take the half moon; which when they
had taken, they betook themselves to the Cities Bulwark, and made a great mine
underneath it, which made a great breach, by which the Prince did verily
believe he should enter the City. Wherefore before he came to an assault, he
intimated to Batteville, that he would have him surrender; which Batteville
refusing to do, a fierce assault was made, which being thrice given was thrice
repulsed with loss to the Assailants. But the Prince preparing for another
assault, Batteville who found his Munition grow low, his men weary by their
long pains taking, by their continual watching, and not able to make any longer
defense, surrendered upon honorable conditions, in case he should not be
relieved within five days: Which being expired, and no relief appearing, he
marched with his men out of the Town, which was delivered over to the Prince,
and furnished with a French Garrison, as were all the other Towns of Piedmont
which were regained. The Prince went from Trino with his Army much lessened, by
the running away, sickne^, and death of many, occasioned by the badness of that
air, the malignity whereof had influence not only upon the meaner sort, but
upon the chief Commanders; for Turen, Marquess Villa, and his Son Count
Camerano, fell sick, and were forced to return for cure to Turin. Nor did the
Prince himself escape free, for falling sick of a Fever he tarried many days in
Inurea, so as the care and government of the Army fell to Monsieur Plessis
Pralin, who being recruited with more men from France sat down before
Pontestura; where meeting with no resistance save only some sallies which the
Garrison made upon his quarters, he proceeded slowly in the siege; but having
afterward gotten into the Town by a breach made by Cannon, and taken it, he
soon after took the Castle (upon conditions of fair war) whereinto the Garrison
was retreated; which Castle was afterward demolished by the French that they
might not be forced to munite it, (as would have been requisite) with a good
Garrison.

Thus did the Spaniards lose the Towns in Piedmont, which they had gotten with
much effusion of blood, and expense of moneys, hoping to make themselves
thereby sole Arbitrators of that State, and to keep the French out of the State
of Millain: But by the misfortune of the Affairs of that Crown, they failed in
these designs; for the Forces which were sent thither from Spain, having
occasioned the coming of the French thither, the Spaniards saw the French not
only possessed of many Towns, and even of the Castle of Turin, but of those which
were taken by the Spaniards, and which they recove^ed, just as befell the
Citadel of Cassalle; so the Spaniards saw the French become Arbitrators of
Piedmont and Montferrat, and saw them come even to the Confines of the State of
Millain. The new Governor finding his Forces too weak to make resistance
minded more the defense of the State of Millain, then the maintaining of what
the Spaniards had gotten in Piedmont; wherefore he gave himself wholly to view
the Forts, to furnish them with all things necessary, and to re-enforce them
with strong Garrisons, in case they should be assaulted, as he feared they
would be; there rema^ned nothing to the entire recovery of Piedmont, but
Vercelli and St. Ia* Vercelli had so strong a Garrison in it, and was so
abundantly furnished with all provisions, as it was judged vain to attempt it
without a puissant Army; and St. Ia, now that both Armies were retreated to
their Winter quarters, was rese^ved for one of the first enterprises of the
next Campagnia; so as the Military affairs being by the sore Win^er reduced
almost to a taci^e Truce; Prince Thomaso growing to confide more in the Court
of France, now that Cardinal Richlieu was dead, resolved to go thither; from
whence he retu^ned much satisfied with not only honorable favors, but with
employments of great authority, being made General^ssimo of the French Forces
in Italy, with power to use them in what enterprises he should please, for
which he had good pay assigned him, and good store of men. The pay came to
200000 pounds Sterling; and the men to 12000 Foot and 3000 Horse. The Prince
being returned went into the field the beginning of the next Spring; and
entering into the lower Montferrat, entertained himself in the Langhe in affairs
of small impor^ance; then going to Cassalle he sent Don Mauritio with a good
strength of men toward Arona; and following afer himself with the rest, he
endeavored to take it; which he easily might have done, had not Camp-master
Fra Iovanni Pallavicino, who marched with incredible speed, prevented him with
Morta^a's Brigade. Count Riviera accompanied Pallavicino in this march with a
few men, and being both of them come in 24 ^ours to Anghiera, fi^ty good miles
from Mortara, they found Don Mauritio before Arona, busy in digging Trenches
and raising Bat^eries; and ^he Prince meeting with so great opposition, and
hearing that the Governor drew n^er with all his Force^, resolved to give over
the enterpri^e, and returned with all his men into Piedmont: whither when he
was come, he sat down before St. Ia, and having made his Approaches, and his
Batteries, he gave himself wholly to the taking of it; but he was detained by
an accident of no small importance; for the City of Alessandria having kept her
Gates locked one whole day; about two a clock at night, sent out 1500 Horse,
under Don Vincenzo Gonzaga, and two Foot Brigades: the one of Fra. Iovanni
Pallavicino's, the other of Don Gregorio Britto. Gonzaga was to take the City
of Asti, and Pallavicino and Britto the Citadel; Gonzaga failed of his intent;
but Pallavicino and Britto fared better; for coming by night to the Citadel,
they assaulted it at unawares, and took it before the Garrison, which was but
weak, were well awake. The Dowager and the Prince, hearing of this so sudden
and so unexpected success, sent both of them speedily to repair it. The
Dowager, with fortunate speed, sent the Companies of her guard and of her Sons,
commanded by the Counts of Aglie, Feusasco, Piusasco and Tana, who coming
hastily to the City with their Soldiers, which were 300 Horse, and some Foot
which they took up in their march, entered the City in sight of the Enemy who
having taken the Citadel meant to take the City, which they easily might have
done, had not the Citizens and the Garrison, who were encouraged by this
recruit, put themselves in a posture of safety, not fearing to be overpowered,
as they had hourly reason to doubt before; they therefore breathed a while,
expecting the Prince his coming; who not being able to march so fast, by reason
of the number of men which he brought with him to relieve the languishing City,
came thither just then when the Enemy, by reason of his appearance, thought it
good to draw off from the City, to the necessary defense of the Citadel. The
Prince having reduced the City to her former condition of safety, did so munite
it, as that it was not only able to defend it self, but to threaten the
Citadel; and retreating to Camerano he gave himself to impede any attempt which
might be made by the Spaniards, who notwithstanding conveyed both men and
munition into the Citadel, which were sent them from the Governor, who was
come into Alessandria: but the Siege of St. Ia, although somewhat disturbed by
this accident, was not given over; for the Prince having substituted the
Governor of Cassalle, Covogne, in his place, it was strongly continued; the
Town was much played upon by batteries, and sallies stoutly repulsed; insomuch
as Don Diego Alverado, who was Governor of the Town, having made honorable
resistance, when he saw the Town was no longer to be maintained, surrendered it
upon honorable conditions. The Prince having rid his hands of this business,
betook himself wholly to the recovery of the Citadel of Asti, which being
besieged, and battered in vain, held out, and did not only annoy the besiegers
with their great and small shot, but even the City it self; but not being able
to do any more, it yielded to the Prince; who, since the defendants had
suffe^ed themselves to be reduced to the utmost extremity, would not receive
them, but upon discretion; which he used, notwithstanding, very modestly,
suffering the common sort to go forth friendly, and detaining their Captains
and Officers only till such time as two piece of Cannon, which were drawn out
of the Citadel, were restored by the Governor, and some prisoners of War that
were in his hands. The City and Citadel of Asti being freed, the Prince went
with some 5000 Foot into the Langhe; and having left Marquess Villa, with the
Dowagers Horse, for a relief on his back, he advanced to the Ligustick Sea,
even near to Finale, intending to fall upon that Marquisate both by land and
sea, when the French Fleet should be come from Catalognia to Provence, and to
make himself master of it; and the Prince being already come to the Gates of
the Town was lodged in the Church called Pia, within Musket Shot of Finale, and
had taken up some other convenient quarters. The Garrison was but weak in
Finale, a good part thereof being sent two days before by Don John di Castro,
Governor of that Marquisate, to defend Cingio, fearing lest the Prince should
assault it; and it wanted provision of bread, but both these wants were
supplied by Genova the Spanish Ambassador: victuals were sent thither by Sea,
and the Governor sent Fra. Iovanni Pallavicino with 1300 Foot from Millain,
who with no less speed and fortune then he had done at Arona, past over the
Mountains near Genoa, and being come to Voltri went by the sea side to Finale,
where he entered with his men before the face of the Enemy. The Prince had not
brought victuals with him to feed his men in that barren Country, for he
expected to be furnished therewith by the French Fleet; which not appearing,
the Prince seeing the Town well recruited and provided, himself and his men in
great scarcity of victuals, and hearing that the Militia gathered together
apace round about, knew he could not tarry there without much danger; wherefore
he gave over the enterprise, and retreated into Montferrat, freeing that
Marquisate from the danger it would have fallen into, had the Prince tarried
therebut one day longer; for the very next day after his departure the Fleet
appeared at Sea; which hearing that the Prince was gone toward Montferrat,
returned also to Provence, from whence it was come.

This being the last thing that was done by the Spaniards, French and
Piedmonteses, in the year 1644* (for the Armies were sent to their Winter
Quarters, after this business of Finale;) We will end this our second part: and
in the third, will treat of the Wars which were raised elsewhere, between the
Pope, on the one side, and the Commonwealth of Venice, the great Duke of
Tuscany, the Dukes of Modena and Parma, on the other side; which having happened
at the same time that these by us related did, we, that we might not confound
order in the Affairs of the two first Books, have reserved for the following
part; where looking back they shall be related and pursued with all truth and
sincerity.

FINIS.

