TO THE BISHOPS AND THEIR MINISTERS, OR Any of them, to whom this shall Come:
Something by way of QUERY, which they are desired to Answer in Plainness And
according to the Scriptures of Truth.

He that enters not by the Door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some
other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber,

John 10.1. Let no man deceive you with vain words* but prove what is
acceptable unto the Lord: And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them,

Ephesians, 5, Printed in the Year, 1671.

TO THE Bishops and their Ministers, OR Any of them, to whom this shall come,
etc.
THIS is a Visitation unto unto you all, that you may consider what you are a
doing, for the Lord God sees all the actions of men, and all must come to
judgment, and every man must receive according to his doings; and every one
that is a Persecutor, or envious, or a despiser of them that desire to live in
the fear of God, who for Conscience sake to God, cannot conform to the Wills,
Customs, and vain Traditions of men, I say unto you that are Persecutors of
such, or do cause such to be persecuted, you must expect your reward from God,
according to your doings; for God, in all Ages has abhorred such, and when
they have done their Work, he has rendered unto them their Wages, and brought
on them Judgments, and Plagues, and none of them could escape his stroke, when
he arose to plead the Cause of the Oppressed, and to render vengeance upon
their Oppressors: And the Lord is the same at this day, as in days of old, his
eye beholds the evil and the good; and he is a rewarder of all according to
their works and their doings, for he does hear the Cry of the Oppressed, and
will not at all acquit the wicked, except they repent, and turn at his reproof,
and meet him by true repentance, which is to put away the evil of their doings
by fearing to do evil and learning to do well; and to study how to please God,
and not to devise Mischief against the Innocent, as many do at this day and are
pulling and haleing their Goods from them, and casting them in Prisons and
Holes, and Excomunicating them that were never of their Church which was never
the practice of the true Christian People or Ministers; neither do we read that
Timothy or Titus were ever called Lord Bishops, or had such Typpits, and Hoods,
and white Sleeves and Surplices, as the Bishops and their Ministers, have at
this day, for the white linen wherewith the saints were arrayed, was
Righteousness they were adorned with a meek and a quiet spirit, which was, and
is, with the Lord of great price. Neither did they sue men at the Law for
Tithes, and cast them in Prisons and Holes, as those called Ministers do at
this day, who would force people, to give them maintenance and wages when they
do no work for them, and to pay for their Bread and Wine, when they neither eat
nor drink of it; and if they will not pay them their demands, they sometimes
take three or four times as much as they at first demanded; and sometimes as
much or more then a man's estate is worth by the year, Oh Abominable wickedness!
Do those that are found in these things think that the Lord takes no notice of
it, or that his eye sees not? Yes, yes, the Lord sees all these cruelties and
will not at all acquit the actors thereof in that day that he comes to plead
with all flesh. Therefore consider what you are doing, you that are found in
those things; do not think to escape the hand of the Lord, for God is no
respecter of persons; but, as is said, will render to every man according to
his doings; and in that day, none can hide themselves or save themselves from
his stroke, though they may call to the Hills to cover them, or to the
Mountains to hide them; yea, though they fly into the clefts of the Rocks* his
hand will find them, for none can hide when he appears in his Judgments.

Therefore all consider while you have a day and a time, for how great soever
you are, or how ever you may vaunt your selves over the Innocent People of God,
who desire to live in his fear, and to wait upon him, and to Worship him as he
requires, I say, however you may vaunt over such, and oppress, persecute, and
seek to suppress such, yet your breath is in your nostrills, and the Lord is
the giver of it, and he may take it at his pleasure, for he gave unto man Life
and Breath, that man might live unto him, and fear to offend him, and made man
to serve him, and to wait upon him, and to worship him in spirit and truth as
he requires; and his spiritual worship which Go^ worshipped in, is and ever was,
a (...) to all Persecuters and Despisers, and to all that preach for hire, and
Divine for money for the Ministers of the spirit and those that spoke, the word
of the Lord, testified against such that spoke, and the Lord had not spoken
unto them, and such did not profit the People at all; and men by wisdom which
is earthly, and sensual, know not God, but if ever men come to know the Lord,
to their comfort and salvation, they must learn of Christ the Light, and Life
of men; who said, I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your
souls, and has said, He that will be my disciple must deny himself, and take
up his Cross and follow me, who am the way to the Father. And has said, I am
the Light of the world. Therefore have a care how ye resist, mock, scoff, and
deride this Light which lights every man; and shows them there evil deeds
and reproves in secret, and shows them what they should do, and what they
should not do; which teaches and shows that they should do to others, as they
would others should do to them.

Now all you Bishops and Ministers, so called, consider whether you are
followers of Christ, as they were who bid People follow them as they follow
Christ, or, on the contrary, are in the steps of those that persecuted Christ
Members, and cried peace, peace* to people, while they put into their mouths;
but, if they put not into their mouths, they prepared war against them; and
such the true Prophets and Ministers who spoke as the Spirit of the Lord gave
them utterance and as he required, testified against. Now it is my desire that
you may truly weigh and consider these things, and examine your own hearts in
the cool, quiet, peaceable harmless Spirit which envyes not, and in the meek
spirit. And every one of you that does so, may find I am your Friend, and one
that desires men might repent, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and be
saved; with out which all men are miserable, whatever they profess, or posess,
in this world.

Now I have thus far, cleared my conscience to you, in uprirghtness of heart,
according to Truth, which God has manifested in me, to show and discover, that
which is contrary to himself, and to lead into that which is right in his
sight, and to Worship him as he requires, and gives the knowledge of himself,
and leads and brings to the peace, which passes the understanding of men, and
is more to be prized then all the world; I say in this Truth and Light which
God has given, to reprove the world of their sins and to lead and guide men
unto himself and keep them in peace and Covenant with him for ever, and gives
to know the tongue of the learned and the Word, which was in the beginning, from
which, and in which, the words of Truth were spoken, which was before the false
prophets, and hirelings were, and will be when they are all gone; I say in this
Truth, which God is more and more manifesting in the hearts of his people, who
in uprightness do wait upon him; I evermore desire to rest and abide.

The 19th. of the 8th. Month, 1671. Leonard Coal.

Something by way of QUERY TO THE BISHOPS and MINISTERS, of the Church of
England, which they are desired to Answer in Plainness, and according to the
Scriptures of Truth.
FRiends, seeing you profess your selves to be Teachers and Instructers of
others, and Pastors, and Ministers, and Gifted men; these things are propounded
to you as follows.

That seeing the Scripture says, John 17.3. And this is Life Eternal, that
they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
Hence I Query.

Query I. What is it that gives the true and saving knowledge of God, which is
Life Eternal? Is it within man or without him? Query II. Is it possible to
attain to such a saving knowledge of the invisible God, as to know and witness
Life Eternal to the Soul that has been in Death, I say is such a knowledge of
the Love of God that made Heaven and Earth, attained to now by any in this
Life, that is under your Ministry, yea or nay? Query III. Is it sufficient to
read that there is a God, and that he sent Jesus Christ into the world; and to
believe so from the Testimony given of him without, and left upon Record, That
he made the World and all things therein, etc. May not a man have such a
knowledge as this, and yet not know Life Eternal to his soul, yea, or nay?
Query IV. And seeing the holy Scripture says, That all have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God, And that, Except a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. What is this New Birth? And how can a man that
is dead in trespasses and sins be born again, and come to know Life Eternal?
Query V. Is Christ the true Light that Lights every man into the world yea,
or nay? Query VI. What was that Comforter which Christ promised to send to his
Disciples, which should lead them into all Truth; which should reprove the
World of sin, etc. Is this Comforter come already, or is he yet to come? Are
any led into Truth but by the Comforter which Christ promised to send after his
departure: yea or nay? Query VII. What is that which shows men their sin, and
reproves in secret for evil, when no man sees it? Query VIII. And is that
which shows men thus their sinful state and reproves for evil, sufficient (in
it self) to lead out of sin and out of evil, into holiness and purity (if they
obey and follow its guidance) yea or nay? Query IX. Can any man in this Life,
on this side the Grave, attain to such a state, as to be made free from sin,
and know and witness, preservation out of Transgression, by the heavenly Power
and Spirit of God, unto his heavenly kingdom, into which, no unclean thing can
enter, yea or nay? Query X. What is the First Principle of pure Religion? Query
XI. What is the Gospel, and what was the end for which it was preached? Are any
true Preachers of the Gospel but such as the Lord God sends forth and Ordaines?
Query XII. Whether or no, the Ministers which were sent forth by Christ Jesus
in the Gospel dispensation, did ever take Tithes? and if people would not give
it, to sue them at Law for Tithes, and take it by force (yea sometimes ten
times as much as the single value of Tithes demanded) and go to a Parish and
make a bargain for so much a year, or demand so much, and if the People think
it too much, and will not give it, go to another place, where they can have
most Tithes, Easter-reckoning, and Midsomer-Dues, etc. by the year? I say Did
the Ministers of Christ after this manner? Or rather, Query XIII. Did not the
Ministers of Christ preach freely, even according as Christ commanded them, who
said, Freely ye have recevied, freely give? Query XIIII. What, and where is the
Church, which Christ himself is the Head of, Elect and Precious? And has he
such a Church visible upon Earth, yea or nay? Query XV. Can a man be a true
living Member of the true Church, unless he be redeemed by the precious blood
of Jesus Christ from sin and unrighteousness, yea or nay? Query XVI Will you,
or any of you affirm and prove by the Holy Scriptures, that your Church, and
way of Worship and Practice is agreeable with, and according to the practice
and example of the Primitive Church in the Apostles days? Query XVII What is
it to be a Member of your Church? May a man thereby obtain Eternal Life and
Salvation to his Immortal Soul* and have an assurance of the Love and Favor of
God, and of an Inheritance that fades not away, when this World shall be no
more, Or rather, are not you such as say, Its impossible to live without
sinning; you cannot be perfect in this Life, but carry about a body of sin
while you are here, and have no assurance, but are dead in trespasses and sins,
have erred and strayd from the ways of God, and are miserable sinners, as you
say your selves in the Common Prayer, (Oh that you did but say it in a true
sense of your condition, and knew a true repentance, which is a real change of
the heart and mind, and forsaking of Sin, as it is written; Put away the evil
of your doings, says the Lord, and I will receive you* Wash you, make you
clean, and then come and let us reason together, etc. then would you join with
us.) But alas are not many Members of your Church, and yet live in uncleanness,
drunkenness, whoredom, etc. who are not Excommunicated. But if any come to be
turned from an evil Conversation, to walk in righteousness and holiness, and to
learn the fear of the Lord, which is to depart from evil; then presently such a
man or woman, you say, is deceived or deluded; and by departing from evil
become a prey to the ungodly, and is hated, reviled, mocked and excommunicated
out of your Church, (when it may be they were never of it) and inprisoned, (and
as it were buried alive) because they do not come to your Worship and conform
to you in those things which they are truly persuaded against (and that by the
Spirit of God) And then again, if any such that has thus for a time been
separated from you, and walked in Righteousness and Truth, and it may be
suffered much by you for the ^^me, I say* if such a one turn again (like the
Dog to the vomit, and as the Sow that was washed to walow in the mire) from the
grace of God into unrighteousness and filthyness and do that which is evil:
then such thereby become again fit Members of your Church, and are receved i^
amongst you as good converts again, and do enjoy their Liberty as before; all
which makes many moderate People greatly to question and suspect, that your
Church and way of Worship; is not the true Church Worship; and therefore do
absent from it? Query XVIII. And can you blame any for absenting from you? Or
is it reasonable for you to force and compel People to be of your Church, who
confess you are miserable siners, that have erred and strayed, from the ways
of God? (as indeed we believe you are) Do you think that outward force is the
way to bring People (that are sinceare) to be of your Church, which daily err
and stray from the way of God? Or rather, Query XIX. Would it not be more
Christian like, for you to let others alone in matters appertaining to God, his
Worship, and Religion, so long as they walk innocently toward all men? And
must all render an account to God of all their deeds, and receive a just reward
according to their doings; for he is no respecter of persons. I say, were it
not better for you, who say, You are Gifted men, or Spirittual men, to use only
the Spiritual Weapon (if you had it?) to convince gainsayers with all; and by
your lives, and good conversations to Preach for^h to all, That you are indeed
the Ambassadors of our Savior Jesus Christ, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit? Query XX. What are the fruits and marks of a true Christian?
Query XXI. And what are the fruits, and marks of a false Prophet, by which
People may know and distinguish them from (...) Query XXII. Why did Cain Kill
his Brother A^^^? Did he well in so doing yea or nay? Query XXIII. Is
Persecution of Christ, or of Antichrist? Who was the first Persecutor about
Worship? Query XXIIII. What will be the portion of those that cause the blind
to w^^der out of the right way and are not you such, yea or nay?
Answer these things in meekness and moderation according to Scripture. That if
you are really and truly of those that seek the Exaltation of Truth and
Holiness it may be manifest: but if you seek not this, but your selves, and are
such as God never sent: then know assuredly that the Lord God of Heaven, who
beholds your actions, and from whom you cannot hide your selves, will discover
you more and more, and your nakedness and shame shall yet more and more appear
in the sight of Nations; and he will give you the Cup of his dreadful Vengeance
and Indignation to Drink, as a just reward of your doings if you repent not.

This is from one that from a Child has desired and truly longed after the
saving knowledge of God, and his way in which I might find Life and Peace to my
Soul, being now in Bonds with many more for Obeying and Keeping the Commands of
Christ Jesus

Benjamin Coal,
Reading Goal the 8th. Month, 1671.
THE END

