English-Law: OR, A Summary Survey of the Household of God on Earth; And that
both before and under the Law; And that both of Moses and the Lord Jesus.
Historically opening the Purity and Apostasy of Believers in the Successions of
Ages, to this present.

Together with an Essay of Christian Government Under the Regiment of our Lord
and King, the one Immortal, Invisible, Infinite, Eternal, Universal Prince, the
Prince of Peace, Emmanuel.

Isaiah 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Ah I will ease me of my enemies, and avenge me
of mine Adversaries: I will turn my hand upon thee, and purge thy dross, and
take away thy Tin.

And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City.

Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, they that return of her with
Righteousness.

The destruction of the Transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, and
they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.

Isai. 2. 3. and 5. Come ye, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, etc.

and 5. Come, let us walk in the light of the Lord.

device showing a ship at sea, with anchor above and anchor below Only by faith

^. G. sculp:


London, Printed by Robert White for T. G. and Francis Tyton, and are to be
sold at the Three Daggers near the Inner-Temple-Gate. 1651.

To the Family of God over the whole Earth; but more especially to them of the
Household of Faith in the Commonwealth of England.
ALL who hold the Christian Faith, do believe that as the world had a
beginning, and was a created substance; so it shall perish and come to an end
(or be changed;) we seem not only to be on the last foot of time in this our
Generation, but having stood 1650. years upon it, we have many thoughts of
heart-longings for the glorious appearing of the Son of God; Many expect him
visibly to reign here on Earth in person, and that he shall be glorified even
where he was crucified: Others look for a Kingdom of Righteousness, a
wonderful light of Truth to be manifested, glorious out-breaking glympses and
appearances of the infinite wisdom, the brightness and evidence of which shall
scatter all those clouds, and dispell all those Exhalations which have misled
us in the walkings of Christianity, the false Prophets, Clouds without rain,
and Fires without heat, which have appeared amongst us: A people in this Nation
has had as great testimonies of this as any people extant on the Earth. The
Power of the Almighty has visibly appeared here these many years, scattering
of Truths, and revealing hard sayings, and giving to understand things that
were hid for many Generations, though according to the wisdom of the Father he
has dispensed diverse gifts, and that there is much of controversy among us;
yet if all be really for Christ, and the increase of his Kingdom, what matters
it? Let but all this move and encourage each in his place faithfully to labor
in the Vineyard of the Lord. The Master is expected; how he will come, lets not
wrangle about, nor with whom: Let Us all high and low, as we profess to expect
his coming, so prepare for it: Assuredly he will then come to us in his glory,
or take us to his glory: Therefore all you that in sincerity profess
Christianity, rowze up your selves, listen to the call of the Lord; He has
called afar off in Germany, he has called at home, both here and in England
and Scotland: hear his voice, prepare to meet the Lord your glory. Hitherto
Christians have been the shame of Christianity, and Gospellers the scandal of
the Gospel. There was a fatal and general Apostasy fallen upon her who called
her self the Spouse of Christ; she as Aholah and Aholibah played the Harlot;
and though she here with us in England promised to return, yet she kept her
Darlings still; if she parted with the Assyrian Adulterer, she kept the Syrian;
God will have no mixture with Idols: England has long desired a through
Reformation: Let no man boggle at the work if another desires more then as some
of you did 20. or 30. years since: why may not God have revealed this to him,
and closed thine eyes now, as well as he revealed his will formerly to thee,
and shut the eyes of others. Heretofore God put mean men only upon the work,
here and there one; now he has put many and great men upon the work; and what
ever spurs they have; yet Christian, if they drive on Gods design, lay thy hand
on thy mouth, and only admire how God brings things to pass what he intends.

Some men are so rational, they can see nothing of providence; reason devours
Religion, and they are afraid lest they should happily find, or be found of God
in a way they expected not; they wholly trust to reason, and will see and feel,
or they will not believe.

Others are merely sensual, and in the muddiness of their temper follow sense
only, because reason is so various; as many opinions as men even in things not
above us; This is the main basis of Atheism; shun this Scylla and that
Charybdis, and understand, All Gods ways are not only prudential, but
providential, and God assuredly speaks both ways: He that improves providence
to Lust, Error, and Transgression against the evident revealed will of God, is
like him that because he hears of Election, sins at liberty, which is a mark of
Rejection; He that in doubtful things in streights for God, his glory, his
Truth and Laws, the purity of Righteousness, in simplicity eyes God with
constant and fervent prayers, walking humbly and watchfully over himself, and
all that partake with him, spying what leads and misleads, and searching all
interests, casts all away all but that of the Lord and his Righteousness:
Surely he is like him that hearing of Election, and not knowing who it is, yet
believing not only the truth of it, but blessings appertaining to it, says, I
will seek if happily I may find, I will knock because of the promise; and such
are assured to enter life eternal.

Now all you that have in your eye the expectation of the glorious appearance
of the Lord Christ in your several stations, Parliament, Princes and Nobles,
Army, Judges, Officers, Magistrates, Rich men, Citizens, high and low, Rich and
poor, one with another, despise not my weakness, inability, unworthiness; eye
not my life past or present, but look to what I say, and as you find it bearing
the mark and character of fervent truth, accept it; if you doubt, labor
satisfaction privately; if you spy an error, rebuke or inform me with Christian
wisdom and sobriety (my zeal for Gods cause, not self-confidence, has put me
forth to the work) and I shall willingly learn, and bless-God that makes me
know his will, yea though by my failings, so it may work to the increase of his
glory, and propagation of truth. Amen, So be it.

And first give me leave to speak a word to you that have at present the
Supremacy of Power, lay to heart these things: First, that you are in Gods
stead; Next that there are many vows upon the Nation for Justice and
Righteousness, against the then, and still continued unchristian, uncivil, nay
inhumane dealings of man with man, as man with God, etc. You stand in the eyes
of all, all your goings are marked, and all your failings graven to Record:
Public necessities, your own consciences and peoples complaints, have plucked
forth Declarations to men, as well as Covenants to God; the Obligations to men
are still the same, if the reason be the same: And for our Obligations wherein
we lift up our hands to the most high God; truly though the Covenant (as is
said) be out of date, that is the end of the Covenant for satisfaction to the
King, to draw him to an union and conjunction with his great Council, be
disobliged; yet the seeking of the settling of this Nation, the three Nations,
all Nations, according to the Rule of Righteousness in love, peace, and unity,
yea the drawing of them to uniformity, both in Doctrine and Discipline
according to the Word of God (that is, by the evidence of truth and the
manifestation of the Spirit) is still the duty of all Christians; for this had
been a duty, had the Covenant never have been; it was before it, and must
remain after.

The present Age is in the learned part very acute, at least to censure all
persons, and then assuredly the actions of Enemies. You have many who foment
jealousies from the supposed Errings and delays, some to one end, some to
another, but all of believing the old experimented Rule of the destructiveness
of popular Government from the variety and inconstancy, the dilatoriness and
ambiguousness of their proceedings, and unsatisfiedness of so many selfish
Interests as are among them; this is to bring in the Government of a King
again; Indeed multitude of occasions makes your proceedings slow-paced. Instead
of particular Acts which are unsatisfactory, settle a complete body of
Government; you have means of supplying all indigencies; for if you improve
your power to evident public good, who will oppose? The Royalist and all among
the Parliament party agree in many just things, yet uneffected: Justice is the
preservation as foundation of the Throne. If you will reign safely, walk not in
any of the ways of them that fell before you; the president of their
punishment, as their error is too nigh at hand: Let no interest deterr you from
your Rule: Conserve indeed the real Liberties of the people, free us from all
those Legerdemains, the sleights of Oppression and Tyranny: What was unjust
gain in the King, let not the State demand there; depend upon, and follow
providence as far as you will, and be as remiss and so called merciful as you
please; but in things just and evidently conducing to common good be severe and
unalterable; this is righteous: In things difficult and doubtful, first use
reason and prudence, discover the interest opposing, and so proceed to afflict;
this will breed both fear and love: Alter a good and just thing, though to a
more just, by degrees, and gently; for interests have here lawful pleas; but in
evidently evil, it is the glory to make speed: Connive not there for an hour.
What is here driven at, is the just Reformation of all our Laws, the Reduction
of them to a Rule and standard of Christian Simplicity. You that are of the
long Robe, both in and out of the house, you whose knowledge both divine and
humane abounds, as your abilities in outward as inward excellencies, Judges,
Counselors and Officers of all sorts, look not at ancient Customs, but at the
common Justice of them; not how they restrain particular evils, but as they
conduce to universal good. If you will not admit the opposition of inferiors,
do nothing but carrying that evidence of reason, as may stop the mouths of
fools, as well as satisfy wise men: Let Godliness now in this light be the
precious gain; its the Pearl of great price: Surely there are things called
Law, admitted practically for Law, and those opposed and complained of, which
are so notoriously unjust and irrational, so destructive to the Nation, as its
the admiration of all men they are not amended; it is laid only to the charge
as (a matter of Interest) to be obstructors; see in the day the Lord opposing
every evil thing; lay down Self, and God will stablish you. To you Princes and
Nobles, I say, learn by Gods dealings with you, to see Thrones, and Scepters,
Powers Civil and Military, Riches and Honors, Wisdom and all, are the gifts of
the Almighty Wisdom: The Hand of Providence holds them forth, and disposes
them as it pleases: You have been bad Stewardes, amend your ways; God has
here and there taken all away, otherwhere a great part, most have suffered:
know God is able yet to take away the remainder: seek not therefore in passion
to break out; what ever you do carry God along with you, and that not in
thought but deed; assuredly the judgment else will be more smart, and deeper
in every change, lets see the Work of God upon your hearts: change Profession
into Practice of Christianity; idolize not the Form, but acting sincerely Zeal,
Holiness, Austerity of Life in the avoiding the very appearances of evil, but
exemplary in Charity, and that not only in giving much, but giving well;
ordering the ways not of your selves only, but of your Families, so that the
nobility of your souls in the excellence of graces may speak you illustrious
above ancient riches, the Virtues or Vices of your Progenitors. The same I may
say to the Gentry, and men of great estate, City and Country; know God gives
you much that you may do much for him; wherein is now your excellency? Titles!
Alas they are but like Absoloms Pillar, serve but to eternize his faults and
misery. Good clothes, large Retinue (as Revenew, if not larger) and they
generally idle, and so necessarily vicious; Coaches and horses, bountiful and
luxurious fare, as much spent to feed and cloth ten, as well would satisfy
each day one hundred: and for one hundred, as would plentifully maintain a
thousand: Is God honored in all this, or is the poor profited? you may think
it; for thus did your fathers, and so did you; but where is the Rule? the
charges of the Commonwealth, if but five shillings, are a burden to you, who
spend ten pound, nay a hundred pound, nay a thousand pound in waste; and they
that have naught, follow your example, thereby believing they gain credit.

I now shall speak one word to the Army; You have followed Providence, make no
Selfish Interest your Idol, lest Providence forsake you; be assured, others
have many enemies; but for you, how few are your friends? there are great
engagements upon you to God, who has with such a continued course given
success to your undertakings: I am so far from encouraging to Mutinies as I
condemn them; there are just ways; use them; I would draw all the world by the
Clew of evident Reason and demonstrative Justice, much more Authorities; and
when my reason could not prevail, I would at utmost lift up my voice in prayer,
with one hand and my heart, and hold my sword in the other for my defense. All
that I say, is, be English men still, war us not into slavery whom you were
made soldiers to redeem from bondage; but especially you Officers, let not
promotion cause you sit still because at case.

I cannot but give out one word of advice to the great and eminent City of this
Nation; you were sensible of evils past, pride made you fat and you kicked with
the heel: Though the greatness of Trade be broken, repine not; break not out,
there is more lost in a day then can be gotten in a year; vex not Strangers
from your Potency, nor Citizens by your Power: Petition not against Will
instead of Law in others, and use far more irregularity, and upon less ground
your selves: you heretofore gained the whole trading of the Nation into your
company; we are all English men, show us your Charter of Privilege amongst the
immunities of common Subjects: will you admit that a particular Company in your
City should of the Grant of the King have a privilege to the detriment of your
general Charter? why should you then to the damages of the whole Nation? Agree
therefore to just things; give God the glory to part with quietly from the
convictions of just Reason, what you might happily hold, either by Law or Power
from your Grants, if the Grant be now evil, though not originally so; for
Reason making things lawful, and being the bounds of Supreme Monarchs in
general, it cannot be excluded their particular Grants: I know this will grate
hard upon some among you; but if Christians, they will hear; it were better to
be less rich, and less populous, so more honest and better regulated: you are
at present, yea after so long sitting under the Sword of the Vengeance of the
Lord, the sink of abominable open prevailing sins: you that should be the Head
to the Body, and the Eye to the Head in the greatness of Blessings, going
before others, and being a Pattern, and Example to all the rest as a Mother
City, as you have been styled in the Nation; you are not active for that
glorious Regiment of divine Reason, which as Christian, is held forth to us in
the Old and New Testament of our Lord and Savior, the Lord Christ Jesus: you
labor not in what is established by Law; then sure it can be little expected
that you should endeavor the Settlement of more: it is a work of difficulty;
the opposition of the world will be; but the world is overcome, and this gives
hopes of Conquest, when we fight an Enemy that has been beaten; its the course
of the world to plead Presidents, and then the highest are the best: you are
able, do the work; you have done much in settling a Magistracy in Chief; set
to the design; this is of interest public; but cease not here; fit them to the
general end of Government as well as to the particular one of Opinion: Its the
way of all Corporations; this may not be evil in Politics; but there is a
better in States, much more in Christianity.

And from you I pass to all Cities and Corporations; You have evils every day
which need remedy: you spy errors in your Charters, whereby you see you are no
way able to act for public benefit: endeavor the Settlement by due
consideration of just laws: present them, as is due, to the Supreme Magistrate;
let them settle the due privileges, and so enable by a standing Law the Rule
of your Christian Government in a social frame: Emulation may be hereby a spur
to excellency of Order, while the improving the same privileges, more or less,
will evidence the excellency of men, which particular honor is the Bellows to
blow up the spark of outward Virtue to a flame in a zealous or ambitious spirit.

And you rich men, and men of parts in all places, improve your Talents, hold
forth the Light God imparts to you for the healing of this languishing Nation.
The poor increase so vastly, through continued and unrepaired losses at Sea,
and from the deadness of trading at Land, that unless some course be taken, all
must to wrack; besides the mercilesness of Wretches, who sell the poor for a
pair of Shoes; some by forging Judgments, and making folks to compound; some
under color of Warrants, breaking open of houses, being Bailiffs, and that at
midnight; and then by the Justice, its said Justices of the Peace, let go with
only restoring the goods again, and this since acted in several places, they
passing unpunished: otherwhere, a Bailiff upon a Judgment of one hundred and
eight pound, upon a debt of forty pound, out of the Common Pleas, (whereby ten
pound sixteen shillings is due to one Officer for one Fee as damage clear out
of their estate, who are not worth one farthing) comes and makes seizure of a
whole Shop of goods, worth by estimation above two hundred pounds in Grocery,
and other small wares of Silk, Buttons, Lace, Ribbonds, Linen, and Woollen
cloth, etc. besides all the Housholdstuff, not leaving a bed to lie on, or
stool to sit on; and these are (by whole Sale as they say) without any
Inventory, or due apprisal, carried away, and yet no Judgment satisfied, that
is, not fully; forty six pounds is all can be made out of these goods; Men
constantly Arrested only to force them to compound; for stand out a Suit, they
are undone, yet who becomes careful to give or crave relief in these matters?
Thus the poor and miserable people are daily utterly undone from Forms of Law,
and the privilege is in the Form. O Englishmen! deceive not your selves and
others with shadows: These (so (more then) evident) errings, wanderings,
failings, and unreasonable, unjust procedures of so called (and proud of (as
striving for the) name of best, purest, holiest, etc.) Christians, are the gaps
and inlets to all those strange unheard of Opinions, those Blasphemous and
unnatural bestial actions, and audacious Printings, which there is such a stir
withal in the world: lay ought to their charge, they recriminate, and bespatter
foully, and soil hangs: For the letter of the Scripture, if Christians plead
that they are gone, it is as killing under the Gospel as the Law; for the
letter of Scripture, and the lives of Christians, are as different as life and
death, hell and heaven: This in contemplative heads, convinced of duty, works
high, and assuredly brings forth all those Enthusiastic Rapsodies which so
amaze the world; these urge them by degrees to greater heights of so called
zeal for Gods Truth, and then after a Prophetic strain, they utter things hard
to be understood.

I cannot see any ground why any should be led away after them, nor give any
credit to their sayings; No, I rather believe it to be the malice of the enemy,
subtle to deceive; they generally drive at two things, Community, and Parity;
the one against the Tyranny and Oppression, etc. of great men in power; the
other against the covetize, selfishness, luxuriousness, etc. of rich men.

Now these things, O you great and rich men, do most assuredly, as you rightly
conceive, tend to mutiny, to nourish feuds and envyings betwixt the multitude
and you. All that I say, is, remedy not these evils by worse; you know what
Beast you have to deal with; its of such stomach and force, that Prudence must
have the honor of the management; if you subdue, know its but by a part of the
Beast (you must admit the Allusion) and what in the winding up has been the
issue of these things, the Pretorians at Rome, the Mamelucks in Egypt, and
others now testify.

Consider therefore what you have to do; God has set all these as signs and
tokens to you; if you fall, the evil is of your selves, your improvidencies,
lightnesses, and instabilities; your odd and uncertain followings of
providence, evidence your fears, those your doubts, those the error of your
principle; all things work contrary. O that every interest now could lay it
self down at the foot of Jesus, and say, I part with all for thee, and then
take up all it has as from him, and of his gift, and be ready to part with it
to morrow: Should we then live as we do now? How many would then give to the
poor to day, lest they should have nothing to give to morrow? How would they
then not delight in luxurious Apparel, Housholdstuff, etc. wherein multititudes
of riches lie dead and buried, lest another should enjoy them to morrow?

I know this to some melancholy spirit may give occasion to think I aim at, or
give too great footing to Community and Parity; for they should in such
contemplations cast away all; but I speak to the settled Christian, who knows
its lawful to use the world, but all in due order; and as its lawful to
recreate, but spend more time in prayer, then in playing; so its lawful to
rejoice in (and to have that we may rejoice in) outward blessings, but glorify
God with a greater portion to the poor then thy superfluity amounts to.

I intend a due and just reproof to excess and prodigality; Keep not all horses
and dogs, some poor, not all in clothing thy self, some to the naked, and thy
self with moderacy; and yet if thou do these things, thou meritest not
Heaven, but thou avoidest the scandal of men.

Now that this is not done, is the fault of the Magistrate: O Watchman! its thy
duty, but thou set up for favor and by-respect, lazy, idle, and ignorant,
and some evil Watchmen; therefore the work is not done; and that thou mighest
trust these, thou made thy Law to extend to each matter, or so intendest: and
this was for two reasons, one that fools, or any might not err, for the Letter
was their guide; the other, that they that would abuse their power, might not;
and by this, not having each week a new Law, as occasion grew, Justice and
Government is lost; for act by these particular Laws who can, in one hundred
thousand things justly requiring remedy? The poor are thus sold for less then a
pair of old shoes. If you would give a remedy to this, authorize some few, or
many, who shall examine and determine all actions by, or against any person not
worth an hundred pounds; for no Trial can be under twelve pound, and the eighth
part of all a man has indeed of the thing in controversy to be spent in trial
of whether my horse be mine or thine, my knife, nay the sheath of that knife,
is a woeful thing in a Christian Commonwealth: I shall not declaim against it,
but only say, its contrary to the worst of Heathens proceedings: I intend not
to make the wound wider, while I desire healing; the difficulty seems to be
only to persuade men this is a wound: I have been as lenytive and gentle in
opening this Orifice of the ulcer of the Law and its practice as may be: I
acknowledge it my Profession, not my Practice; and I account this according to
the Head Rule of Englands Law, rather the Practice then the Principle, the
error of Custom and interest from men, then of the Law; I hold forth nothing
for Law which is treated of in the Laws of England, but according to the
general rule of that Law, holding nothing contrary to the Law of God or just
reason to be its Rule; all which I am ready to all, or any particular, to
manifest when ever called thereto.

And now I come to speak one word to the people; You are of many sorts, and
many interests you have; but as I find the worst and wickedest, as educated,
professing Christianity, I advise you first to labor as such, to approve your
selves: you have, its probable, been most of you Baptized; the Covenant is
indelible after once you have (I say not been Rebaptized, or Baptized with the
Spirit) but owned that Covenant, in the name Baptism; you are a debtor to the
Lord Christ of all the duties of the Gospel.

This then, O poor Christian, goes far; its the Magistrates duty to rule well;
so it is thine to obey well: It Is the same with you as with the people in
Christ's time, when the great and powerful men speak the Law, and hold forth
duties of Righteousness; do as they say, however they do; Its the Magistrates
duty to hear and receive in a right way just things from you; and by the
implicit Reason of power only to vote them unreasonable and scandalous, is
unsatisfactory; but if they do so, remain you in your integrity; break not out
against them, until the Lord shall open a way, he will do it in his due time;
go on and satisfy thy soul in thy own righteousness, I say so, Comfort thy
self in the mercy of thy God, who has given thee to see others failings; and
though thy condition be poor and needy, yet break not out: This I say of this
great scarcity which has fallen upon us, wherein I believe many have perished,
yet the evil has light on the rude, stubborn, disordered poor, against whom
men's bowels have been shut up; walk therefore according to the condition
wherein God has set you; exalt not your selves against great men, no nor
against rich men, they will be too mighty for you; poor and proud is a high
judgment, it brings misery with rejoicing. I know many of your souls die
within you, when you see the wicked full, their eyes stare with fat; you wait
upon God, and your children famish: yea many hence think God regardless, so
unjust at first, at last deny him. Fools, know it is his Wisdom, he punishes or
tries, or both; he punishes the body in the want of temporals for breaches of
duty to thy brother, neglecting the creature, or abusing it, and the Creator in
it: He tries thee for his glory; was he unjust in his dealings with Job? then
note that poverty is no shame, Christ has sanctified it; no nor death, no not
on the Cross, if as Christ the Captain of our salvation, thou be made
perfect through sufferings; not so, if thou blasphemest, etc.

And now one word to the Teachers of the people; Take heed to your selves, lest
while you preach to others, your selves become not castawayes: Some of you call
your selves still the Clergy, I pray evidence by what special right or title:
next you claim special Ordination; pray agree to what end; we are jealous of a
many among you that would ingross all knowledge of the Gospel by as gainful a
Trade as others did and do the Law; Briefly thus, If you have an infallible
Word, show it; if but a humane, and that that be attainable merely or more
especially by Learning, and that by disquisition knowledge shall increase, then
show how parts and graces are distinguishable, and whether you will quench the
spirit altogether, or allow it altogether, or what or how; tell me why a
brother, a member of the congregation, by them approved, may not improve his
Talent to the edifying of his Brethren, as well as a Bachelor of Art, or
Master before ordained as you call it, Common Place as you call it, and that
often more sorily then an honest Bibling brother that never came at the
Colleges, though at the Schools of the Prophets.

I cannot disallow Pastoral designation, and so in order from Pastoral or
Teaching abilities; but to rest in designation any more then in ordination is
incongruous; I know this opens a gap to fears of maintenance, but I see none
justly; I pray God your standing off open not wider ones. If you be not the
chief, you are none; what is the cause of your contest? I profess, I am not
prejudiced against any person; I have been inquisitive into intendments, and I
judge the tree by the Fruit; may not man do so? is it not consonant to reason?
When do you leave your Parishes generally but to get better, greater Livings?
you have made the notions of the Religious a call from one people, and assent
of the other call but stales to your additional maintenance.

I agree maintenance necessary, but I dare not boggle with the things of God;
speak right out, eight score, be it so, is but sufficient by the year to
maintain any Family, and till I come at that, I will not hold me to any call;
you dare not do it; abuse not your selves, many see it; say not else you can
have so much in another place. This is the beautiful Harlot; your hot and eager
disputes are the Alarms to our continued feuds (I cannot speak this to all, for
there are some who imitate as much as this Age will permit, the example of
Christ their Master; and what ever their opinions be in Politics, they submit
to the Powers for conscience sake, and what ever they may think, they unrake
not the coals of dissension, much less will they blow them to a flame;) here
are all our griefs, here is one wound so long kept open, hereby is all
obedience in all degrees lost and extinct, no respect of Magistrate in any
degree; the truth is, the unfitness of some Magistrates, in not having
abilities, and of others in misimproving them, and so of Ministers, has
heightened by a just judgment the evil of contempt on all sides; the retaining,
and so eager seeking unwarrantable interests will make the Callings I fear
suffer by bringing all into question; my reason is, This has been Gods way
here now and before: As all things necessary to salvation, are (through the
goodness of God) plain and evident; so all things necessary to righteous
Government; what Magistrates stumble at, is the perverseness of people in
pursuing unjust ends to or against their fellow-brother, but especially in
cutting short or tying him up too strictly in the requisites of honor, order,
and maintenance, and that for the Public. The people stumble at the
Magistrates evil using, and greatly abusing his Trust and power to
self-interests, professing for the public, but intending and visibly bettering
self. Its a received Rule, The disease is more then half cured, if the true
reason be known.

O you Magistrates and Lawgivers, you have the first part to act, be you
righteous; evil and disordered people are the manifest tokens of a loose
negligent Magistracy. Its evidently easy to settle a Nation more numerous,
more disordered from ignorance and will, then this is; in the time we are
discoursing how far the Magistrates power extends in Religious things, or in a
Politic consideration what shall be done when the Nation is settled, before the
settlement be made or agreed upon; let us not to avoid the evils of the worst of
Levelling so called, give advantages to their designs or proposals: Let Us walk,
so that we may by reason as well as power maintain our proceedings; before we
undertake, lets resolve to prosecute or surcease upon evident and public
reason; the want of this has disobliged more then ever the Covenant or
Engagement bound. And as I begun with you in Supreme Power, Civil, or Military,
or both, so give me leave to end; when you first engaged, when first you began
this great work of Religion and Public Liberty, how hot and spirituous were
you, when great oppositions and many designs were on foot? how watchful, when
you were running for the Goal and striving for the Mastery, yea, as your
selves said, venturing for your own Lives and Liberties? how regardless of bare
forms? how then could you look at public good in the nighest safest way? you
could then lay out your way besides the common Road without the formality of
suing out an Ad quod damnum; yea what strength of reason could not untye, the
Sword did cut: Thus are the burdens, snares and vexations of truly religious
people gone as to the conscience: Thus far you have been sincere in your
Obligations to God; be also as faithful in your Trusts to the Nation. I would
not have Judges taken away, root and branch; Judges are found in Holy Writ, yea
such in power and Authority as we desire to have; we desire Justice should flow
like streams, and Righteousness like mighty waters; the want of this
impoverishes the Nation; I am in such place, that I see and know it, yea I
believe, let it be rightly scanned, it will appear most costly, more ruinous,
and more enslaving then two such Armies; and as now practiced, more intolerable
then an universal Toleration so often charged upon you.

Now the Lord God of hearts lay what is written to all your hearts, and grant
that you may go on as you have promised, namely, according to the great Trust
that is upon you from the people, you proceed in procuring common good, (which
is the true and ultimate end of all just Government) and by a right aim at
that, direct all your actions, and not cease to improve your best judgments,
and lay out your most unwearied labors, notwithstanding all discouragements,
either from malice, envy, danger, or any other cause whatsoever, to promote the
same, so far, and so fast, as the subject matter will bear; and assuredly the
blessings of Heaven will attend and follow you and your Councels; otherwise be
assured, when God has made use of you for a while, the Lord will cast you
away, as others before you, and your place shall no more be found: for the
averting of which judgment, and settling this Nation and the Government of
quiet and peace upon the foundation of Truth and Righteousness, is the prayer of

Him that zealously and faithfully endeavors and prays for the peace and
happiness of the Commonwealth, CHARLES GEORGE COCK.

The Table.
THe Creation of man and the end of it. page 1 The fall. ibid. The
restoration. ibid. How God Communicated himself to man before the fall. ibid.
How after the fall. ibid. Gods Law given to man. ibid. How that wrought. ibid.
Whither this extended to all men. ibid. The extent of that Law. p. 2 Gods Law
against murder. ibid. Adams and so the Patriarchs power. ibid. The Law of
Nature purely tends to parity. ibid. The dispersion after the flood. ibid. The
original of it. ibid. Who was then the Prince or chief. ib. and p. 3 How Lands
were then divided. ibid. How wars began and servitude. p 3. Gods choice of one
peculiar Nation. ibid. How the rejection of others wrought. ibid. How Abraham a
mighty Prince. ibid. The Patriarchs sin and infidelity. ibid. Gods peculiar
people Bondslaves. ibid. Moses what, and his Judgments. ibid. and p. 4 Not
exemplary to our present Magistracy. ibid. The first law of Moses. p. 4 God
rejects not Jethroes counsel, etc. ibid. Gods Law of the second Tables and
their division. ibid. and p. 8 The supplement for instruction of the people.
ibid. and p. 8 His successors and how chosen. ibid. and p. 5 To Samuel and so
to Saul. ibid. Whither he and so Kings be of divine appointment. ibid. God
chooses David and Solomon, and rejects their successors. ibid. Gods special
spirit ceases in hereditary Kings. p. 6 The influence of good and bad Princes
upon the people. ibid. For sin the Prince is rooted out. ibid. The Principality
sold. ibid. Christ expected by the Jew. ibid. and how. ibid. What the
Patriarchs were, and how the promise of outward blessings was made good to
them. ibid. and p. 7 The Nature of the first Covenant so called. p. 7. and 8
The end of Gods Law given to man. p. 8 The severity of that Law. ibid. In
obedience to this they placed Salvation. p. 8. and 9 Whither these were the
best Laws for all men p. 9 All Prophesies and Prophets related to these Laws.
ibid. In what condition Judea stood at Christ's coming in their diversity of
Doctrines and Opinions; the Temple defiled, yet never more outward profession
and holiness. p. 9. 10 Christ birth and the Manner. p. 10 His obedience to the
whole Law. ibid. and p. 11 John a Preacher of new Doctrine, yet regarded and
followed by the Rulers. ibid. Christ's Acts and Doctrine. ibid. Pharisees and
Sadduces the greatest pretenders to Religion in Christ's time Hypocrites. p. 11
Christ's Doctrine that there is no Salvation by the works of the Law. ibid. The
purity and strictness of his Doctrine. ib. The liberty Christ gave on the
Sabbath to, and in what it lay. ibid. The Jews scandal him and his Miracles.
ib. The inference if Judas received the last supper. p. 12 How the High Priest
prophesied at Christ's death. ibid. The Doctrine of the Apostles the same with
Christ's. ibid. The Apostles had the Spirit, but not all alike. ibid. The call
of the Gentiles. ibid. How manifested. ibid. The Apostles not infallible in all
things. ibid. Whither the Gentiles ought to observe the Law of Moses. ibid.
Wherein the Quere rests. ibid. First Quere concerning Circumcision, the debate
of the matter and by whom. ibid. and p. 13 The sentence. p. 13 The style and
phrase of it. ibid. To whom directed. ibid. By whom received. ibid. Division
and strife among the Apostles. ibid. Paul circumcises Timothy after the
sentence at Jerusalem. ibid. Why controversies arose, and God permitted them,
righteousness opposed, Satan's wiles. ibid. The spreading of the Gospel. p. 14
The Apostles urge the letter of the Law (called old) against sin. ibid. Not two
Covenants, viz. of works and faith; But one diversely demonstrated. ibid. What
part of the Jews Law so called vanished with Christ, what remains. ibid. Sects
in the Apostles times, and how arising. ibid. What is a Sect, what a Schism.
ibid. What remedy the Apostles used. ibid. His Doctrine thereupon. p. 15 The
continuance and eternal duration of the Gospel of Christ. ibid. That the
professors were subject to afflictions. ibid. That they ought not to be
discouraged thereby. ibid. Persecution of the Gospellers or Christians. ibid.
Jerusalem the Carcass, the Romans the Eagles to devour it. ibid. All evils
charged by Heathens upon the Christians. ibid. The ground arising from
misinterpretation of the Christians Principles. ibid. Heathens and that of the
wisest, witnesses to the Christians Doctrine, and that in tortures. p. 16 The
purity of Christianity under persecution. ib. Their defection in tranquillity.
ibid. The painfulness and contentedness of pastors. ibid. Who Pastors, and
their duty, etc. ibid. Julians policy to eradicate Christianity. ib. The
effects. ibid. Worst Emperors Christ's greatest Enemies. ibid. How the Gospel
grew when Scriptures were burned, etc. ibid. The purity of Roman Pastors so
called Bishops in the Primitive times. ibid. Pagans eyed prosperity as the sign
of Gods love. ibid. God exalts Christianity to the Throne. ibid. The purity of
the Prince and how it wrought. ibid. God now afflicts his Church with error. p.
18 The spreading of it. ibid. God punishes with the sword of Barbarians. p. 19
Error increases. ibid. Piety of some professors converts Barbarians. ibid. Pope
of Rome affects the title of Ecumenical, and queries the power of Emperors
over them. ibid. The Quere arising among Christians. ibid. Britain receives the
faith. ibid. Bishops of Rome erect Judicatories. p. 20 Gain large temporalties,
etc. ibid. Admitted infallible. ibid. Arbitrates the controversies of Princes
and claims it and upon what ground. ibid. The title of the Pope and Bishop to
all power. ibid. The imitation of the Ceremonials and Judicials the foundation
of all errors in Church and State among Christians. ibid. The Clergy encroach
upon temporal Magistracy and Jurisdiction. p. 21 An universal Monarchy intended
with Christians. ibid. How all things led on to facilitate the design ibid.
The pride of the Clergy and from what Ground. p. 22 Many Laws altered in
England upon the coming in of Christianity. ibid. How whole Nations came to
become Christians at once. ibid. Popes labor to gain the right or use of
Appeals from all Nations. ibid. Some Princes oppose, and the reason. p. 22 The
evil effects of this claim. ibid. Especially in Germany and England. ibid.
William so called the Bastard or the Conqueror, admitted King of England, his
claim, his reign ibid. His politic settlement. p. 24 His successors tyranny.
p. 25 The opposers, and how quelled. ibid. The gate God opened for freedom. p
26 Magna Charta, and Charta De foresta, granted ibid. The Pleas of Kings
against them. ibid. The Judges and Lawyers absolute interest serving Kings
tending to enslave the people. ibid. Some Judges hanged for it. ibid. The
contest briefly examined. page 27. Why the Pope suffered these contests. ibid.
The Popes policy to avoid Reformation from Princes. ibid. Gods witnesses
against Romes signs, and her dealing with them. ibid. The Pope and Princes
strengthen each other. page 28. The Kings of Englands best title is from
Parliamentary elections, and the reason. ibid. Princes liberality to the
Churches. ibid. Parishes erected. ibid. God still raises up witnesses against
Rome. ibid. Incestuous Marriages from the Popes dispensations in most of the
chief Families in Europe page 29 The Kings labor to exalt Prerogative. ib. The
settlement of the Court of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Chequer, etc. ibid. In
whom the choice of Judges, and how, ibid. Court of Wards erected, etc. ibid.
Court of Star Chamber erected. ibid. Admiralty and others Courts, etc. ibid.
Luther and his Quarrel with the Pope, page 30 His Doctrine, ibid. His Abettors
few if any. ibid. His opposers, all Christian Princes. ibid. Hen. the 8 th of
England writes against him. ibid. The reason of the Princes siding against
Luther. ibid. Henry after quarrels the Pope; The Reason. ibid. His halting
twixt Popery and Protestancie. He seizes the Monasteries, etc and the reasons.
page 31. How he rewarded his instruments. ibid. Edward the sons zealous
Reformation. ib. Mary's cruelty. page 32. Elizabeth's deliverances and
succession. ib. Popish plots against her upon Reformation. ibid. Englands laws
distinguish twixt a Papist in Opinion and in Faction. ibid. Englands Law at
Elizabeth's coming to the Crown. ibid. Recusants why so called. ibid. All
Protestants agree not to Elizabeth's Reformation. ibid. Their Reasons and
uninterestedness. p. 33 Some of the Parliament men questioned by the Queen.
ibid. How she misliked the so called zealots. ibid. They fly into Holland, and
they print freely. ibid. Against both Magistracy, and Ministry. page 34 Yea
against the Queen, in regard of manifest error continued both in Church and
State. ibid. Her Potency and relief to her Neighbors. ibid. James succeeds,
Loves not Puritans. ibid. Yet distasts them not ibid. Advances the Interest of
Prerogat. Courts ibid. Takes away the good old laws to increase revenew. ibid.
The succeslesness of His wise Councels. p. 35 His policy to subvert the freedom
of Parliaments. ibid. His way discovered. ibid. The end then aimed at, the
subduing Scotland absolutely, ibid. The Court party. ibid. The King would not
agree to Arms. pa. 36 The cross dealing of the Scotch Presbytery with King
James ibid. Some laws made in King James time how diversely executed. ibid.
Charles Crowned with great joy. ibid. Disgusts against him in his first
Parliament. ibid. He gets money, and dissolves it. ibid. Breaks his Royal word
(so called) in his grant to the Petition of right. page 37 The State of the
Church here at the beginning of, and during his reign, page 37. 38. and 39. in
the pride and dependence of the Hierarchy, seeking by unjust ways to raise
private estates out of the Church revenues. ibid. Their little regard of
Blasphemy, drunkenness, etc. ibid. All they sought was unity, and by
uniformitie. ibid. Hate against good men. ibid. Their policies to bring in
Popery. ibid. Some of their errors repeated. ibid. The civil state considered,
page 39. 40 The King lost his Militia in all kinds. ibid. His Lords given
altogether to vain sports, etc. ibid. The Gentry follow them, and the Yeoman
them, and so all order is broken. ibid. Justice wholly turned into form and
practice, and destructive in all the pooceedings of Law. page 40. 41. 42. 43.
44. So the first step to introduce general poverty. page 45. 46. And that
demonstrated by consideration of the parties suing. ibid. The process what and
whence, and by whom. ib. The Courts of Trial above and below. ib. The Attorney
and their practice. p. 43. 44. Declaration and Plea. ibid. Issue, single, and
double. ibid. Jury. ibid. Verdict. ibid. Stay of Judgment. ibid. Judgment.
ibid. Stay of Execution. ibid. Remedy in Chancery the worst evil. p. 45. 46
Sollicitors what. etc. 44. The reasons of all this Error: pa. 45. 46.
Privilege of Persons and Places discussed: page 46 Witnesses and the abuse in
them. ibid. Most ordinary matters in practice undetermined in Law. page 46. and
47 Cheatings in Bargains, sales and all conveiances. page 48 Englands Law
practical only, so that Government was subverted page 48. Coppy-hold or base
or villein tenure discussed. page 48. 49. Want of Forcing Plantations, another
causes of Englands poverty. ibid. Inns, Alehouses, and Taverns, another cause.
ibid. Marrying of the poor too young another cause, and debilitates nature, and
makes unfit to labor. ibid. Englands good laws for maintaining honest
laborious, and punishing idle ones, enervated, and neglected. page 50
Considerations of binding out poor children apprentices, by the Justices of the
peace. p. 50. Difficulty and varieties of Laws, the Lawyers Gins evidenced.
ibid. The Criminal part of law neglected, and how. page 51 The policy in
ruining the old frame of Englands Government. ibid. The policy to evade the
discovery of this. ibid. London the great Monopol of Trading. page 52
Monopolies one of the Royal trades. ibid. The Kings policy in ship-mony and
the end. ibid. Kings Charles intends War. page 53 Intends an alteration of
Government. ibid. That the alteration was made of necessity. ibid. For a
ground he imposes the Eng. Liturgy upon the Scots. ibid. His carriage to
engage a deeper War. ibid. He is necessitated to call a Parliament. p. 53
Breaks it, and necessitated, calls it again. ibid. The King seeks money. page 54
The King disables himself to dissolve the Parliament. ibid. The Parliament
questions Strafford. ibid. His pleas, the Parliaments answers, ibid. The King
attempts upon some Members. ibid. The Parliament sets a guard. ibid. The King
practizes the Army. ibid. 400000. l. Raised, and the Army disbanded. ibid.
Ireland almost lost. ibid. The dislike of the people to the Kings increase.
ibid. The Bishops questioned and discarded, ibid. The King flies. page 55 The
Parliament arm. ibid. The King fled, the Convocation follow. ibid. Many Lords
and Commons go also. ibid. These he calls his Parliament at Oxford. ibid. The
Lord Keeper flies to the King. ibid. The controversy twixt King and Parliament
as it stood controverted between them. ibid. The National Covenant agreed on.
ibid. And the Nature of it. ibid. The Kings aim in settling Government. page 56
Exemplified in a demonstrative particular. ibid. The disadvantage to the
Parliament by being only defensive. ibid. The diverse interests that followed
the diverse parties of King and Parliament. ibid. Two special parties,
Presbyter and Independent. ibid. The principal differences, generally
discussed. page 56. and 57 The doctrine Episcopal and Presbyterian the same.
page 58 The Parliament upon prudent consideration do not fully approve the
Presbyterian way. ibid. The reasons. ibid. A main error held by Presbyters.
page 59 The Congregational way rather allowed. ibid. And the reason. ibid. The
objections against it, page 60 The Army new molded in a dangerous season. ibid.
Naseby fight, and the disadvantages to the Parliament in reason, ibid. The
prosecution of the victory. page 61 The King comes in to the Scots. ibid. The
Scots return, ibid. Independants how thought on, etc. ibid. The Army seize the
King at Holmby. ibid. He is prudently wrought into the Isle of Wight. page 62
The Armies interest questioned. ibid. London Prentises assault the Parliament.
ibid. General Risings in all Counties. ibid. A great insurrection at Norwich,
with an extraordinary providential issue. p. 62. and 63 The Navy revolt. ibid.
The Presbyter joins in the design. ibid. The King set at liberty prudentially
in the Isle of Wight. ibid. The mannagement of the plot. ibid. How advantageous
to the King. ibid. The Scot invades England to necessitate continuance of the
treaty. ibid. Colchesters Siege. ibid. The Parliaments Armies streights and
patience, the Scots routed. p. 64 The Army march to London. ibid. Diverse
Members imprisoned. ibid. London Garrisoned. ibid. The King questioned and
executed. ibid. The Kingdom made a Republique. p. 65 Opposition to the work
fomented, with the grounds of it. ibid. All arose from the Kings party. ibid.
The Levellers rise. ibid. Levelling in all the various Interests of it as evil
considered. p 66. and 67 Just Levelling considered, p. 67. 68. 69. as it
relates in the whole to a just settlement of the Nation. ibid. The diverse
grounds these just Levellers had. p. 69. and 70 Manifesting the difficulty of
due reformation in the Nature of interest corrupted. ib. The scandalizing of
authority under availed name disallowed. p. 72 General complaints considered.
ibid. A consideration of the incoherency of Christians Lives and Doctrine ibid.
The Parliaments faithfulness in general. ibid. Obstructed by particular
interests. p 73 Some considerations of some Laws or statutes new made, how
tending to the privilege of the people. ibid. Consideration of Engagement.
ibid. Consideration of trials by extraordinary Commission. p. 74. and 75.
Wherein is considered The holding up the hand. ibid. Opening the doors. ibid.
The parties whether to have council or not. ibid. Whether the Jury be Judges of
Law and how etc. ibid. Gaoles and their evils briefly considered. p. 75
Maintenance in prison. p. 75. and 76 Arresting by armed power considered. p. 76
Dilatory Pleas exploded. p. 77 The reasons of making the Laws difficult. ibid.
Contrariety of Laws resolved. ibid. Kings of England had not the Militia. p. 78
Consideration what is the Law of England, etc. p. 78. and 79 Want of
workhouses, and the reasons. p. 79. and 80 Particular Law Books examined,
whether Law. ibid. These greivances not yet remedied. p. 80 Errors in all
states and conditions of men. ibid. And the most visible reasons of some. ibid.
Lawfulness of Impropriations questioned. p. 81 The Objection against the
present Parliament. ibid. Counsel of State considered. ibid. Corrupt Interest
still makes Corrupt Officers. p. 82 Taverns, Inns, Alchouses the Nurseries of
all vice, increase. p. 82. 86. and 87 From these Defects Governors opposed.
ibid. Civil Apostasy as well as Ecclesiastic agreed. ibid. Christ's Kingdom
desired; till then a Rational prudential settlement. ibid. Saints privilege.
ibid. Their submission to all Government. p. 83 Gospel good works what. ibid.
Christians bound to the Law. ibid. The vanity of the Amusive part of Civil
Government simply. p. 84 Court of Chancery considered, and what is the proper
matter for that Court. p. 85 Some General considerations of legal grievances.
p. 86 Necessity of settling Schools. p. 87 And regulation of apparel. ibid.
More consideration of legal Nicety. ibid. Speedier Law in proper places
necessary. p. 87. and 88 Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, how the
privilege of the Subject, considered. p. 88. and 89 The way to settle the
Nation propounded. p. 89. and 90 Who to be used in settling the Law. p. 89 and
90 Excellent reason in Englands Law. p. 89 Evidenced in particular cases. ibid.
Gods Law to be the head rule. ib id. Consideration of discents of inheritance,
by a double portionaccording to Gods Law, or as in England. p. 90 Who the great
opposers of due reformation in the Law and practice, etc. p. 90 Diverse
conversation of Christians to their profession. ibid. A serious Caveat to all
in power. p. 91 The extent of the Engagement considered. ibid. Assizes in
Norfolk held in an illegal place. p. 92 Some matters concerning the course of
Error in Criminal trials remembered. ibid. A great abuse in Undersheriffs.
ibid. Evils of Law suits worse then ever. p. 93 Something fit to be done
considered, to answer so many Engagements. ibid. Difficulty of National
reformation. ibid. Danger if Reformation be not evident of strange returns.
ibid. Considered from several opposers. ibid. Gods admirable workings for the
Supreme powers of this Nation. ibid. This ought to raise hearts to serve God
the more. ibid. Not the Author of a work, but the nature and usefulness to be
regarded. ibid. The end of the first part, intimating the general end of the
second. ibid. Desire of a blessing from God in it. p. 95
Courteous Reader, amend these faults of the Printer, with some false stops,
which the Author could not so well correct, nor the Printer in so much haste as
was in this desired.
PAge 2. line 50. read most. p. 3. l. 9. r. ware. and l. 56. r. our. p. 14. l.
26. r. promises. p. 17. l. 28. r. Grandeurs, p. 20. l. 45. r. mother. p. 21. l.
45. r. that. p. 22. l. 53. r. Annate. and l. 56. r. still. p. 31. l. 26. r.
change. p. 34. l. 5. r. naught appeared. p. 37. l. 22. r. at least as to. p.
42. l. the last but two. r. Councellor. p. 43. l. 21. r. exacted. p. 44. l. 47.
r. Mystery. p. 46. l. 3. r. that was, was Kings. p. 48. l. 13. r. Acres of the
Tenement. p. 49. l. 10. r. Christian Knight. and l. 47. r. first. p. 53. l. 43.
r. barques. p. 55. from the word there. l. 10. to reject. l. 12. put a ()
Parenthesis. and l. 27. r. while with a little w. p. 58. l. 51. r. empowered. p.
67. l. 21. r. to leave each. p. 69. l. 11. r. a Hanck. p. 78. l. 37. r. Hanck.
p. 82. l. 35. r. policies. p. 85. l. 22. r. course. p. 87. l. 15. r. effronting
and l. 18. r. universal. p. 89. l. 19. r. force. p. 91. l. 31. put the stop
after value.

A SVRVEY Of the Household of God on Earth, etc.
THe Lord God for his own glory, and the accomplishment of his determinate
Councels, made the world, and every living thing, whether Angels, or men, in
heaven or in earth; which perfected, The Almighty wisdom, though it could have
otherways gloryfied it self, thought fit among all the Creatures which his
hands had made, to raise man to that pitch of honor, as to make him not only
the object of his love, but in some sort the Author of his honor, (who is the
fountain it self or original spring of honor and all other virtues and
excellencies) and this he himself acknowledges, by several expressions of his
own, and Prophets, when men have yielded obedience to his Commandments, saying
they honored him, or gave glory to him. Yea indeed it will be acknowledged of
all sorts of men, that the end of man's Creation was (as is the work of every
Artificer) the glory and honor of the Creator, and maker; Therefore the same
wisdom that Created man, even while man was yet simple and pure, in the
absolute height of his first created perfection, put him under the obedience of
a Law and Rule in word, to the keeping of which those first principles which we
call the Laws of sense, and reason, were but subservient. But man kept not long
that station; but disobeyed the law of his most high Creator, by which error or
fall its concluded and agreed, by all Christians, that the whole nature of man
was corrupted and tainted, and from being the sons of God in pure creation, all
mankind became the sons of Adam by natural propagation; bearing in our bodies
the sting and marks of our first sin, in our daily and continued
transgressions, thrust out from the presence of our God, and could dwell no
longer in paradise. And now the Laws of sense and reason were man's rule, God
not holding that lively communion with man, which he did before, to prescribe
him particular and positive Commands, or Laws; (at least that we read of.) Yet
the goodness of our Creator, transcendently appeared, in that while he breathes
forth threatenings to his disobedient servant, nay actually punishes him, in
ejecting him the earthly Paradise, the Type of the heavenly Rest, he opens a
door of comfort, in so sweet promises as he there annexed, of the hopes of a
Savior; under which Covenant he pleased in all ages to take a special regard
to some men, in and by whom the family and household of God was continued; and
to these he several times, and by several manners revealed himself (whether by
Dreams, Visions, Angels, or otherwise, is not so material to be here discust)
and taught them the Laws and Ordinances of his house, which Laws we see were
not so contrary to the Law of pure Reason or the inherent law of nature, that
they wrought division, or separation either amongst themselves, or with others,
or so perspicuous to the eye of man's reason, that each wanderer saw the wisdom
of the Father, and immediately followed that rule and dictate of the divine
Spirit; of which families or households it is conceived the Lord had several in
diverse Countries at the same time; but as being least questionable, most proper
to a Christian, and so most subservient to our end, we shall only look at the
direct line of scriptural genealogy, from Adam to Noah, and so to Abraham, of
whose posterity in the twelve Patriarcks, was found the people of God, the holy
seed, among whom were (in his due time) shown the Oracles of God, the depth of
wisdom, both for the government of Gods people as men, or Saints, by the Lords
anointed, and every inferior power under the civil Scepter: or by the royal
Preisthood or inferior Levite under the Divine declaration. How far Adams power
extended, or how absolute it was, I shall not controvert, nor yet Noah's; but
this we may see, that it was so paternal, that we read not of any censure that
he gave to Cain upon his brothers murder; though we see God did; but how it
was effected, whether only by the voice of conscience, or otherways, is so
difficult that we will not guess, but conclude, had the knowledge of it been
material, either for Gods honor or our good, the holy and wise God would not
have so obscured it; nor yet gives God a precept against murder, but gives it
Noah after the Flood. That it was want of absolute power afterward, that
brought such looseness, and disorders upon the world whereby sin in the
successions of generations, from Adam to Noah, was so multiplied, the contrary
seems evident, and that from the Tenor of Gods truth: For there were mighty
men, who abused their power to wrong and injustice, therefore were they
plagued; we may say plainly, they sought and got power over each other, and
destroyed the pure law of nature: For (though I am not against, nay I am for
Government, as will well appear hereafter, yet) this I say, that the law of
pure naturals sets not one above another, which law observed, there would be no
need of Governors, for each one would be a law unto himself: But to return, the
power thus obtained, they abused it to unjust ends, Spoil, Robbery, Rapine,
Lust, and such like; for this came the wrath of God upon these children of
disobedience and violence; and the Flood washed away them and their sins
together. Yet the Lord remembered Noah, for was he just, from whose posterity
descended all the present Inhabitants of the earth; and although the fathers
were, as Shem and Japhet, righteous in their generations; yet the sons and
progeny of these, forgot the laws of their fathers house, and fell into the
delusions of Satan, by the lusts of their own hearts; And forgetting the
Judgments of God upon the old world, they as well as the seed of Cham, fell
into the sins of the old world, and promoted themselves over their brethren,
not according to priority of birth, as most congruous to reason, but by might
and power, abusing those excellent qualifications of divine infusion, against
the law of the most High, and then according to their factions, they by
strength got dominion, which loath to lose, they combined together against God
himself; nay as sure as the Lord lives, the Poet truly expresses the heart of
man, These Giants or Principes would if they could, have plucked God out of
heaven; they first brake his Laws, and then fought against him; but the
Almighty now only scatters them to his glory; and they who before were bounded
in a narrow compass, are now dispersed through all regions, and it is concluded
that the chief of them of one language, upon the confusion of tongues was their
Prince, but whether that were the most Ancient, Strong, or Wise, we shall not
need here dispute; it is agreed there was a chief, and that the most ancient,
by the general Law of reason, owned that place. However it is most probable
that their dominion extended not over many, or that their power was unlimited:
But it seems among the sons of Noah, that Chams posterity first deviated from
the rule of nature, in Nimrod, who notwithstanding he had elder brothers, yet
took the power of government upon him; yet its conceived he went no further
then the government of his own family, the heads of families appearing in the
same age with him in the offspring both of Shem and Japhet; and it is not
probable that in those times the government was mostly such; for they might
have enough in one family for one man well to govern, considering the many
hundreds of years those ancients lived, and the mind of man might well then be
contented with it; the profit was care, and the honor duty, and the end only
safety against brutish invasion, which course is as most natural, so most
conjectural, until the contrary be proved. And most assuredly as their
families increased, even after the dispersion, so divided they the land as well
as in the days of Peleg; and though it may be conceived that in this
dispersion and confusion of languages, the seed or occasion of future Discords,
Wars, Jars, and such like was sown, yet it is probable that the earth in the
fullness thereof being before them, and the remembrance of kindred being fresh,
they did not immediately break out into blood, by forcing a disseising, or
putting them out of possessions who were in; but those unprovided sought out
habitations, and their numbers in their respective progresses increasing, they
sent out what we call Colonies: The chief leader or Colonel of which, was, as
is most likely, the most Ancient, who also gave forth to them the general law
of their fathers, whether traditional or otherways; and the next in degree of
age, as the fathers of many children were accounted as chiefs, next that chief,
or King, and these by Scripture according to that phrase in the time of Moses
writing (when now the world was grown to some setlement in disordered order)
were called Princes; But these soon wax out the remembrance of their neerness
of blood (for surely where God was not regarded, man was neglected) forgetting
God and his Law, and private interest increasing, the issue was divisions, Wars
and Jars. The just might separate and divide, as did holy Abraham, and just
Lot; but the wicked fought for it, and by power obtained their will, and that
law or liberty of blood-letting once admitted, there was no stint of strife,
they renewed the Wars as the season of the year gave opportunity, and with this
strife out of all question came in (against the law of nature) the servitude of
man to man, and therewith also a confusion of families, as to pure descent. But
let us pass on and have, the Lord makes now his family in the household of
Abraham, by especial Covenant of promise with him and his seed, rejecting all
other Nations; Yet how that rejection wrought, is difficult: for Melchizedech,
Abraham's contemporary was a holy man, and assuredly kept purely the law of his
fathers, supposed of Shem, though living amongst the accursed Cananites; so
Pharaoh King of Egypt, to whom the Lord communicated his error in taking
Abraham's wife, and more especially Abymelech King of Gerar, who apprehensive of
Gods indignation, for the same thing, prays as one, and that not only of
himself, but as of a Nation that knew and kept the Covenant of the Lord, Will thou also destroy a righteous Nation, said he not she is my sister? But to
proceed; This Abraham is called a mighty Prince, yet Arms but three hundred and
eighteen, this confirms what was before asserted, showing what Kings and
Princes then were, for these were to fight four Kings, and manifestly proves
the generality to be but heads of families (though the Assyrian had now
conquered many families) mark also Abraham's complaint for lack of an heir,
urging his power and estate to difcend to Eleazar his chief servant; These
things are inserted only to lead the weak reader in a plain path way of
historical narration, therefore this one example might suffice, but this must
be more then seconded, both in Isaac the child of promise, and Jacob and his
progeny; Isaac was Abraham's heir both of goods and graces, yet falls into the
offense of Abraham his father, and for safeguard of his life denies his wife;
And as a King governing his family; has issue Esau and Jacob Twins, and
although the birth right of divine blessing is by Isaac given to Jacob, yet the
temporal inheritance was to Esau, which primogeniture is several ways; and in
the right of it acknowledged to Esau, by Jacob, whose substance was the gift of
his God in, and for his faithful service he performed to Laban. But lets have
to see Jacob in his full grown family, descended into Egypt, and there
continued the time appointed by Gods promise, during whose servitude, while the
yoke of Pharaoh gauled the necks of his offspring, (the way which God used to
perform and fulfill his promise of freedom, it is strange to flesh and blood) you
can look for no other government upon their shoulders then the whips of the
Taskmasters, until the time of deliverance from the Lord comes, who raises up
Moses to be their savior and leader; but the judgments of his mouth during
the whole course of his government, were for the greatest part extraordinary,
even from the mouth, or Spirit of the most high God, which although it shows
how nigh a relation holiness and obedience can work betwixt man and God, yet so
far it shows not ought as exemplary to us in our present Magistracy, either
the superior or subordinate, in ordinary jurisdiction; neither the Acts or
judgments of any of those Judges afterward, in such special causes of evident
supreme, either direction, or assistance: neither during their forty years
peregrination in the wilderness, nor in their days of rest, until they called
for a King, nor indeed at any time: That is, we are not to take what ever one
judges supreme or subordinate, in ordinary jurisdiction or legal government
say, as a binding word issuing from an infallible spirit, or accompanied with
such divine directions; But according to the respective laws, and customs of
the place and Nation wherein we live, ordered according to the reason, and
necessity of intervening accidents, wherein those general rules, which nature
teaches, of self preservation, and of preferring generals before particulars,
and general and common good before particular, (always presumed naught be done
contrary or destructive to any part of Divine rule) must by all men, as was by
them, be observed. But seeing all that Moses did was not extraordinary, let us
a little view his behavior, in the course of this narration, even of that man
with whom so extraordinary a spirit rested; for his first actions I leave the
reader wholly to Scripture (only this, he was under persecution from his
infancy, being then exposed to the mercy of the waters only) for what I shall
specially aim at, shall be, and are his acts judicial, and those either in
referenre either to Church or Commonwealth; The first law of Moses mouth was
not only binding to the Jew, but from the equity of it, was, and is, the pure
principle of obedience to the supreme powers, Obey God; for where that is not,
or ceases, the other is little observed; so that some, which it was thought
believed no God, yet professed many, by that superstition to enforce a
reverence, and from thence obedience. Moses now not only gives, but administers
law also unto the people; in the next place looks to settling of civil
judicatures, in the stablishment of Judges, and giving rules for the choice of
Judges and administration of justice; wherein it is worth observation, that the
advice Moses receives herein, though not from the mouth of Almighty God, but
of Jethro his Father in law, yet being agreeable to good reason, (I say no
more) he yields, enquires not of God, nor did God alter it after, because not
coming immediately from himself, nor made any declaration by himself or Moses,
that it came from him, either to get the glory to himself, or to enforce with
greater authority the acceptance of the same: Nor yet disallows of it after,
but approves it, and it was an established Law for the great judicatory of that
Nation for ever accordingly. The next thing was the Act of Almighty God in
giving the laws whereby the people should be judged, which were summarily
comprehended and written in two Tables of Stone, (it may be to signify their
long or everlasting duration) which were delivered by Gods own hand (according
to our natural expression) unto Moses, and by him, unto the children of Israel,
Gods people; which Laws were of two sorts, the first concerning God, written in
one Table; the other concerning man, written in the other; now these being as
we say general laws, and difficultly could all sins and offenses by the common
people be reduced to their proper Commandment, so that they would have pleaded
ignorance, in excuse of their sin; Therefore God gives particular Laws, and
Rules, for all emergent sins, and sets forth particularly the whole frame and
order of the worship, and service he expected from his people, yea every
circumstance requirable therein, upon which the whole Law of God, or which God
gave to the Jew, was or is thus distinguished, into moral and ceremonial,
relating from man to God in his worship and service of him: And into moral and
judicial, relating from man to man; which later must be thus opened; The Laws
of the two Tables were and still are by many supposed to be absolutely moral
or perpetual, and that as well to the Christian now, as to the Jew then; but
the judicial not so; but of this more in convenient place and time. Now these
judicial laws, commonly called Moses judicials, did respect both body and
goods, all which stand upon such order, as is most agreeable to natural equity,
to the well being of a Common wealth, and that, both in peace and war; To a
man's self, and also toward his neighbor, superior, and inferior; yea in all
things tending thereto; which laws as the Jew received them from the hand of
Moses, as their chief and governor; so did they live accordingly, giving
obedience to them all the days of Moses; after whom, not Moses son or sons
ruled Israel; neither by his, their, or the peoples seeking was any such thing
once mentioned, but the government (most especial gifts and graces, testifying
his divine vocation, showing forth themselves in him) was given unto Joshua;
but no new law divulged, but the division of inheritances to the several Tribes
in their respective conquests, was as the Lord had commanded Moses, and he gave
forth as a law to the people. And having through Gods goodness given
possessions, and in peace, to Israel, before his death, he calls for all
Israel, or their elders, heads, judges, and officers, and from Gods former and
present mercies, promise and threatenings, persuades them to obedience to these
laws, which for some time they observed under their particular heads of Tribes,
without any particular Prince, and won great victories against their enemies,
(which although I find in history to be ascribed to be done under the command
of Phineas the Priest, yet I wave it, and only prosecute the order of
Scripture.) The next successor in government there given to them is Othniel,
then Ehud, Shamgar, Deborah and Barak, then Gideon; these were by a special
spirit of God raised up for the deliverance and saving Israel, from the hand of
those enemies, into whose hand for sin their God had delivered them; But they
still departing from him, that is, from his Laws, not giving either any, or not
due obedience, God as it seems intending to chastise them yet more (as the
strokes or contentions of friends are most bitter) suffers Abimelech the son of
Gideon by unjust and unused ways to seek not only the government, but a
kingdom, yet after his death (whose ambition was also punished together with
the peoples sin (for the people were Gods avengers on him as he was of the
people) now arises a new succession of Judges of several Tribes, and as it
seems also by the special hand of their God upon them, as Tola, Jari, Jeptha,
Sampson, after whose time there was as it were an interregnum, no King, no
Judge in Israel, and the manifestation of the will of God by a special spirit
to any chief of Israel ceased, and so for defect of worthy noble virtuous
spirits, the government was conferred upon Eli the Priest, in whose time there
was no manifest vision; And though Samuel the last had it, yet it continued not
after him, if it ceased not to work at sometimes in him, who as it seems rather
out of fatherly indulgence (although he had seen the judgments of God upon Eli
his Master, and his family (for such weaknesses are evident often in Gods
dearest children) then by divine appointment, makes his sons Judges: but they
turning aside after lucre, and taking bribes, perverted judgment. Whereupon
all the Elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel to
Ramah, and said unto him; Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy
ways, (that is righteously) now therefore make us a King to judge us like all
Nations. Where we may see, error in government and governors causes desires of
change of government, etc; But the Lord commands Samuel to listen to the
peoples voice, but declaring to Samuel, who it seems was also a little sensible
of the peoples neglect toward him, though most for God, that this choice of
man was their rejection of God. Whence mark, in the purity or purest of times,
Gods Church was governed as a Commonwealth, in the declining days it grew to a
kingdom. The next thing to be considered of, is, to see the King settled in his
Throne, wherein I shall first seek out, how they came to have a King, that is,
whether of divine appointment, or of their own election; it is truth that it
seems both concurred, 1 Samuel 8. 5. compared with 1 Samuel 9. 15. but then the
question is moved justly, who was the first and principal Agent, the Lord in
appointing, or the people in requiring a King, which being plain on the peoples
part, it is objected that the Lord in his first laws to his people, Deuteronomy. 17.
14. etc. gave them a Rule concerning the choice of their King, namely one of
their brethren, etc. and that Jacob prophesied of the same, and that God laid
down the duties of the King, etc. To which it is answered, that neither the
prophecy of Jacob, nor Gods laying down the Kings choice, duty, and such like,
no nor Samuels anointing Saul, by Gods appointment, proves any divine
institution, no more then the prophesies, etc. of great sins and defections
from God. etc. warrants them: No, no, the utmost it holds forth is rather a
Divine concession, then an original institution; for the Lord in that eighth of
Samuel, tells Samuel, the people had rejected him for being their King; and
laying before the people by Samuel the usage of Kings, ruling at list, or
according to their own will and power, as it were to deter the people from
it, the peoples stubbornness ver. 7. 8. and 19. and 20. shows plainly that in
wrath, as the spirit elsewhere expresses it, he gave them a King, that is,
yielded to their desire of a King; and Saul, anointed by Samuel, was chosen by
Lot, and being hidden, was sought, and by Gods direction found out of the
people, and saluted King, with a God save the King; whence if it be thought fit
to be objected, he was chosen by Lot, and so the disposition of that being from
the Lord, the Lord appointed the King, its agreed; but thence to infer that
Kings are of divine institution, it follows not: This only is properly raised
thence, that God appointed that person Saul to be King of his own people: after
Saul David comes to the Throne, and though by Gods appointment, and special
designation, the house of Saul contends with him; Absalom he Rebels, and
carries the multitudes of Israel after him; and Solomon the wisest of the sons
of men succeeding, though by David's appointment, yea by divine approbation many
ways manifested; if not fore-prophesied, he so sins, that the Lord rejects
him, dividing the Kingdom, and now in the settlement of hereditary succession,
that special spirit which accompanied the cheifs or Kings of Gods people
ceases, as to the most, if not all of them, and rested upon special Prophets,
whom the Lord raised up in the Reigns of several Kings, for the manifestation
of his glory, and love to his people, not only declaring his notice of their
especial sins, but also denouncing judgments in case of impenitency, which
accordingly fell out in the several raigns of several of the Kings of Israel;
and Judah, which subsequent Kings were either faithful wholly, or in the main
depending upon God, and walking in the ways of David their father; or else a
kind of formal servers of God, not faithfully, but hypocritically, or openly
profane, and Idolatrous, one or two especially, Jeroboam who made Israel to
sin, yet of Gods appointment, renting the kingdom from Solomon's heir to give
it him, and Ahab that sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord,
for whose outward humiliation only God spared the Nation during his days.

Now this is to be noted, that even then, such as was the King, such was the
pople generally, and for the greatest part, at least in outward profession; An
idolatrous King, an idolatrous people; a lukewarm King, a careless people; a
zealous faithful King, a reforming praying people; So far ever was outward
splendour and power a leader of outward profession, and civil conversation; and
under the law, accordingly, as the Lord was served faithfully, negligently, or
profanely, such was his carriage toward this his people, under faithful and
holy Kings, great blessings, both of War and peace; under the indifferent,
lukewarm, neuter, self-seeking Kings; Secureness in peace, and cutting short
in War; But under the idolatrous and openly wicked, actual devastations,
besiegings, overthrows, and at last general captivities; of which, the kingdom
of Israel so called, being of the ten Tribes under the head Tribe Ephraim, felt
sorely, and still feel, where ever they were carried by the Assyrian Monarch;
who was punished as for her own sins, so for the example of her sister Judah,
whose race was yet continued in their own land, under their own governors, but
for sin cut short, and the royal race wasted, or overawed, the kingdom at last
became Mercinary, and set forth by the Asian Kings, the successors of part of
the great Alexanders Monarchy, to a public sale, yet sold to the Priests, and
of the royal blood, until at last in the fullness of time, the Roman
conquering, or Commanding both the Asian and Egyptian Princes, it was sold or
given to Herod an Edomite, so that now the Lawgiver and Scepter departed from
Judah; The temporal kingdom of the Jew in power royal, ceased from all the
Tribes of Judah, and Israel; And now the Jews themselves expected the coming
of their Messiah, and the fulfilling of the Ancient prophesies, according to
their received vulgar interpretation, of a most glorious mighty powerful Prince
then to be raised up of God, who should subdue all their enemies under them,
free them from the Roman yoke, now so much feared, and should lead them in the
strength of Moses, and Elias, and by his power should consummate all their
joys, in reducing their dispertions to an head, and seating them freely, and
absolutely the Commanders of the Universs: Thus private interest still led on
the people, though pretending to God, so powerful is nature ever with the
flesh. Having here drawn into a short sum the Misterious history of Gods
dealing with that people, which he did more immediately hold as his own
inheritance, and made a special covenant with them, before we pass to new
matter, let us a little look back and reveiw, generally and briefly what this
people was, the form of the Covenant, the nature of the Laws and Statutes given
them by God, and their execution, and such other particulars as shall offer
themselves. In the first age the persons magnified in holy writ, is, Abel,
Enoch, and the rest, what were they but plain men, living innocently; Abel,
though loving God and loved of God, God rescues him not from the violence of
his brother Cain, but he falls and perishes under his hands; and Enoch among
the Ancients lived no more then three hundred sixty five years, and was
translated, (as it is translated) that is, to Saints, taken into the mystery of
God, but to men ceased to live longer on earth; both were blessed, yet one dies
violently or untimely, the other timely; he lived not half the days of wicked
men before translated; both judgments in men's accounts: In the succeeding
generations after the flood, what was Noah, the preacher of righteousness, or
of the truth, which were traditionally, or otherwise received, as the word of
the righteous God? He was neither believed, or regarded of the wicked world,
and though he saw Gods great judgment upon the world, and his special mercy to
him, in their destruction, and his own wonderful preservation, immediately sins
grievously, and is derided of his own accursed son, yet this is the man whom
the Lord chose, and with him enters an express Covenant.

When he chose a Judge and Ruler, whom did he choose but Moses? And his present
qualifications, were, an Alien, exposed, in a strange land, and fled then for
fear of what the eye and Judgment of man called murder, (I speak not this to
justify sudden murders) and where he was at first a hired servant, at best a
sheppard, a stammerer, and tediously impertinent, even with God himself, and
loath to the work, though God had also fitted him in a humane way, for
government, yea the extraordinary duty which was upon him, to lead a rebellious
and stiffnecked people, as he found them, to which end surely by divine
providence (he was not only of a meek spirit to bear injuries, but wise to make
use of them) brought up not only in Pharoahs house, but learned (in more then
the ordinary politiques or usual recreations, of hawking and hunting, swearing,
drinking, gaming, etc) in all the learning of the Egyptians, which was the
admirablest of that age, as stories witness: the very Greeks themselves,
borrowing their knowledge from them: And this was according to the rule of God;
for the choice of a Magistrate, men of knowledge, not men that had the age for
knowledge, or education, or such like helps, if they wanted the thing, but that
knowledge indeed. I omit to speak of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as exercising
but only a paternal power, which though it were the foundation or rise of other
governments, yet must now be enlarged, as necessity evidences, as well as
enforces; and when the other Judges, or Heads, or Elders were chosen, they were
chosen according to the rule, and so long they prospered; yea go to the Kings,
Saul seeking Asses, David from the Sheepfold, and how were these despised
(that I may speak it once for all, the generality of men, saw not Gods choice;
else why did the people so murmur against Moses and Aaron, Miriam against
Moses, as also Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and the next day all the people,
notwithstanding that exemplary punishment upon them, saying of them swallowed
up, you have slain the people of the Lord: so of Saul, shall he? (he in
derision, what a Benjamite, a younger son, etc. shall he deliver us? how?)
Deliver, as if they had said, he cannot; and if you ask me the reason both of
this and all other disobediences to prophesies, commands, and declarations of
the will of God, I must deal plainly with you; the same reason moved them,
moves us; and so on the contrary, we believe, or believe not the word; As our
hearts are affected, so move our hands, so are our actions enlivened; see this
when Saul chops the Oxen in pieces, and sends them through all the coasts of
Israel, with that Proclamation, So shall it be done to him that will not follow
Saul and Samuel. The fear of the Lord fell upon them, says the Text; what is
that, but the Lord put, or raised up their spirits to the work, and so it was
effected? and where God gave a spirit of sloth, deadness of heart, etc. there
they set still, and were afterward punished, as well as cursed, who did not
help the Lord against the mighty: Yea the Prophets were not esteemed in their
days; which of them came to his end, either without sufferings, or but by
sufferings? and who were the Enemies? The Kings, etc. and which of them, but
the evil ones, see Isaiah, Jeremiah and the rest; and yet their great renown
was spread abroad amongst strangers, though there may be a reason for it, as
Jeremiahs providing for by Nebuzaradan, giving him in charge to Gedeliah, and
that was he prophesied against Zedekiah, and for Nebuchadnezar; but our Savior
hints another, God did not raise up his Prophets in vain, but they were his
messengers, and against the Kings, and Princes, and therefore being hated, or
at best neglected by them, so were they by the inferiors, following their
example: and so called mad fellows, and by the base Priests of Idols forbid to
prophecy in the Kings Court; and all along such were they whom God chose,
owned, employed, and Covenanted with; and now not to speak here more of the
persons, I come to the nature of the Covenant, which both with Noah, Abraham
and his offspring, Moses and all Israel, were in the letter but outward
blessings; and though by the word everlasting there is more to be gathered, yet
at first veiw, what is it? Seed time and Harvest, the dominion over, and use of
the Creature, but with restraint, not with the blood, cold and heat, Summer and
Winter; and now God gives a law, and not before, otherwise then as the voice of
nature sounded it forth against murder, professing he will not only require the
blood of man at the hand of man, and that without any exception, but even of
the beast; and this law was before the so called partition wall of divine love
to the Jew was declared, while all men were simply considered as the sons of
Adam. Upon this declaration declaration there is a new covenant; but what is
that? All this land will I give to thee and thy seed, and blessings where ever
they go, assured by the note of Gods Alsufficiency, which though typing higher
matters, both in respect of the place Canaan, and his seed; the Lord Christ
Jesus typed in Isaac; yet Abraham's faith fails him; for his life and wife he
lies; and Jacob pilleth rods, and decieves, as some say Laban, to enrich
himself, and was irregular in his affection to Rachel, and other frailties;
Such also was the Covenant with Moses and all Israel, In blessing I will bless,
with riches, honor, long-life, victories over enemies; and this was in case of
obedience to Gods laws; and then for disobedience, Cursing I will curse, the
earth should be Iron, and the heavens brass; and as before, one should chase
100. and 100. put 10000. to flight, etc. so now they should fly when none
pursue; the same Covenant with Solomon; all which shows, that what the Lord
held forth to the Jew, was outward and legal obedience, so called
righteousness: and now that the Covenant might have effect, God gives his law,
with promises and threats; and this according to the nature and quality of it,
either toward himself, or of one man toward another; for the Laws toward God,
they were either the moral, the sum whereof was the ten Commandments, of which
the first four are here first to be discussed, and are indeed the prerogative
or royal law; which were briefly, To have but one God: Secondly to make no
likeness of him: Thirdly not use his name irreverently: Fourthly to sanctify a
seventh day, if not the seventh day to him; all which laws are still binding as
accounted moral, though neither wholly accepted nor neglected; the mystery of
the Trinity being by some impugned, the likeness or similitude of God made now
in the shape of man, the most dangerous Idolatry, his name blasphemed, and no
day kept as it ought, though a day professed for his service: (but of this
anon) The other laws were relating from man to man, first settling the rule of
obedience to the then generally supreme power, being especially paternal; whose
Complaint the whole congregation were Judges of, as executioners; then he comes
to the special and highest crimes, of Murder, Adultery, Theft, to secure life,
chastity, property, and for a further assurance gives a law against false
witness, and as the ground of all, and root whence these vices flow, forbids
covetousness. Now these laws were given in terror, as Moses says, to prove
them, that his fear might be upon them, that they sinned not, (yet all was too
little to hold in so stiff-necked a people) and after these general laws, as
the heads of common Justice in the root, and branch, he gives other laws for
all occasions, both in respect of Magistrate and People, Master and Servant,
Parent and Child, Husband and Wife, Enemy and Friend, or Confederate; and that
both for War and Peace, and that with respective security both to day and
night, and that for life, Maime, chastity, goods, good name; and that as a
beast might offend, with respect to him, as the Oxgoring, yea to beast as a
sufferer, as wandering, yea and to the wholesomness and means of healthfulness
of men, not only in their wanderings, but in their settled habitations,
remaining still the host or congregation of God, not to have any defilement
open to veiw, for all which I refer you to Scripture, with the rest of the
heads specified from the twentieth of Exodus, and so onward; and having thus
settled an outward law of peace, and rest, or War and Captivity, or other
Judgments, bound and assured by threats and promises, the Lord now proceeds to
the establishment of the manner of his worship, which was and is generally
holden wholly typical, and ceased in our blessed and eternal Savior the Lord
Christ Jesus; and this I wholly at present omit to enlarge, and now come to the
third thing considerable, which is the manner of execution of these laws, which
was very severe, as you may see in the punishment of Corahs sin, and so in
Achans. The men, wives, children, and all were punished, not only by God as in
Corah, but after by Joshua in Achan; a terrible God, a terrible law, and
terrible execution; yea the law was extreme rigid, if we regard the proness of
man's nature to offend; what, a poor man to gather a few sticks for his
necessity upon the Lords day, and dye for it? what, the Princes and holy men
that knew as much by themselves as by Aaron, all devoured by an earthquake, for
their zeal in offering sacrifice to God? the people were so sensible of it (but
in presumption) that next day they blame, if not threat Moses and Aaron for
slaying the people of the Lord. Now these laws were the then rule of the people
of God, and by these did the people of God under the whole regiment of the law,
either justify or condemn themselves: So Joseph, How shall I do this, and sin
against God? So David, thy law is my delight, my continual meditation, that I
may not transgress thy will; so Job; Thy ways have I kept and have not
declined from them; and so the young man in the Gospel, All these have I kept
from my youth up; and Paul, after he was enlightened justifying himself in his
integrity against the Jews his now persecutors, says of himself, As to law
blameless, that is, he knew not, nor could any one tell how to accuse him of
the breach of the letter of the law in any title; now if you ask whether these
laws were the best or not, I must tell you that most undoubtedly the laws in
general were such laws as no Nation in the world nor altogether had (from
themselves) so exact a platform of government; but surely some of these were
but particular to that Nation, and that as our Savior says in the case of
divorce, yielded unto, rather then given, for the natural inclination of the
peoples sake, or by reason of the frowardness of their disposition, which our
Savior calls the hardness of their hearts, specified in divorce, and also as
that of the law of jealousy; That law for unclean and clean food, I account
rather typical then judicial. Now to all these laws were Promises annexed in
case of obedience; Threats in case of disobedience, which were often reiterated
by those special Prophets, whom the Lord raised up, in the several generations,
under the Judges, Kings and Kingly Priests, until the Lord sent his own Son to
declare his will unto his people, in the fullness of time; and though Moses were
faithful, yet that was but as a servant, as says the Author to the Hebrews;
but the Lord Christ Jesus, who is the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession, is sent from the bosom of the Father, to whom the whole will of
the Father was known, and in these last times God speaks to his people by him,
even his own Son, whom he made heir of all things, who being the brightness of
the glory, and the engraved form of his Fathers person, and sustaining all
things by his word, has by himself purged our sins, and sits at the right hand
of his Father; wherefore we ought with all diligence to attend to that heavenly
doctrine which this our Lord declares; for if just punishment were retributed
by the Lord to them who disobeyed the word spoken by Angels: how shall they
escape who neglect the Gospel given by the Lord of Angels, the Son of the
Father, to whom the Angels are but ministering Spirits? him, of whom all the
Prophets fore-prophesied, even the Shilo, the Messiah, the Savior, who should
save his people Israel, and lead them through the wilderness like a flock of
Sheep, under whom they should lie down in the pleasant places of rest, and none
should make them afraid; He that was now expected by the Jew; and so much the
rather, as fearing bondage from the imperious and flourishing Romans, and
hoping of salvation and deliverance, temporal Grandeur, power, and dominion, by
his puissance, who was to break all Nations as a Potters vessel, and thresh
them with an Iron Mace; to whom all people must bow down, the mighty
Councellor, the Prince of peace, and his yoke must be upon their neck, and his
government upon their shoulders, till time should be no more.

Now lets a little consider how the state of Israel or the Kingdom of Judah
stood at the time of Christ's coming; That they expected the Messiah is evident,
they seeing those things fulfilled which were fore-prophesied, of which sure
they were diligent heeders, especially being driven thereto by so many daily
fears, as the power of the Roman, and the Tyrany of their strange King put upon
them; and the Scripture notes of diverse to whom God had imparted a true
understanding of the light of prophesy, who kept continually in the Temple, and
served God day and night with fasting and prayers, looking for, or expecting
his coming; and no doubt they had disciples abroad, who being instructed by
them, had their hearts prepared to believe him, though no outward form, beauty,
or comeliness (as others thought) appeared in him; So that their expectation was
general; but each one after the rate of light and knowledge, true or false,
which was impared to him, or he had received under his Rabby, who read the Law
to him, who were of several opinions, (not altogether dead yet) as Pharisees,
Sadduces, Essenes, and these again subdivided according to the merit or
acceptance of the Rabbis or Doctors of the Law.

The Temple was in respect of the legal strictness polluted, the whole law by
these interpretations, instead of Gods rule, become man's Fancy, or at best his
precept; for all was now grown into the vast Ocean of subtilty of conceit, and
that Rabby was most venerable who could fly the highest pitch in sublime
conceits, so that the pure Law was made a puddled fountain, and the spiritual
heavenly meaning was lost in carnal voluptuousness and self-endedness; there
was great learning, never more, but never to less purpose, much praying and
fasting, Ashes and Sackcloth, yea and besmearing their faces, to suborn
humility, but all to hypocrisy; and yet sure if in Esays time they Justified
themselves against God as impotent, that he could not see their fasting nor
humiliation, and soul affliction, nor hear their prayers, nor answer them by
deliverance, as in the fifty eighth of Isaiah, then much more now, when greater
mercies were expected, and longer time had revealed more light; but they did
all for pretense; this, and alms, and all, to be seen of men; to devour
widows houses, and enrich themselves; though the whole State were beggered,
eager and strongly contending for privileges, but still to better themselves,
though greater losses to the public accrued; condemning their fathers, and
surely the ten Tribes their brethren, who were before carried captives by the
Assyrian, and placed beyond the great River; and justifying themselves as holy,
in that they built the Sepulchers of those Prophets whom their fathers had
slain; And by this expecting the Messiah, and by him deliverance, and this was
the state of the Jew at the birth of our blessed Savior, born of Mary, at
Bethlem, of the Tribe of Judah, of the stock of David, yet as not owning
inheritance in the world, brought forth in an Inn, his Cradle a Cribb, his
consorts the Ox and the Ass, the room being no better then the stable; yet
where God stirred up the hearts, there was he worshipped by Kings, if not by
wise or learned men, of great esteem; sought to be slain, flies into a strange
land, and then is brought by his father to a mean village, where he submitted
himself to all the laws which his servant Moses had delivered, not only in the
circumcision of his flesh, but in fulfilling the whole law, and that not only
private and domestic in his obedience to his reputed father, and his mother
Mary; So that he was called not only the son of the Carpenter, but the
Carpenter (until such time as he was called out to his Fathers work, which was
first at twelve years of age, to the astonishment, as confusion of the Doctors,
which was Gods Act of preparation to those Rabbis, had they not had eyes that
they might not see, and ears that they might not hear, because the Lord would
condemn them) but also in the public administration of the Jewish law,
appearing by his going up there to the Passover, and that not only to his God
(as man) but to his Prince, yea though a heathen, a stranger, giving his
tribute to Caesar; he had also a forerunner, John the Baptist, in whom I must
observe, that he preached a new doctrine, viz. Baptism, yet even the rulers
went out to him, and though he in his preachings showed the error of the then
sort of teachers, he was not meddled withal, nor opposed, much less
imprisoned; But now when Christ's time was come to preach, I pray let us mark
his behavior, first he goes to John, and is of him baptized, and then
recieving a testimony from heaven, to prepare the people to recieve his
doctrine, he then is carried into the wilderness to be prepared himself by
temptation, whereto his manhood in it self was subject, but by the Godhead
sustained, and this finished whereby he was approved, he now sets upon his work
for which he came, and as a Doctor of the law he preaches, or declares the
mind of his Father; John he begins in (a strange place) the wilderness, and he
cries, Prepare the ways of the Lord, make his paths straight; the Lord Jesus
he follows, and in the land of Zabulon in the City Capernaum (the obdurate
people had need of redouble blows) he preaches, and says, Amend your lives,
for the kingdom of God is at hand; and then he chooses or calls to help him in
this great work of reforming sinners (and that of the greatest sort) poor
fishermen, surely as rude and ignorant as the rest, in ordinary, and these he
makes his partners in the work, and now instead of expounding Moses law,
according to the order of the Scribes and Pharisees in the Synagogues of the
Jews (places of public meetings for that end, but always intended for the
service of the most high and true God by the Jew) he preaches the Gospel of the
Messiah, and withal healed their bodies, no doubt to intimate that what he
preached of the blindness of their minds, was not only true, but that he would
and could heal these also, he being for that end come into the world; and now
his fame of miracles and salvation to the body being spread abroad, he has
great renown and glory; for such benefits are quickly resented, and now this
preparation made (mistake me not that I think Christ or his doctrine had need
of any outward help, in respect of his power, who could of stones raise up
children unto Abraham, but in regard of his will, it being so by the Almighty
wisdom pre-decreed that all things in ordinary course should be so carried,
that no man should without his Spirit, see, that good or evil was to man, but
by means, though the wise man saw the contrary) he divulges his Gospel full of
inward rays of divine wisdom and magnificence, but averse to the then
recieved doctrine, the interest of the then prevalent (party) or factions, the
Pharisees and Sadduces; who had the trick of this age to count all gain sweet,
and were (not by words to aggrandize that sin which was high enough in it self)
no better then hypocrites, even the best and strictest of them; for so our
savior bears record, If your righteousness exceeds not that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you can in no wise enter into the kingdom of God; and if I be not
decieved, his whole doctrine tends to this, namely to prove, salvation was not
through the righteousness of works, but by faith in him, and yer evidences this
faith by the works of the law, but not according to the vulgar interpretation
of the doctors of the law, but according to a more divine and exact rule, which
I shall thus diversify; the Doctors gave a liberty from or beyond the letter,
for their lucre and man's lust; Christ's rule is restraining the liberty of the
letter, if any liberty were, against all lucre, self end, or advantage what
ever, as is most evident in the exposition of our savior upon the sixth and
seventh Commandments, manifesting it was not only the act of Adultery, but an
unclean thought that God abhorred; and it was not only the life of thy brother
which God forbad thee to seek after, but even of thine Enemy; and as a private
person, you were not only not to punish the offender, against thine own self
and life, but to do good against his evil; and for thy brother, take him in
natural, national, or spiritual relation, (all which I presume ought to be
there intended) thou ought not by evil words, either to provoke or revile
him; this was the Doctrine of him who was the Prince of peace, and gave laws
all of love; it was his legacy, his will, his precept or Command; so that I see
not by this doctrine in any thing the law moral nullified, but explained; and
this I take to be out of doubt (except to the fourth Commandment) on all hands,
which yet he takes not away, although he does give a liberty which the Rabbis
granted not, (at least in him) namely to do good that day; and surely though he
makes man lord of the sabbath, it was not to take away Gods omnipotency in the
power he had over man, and all his days; for the reasons of the sabbath, or a
holy rest, are still the same, both in respect of man in his freedom from
labor, and thereby made more fit for spiritual services, and also in regard of
the ends, man's increase of outward knowledge in the written law, or revealed
will of God, and the glory of the Creator (if he can reap any from the weak
imperfect duty and endeavor of the Creature.) But the Lord himself I say did
in no kind abrogate the day, which God instituted in paradise, though he
cleared the Jews mistake in their manner of observing that day. In the next
place for the judicial law, our blessed Savior he meddles not with it, any way
to annull or disapprove it; himself and his disciples observed it, and he says
of that, and all the whole law, he came not to destroy the law but to fulfill
it; and was so far obedient, as that he would not meddle as a Judge, whom God
had made but a minister, and celebrates the passover according to the custom;
till he came to preach he wrought the work of his earthly father; after that he
professed the labourer was worthy of his hire; and doing his heavenly fathers
work, going about and doing good, healing all diseases both bodily and
spiritual, and that to all persons without respect of Nation or quality, sinner
as Saint, Centurion as ruler of the Synagogue, the woman of Canaan and Samaria
as well as of Jairus daughter, or Mary, or any, and giving the same rule to his
Apostles, he sends them abroad without either Scrip or Staff or money in
purse, yet assures them that as himself was rejected of his own, when he came
to them, and they knew him not; so must they, his disciples, expect the world
would use them; they must be brought before rulers, Kings and Emperors for his
name sake, (Majesty is always jealous of Competition.) See who should be his
Enemies; But not only so, they should be hated of all men for his truth sake,
that is the reason why hated, for his truth or names sake; and that they might
not be discouraged, he foretells his passion; but how wrought it at the time of
Trial? all fled but Peter, and he denies him; which of the rulers, say the
Rabbis, see thou believe on him? for Nicodemus the ruler came only by night,
none knew it; mark it, the wise men rest in their wisdom, and the rich though
convinced, yet are wary; shame, or fear, or both (of men) keep many a man from
God; yet they knew him; his miracles they attribute to the Devils power, he
evinces the contrary, they yet believe not; they admire, but believe not; thus
he spends his time, and having attained seventy Disciples, and some few women,
and here and there a Sinner, with whom he most conversed; for he came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, through the meekness of his
carriage, and goodness to all, having taken off the eagerness of the multitude,
and made them followers of him, if but for his wonders sake; he is in the
appointed time betrayed to them (who now were jealous least the multitude
should believe in him, and Caesar come and take away their Nation) by his own
Disciple, when he had now declared and sanctiated his Testament, at which
whether Judas was present I will not stand here to controvert, but only say if
he were, it is for terror, not comfort or warrant for sinners to approach these
sacred mysteries without due examination; he eat and drank his own damnation;
but being hidden, I shall not search further, or difficult I will not here
determine further; and being now apprehended, its consulted whether he should
be put to death; the High Priest (prophetically says the Scripture)
politiquely says the rationalist, least the people making him King, as was
like they might, induced by his powerful workings, and thereby hoping in and
through him to be delivered from the Roman yoke, which the great men feared
would bring an assured and speedy bondage upon them, concludes, better one die
then all; and then by that people (oh vanity) who before they feared would make
him a King, they now condemn him as an enemy to Caesar; but that not holding,
by their choice of a Murderer, the Heathen judge acquitting him, they condemn
him; and now his Apostles and Disciples preach the same Doctrine after his
resurrection, by which they were established, being before shaken grievously;
we thought this had been he, says one, and all were affrighted at his first
sight, not understanding the Scriptures, yet says he, they plainly testified
of me (and I pray take notice, to Satan in his Temptations, to the Lawyers and
Pharisees and other the offspring of the old Tempter, and also to his Apostles,
he uses the word or letter of Scriptures, which was in self convincing, but to
the First the word only, to the Second often, not only the word, but a further
and more spiritual meaning) and I pray see the same foundation Christ was, and
laid, The same the Disciples, Apostles, and others use and build with and upon,
and in the same way, according as they received light (which was not all at
once (I pray observe that) they had the spirit all, but all nor any of them had
all the Spirit; they had their portion, the grace as Paul says, which was
given some in one kind, some in another; therefore they first apply themselves
to the Jew; our saviors rule while he lived, was, Into the Cities of the
Gentiles enter you not, but go you first to the lost-sheep of the house of
Israel; but after a time God manifests by the vision of Peter (so God taught
him first) after by pouring the holy Ghost upon the faithful house of a Gentile
that they might be baptized; and now after a disputation and satisfaction from
Peter of these things (they that were infallible in particulars which the
spirit gave them, were not knowing and sometime erred in what God yet revealed
but to Peter (I pray note this but now) freely they preach to the Gentiles, and
zealous Paul of a persecutor (I say no more) made a preacher, he goes
especially to the Gentiles, and with much labor and travile, and with many
dangers preachers Christ; but the Devil is as busy as may be; he feared not
these men who had received the holy Ghost, and had abundance of the spirit, he
throws his stone, and has Agents enough to roll it; now the Gentiles are
admitted without dispute; the question is if they be not bound to Moses law. I
find no question of the moral; the scruples are concerning the judicial and
ceremonial; the first question was concerning some that taught the brethren
circumcision was needful to salvation; this controversy which has filled the
world so called Christian so full of controversy from that time to this
present day, as namely whether we be saved only through the righteousness of
Christ apprehended by faith, or have need also as to salvation to observe the
Law, that by the Jew was meant of the visible law ceremonial, by the Christian
moral etc. The wits of the world saw not then the evidence of the spirit, nor
would acquiesce in the resolutions of the very Apostles themselves; so that the
congregation at Antioch being hereby in great disturbance were enforced to send
Paul and Barnabas to congregate the rest of the Apostles at Jerusalem; this
upon a full meeting, was to receive its end and determination; where being
recieved of the church, Apostles, Elders, and brethren, who were called
together, and the matter publicly debated before them, the result of which
Peter declares to the Church or multitude of believers, evidencing by the
letter of scripture, and that of the old Testament, which surely is one of Gods
witnesses, That, the Lord in calling the Gentiles, who were uncircumcised which
before was the visible condition of salvation, declared and testified, That
salvation was in Faith without any Oblation to the Law. But mistake not; I
intend not here, as if the Question were of abrogating Moses Judicial, but
that Salvation was not tied to the obedience to that, or the whole Law; but
only through the grace of the Lord Jesus: which being allowed by James, he
gives his sentence, that the believers of the Gentiles be not yet till further
instruction, tied up too close to the severity (as their vain liberty will
account it) of the Jewish rigor, but in those things which will cast too great
an odium upon us with the Jew, as participating in Idol Sacrifices, whoredom,
the great and ordinary delight of the Gentile, and in eating any thing
strangled, or blood, as being a precept highly esteemed with them, lets in
these, write to them that they abstain; to which all agreeing, it seemed good
to the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church, to send this their resolution
in letters by certain of the Church at Jerusalem, together with Paul and
Barnabas: the style, phrase, and order of which holding sorth still the pattern
of Christ their Master and Teacher's meekness, gentleness, and lowness, the
Lamb dumb before the shearer, and testifying their unity in Christ their head,
take notice of in the parts; the Inscription whereof was, The Apostles, Elders
and Brethren, unto the Brethren (not the Elders, nor Officers, but Brethren)
which are of the Gentiles in Antiochia, Syria, Cilicia, send greeting, in the
body; Forasmuch as we have heard that certain of the Church of Jerusalem (or
Jews) have troubled and cumbred your minds, saying you must be circumcised and
keep the Law; to whom we gave no such commandment; to testify which, we send
eminent men in the faith to you; for it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us
to lay no more burden upon you then these necessary things, that (to the end
no offense be given to the Jew;) you abstain from things offered to Idols,
blood, things strangled, and from fornication, from which if you keep your
selves, you shall do well; fare you well. Here was no charging, willing, and
commanding from the sacred Synod; no Authorrity of the Church urged, more then
the note of intimation, that what was done, was by them who had received the
holy Ghost: The issue is also considerable; for these Commissioners of the
Churches, both of Antioch and Jerusalem, coming now to Antioch, I pray
consider their carriage, they assemble; whom? the Elders or Preachers? no, they
would not tie the people to believe implicitly; therefore they assemble the
multitude, all the believers, and there they deliver the Epistle, which is read
with joy for the consolation.

This done, Satan is at work again, raising strife and contention betwixt Paul
and Barnabas, so that they parted company: wherein I pray note, the children of
God, nay, the chosen vessels, yea, consecrated by the actual operation of the
Spirit, are subject more or less to humane frailties; consider further, Paul
after this decision of that great controversy at Jerusalem, yet by and by he
circumcises Timothy, to give content to the blindness of the Jew, and was never
called to account for it either at Jerusalem or Antiochia; and though himself
at the same time delivered the decision of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem
to those converted to the faith of Christ in the Cities about as they
traveled, to establish their minds, in case either the controversy concerning
the Laws necessity were there raised already, or might right rise afterward;
by this humane Wisdom, laboring to prevent a further increase of that
controversy. And if it be queried why they did not miraculously do it, as well
as heal diseases, and such like; Know O man, that it was contrary to Gods
Ordinance; he appointed preaching to convert the world, and miracles were
Trumpets to call the people together, and prepared them to receive the Word,
and with the Word God gave grace as he pleased; and that this must be so, is
plain; for all that saw the miracles, attended not to the Word, and all that
did both, were not converted: Thus you see the devils beginning; he presently
raises up controversies in the Church, and also persecution; without the
Apostles are imprisoned but for magnifying Christ; one condemned to death as a
traitor, an enemy to Caesar. See, it was the doctrine of Righteousness was
opposed, but Treason is charged; how many Christians have played fast and loose
for this cause with Christ? for, could they have suffered as Martyrs, and had
the point of Controversy been the main of their charge, they would have stood
it out to the last; but that being but by the by, and Treason or Disobedience
to Powers the chief, they faltered; but the Apostles and Disciples, through
good report and evil report, went on in the Work, and great wonders were every
day done, confirming the believer, and astonishing the opposer; so that now in
the greatest Cities of Asia; Greece, and Italy, the Gospel is preached, wherein
the believers of all sorts have the same rules laid down, which Christ
delivered to his Apostles, clearing still the righteousness of the Law, but not
placing Salvation in obedience to it, as is manifest in all the writings of the
Apostles; and by them, as by our Savior, urged by the Letter of the old
Testament, declared by the Prophets against unnatural lust, idolatry,
coveteousness, maliciousness, envy, murder, debate, deceit, frowardness,
extortion, pride, boasting, idleness, haters of any good, doers of any wrong,
inventors of any evil, disobedience to any power, ignorance, breakers of
Covenant, without natural affection, unappeaseable, merciless; and that these
are worthy of death, he appeals to the Laws, which if he meant of nature to the
unconverted Gentile, whose moral strictness was most admirable; then surely to
the converted he much more intended the Law of God given by Moses unto his
people, according to an everlasting Covenant, being of general necessity and
convenience under the Gospel as during the Law; and by those Laws he says, the
offender deserved death; and surely that particular cruelty, was universal
mercy; and in and through all the writings of Scripture there is urged, not
only a necessity of having, (but of obedience to) the Law, but for civil
benefit, not as saving, but as found general in those whom God had elected, as
St. Paul argues strongly, in showing the nature of the Covenant with Abraham to
be universal to all believers; so that it was a Covenant of Faith; and if I be
not mistaken it is plain, the Covenant is, though called double, yet not liable
to that distinction of Works and Faith, but that which was through the veil
which was then upon the profession of the Law, placed in the obedience only to
the Law, and so called of Works, was now unveiled, and declared to be only by
Faith; but withal evidenced that, that faith which was not still working, was
dead, and the testimony of our faith to the Church was our works; and I see not
but that the outward promises, or promises of outward blessings are still the
rewards of legal obedience; and for the reward of faith, I see no promises but
of eternal bliss; and though the faithful keep the Law, yet they rest not now
upon the promises of the Law; but the glad tidings of the Gospel sound in their
ears, and they are fixed upon the Allelujahs of eternity: Out of all which we
may gather, That the Law not only Moral but Judicial, being not absolutely and
necessarliy proper to the Jew only, as being either Ccermonial, or alluding
some way thereto, was the obligation of common or civil, and also of Christian
equity to the whole Church believing in Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, which
is plainly manifested through both the Testaments; but now all the Ceremonial
Law being Typical of Christ, that was abolished, so that as the shadow vanishes
when the substance appears, the proper Priestly function, service, sacrifice,
rites and all are buried; and will God now leave no Rule of Faith, no worship,
no day, no order, no government, no maintenance? Let us see the way for this:
First, Christ taught, then his Disciples, then each Christian instructed one
the other; and upon this arises Sects and Divisions, even in the Apostles
times, some were of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Cephas; so that now what was
the Church, of or in a Province, was, or might be divided into several
Congregations; and that either differing in a Circumstance, yet holding all the
head in one Community of worship upon occasion, and so only a Sect, or
differing in opinion in things not plain but doubtful, or else in matters which
were counted of such value, or so nighly concerning the principal points of
faith, that they did, as it were, rent from the Head, and would not admit
admixtion, which were the producers of Schism; and this was, or ought to be as
was at first supposed, only in heresy, things or opinions inconsistent with
the rules of Christianity, which either did appear, or it was declared would
appear in Paul's time: Now how does Paul deal with these. Truly what power he
had concealed, that he either used not, or pretended not unto, is not possible
to judge of; but what he used was according to the nature of the Covenant
explained, which was of faith, for the works of the Law, in literal obedience;
man may enforce obedience, but Grace is the only gift of God; and therefore he
only uses the sword of the Spirit, which was the Word, powerful indeed in a
right and skilful hand, and no other; he informs, and labors to enlighten them,
that Christ was the head; and if a member were divided from the Head it was no
longer a member; and tells them plainly, that Christ was the foundation; and
who ever laid other, however wise in the sight of the world, whether of
worshipping of Angels, mediation by Saints, abstaining from meats, forbidding
to marry, observing of days, and all such like, though they had a show of
wisdom, in voluntary humility, and beating down the flesh, yet they were will
worship, the gate for Satan to enter by, and by carnal seeming wisdom, to
build with hay and stubble, and daube with untempered mortar, yea to change the
truth of God into a lie through the decieveableness of the flesh; for these
precepts of men, being admitted, first as explaining the will of God, were then
accounted helps, then necessary, then matter of faith; and this prophecy, who
is so blind that has not seen fullfilled? therefore he advises, to beware of
vain humane wisdom, or philosophy, which was bewitching, and tells that this
mystery of iniquity began to work, and would work, and that there would spring
Heresies, yea that it was necessary, but from the Gospel no one must depart, no
not though preached by an Angel from heaven; and least the people of God should
be discomforted by the afflictions and persecutions of the Apostles, and other
disciples and professors, it is often plainly declared, they must look to tread
the trace which their blessed Savior had done, who was the high Priest of our
salvation, who was perfected through suffering; but withal declares, and it is
plainly laid down, a most triumphant time should follow, whether here, may be
doubtful to many, but hereafter is believed by all. So that that weight of
glory shall far out-ballance the sufferings which any one under went for the
Gosples sake. And truly the persecution even after the death of Christ was
immediately great by the Jew, and though God left himself not without witness,
even among the wisest of them, as in Gamaliel, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea,
Paul most notable, and others: yet there was little cessation, through the
great division and factions, which God suffered them after the death of Christ
to fall into, ( Jerusalem being a type of spiritual Sodom) gave warning to the
believers in Christ, to fly out of that Babylon, that so it might be prepared
for that first coming of Christ to Judgment, which he did by the Romans, the
Eagles flying and hovering over that carcass until the appointed time, when by
them it was devoured; and now begins the curse upon the remainder of Israel, of
the ten Tribes, Judah and the residue, for their sins, being not forewarned by
the great judgment, which fell upon Samaria and her children, aggravated by
that most fearful imprecation, His blood be upon us and upon our children,
which City thus taken out of the way, the persecution ceased not, but is
renewed more bitterly, under the heathen Emperors and their substitutes, in the
several provinces of the Empire, and let us mark the Devils cunning, all evils
were laid to the charge of the Christians, not only sedition, and tumults
against the State, but the causers of those direful evils, of War, Famine,
Plague, Inundations which over spread the face of the earth; but these could
not be so well proved; Though undoubtedly, the interpreters of the heathens
Oracles gave good satisfaction to them were willing to believe it, but they had
more evident Testimonies, if public fame had not been ever subject to lying,
they were breakers of all the laws of nature and nations; and this had some
foundation in sense and reason; for they that taught that the love of the Gods
was not obtained for, nor yielded to good life, right dealing, earnest serving
of them, nay though accompanied with never so much inward zeal, or outward
fervor; The Philosophers could easily sum the positions of the Christians into
this General Doctrine, and then let them alone, to conclude, that surely there
could be no expectation that these men should do any thing according to the
law, but for lust, or pleasure, or profits sake, and therefore counted them
enemies to all civil, moral laws, and living, and what could they then lay to
their charge, which would not easily be believed of them, not only Adultery,
but incest; not anger, but murder; not swearing or lying, but perjuries; and
all abominations; and though these things were not done by day, their outward
lives were civil and just, it was in the night, and though common Justice
appeared in them to their neighbors, it was Hypocritical, their vitiousness
was acted amongst themselves, or such seeds sown, as would infect a future
generation; And no doubt Paul having blamed them for going to law with one
another, but especially before heathen Judges, which opinion they could not but
hold in some part, while their Savior taught them so often to forgive their
brother, and to him who would take thy cloak, to give thy coat also; these
circumstances were aggravated, as people looking at no Government, no order, no
discipline; Paul's reproving, exhorting, convincing, persuading, holding no
communion, delivering to Satan, were to them fancies of the speculative
understanding, and all his weapons, not carnal to the destroying of the
outward man, but mighty through the power of God, piercing even to the heart
and reins, and dividing the joints and Marrow, which their carnal religion
could not comprehend; caused them to think, they did God good service to
persecute and destroy them: yet God left himself not without witness even
amongst these heathen, who not guided by the votes of the multitude, nor swayed
with words, but substance, did in all Ages testify the truth, not only
evincing these charges to be lies, but the purity, holiness, profound
sanctimony, and exemplary chastity of the Christians was unparalleld, and their
trials manifested their patience invincible, so that they overcame also as
Christ their chieftain through sufferings; and these were not only of the
vulgar people, but learned Philosophers, and noble Senators, and ever or most
generally; of the chiefest in esteem for natural excellencies; and this was
notorious, that he, or she, that were the worst heathens, proved generally the
precifest Christians; by which virtues at last, their enemies were even
overcome, so that the very executioners turned Martyrs; And though God often
afflicted his people, and suffered them to be afflicted (for it is evident that
under persecution they grew most, not only in holiness, but in Number; So that
the blood of the Martyrs was found to be the seed of the Church) it always
turned to their greater good, and in his release from afflictions (for God gave
them ever and anon a breathing time) they lost by Divisions, Controversies,
Pride, Ambition, and such like, of the glory of their sufferings: which who
ever reads the Histories hereof, cannot but observe, in persecution still
praying, meetings full and frequent, Amities strong, and lasting, obligations
mutual, Engagements reciprocal; And while they could hope to own nothing but
themselves, they quarrelled not for what they knew not they should hold; and in
the assuredness of propriety, had a holy community of all things amongst
themselves; worldly cares were vain things, Honors despicable; Riches fatal;
husbands deceitful; wives treacherous; Children troubles; all burdens but only
Christ, the Lord Christ was their Spouse, their honor, their riches, their
Treasure, their safety, their all in all; release them from afflictions, the
world prevailed again, the flesh domineered; yet even then, how many were most
holy, beyond present belief? yet even then, how many that left houses, and
lands, and all in affliction for Christ's sake in the storm, would never return
from the Churches habitation in the wilderness in the sun shine; but wasted
themselves in continual prayers, fastings, meditations, holy vows, and all
exercises of the height of zeal; counting all too little they could do for
Christ? how many flourishing virgins, thus espoused themselves in the
Wilderness to Christ, as well as to the fire, to the beasts, to variety of
deaths, and tortures for him in the Cities, and Towns? how lowly, plain, and
painful were the then Pastors of Congregations? Paul taught, the labourer was
worthy of his hire; but looked at a reward far above earthly treasure, they were
the first in holiness, every one chosen who had most ability; the set stipends
were not their provokers, but zeal for Gods glory; what was given was not
received, then sure what was witholden, was not sued for; And now it was plain,
persecution was not the way to eradicate Christianity; and the very heathen
Emperor Julian the Apostate, whose heart knew horror for it, as Christ's
politiquest and greatest enemy, sheathes the sword, and works by poison, but
not to the body; he hinders meetings under pretext of Treasons against the
State, and for public safety sets up Schools of Idolatry, and forces the
Christian children to be there trained, or else their parents dye as Traitors;
Now, no longer Martyrs, this quails many a courage, and was a great trouble
and affliction to the Church; but they overcome God by prayer; here was the
first trial, and therefore need of the greater strength; They stood in the
first ranks of the bataile of the Lord Christ, and they were by him fitted
accordingly for the combat they under went; fear of death, which to us is most
terrible, was to them (unconverted) frequent, and therefore contemned; thus was
courage by example given to them should follow; there is always a mystery in
providence, secretly fitting all things to that end the Lord determines, and
works still for the good of his people; and this preparation I take to be
against the cruelty of the second beast, which was to afflict the Church after
the first beast (the Roman Emperors) was taken away; the Apostles led the
dance, and the holy Disciples and Martyrs of all sorts followed after, and that
with the same faith and constancy, though through variety of Torments; and the
persecutions were so violent, that one of the learned amongst the Ancient
Pastors of Gods Church Records, there was but one day in all the days of the
year, which had not been defiled with the death of at least five thousand
Witnesses to the truth of Christ's Gospel, under the ten persecutions of the
heathen Emperors; and this is notorious, that the worst Emperors were
Christians greatest enemies, seldom so much the zeal for the Gods, as envy at
godliness, and coveteousness of riches, the Christians goods filling anew the
empty treasury, exhausted by intemperancy of the Emperors, or covetize of the
Courtiers, who were, as they ever will be, like graves never satisfied; and is
it not strange, that a crucified God witnessed by the meanest of men,
fishermen, should be thus followed, and should break forth so gloriously amid
flames and furies of all sorts, yea every thing that was projected to
overthrow it? the demolishing of the outward Temples, the burnings of
Scriptures, made but more pure, though more secret meetings otherwhere, and
made them get the word into their hearts and memories (for it is wonderful what
labor the ancient and primitive Christians took in getting the Apostles
writings by heart) where it could never be extinguished, but they should reap a
greater light by it; and thus God tried his Church, purged and purified it, by
sufferings for three hundred years; and not a Bishop so called of Rome or
Pastor of the Church there in all that space, but either suffered persecution,
or died Martyrs; yet even amongst those Emperors persecutors, God left himself
not without witness; and which is most notable, in the worst man, and cruellest
to Christians, Maximinus, who at last glorified the God of the Christians, and
by new laws gave them immunities and privilidges above other men, who before
were thought worse then brute beasts. Trajan, Antoninus, and others by
providence in his mercy, moderated and slacked of their fury to believers, but
never acknowledged him as this man did, though he might back-slide; but this is
notorious, that the Pagans always believed God hated, or the Gods hated the
Christians because they saw them afflicted, judgeing eternal love still by
temporal favor; and now to show and evidence his power in that also, and to
convince the Enemies of this truth, he not only gives a respite, a cessation of
miseries and afflictions; but to show his power all one the sudden by
unexpected ways, raises up contemned Christians to Thrones and Scepters, and
all the grand ones of the world are but the rewards of religious purity to the
true God; and now the poor banished soul, ship-wrackt and lost as it were, is
brought to a haven of rest; now Churches built; now who so glorious as the
greatest sufferers? and in these days of tranquillity, the sense of present
joy did more then counterpoise the sufferings past; the poor Bishops are now
the Emperors fathers, endowed with livings; and if fame lie not, The Roman
Bishop stole what Constantine never gave, but the Decree was not unsealed till
a long time after, and this is Constantines pretended donation; but sure it is,
Constantine did highly honor all the worthy ministers of all the Churches, in
whom the Virtue, Piety, and Doctrine of Jesus our Savior was exemplar; and now
there is a new face of the world, and surely the Christians now think
themselves very happy, their Emperor a Christian; the power, glory, riches and
honor of the world theirs; now peace, now plenty ensue, and what can their
hearts desire that they enjoy not? The Dragon the persecutor is now gone, and
what does reason suggest? Now they will serve God gloriously; before the
service was mean and contemptible, scorned by heathens, in private and secret,
in a private house, nay Barn, Stable, Cave, or Grot; any where so they might
but serve him at all, to live and praise him was all they looked for; they were
in Egypt, in bondage before, the whips of the Taskmasters were upon their
shoulders, or at best but in the wilderness, but now they enjoyed Canaan, the
land of rest, now build the Temple, hew the stones, lay the foundations, and
erect not only chambers or lodgings for the Priests and Levites, but the
Singers, the Porters, and all the train of due and orderly service, and hearts
were willing to the work, and then purse and hand was ready, and now all on a
sudden the whole world is turned Christian, and all the provinces of the
Roman Empire crouch under the Standard of the Cross; and the highest Purple
adores the woaven Coat of our Savior, and now the Pagan, according to his
principles worships the rising Sun; Thrive Christian, and I am a Christian, but
otherwise adue Christ, and God, and all.

But they might go far who had such excellent leaders, when their Emperor and
Princes showed in their exemplary life the power of Godliness, so that the
difference was evident betwixt the sincerity of Christianity, and the vanity of
Idolatry; for its reported of the Emperor Constantine, that he was not so much
a Conqueror of his enemies, through the power of faith, as of himself; all
passions subjugated to the rule of his Savior; he eat to live, and lived to
magnify his Savior; and knowing he could never attain the height of that
perfection which his Savior had, and he aspired not unto; yet as he had
commanded, so he imitated and made him his rule and his pattern; his
recreations were divine Contemplations; and his private discourses betwixt God
and his soul, were as Paradise to his soul; yea, such was his diligent and
awful constancy, that his Pavilion was his Oratory for divine Service, he
would not neglect his hours of prayer, amid the greatest dangers and troubles
of warfare; yea such was his zeal, that you could not distinguish whether he
were the better soldier, or most excellent Preacher; and who would not haste
to be a Convert in this season of blessings? and as his care was so wonderful
for the soul; he neglected not to put in execution good Laws, and where need
was, to make new; his care was for the weal of his people; he sought his
peoples good more then their Goods, and approved himself the common father of
his Country by his sea of bounty, which all pertook of freely; the Orphans not
only educated but maintained; to which he not only employed the public
money, but out of his private Treasury he afforded largely; he would relieve
the necessitous beggar, but caused to be sought out the modest needy wretch;
and comparing quality and necessity, he fitted and proportionated his bounty
accordingly; so that to eminent virtue, he has given entire possessions; yea,
himself sought out the desolate, and afflicted; and all his Laws now tasted of
the radiences which Conversion had generated in his soul, and were not only
moral, as agreeable to Nature, but also Christian, as savouring of that
enlightment which our Savior in his Preaching had given to the Law: and surely
here was a glorious Court, where the Prince himself gave such examples; how did
the Nobles, the great, rich and powerful follow, especially when the wise
Emperor had fained a little inclination to Apostacy, and disgraced the fawning
parasitical and hypocritical Courtier, and exalted and entrusted the faithful
to Christ, though not obeying the Emperor; and it was indeed admirable, all was
wonderful; the Fathers of the Church were the Emperors Council, not out of
their ambition, or his necessity, but to show, his actions feared no Monitors,
and his Councels should be questioned by the strictest Christians; and what
might now be feared, was then reverenced: Thus did the Church flourish; but see
here the devil was not conquered, though his Agents were; he now must go
another way to work; a wily Serpent he is, and can turn himself into many
folds, and therefore he now attemps new ways of tortures and afflictions; and
when the foreign enemies of the Church are beaten down and conquered, now he
makes them enemies one to another; hitherto the common calamities had hindered
the growth of divisions; the Sword was the Lords avenger, he now suffers
another; nay, Prosperity ushers in Pride, Pride Ambition, and that Envy as well
as Covetize; and out of all these springs up Arianism, the first great and
spreading error to usher in that fatal Apostasy so long before prophesied; and
if we look into the groundwork of it, or the foundation, it was Philosophy, or
searching into the secrets of the divine Decrees, and the reasons of them, the
Arcana of the Trinity, the extravagant curiosities of able, idle, and yet
active wits, set on by the itch of vanity, and singularity, from the ignorance
which they see in others; and the applause of novelty from such as count all
things wondrous that is above the sphere of their own capacity; and this was
the first comet of the kingdom of darkness, which in its growth threw darts of
plagues and poisons insensibly into the hearts and veins of the professor of
Christ in its glorious condition; which to remedy, there is by the Emperor a
general Council called; (note, that was the then unquestioned remedy) wherein
though condemned by the power of man's Vote, yet nevertheless continued his
strength, and was not vanquished; for the Emperors, and all at last submitted
unto this rage of the flood of error, until God in his time, who orders the
rise, and fall, as lasting of all things, turned the stream into another
channel: after by the Synod of Jerusalem that heresy was tolerated, by
absolution of the Patron, which the Council of Nice had condemned; and by this
tract of time, sin growing speedily, the Papacy began now to lay another step
to the grand defection; for the pride of the Pastors was now grown so great,
and the revenue so eminent, that the Fathers of the Church fight for the
Papacy; and if the man-child born, the Church, went into the Wilderness, that
is, no sooner did the Lord cease afflicting his Church, and gave riches, and
glory, and honor, but the purity and integrity of Ordinances ceased; and if you
would find Christ anywhere, it was among them that were either in the
Wilderness, those holy ones that were through acerbities past, so taught the
vanity of the world, that nothing could bring them to the trial of the world
again; or those, that though they were in the City, were yet as in the
Wilderness, such as over whom the glories of the world had no power: Then
surely now the Church was not to be found, except the two witnesses of the
Lord, I mean the two Testaments were his Records; for if the Pastors were thus
changed, how might the people err? And surely from this time I count the
Prophecy of Antichrist began to be manifested, and the Apostasy and great
defection to appear; for immediately under the reign of Theodosius the younger,
when Alarick the Goth subdues Italy, and takes Rome, Sosimus then Bishop of
Rome affects the title of Ecumenical, and claims as proper to the Bishop of
Rome, That nothing in Ecclesiastic affairs should be ordered without his
consent; the first link of the chain of perdition. A non after rises the
Nestorian heresy, then the Eutichian: and thus the Lord punishes his Church
now; before, the evil was the Sword; now Error, the greater plague of the two;
then purity increased, now profaneness; yet I cannot say so much profaneness,
for even the lives of the then Heriticks are a shame and condemnation to our
present Christians; yea, even in the defection of the Saints, how many humane
excellencies appeared! what austerity, what voluntary poverty, singular
chastity, admirable constancy, unparalled charity! And thus grew the glory
of Christianity, so that the Barbarous Nations, who were the scourges of
Christians sins, were the admirers, and in some kind the imitators of their
piety; and it pleased God there was yet some wheat amidst the field of the
Church, excellent in all the qualities and ornaments needful in a disciple of
our Savior; by whose industry and faithfulness great part of true Christian
purity was not only continued, but also propagated, as well as errors and
heresies in great part vanquished; so that the splendour of the Church of Christ
was great and powerful; and so much the more, as for that the Churchmen had
now made some Quaeries concerning the power of the Emperors over them, as being
the servants of Jesus Christ. And also of their power over Emperors, the
Emperor being but a believer, they officers; he set apart, yet but for civil
ends and Government; they for sacred and divine: they begin the question with
the power of Calling, confirming, presiding in, and adnulling Councels, and
ended in dethroning Emperors; They who undertook the contest were wise and
able; and though they opposed a powerful, yet it was a devout Emperor, and
shaken with homebred and intestine afflictions, frequent in the decaying estate
of the Empire; this was heightened by what was then called zeal for Gods Altar;
after that branded for spiritual pride, and accounted the highest step to
Antichristian error, opening the way to what ever followed with ease, placing
an especial sanctity in ordination, from the Deacon to the Patriarch, and so to
the Pope gradually; and in him, not only to primacy, but supremacy; so that
what was before evidenced by faith, and holy conversation, was now solely
attributed to imposition of hands; this was a holy unction, an indelible
Character, marking who were Christ's; God left not himself without witnesses
against these growing errors, in the several Ages, wherein they were propounded
to the world, which gave some stop; but one error ushering in another,
strengthened themselves; so that at the last they shut truth out of doors. But
to speak of the particular errors upon the Quaeries arising among Christians;
First, concerning the written Word of God, and word in general; of the written
Word how we are to find out the sense, and know which is the true letter,
whither it may be translated, and whether a fit Judge of controversy:
Secondly, if not, who; concerning traditions, and the way of knowing them,
which are Apostolical: Thirdly, the properties, office and marks of the true
Church: And so Fourthly, of the ground of faith; upon all which, with many more
necessary and useful matters, the whole frame of unnecessary superstitions,
vain, sinful, nay damnable doctrines arising in future time was founded: I
cannot (at present at least) intend any discussion, nor may it take so well
with the generality of men, to have one whose study and profession was the Law,
though a Christian, which general profession I esteem a full liberty to Quaery
any so called Ecclesiastic, or Church controversy; but that indeed being not
the main of my intention, I shall apply my self to what is the scope of my
undertaking in that way: The God of heaven, whose aid I implore, shall direct
my spirit. The Bishops of Rome now labor an addition of believers in all
Countries, and not only France and Almaine, but even the remotest Islands of
Britain receive the truth; the Church was to be universal, there was a word of
truth for it; But as the Emperors and Princes of the world had by several
experiences found out the best and quaintest ways of stretching their subjects
pursestrings without cracking, to be the gains and in-comes of suits and
controversies, which being the vents either of malice in prosecution or victory
in the issue, and the party overthrown, though miserably complaining, were
always remediless, generally unpittied, for it was done by Law, the rule of
Justice; The Bishops of Rome now begin generally to challenge to themselves,
not only for the honor, but for the necessity of order, special government by
way of judicatories, at first only of matters arising within the precincts of
his government as Bishop of Rome, but after it extended by way of supremacy
(the great injustice of all Princes giving color thereto) to pluck away causes
from the remotest parts of the world after the Bishops had settled their
powers, and by them courts in any kingdom, realm or nation; And from particular
controversy between person and person, Bishop and Bishop, he at last became
the umpire of the controversies of Kings, and by virtue of the necessity of a
final appeal, he gave away kingdoms as he pleased, as the annals not only of
Germany, but of France and England do specially commemorate; and now the name
of universal Bishop would not suffice, nor these large temporalities bestowed
upon them by Princes, but they seize the Cities of Romandiola, Ferrara and
Bononia, and much more in the vacancy of the Empire; nay the little Horn would
not rest so contented; but the Emperors oppose; the Popes now produce the
grounds of their actings, partly from reason, partly from Scripture, yet both
agreeing in the substance, the necessity of an umpire in the Christian
Churches, that this absolution must rest in the Church, whereof Christ was the
head, Peter his Vicar, and the Pope his, that all the kingdoms of the world
were now the Lords and his Christ's, that he gave them to whom he would, that
this his Vicar was the most fit person, yea the only fit, if not designed, for
he was the common father of souls, had the care of the Churches good upon him,
that not only all were alike to him, but he bound alike to all the obligation
too, the Church only excepted. This wrought conscientiously in many, but
actively in most, though suspected of self-seeking in some, covetize and
avarice being the common error of great enjoyers, especially in high and
ambitious spirits; whereby the Pope was not without his Champions against all
opposers; and as most pretenders do, they did some justice extraordinary at
first; but when the notion of infallibility was accepted, who could oppose? now
the Church was in its ruff, and now the whole world turned religious, and all
Nations, especially in Europe, were become so great admirers of Christian
profession, that they erected Monasteries, Frieries, Nunneries, and men and
women were engaged on all sides, all worldly obligements neglected for the
service of their Savior, husbands forsaking wives, and wives husbands;
Children and Servants leave Parents and Masters; nothing so secret which
confession could not unlock; there was ease and plenty; so that the Popes chair
having so many feet, it was in no great fear of falling; but least the people
should discern this, the foundation of all is laid upon the indubitable word,
so called of God, of which they are the sole Expositors, and this by way of
anology or similitude betwixt the old and new law; Therefore they hold forth,
that as among the Priests one was chief under the law, so also under the
Gospel; and as the Priests, so their lips must preserve knowledge; as there was
a bloody, so here was an unbloody sacrifice; and as there was a Temple, so here
another Church, inferior Churches, as the Synagogues; the times of sacrifice
are called Canonical hours, and all the officers and offices of the Jewish
frame, are now brought into the Church, and though acknowledged ceremonial in
themselves, and so passed away, yet the mystery of them opened, and the end
relating to the service of God and his Christ now, as before to God under his
name Jehovah, was allowed as necessary for his better service; and as the glory
of the second Temple was to exceed the glory of the first, so the maintenance
of the ministers of Christ, and the outward luster of service, was to exceed
it; but that they might fulfill the measure of iniquity, they bring in the use
of Images first into the Church only, then for private devotion; this was
contrary to the Jews order; but they answered first the Jews made pictures of
false Gods, they of the true; the Jews in the shape of beasts and other
Creatures, these of man, and that after God appeared in the likeness of man;
the Jews of God whom they had not seen, they of the Lord Christ; the Jews
worshipped the stock, the representation; they had it only for a remembrance;
but these admitted; now follow miracles, which they call the sign of the true
Church; but that they might the better uphold their Monarchy, they look not
only to get some particular, as the most ordinary and useful causes, falling
among men into their Jurisdiction, as probate of Wills, allowance of Marriages,
trials of Adultery and Fornication; but they labor to frame the Civil State
according to the mode of their Ecclesiastic Hierarchy, whereby the one should
stand as a Bulwark to the other in the day of opposition: The word yields the
foundation to reason, and reason of experience (joined with the interest of
practicers) confirms the the word; and even from this time there was the
foundation of an entire and universal Monarchy among Christians laid; for it
was supposed as truth, that the Church of the Jew was the pattern and Type of
all the Christian Churches, that they were all to live as Brethren, both under
the Ecclesiastic and civil Regiment; yea, that not only between believers of
the same Nation, but of the remotest parts of the world, there was such a tie
even by the right of profession, that for their relief we ought not to plead
too strict a property in our goods, but freely to communicate to their
necessities, whether the same were by reason of persecution, or famine, or such
like, or other accidents of providence, and founded indeed the whole fabric of
their Government upon the rule, according to the Jewish Model, and by degrees
exterminating those Laws which were spied to be disadvantagious to their
interest, and for the absolute power of Princes, as they saw occasion, from the
troubles of the Empire, the weakness or religiousness of the Emperors; indeed
every thing according to the order of times made way for the accomplishment of
the intended vision: But this was no great piece of difficulty, for the nature
of the matter led them easily to it, as it seemed; for the Laws even of the
Romans, from whom all Nations almost had received their general rule of
Government, however at first misshapen, and rude, yet after polished by
modelizing according to the rule of the Jewish Tables; and not only so, but of
many or most of their judicials; for indeed, where can we have Laws more
agreeable to natural equity, then the Almighty wisdom there proposed; so that
the Arabians, Egyptians, Asians, yea, and the only not barbarous Greeks,
founded or framed their generals upon, or according to that incomparable order,
and in their ministrations did not much differ from the Hebrew originals; but
this premised, that the whole body of Christians was but one Commonwealth, and
that under the head of all immediately, the Lord Christ Jesus; it seemed to
follow by this, that he must have his substitutes on earth according to the
nature of men, one as Priest, chief for the service of him, to govern these men
as Saints; another as King, who was to rule and govern them as men, according
to the Law of God in righteousness and holiness; but all to be bound and
loosed, as I said before, by his mouth only who had the key of Knowledge, by a
now received infallibility, which was without much difficulty effected. The
Bishops and Clergy-mens lives being yet not generally obnoxious to scandal,
many yet retaining a great deal of exemplary piety and purity, yea even in the
bosom of the Church of Rome; for although it be easy for particular and
private persons to rush suddenly and immediately into great error, yet for
Commonwealths, or the public Governors, or common Societies, it is not so; for
what they look at, is Supremacy and uncontrolable Government; if so, the
jealousy which people ever have had of their liberties, will cause them rather
to introduce things by degrees, then at once, and that so by little and little
they may with ease obtain what by seeking at once they had utterly lost. Thus
did temporal Princes (for so we must distinguish while Bishops are become
Princes) by their Subjects, and thus did the Popes by them; but it is now fit
to leave the general discourse, and to reduce matters as intended, to a more
narrow compass then the consideration of the whole body of Christians, and look
at specially this Nation of England, which now having received the Faith of the
Lord Christ, whether under King Lucius primarily, or under any former, whether
first preached here by Joseph of Aramathea, or any other, whether Apostle or
Disciple of the Lord, but after more generally allowed, spread, or promoted
upon the coming of Augustine the Monk from Rome, I shall not controvert, but
allowing every man his opinion by whom first introduced, where first preached,
and such like; I shall take that only up which none will deny, which is, that
about the time of Lucius, it was by public and Magisterial Authority first
allowed, and has more or less ever since been continued, embraced, and
followed by some in this Nation at all times, but generally by the whole
Nation, though at first the overrunning of strange Nations might suspend the
splendour of it; only thus much I must say, that 'its evident by history, that
the Christian Religion was here entertained and settled long before Augustine,
and that there were Monks particularly of Bangor, who professed Christ, and
lived according to the Discipline of our Saviors Doctrine, which grew now
inconsistent with the dignity of the Roman Bishop, and others with him, and
all of the Clergy in their degrees; for now for the honor of Christ, as was
pretended, there was to be more order, as it was called, to be observed among
Christians, which was meant of outward duty and obedience to the Popes
Substitutes, in every place by the rule of gradation; for as the Pope
represented Christ, having his power from him; so all Bishops and inferior
Clergy ought to have and give their due respects from the people, and each from
other, according to the places and trusts by his Supreme Holiness (whom they
more or less immediately represented) reposed and imposed in and upon them.
This observance Augustine the Monk expected; but the English, or rather British
Monks found not this in the Doctrine of the Apostles, nor presidents of the
Primitive Church; truth, they found examples of paying more observance to holy
men, then Augustine required or expected, but no way allowed, much less sought
by them to whom it was done, the Lord Christ never had nor required it, but
himself washed his Apostles feet; and his Doctrine upon the decision of this
case in controversy was far otherwise, He that will rule, let him be servant,
be not like the Princes of the world; but yet this as most cohering with
natural reason and the custom of Princes (and that the decree might be
fulfilled) was accepted by the Princes of the earth; and now the Crozier and
the Crown went together in England; for the Princes were generally zealous of
the Law, after once admitted (it may be politickly, but I judge not) although
that from the power of the Romans here, so long ruling, there was a foundation
laid of good and just Laws, and holding much consonancy with the Judicials of
Moses; yet the many barbarous and irrational customs and usages, especially
those that were unchristian, were by the Kings, with the consent of their
people, abolished and extinguished; and there was one general Law received,
which was, That nothing was to be done, taken, or holden for Law, which was
contrary to the Law of Almighty God, meaning the Law of Moses, which they took
to be the special Rule of Moral Wisdom, and if once sanctiated by the Bishop,
undeniable, if not infallible; and though it is like as in all other Ages, and
places, the alterations of old and long received Laws, and introduction of new,
was difficult and dangerous: yet this Age being a warring Age, and Soldiers
little book learned, and yet the Princes of the earth, the vulgar people were
far less, so that the many followed the mighty, and obedience was more pure
then, then now, though more easy to be corrupted; so that the Kings believed
the Bishops, the Lords the King, and the people the Lords; and thus it was that
whole Nations even on a sudden became professors of Christ, I say not
Christians; and though the Monks of Bangor would not, seeing the pride of
Augustine, submit to him: yet the King converted, power effected what prayer
would not; but this bred a worse stir after; for these Monks still living in
their simplicity, and preaching faithfully, requiring nothing, but being
contented with what the people gave, were more pleasing to the people then they
who were not only imperious and proud, but covetous also, so called, in
requiring and enforcing Tithes, according to the Mosaical Law; and this was
trial enough, for generally men love to be of that Religion that costs them
least: Parishes were not yet known (they had not in these days, nor many
hundred years after, such clear light in Christ's Discipline, as to find that
civil prudential thing in the book of Religion;) but men gave (who would give)
their Tithes to the Ministry; these in each County, or Diocese, or Precinct
(notwithstanding all learned oppositions of the so called Clergy) were
treasured in common: the Bishop, if any were, as the High Priest, or Priest,
had his portion or Tithes out of the whole, and the Pope was to have his Tyth
afterward, called Annate, or yearly Offering from him, besides first fruits
paid originally by every Minister or Monk (for they then generally were the
Ministers, though not only) to the Bishop upon his introduction, and the Bishop
to the Pope, all pretending s^ill after the pattern of the Jewish Church. So
also was it in their Courts by way of gradation, admitting appeals, and that at
last to the Pope himself, which though upon the first ground each Prince ought
to have allowed, yet some Princes finding the evils in time by alienating the
hearts of their Subjects from them, subjugating purse and person to a stranger;
for so high these Popes at last went; other Princes spying the rents in other
men's Dominions, avoided it in their own; so that they either never allowed, or
sought to avoid, if before admitted, such appeals; upon this nevertheless at
length sprung up controversies, not only between the Pope and other Princes,
but also between the Princes of the Earth, in the respective Nations of the
world, and the Bishops: both also using the same arguments of duty and
allegiance; the Pope by reason of being the Vicar of Christ, the King the same;
the difference was, the one was in Spirituals, the other in Temporals; this
has made the Bishops not only combine against their Sovereign for the Popes
Cause, but even the people; for some pretending conscience, have served the
Popes and Bishops lusts against their Sovereign, and many times either for
necessity, or necessitated by superstition, against their own as well as the
Kings Interest: And thus by degrees what the Spirituality, as they termed
themselves, had obtained in other places, is granted in England; and the
marvel was not so much at what was granted, but that no more was, when even
the Crown it self was holden in homage at last of the Popes Holiness so called:
And now were the people all fitted to receive even what should be imposed upon
them. I cannot but observe again, that these Ages were very ignorant, so that
the Churchmen for want of others, were without scruple, commonly, if not
generally, admitted the Seats of Judicature, in the ordinary Law Courts of the
Kingdom, and were the prime men of the Kings Council, so that there was naught
to hinder, but only the pride and power of some warlike Noblemen, who in
emulation still opposed the Bishops; and as the Age grew more knowing, began to
stickle against them. But now the pride of Rome, come as it were to the highest
pitch, even as all other things have their rises, stops, and declinings, even
so had this; but that it might not fall alone, nor want strong supporters
against the pride of Princes, which Rome thought would be ready to push at her,
she drives on a fury in spurring the people to depose their Princes, upon her
Excommunications; the dire effect of which, all Christian Nations so called,
felt more or less, though more especially Germany; so this our England; and
truly, the people might well be apt enough to it, for that most Princes had, as
their Rights of Prerogative, taken from all but their Soldiers, whose swords
upheld them in their Majesty's, and so they upheld them in their acquests, be
they good or bad, and from the Priesthood, then generally so called, whose
superstitions should work an awe upon their spirits, all that could be called
an immunity, much more the Rights of a free people, and that people should be
slaves to their Prince, is not found in Reasons Lesson, and that any prime
Nation in Europe was the Conquest of any of their Kings I read not; true it is,
Castile conquered all the rest in Spain: so the French were reduced into one;
so others, and so our England; the conquered yet in length of time enjoying
almost like grace with their fellow Subjects; but with us in Wales we were made
one: This caused often and dangerous tumults, wherein still a Priest bare his
part; but things of long date being uncertain, we shall now come to look at the
last great mutation in this our England, and carry along the business of the
Commonwealth from the time of William the first, surnamed the Conqueror, as
principally eying that, but with a reflex upon the matters of the Church, as
being not to be neglected in respect of their own nature, and also for their
necessity to the explaining the matters treated of; and I the rather choose to
pitch upon that time, because the histories are more clear, and from that
settlement do all the grand Quaeries flow which are now discussed by so many
wits, and so many pens, wherein yet I shall be brief, as formerly, though
laying the plot to the generality of the succeeding matter. William the first,
commonly called the Conqueror, being the Bastard son of the Duke of Normandy,
having indeed no title at all to the Crown of England, (I cannot say usurps, he
fought against an usurper) yet lays claim to it only under a pretended and
invalid promise of Edward late King of England, and with his Comrades, to whom
he had promised shares in his purchase, He from Normandy, and with Normans,
that is, Frenchmen of the Country, Province, or County of Normandy, lands in
England, fights the then King, and slayes him in the Field; and the English
distasted at former Kings, and it seems doubtful to whom the Crown belonged,
and no one publicly laying claim, whereby it is probable the race was wom out,
or utterly disheartened: William soon settles himself, and by agreement with the
English, to keep the Laws, or rule them according to their Laws, he is accepted
as King; but as to avoid war, the strengths of the English being yet in no
considerable manner broken by the one battle with the slain King, he pretends
his Title of Donation, Adoption, or what you will call such a pretense; yet he,
as he found occasion and opportunity, not only strengthened himself, but weakened
the English, and that insensibly, deposing all Bishops of whose fidelity he was
not assured; and for settling a new form of Government upon, yet exceeding
prudent grounds, which was the so called Tenure in Capite, or of the Crown, he
by cutting off the Males of the chief Nobles as Traitors, disposed the Females
where they were, in marriage to his Normans, and the other upon seisures, he
granted, to hold of him, as of his Crown; thus he wrought his own ends every
way; for now he hereby takes the power of the Kingdom, and the adherences of
the ancient Nobility into the Norman Race; his Normans now, as by agreement,
and according to the rule of their Nation, take all from him, who is Lord
paramount. Thus all the land in England is holden of the King, and by the
equity of the judicial, he holding all of God only, and so the land was
absolutely enslaved, and the title of warlike conquest is achieved by a quiet
bargain; for this marriage of the inheritrix, all other objects taken away,
cast the tenants eyes solely upon the enjoyer of their Lady; now this way was
prepared to before, the kingdom being formerly divided, not only into
Counties, under an Earl, Consul, or their Sheriff, but each County into their
Hundreds, and those subdivided into half Hundreds, and those again into
Tythings; the most admirable Law that ever was in point of prudence directed
even by the infinite Wisdom to the Jew, and approved by these men, as
obligatory to Christians, or so pretending; these in their gradations all had
their law from their Lord, and held of him, most under an oath, and that
according to the nature of the Tenures, whether by homage or fealty, only with
a saving of right to the King and other Lords, and that Lord he held of the
King: nay, the wise Bastard had a further reach; for these Land-tenants were
his Militia, and none else were now suffered to have Arms, so that his Normans
being conveniently disposed into all parts of the Nation, and the Nation thus
engaged by these courses aforesaid, being more warlike then wise, few then
knowing more then the Priest told them, the work was readily effected; and so
much the rather, because the Nobles had Knights held of them by the like
service of attendance in the wars; some holding Honors, and some Manors in
subordination; and these again had Freeholders for the provision of their
houses, which was called the service of the plough; And thus all being
distinguished into their orders and ranks, there was nourished by these mutual
dependances, love and duty, service and sustenance; the Noble man being at
Court, the Lord or chief Knight in the County, the Patrons of the Yeomonry, and
all yet held in chief of the King: This prudent settlement holding a
correspondence with the ancient Jewish, and no difference from the later Roman
Government, both here by several Governors and Governments made native, was
very facile to be effected; and the rather, because that our rocks of offense
now, were no stumbling stones of offense then, but the foundation-stone of the
ladder of the highest preferments; for the Kingdom being settled upon a
Military frame, yet wisely observing the rules of humane Arts, Wardship and
Marriage, the now or late Bugbears were thus laid and reserved by that discreet
Prince, following so justly and evenly one upon the neck of another, by them
accounted demonstrative reason; that truly his enemies approved at last what
his friends denied; that is, the English admitted what the Normans spurned at;
for as I find the Kingdom being put into this Sword posture, it was thought
meet that the Tenants of the King, who were not fit to do him service, should
be under his tuition; and who would and could so carefully provide, both for
their training in warlike exercises, or dispose them in marriage for his
safety, and their well-being as the Prince, whose strength and securiry they
were to be both in war and peace? so that Lords to their Knights, and they to
their Esquires, and all to their Soccagers; so that Soccagers, or Freeholders
sought a Tenancy in Knights Service; and they by Knights Service sought to hold
of the King, not in Capite only, but by the greater services of Petite and
grand Serjeantie, being so much the more or less honorable, as they were
directed more or less immediately to the person of the King: And I do not find
that King William did create more Lords then there were Counties; for he
observed his plot of Government, as I may say once for all, intermingling the
old and his new with such a fit contexture, as the first glance or present
witnesses did not easily discern it: Now as he laid his Military part wisely,
so did he not indiscretely settle the Civil part, for that he also ordered,
that as the Commonwealth was but all one great family, and though in regard of
the multitude of subjects, or children, it was necessary to see and hear by
others eyes and ears, and so to answer and determine differences: yet it was of
necessity that all should yield obedience to him, and render him a final
account; and therefore he disposed not from himself the ultimate and last
determination of all, or any cause, but that they might appeal to him, and that
not only in high and criminal matters, concerning his Crown and Dignity, the
life and honor of his subjects, the original due object of the power of the
Court now called the Common-Bench; or of his Treasure, the object of the Court
now called the Exchequer, or the Court concerning matters of the Income,
Profit, Revenew, or Treasure of the King: But also of the differences betwixt
party and party, the object or subject matter, call it what you will, of the
power of the Court now called the Common Pleas; which for ought I can find
authentic to convince me, had all one officers, which were not many; all one
Process, which was a special Writ for appearance, and a trial before the King,
or such as he appointed in his Court; for the King was to be always present;
and there was also help in case of Equity by the Kings Chancellor, in matters
of the Summum jus of Law, according to the common Lawyers phrase, or severest
opinion, according to the rule of pure conscience; that is, do as you would be
done unto, or like a good Christian, according to the Episcopal and Church-mens
equity in the times of their Regiments; now this foundation laid, which offered
benefit as well as Law to the people, who had hereby remedy against the
greatest oppressions of great men, or Judges, in the Courts of the Sheriffs, or
Lords Courts, or Hundred Courts; which all at first submitted by way of
gradation to each other, all to the Kings; and so the Courts in Cities and
Boroughs, and other places incorporate, as also Franchises and Liberties, which
were the evident marks of conquest, and granted larger, or stricter as the King
pleased.

Now the King plots his own setlement; first, as being a Norman, that is,
French; he wills all our pleadings to be in French; for he being as chief
Father of the Commonwealth, to see to all, ought to understand it; Next, he
ought especially for offenses criminal, or trespasses of force voluntary, to
have the punishment of the offender, as a disturber of the peace of the
Commonwealth, as well as the particular party to have reparations; and
therefore he brings in, together with Appeals, the ancient usage of England,
which was the challenging of a man to have committed an offense, as of treason,
murder, rape, felony, and the like; a kind of suit in the name of the King,
called an Indictment; and truly all the reason of the introduction that I can
see, was to advance the end of the Kings gain; for here the King has all the
gain; all the goods of the party (at first) from the day of the offense done;
truth, now he has it in appeal; but it was not so; for this, the old true tale
of Kents freedom will be known Evidence; for they opposed this part of
prerogative; and then the father to the bough, that is, to be hanged upon the
arm of a tree, the usual and ready way then of dispatch, and the son to the
plough, that is, to the improving the inheritance left: Concerning the common
Law, Prerogatives of a Prince, or what the Laws of England anciently, as by the
right and light of natural knowledge, granted to their Kings, a certainty of
land of the Crown, Mines of gold and silver, Royal fishes, lands deserted of
the sea, and of them who died without heir, as the prime person in whom the
honor and glory of the people rested, I omit to speak at present: Truly that
this William used Parliaments, I find not, though others do; for it is evident
to the world, and he that is not blind may see; he to quiet the people,
pretended Title; but his intention was to make it his absolute conquest; he
therefore calls Councels, where his Lords were present; they do what his Will
is, and there is an end; So that grant it a Parliament, or National Assembly of
the Estates, yet it was but to grant or enact what the King desired; his
Normands had liberty to speak their will, what English man durst oppose? but
the acts of his successor fully demonstrate this; who destroys thirty towns and
Churches to make a Forest: the Monks of the time durst speak, but who else? So
that now it was evident what Title he claimed by, pretend he what he will; for
the King had still his pretenses; truly the English were now in great
streights, they saw their Laws utterly abolished, and their lives and estates
to lie at the Kings mercy; there was no remedy to complain, who durst? The
Bishops yet notwithstanding something interpose, but their mouths are stopped
by a command from his Holiness; for people must not rise against their Prince,
but at his will; and fill his coffer, and you have his Crosier at command; for
Rome was now at the full height of wickedness; but God taking away this
sacrilegious Prince, he soon opens a way of comfort, to the almost cowed
English, giving them some means of revenge by a royal contest or a quarrel for
the Crown: this, and matters of like nature settled, there now arises a greater
quarrel, which has continued even to these times, though with diverse parties,
and upon several grounds; and that was betwixt the Lords and the King; it seems
God would have the English free, and though he chastised them, he would not
forsake them; for he makes their enemies the chief assertors of their ancient
Liberties; for these Lords find now that they had not the same free
privileges their Ancestors had and claimed; their births had now made them
English; and of sharers in principallity, they were made mere, though greater
Subjects; The King Lawyers belike had found some flawes in their patents, it
may be they had done some wrong to their Tenants; and were complained of; and
the King to anger them, that they might forfeit their too large liberties, did
the poor men right, the greatest vexation and Soul or heart-grief a proud great
man can have; but be the ground what it will, many of which are evident, and
arising as before is said; The contest grew high; there were things called
Parliaments assembled, to the end to determine these differences, and in them
diverse good Laws tending to reconciliation were enacted; but what was the
effect of force, ceased in execution, when the cause was removed; and the Lords
armed against their Princes; and truly their Tenants took part as the rest did,
they feared the saving of their faith to their King would prove the forfeiture
of their lands to their Lords; and now what was intended for the Kings
safeguard, was his ruin; the most immediate Lord carrying all the power, the
superior Lords all along were strangers; So vain a thing is the most prudent
settlement of men, if Divine providence affords not success: But this still
remains a sure foundation, good Laws are ever the same, though the badness of
men may enervate and weaken them, yea often times invert them; but still as
differences grew higher and higher, Parliaments were the means of quieting of
all, which does clearly evince that those national meetings were, and are, not
only the most natural and prudent means of composure of civil differences, but
also proper to this Nation, the due rights of which were always contended for;
This contest wrung away from the King those two great Charters of privilege
called Magna charta and charta de foresta, being the express limit and boundary
of the Prince, that he might not upon occasion fly out after upon his title of
conquest; the subject matter of them are evident to each man's veiw, they are
generally consonant (none contrary) to right reason, they are restraints of the
Princes absolute will, or of Governing according to his own lust, and
declarative to the subject what he might trust to, establishing indeed the
right of property, meum and tuum, against that high point of levelling (which
the Princes of this Land, as of all other Nations sought after) not only the
great men, Mountains, Lords, but even the Mole-hills, the meanest Subjects, to
the nod, beck, word of this man God the King; The Lords, and others saw this;
wherefore they bound the King by oath, but what coard is able to hold a
covetous, much less an Ambitious spirit? first therefore they plead duress, or
constraint; and I must ingenuously acknowledge there was force against force,
another King confirming it in his minority, or under the Age of twenty one
years; he thinks this a loose to his oath, as if he were old enough to vow, but
not to perform; and to these refuges of the Princes the Lawyer could give
excellent colors; and now the masterpiece was to set the work afoot in a
legal way, and the Judges of the land were to determine this part; they were
sworn to the King, and therefore they must give their advice and afford their
best assistance to him; the histories public say it was an enforced opinion,
whereby they annihilated all the principal privileges in the grand Charter,
putting at once the sword and purse of the kingdom into the Kings hand, upon
necessity, making him to be judge of the necessity, for the great trust reposed
in him as King, for the benefit of the Commonwealth, and of this faithfulness
there must be no doubt; this was in the time of a weak wilful young Prince; so
that the Lords in Parliament (for who else durst budge or stir?) question the
Judges as betraiers of their trusts, and the liberties of the people; and make
them examples by hanging them at the common Gallows. There were then men whose
judgments and opinions were as absolute for this King and his actions, these
men and their determinations, as might be; who cried out upon the Lords and the
Parliament, as Rebels, Subverters of the Law, the settled Law, and that by the
opinion of sworn men, the Judges, magnifying the King as one that did but
intend to take away the Root, Spawn and seed-plot of Rebellion; for while a
power of contest or visible cause thereof remained (which these Charters had
often manifested themselves to be) there would be no visible security for a
settled peace; if the Lords might judge of one right or privilidge of one part
of the Kings prerogative, why not of all? if so, as good be no King; this was
the Court dialect, and of their dependants; and this controversy ceased not
till at last the King had ruined all the power of the Lords, and now all was
safe; the Kings therefore to divert the stream of affection in the people, from
seeing into the invasion of their liberties, propound Wars in France, wherein
being successful, they please the people with small things, and take away great,
but especially curtail the Lords of that absolute dependence which was upon
them by their under-Tenants, granting the use of Magna Charta and the other
Charter as Law, but breaking it upon all occasions in times of War, and then
complying in times of peace; and truly this was the State of England for the
space of about three hundred years after the Conquest.

But you will say, why did the Pope suffer this? why did not he as the common
and spiritual father of the whole Christian flock, use his power both over the
great Ram the King, and the lesser cattle and younglings of the flock? what,
such devastations, murderings, perjuries, and other evils, as must of necessity
follow so many Warlike conflicts? under Christ's kingdom the Lion and the Lamb
were to feed together, and the Wolf and the Kid to lie or couch together.

Truly the Pope had ever an Oar in the Boat of the Commonwealth. But know,
Rome was now the Princess and Queen of Power, she raised up the people, to
scourge Princes disobedient to her, not those obedient; they should whip the
people to the bare bones; and this juggling appeared, and there were open
complaints even to Princes against the Vicar of Christ; But as the Princes to
appease their Subjects, propound War against a neighbor Prince, yea though
Christian; for now great men and Princes being become Christians, it was hard
to know whether Christians were Christians yea or not, their actions were so
far different from their professions; So the Popes to take the Christian
Princes off of their intentions to look into his Court and customs, propound
War against Turks and Infidels, a holy and specious pretense, to redeem
Jerusalem from the hands of heathens, still the Jewish pattern; by this he
has a double advantage, for his, chief Enemies gone, that is the most active
and most zealous Princes for reformation, he propounds the same to others, but
discharges them of their oath, (for they that went did so) for many others he
employed against his private Enemies, that is; Enemies of his leudness,
wickedness, and apostasy from the faith of God, (the Kings of the earth making
a league with the whore, and drinking of the cup of her fornications (and shall
no doubt of her destruction also) so that they who should and ought, being
taken off from punishing her) God raised up poor despicable Creatures, yea
taught Babes and Sucklings to vindicate his truth, as the so called Waldenses,
Albingenses, poor men of Lions in France, and boundaries of Italy; Wickliff
with us, John Huz and Jerome of Prague with the Germans, and others with others,
thousands of which the Pope in the teritories of France caused to be murdered
by soldiers sworn for Jerusalem. Now as the Popedom was corrupted, so was
the generality of all the Bishops, Doctors, and Priests in all places; they had
an abundance of riches, fat paunches, and lean pates, they had now found out an
easy method of serving Christ; they were in the years of the Churches
prosperity, that themselves agree, and we believe; that was the great reason
they took so little pains; The Kings had reserved donations of Bishoprics to
themselves, and riches and honor (the nourses of ease) were what all strove
for; these dependances held the generality close to the Kings; if any opposed,
it was pride stirred up anger, that they were omitted, and others either
preferred before, or above them; yet even in this time the name of religion was
venerable; and truly the faith of many, or rather the credulity or superstition
of most, with abundant charity was everywhere perspicuous; love of God drew
some; but Pride, Lust, Covetize, Ambition, Ease and such like drew a multitude;
to speak of the multitude of vain and superstitious attractives, I count
needless, as fitting rather itching ears then solid heads; yet this gangrene
over spread the whole body of the Christian Commonwealth, and it was no
miracle, for miracles were become common, and now the Church slept in greater
security then before; for who durst oppose the word of the Pope, and the sword
of Princes? for seeing fire and faggot, the ax and halter were now in the hands
of the chief Christians, what cause of fear to the servants of Christ, and what
need the Kings fear if they had the Pope to their friend? yet diverse of them
repined, seeing so much of the temporal estate each day slipped away under
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, so called, as that in the time of Henry the
fourth of England, when it was complained of in Parliament, that the third part
of the Land and revenue of the whole kingdom, was in the Churchmens hands, and
it was petitioned to take some away, the first public act of the people of
England against the jurisdiction and estate of the Bishop of Rome, although in
the case of John's grant of the kingdom to the Pope, to hold in fee of him: The
Lords dis-owned the power of the king to grant, as having no more but a trust
in the kingdom; but they did not hint that his Holiness could not take, and it
was vain when they saw he gaped for more then he took, and took more then was
his due. The succeeding Kings were either so given to foreign wars, or
troubled with the intestine divisions of the houses of York and Lancaster, that
now they were forced to own Parliaments, yea to take the chief strength of
their Title from their determinations: There had been a Law made formerly, to
have Parliaments once a year; for as the Kings of England sought to avoid those
public conventions of the most potent Lords and popular Commons, for diverse
most evident reasons as they conceived, (and upon their unjust grounds truly)
destructive to their Royalty; for there their actions were continually
questioned; the actors by personal command of the Kings against Law, or
laboring the abolishing the Laws, either fined, or hanged, or otherwise
punished; and though some Parliaments went cross to others, some even
justifying the acts of kings against Law, and their abettors; this invalidates
not the power of the Parliament, but confirms it; for by these Acts the kings
after made Title; so that here the Parliament got into their hands, and that
upon motion of the kings, even the power of appointing the king; and this arose
from that bloody contention between those two houses: But you will ask, was not
the Title clear? yes, without doubt; but the Estates, that is the Parliament,
upon the great dislike of the present Government, their hearts being alienated
from a dissolute and riotous Prince, sought out the man among them of the Race,
with whom the potent men could drive the best bargains, for Riches, Honor, and
promotion; and ever or mostly, though the love and zeal of the Laws, Liberties,
but especially of Religion, gave the first blow to the quarrel, and suited it;
yet interest espoused, wedded, owned and enjoyed it; so easy are the best
natures to be corrupted and depraved by outward excellencies, or esteemed
excellent things.

But it may be Quaeried, what all the succession of Princes all this while did
for the Church? truly all they could both by themselves and Subjects,
multitudes of Churches, Monasteries, Fryeries, Nunneries, Abbeys, Chapels, all
planted in the most pleasant delicious places of the Nation, admirable and
costly structures richly furnished, largely endowed, both with lands and yearly
profits of Tithes, only to send a brother to preach; and now the common
maintenance of the Church or Churchmen ceased, and was made proper, and after
was drawn into that civil order, which we now call a Parish, being a limitation
of the bounds of the Church, for care of souls and maintenance; and though
indeed there was so great a sufficiency, yet even then many of the Clergy were
in want; it may be the Pope thought it fit some of Christ's Servants should be
like their Master; I mean of that so called, and justly at first, the Friars of
Saint Francis Order, according to their style, commonly called the Begging
Friars; for so they did upon conscience of the Rule of our Savior, Go forth
into all the world, take no care for any thing, one coat, no money, not a
staff, no nor sandalls; these went barefoot, preached diligently, expecting
only what God moved peoples hearts to bestow upon them; for they believed,
that God that said, The labourer is worthy of his hire, would not suffer them
while they labored to want. That Rome testified against Rome, admitting truth
for truth, though living in Error; yea, many of these preached against the
Errors, I say not of the Church, but of the Court of Rome, wisely as it was
believed, covering their mothers nakedness with the Fig Leaves of their
temporal acquests; but all were not so politic, some spoke plainly against the
Bishop of Rome in all Ages, and preached Rome Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist;
and it might well be; for Rome come to the height of outward greatness (so that
the Mahumetans, who look for an earthly Paradise excelling and abounding in all
carnal delicacies could not have desired more) it fell into the sink of
enormity, all debauchery, riotousness and profaneness, and exalted it self not
only against God, kicking with the heel now she was fat, but above God, under
the power of the Keys; for she dispensed with the very Commandments of the
Almighty, giving license, not only to unlawful, but even to incestuous
marriages, which has filled Christendom, so called, with all those horrible
and direful effects of wrath, upon all Nations, which now of late years have
fallen out, especially upon the Kings, Princes, and great men, the great
Merchants, whose lusts would admit no denial, and so traded with this
spiritual harlot, for some of her trash and paint, to give a color to all
their incests, murders, perjuries, lies, adulteries, rapines, thefts,
extortions, and such like; and let all the families of Europe look to
themselves, they boast to be descended of Kings, allied to all the great
Princes of Europe; but have they not therewith an alliance to the judgment,
which will, it is probable, follow these sins, till the blot be utterly worn
out? and let them look to it, they hold not but by this beast, and will be
destroyed with her: mistake not, I say not all Kings, or kingly power, or Rule,
or Government, but the issue of Incest, and the spawn of unlawful Lusts.

I must now return to the civil State, where the Kings as I tell you, still
labored to maintain their Prerogative, so called, by which they intended the
absolute rule of their will, holding all that was yielded by the Law, not as
datum, or given, but debitum; therefore they refused it not, but labored to
encroach, and therefore there was no immunity granted to the Subject, but they
paid for it; no right cleared, but bought at the hardest market; yet upon these
chaffers the Kings settle the Courts of Judicature, both of the Common Pleas,
King's Bench, Exchequer, and appoint Judges and salaries at Westminster, a
certain place, and at certain and appointed times, whereby the great and
arduous causes, the difficulties of which could not be determined by the
ordinary Judges of the County, might by these eminent and most learned, or so
esteemed, receive a period with less charge to the Subject, and to these were
appointed Officers and Fees: After this the Chancery was settled, and the chief
Judges of all these Courts, I have read, the Parliament were to appoint, and
they might if Annual; but if but every seven years, as by after agreement was
established, it was requisite to admit the king the choice once, and then to be
sure he was like to keep it for ever, (there was a president) out of these
Courts the kings raised large supports; for all the Officers which were now
multiplied, went all along with the Crown; and yet these Courts the kings liked
not, but labored to introduce other Courts, the settlement of all these
Judicatories by way of gradation, admitting a final appeal to Parliament in
course; therefore the Court of Wards is erected, and that upon a good color,
but a bad cause; for the latter kings having seen the issues of things before,
as is related, now neglected the warlike education, and the preferment of their
Wards, as at first institution; indeed the cause which was then, that was the
putting by degrees the whole power of the Land by Marriages, was now ceased;
and now none bare less affection to the king, then the race of Normans, the
issue being like in condition with the English, ill brooking the service and
vassalage which themselves labored to lay upon the English.

After this Court came up the Court, so called, of Star Chamber, intended still
as a bridle to curb the headstrong humors of the Lords and great men.

There were erected Courts of Admiralty, and all these Courts were bounded, had
their Rules in all circumstances; the defects of which were still, as I said,
liable to appeal, that is, to be questioned in Parliament; the Law Courts, and
Statutes, Courts of course, the other agreeable to their own nature by
supremacy of power; neither were the Spiritual Courts so called, that is, the
Courts of, or under, or by, or from the jurisdiction, power, authority of the
so called Clergy, from the highest Bishop to the meanest Surrogate of other
settlement; yet in these the Kings were chary; for they appealing to the Pope,
a curse might follow; and who that has a due consideration of conscience, can
blame the Princes, Judges, Magistrates and Officers of those times, seeing they
pretended to believe the Popes Supremacy of power, and all other things
conducing thereto?

But now we shall see a stronger opposition to the Pope then ever; for he
sending out many profane Indulgences, as for pardoning of the greatest
offenses, and tolerating the highest wickednesses, Luther a Popeling opposes,
and that openly before the Emperor, at the great meeting or Parliament of the
Princes of the Empire, many of which took part with him; he thus upheld, and
the Pope scorning the check by a paultry Friar, he curses and excommunicates
him; Luther writes against that, and seeking and searching the Scriptures to
find out how to assure the truths he had declared, God manifests many more.

Now here I must observe, that Luther broached no new matters, it was the old
Scriptures, and the old truths of the Scripture; but the men that then lived,
thought it then strange, and novelty, as being contrary to what they had been
trained up in. Of all the foreign Princes to Germany, who stickled in this
business, none so hot as the king of our England, then called Henry the Eight,
a Prince not esteemed so Religious as Warlike, nor approved so Warlike as
fierce, every violent spirit not being for the management of Military
Atchievments; and to speak the truth, the ease and delicacy of Court breeding,
imbecillitates the mind, and enervates the body for the pains, care, and danger
of War: This king nevertheless, had sure some design in his head, to gain his
Holy Fathers good will in, as other Princes; he therefore writes, or causes to
be written, which he fathered, a Book against Luther, in maintaining the Popes
power, yea even in the unjustest matters; that is, That Luther, a Vassal of the
Sea of Rome, a Child of the Church, ought not to judge the Fathers acts, nor
censure, much less control matters allowed by him, much less authorized, nay
commanded; for the bearer of the Indulgences had his Letters missory, or Bull,
so called. Luther bears this shock, and all and alone stands the dint of the
whole, so called, Christian world, a few men, and one or two inferior Princes,
with an university, excepted; but this notwithstanding, Luther teaching and
holding forth the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, fears not, and
multitudes are converted (I may say to the Faith) from the Pope to him, he
appealing to a general Council; but the Princes oppose with the Emperor, as
well as our Henry; and good reason, as I before declared, set the Council to
order the Popes matters, and a Parliament or Diet will by Analogical Rule
argue, at least (rationate at first, and at last determine) of the rule of
Princes; let a Friar question the Pope, and any Subject may as well altercate
with his Prince, and at last appeal to a Parliament, as Luther to a Council;
truly all the irregular Interests of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and
the rest of that rabble, and of kings, and Princes, Judges, Advocates, as
Lawyers and the rest hang upon one thread; and I presume that one sword at one
blow cuts at last both asunder; assuredly as they have stood, so they will fall
together; but mark Gods way; our Henry was a dissolute young Prince, and he
married young, and to a widow, nauseous to such a spirit, vain, though
Heroic, or magnanimous, to give it the best among such epithites; he was
desirous of a divorce, which he at first at least sought, not so much (as is
most probable) for conscience, as humor sake; for this change he seeks the
Popes dispensation; she was a daughter of Spain, the elder son of the Church,
that is, the most ambitious among the so called, Christian Princes, which now
stood ready at all assayes to act the Popes pleasure.

He was nigh and potent, and must not be displeased; the Pope dallies, puts the
English king, desirous and hoping of a divorce, upon an injury to his Crown, as
it is at last resented, by making him in a private manner, as a subject to the
Pope, appear before his Legate to answer his fact.

Truth is, the very Court of England was now tainted with Luthers Doctrine,
notwithstanding the kings Book, and these men taking opportunity of the kings
wrath, blow it up to ingratiate themselves and advance their interests, by
subverting their enemies, they instill into the kings ear, a Rhetoric
pleasing enough to a high and angry spirit; namely, that he had no dependence
on the Pope, his Royalme was free: True, his predecessors either of weak Title
at first, or controvertible at last, of weak parts, or in a turbulent State,
either durst not, or did not openly oppose, yet truly did what they could to
extinguish that power that they believed usurped: The king upon this, resolves
to proceed without the Pope, and at last having experienced many ways,
receives satisfaction, and withal, to despite the Pope, renounces his
Supremacy, and gains it Enacted by Parliament.

But to show his zeal to the Romish Religion; he continues the Act, so called,
of the six Article, a most bloody and Popish device, and executes it, by which
two conttary Acts, a Papist is burnt for denying the Kings Supremacy, and a
Protestant for affirming the Pope Antichrist, and such other matter, both at
one and the same Stake; so that it was evident, this Prince sought not the
honor of Christ, but his own interest; but this foundation laid, he proceeds a
step further, which enlightens this somewhat more; for the Pope, who thought he
had as good hold in all his Christendom, so called, as Henry had in England,
he first cites, then excommunicates him; but this Prince all fire by his
Colleague in Arms Bourbon assaults; and, had not Woolsey been truer to Rome
then to England, had had the Pope his Captive; but money not coming timely
enough hinders that; but he that regards not the father neglects the son; Henry
therefore thoroughly angered, finds some default in the great Churchmen, most
obvious to Law, and least favored of the people, and not at all owned in the
word of God, as were Bishops, Pastors, Priests, and Ministers.

He therefore feiseth the rich Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries and Frieries; and
as before the Knights Templers once fallen had many sins laid to their charge,
which it was believed they never did; so these had many sins found, which it
was proved they might well be charged withal, which but few ever believed of
them, as Sodomy, Beastiality, Murder, and the like; for Adulteries and
whoredoms they were known, and he justified his actions by the actions of the
late named Cardinal Woolsey, who had, as he said, destroyed little Monasteries
to build a great College; and he destroyed great ones to support a noble
Kingdom; intimating, that he found that these would be his enemies in his
contest against the Pope, to whom they were more surely tied then to him; so
that in case contention came, this was so provided for, as a dangerous fire hid
within his own bowels; the lands he exchanged with his Lords, Nobles, and
Servants at easy rates, whereby he was little advantaged, and they highly
obliged, whereby he got fast friends against the Papal power; and they that
would not exchange, were noted as favorers of the Pope; and from this change
first arose our Lay-preachers, or Impropriators so called: See how God works
his ends against his enemies, not a title of, or for God intended, and yet his
work done; and Henry has the glory of the first Reformer, yea, and his
Declarations pronounced no less then zeal for Gods Glory; but what he truly
had, others as truly deserved in his Court, whose faithfulness to their Prince,
and zeal for Gods House, yet at last by the malignity, even of the contrary
faction, was, when his service was ended, and the Kings coffers full, rewarded
with an Axe, such fickle things are Princes, the sons of men; and this is the
promise of the faithful in this world of affliction, in the life to come
eternal felicity: this was the first turn of the wheel of wrath against these
Apostates from the purity of the Gospel, and the practice of the Gospel; having
left the Service of Christ to serve themselves in the honors, riches, glories,
pomps and vanities of the world, lusts of the flesh, and pride of life; and now
as wave succeeds wave, so does sorrow, sorrows to these children of bitterness;
for the son makes clean work, and hardly leaves a handful of Popelins in
England; and this was presumed to favor more of conscience, because they saw
not the hire of the work, there was little pay for their pains; but he of short
continuance.

Mary, though born in unlawful wedlock, was, notwithstanding the Will of the
last King, or the Acts of Parliament for disinabling of her, through the
potency of the Popish party, yet by Parliament, advanced to the Throne.

But surely England had now well thriven in knowledge, especially from the
after Lights to Luther; who following his steps went further in the knowledge
of the Gospel; truth is, Luther opposed them, and had his followers; but the
other and more, and the opinions increased and spread further. And to declare
the truth, and honor it with respect enough to Luther, who deserved much of
Gods people, as an instrument he had raised up for their benefit; his
bitterness against his brethren, desertors from the errors of Rome, as from
what they accounted his mistake, gave the Papists much advantage to upbraid the
dissentions of the Schismatics, so called, urging that there was never like to
be peace where this gap was opened, that the divisions of the Church were
subject to the questions or judgments of particular Christians; for from hence
each man as his understanding or ability was, less or more, should believe as
he listed, and trouble the peace of the Church as these Schismatics had done;
to prevent which in England, it having had some footing as was conceived here,
through the interest of Henry, and the youth of Edward, who though begot by a
Popish Father, was educated by a Schismatic Tutor: The Bishops ply it hard by
fire and faggot, to root out all that followed the way as it was called; they
had many nicknames in all Ages; but here they who were the Lords Wheat, had the
name from the envious man, of the devils Tares cast upon them, Lollards; and
they had as in the Primitive times, all evils, errors, and sins charged upon
them; they were generally poor, and happily the rich thought any way a good
riddance, especially being so, at least accounted, of proud minds, though in
beggars rags, and had all those phrases of Scripture applied to them as to
those who subverted souls.

So that here was a great persecution, many hundreds were put to death, in
opposition to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; but the State in policy
meddled not with the taking away of the Abby-Lands, because of the strong party
that might have engaged against them; and they who hoped to have time to make
all sure, would not seek that with too much haste and danger, which by former
experience they saw a small time would of it self restore; for it was taken
before, and would shortly be again; and hinting nevertheless that a mite of
Gods stock, or of the Churches and Church-mens dues, as they called them, in a
Lay-mans hands, would bring a moth and curse upon all his estate; so that what
Covetize had robbed, Conscience would restore, if not double; and as the
Church-mens policy was great, so they forgot not to foresee a storm, in case
Mary should depart without issue, and the Crown come to Elizabeth, who was, as
the Germans called them, a Protestant, as the French, a Huguenot, or of the
Religion, as the English, a Lollard, a Bibler, a Gospeller; wherefore there
were many plots to take her away; before she came to the Crown it was less
danger; but the Lord prevented, and she trusted in God; having no forces, no
armor, no money, all the Realm Papists in profession, but a day or two before,
Mary dead, is with an universal joy, almost, received to the Throne; and
although the Pope being now strengthened by the decrees of that famously
infamous Council of Trent, had raised up all the Princes, so called Christian,
as much as in him laid, against her; and having excommunicated her as an
Heretic, gave away the Kingdom to the King of Spain; who with a so called
invincible Armado, came to conquer it, upon pretense of his holy Father the
Popes donation; and had by Jesuits, Priests, and others labored many ways to
take away her life, yet she outlived all; and all undertakers against her,
both in Ireland and England brought to themselves ruin, death, loss, or shame;
This in care for the Queen, produced Acts of Parliament of several natures,
against Papists, Priests, Seminaries and Jesuits, distinguishing between a
Papist in opinion, and a Papist in faction; and so Priests, as being the
inciters to things absolutely evil in themselves, upon Tenants or grounds, not
only unwarrantable in the word, nay absolutely contrary, but destructive to
the principles of Nature, humane contracts, as no faith to be kept with
Heretics, no treason to kill a Prince, declared heretical by the Pope, and
excommunicated: And although the Priest and Papists did retort upon the English
Professers, their former pleas for liberty of conscience in matters of
Religion, and upon that account would have saved many Traitors to the State of
England; yet England wisely distinguished between those who had sucked the
poison, but poisoned not others; executing these, and banishing them; yea,
though venting their false opinions, if not guilty in, or of promoting of Acts
of Treason. The Pope stomachs this; and Elizabeth having now framed a new
Church Liturgy, or Book of Common prayers, or rather corrected the old Popish
Mass Book, wherein was nothing contained which the then compilers supposed to
smell, or have a touch or savor of Popery, and casting out all Q. Mary's
Priests, had placed (Protestants so called) Bishops and Ministers in the
several Diocesses of the Kingdom, and respective Parishes; and commanded no
other Liturgy to be used under several penalties; the Pope, I say, he
thereupon inhibits all Papists to join in the Church duties, offices, or
services, with the (now so called) Church of England; whereupon many refuse to
go to Church, who thereupon were called Recusants; and although there were
great penalties at last laid upon them, as of twenty pound a month; yet the
Recusants in all Counties were many, especially of the Nobility and Gentry; the
vulgar generally, as being bred up under that notion, that ignorance was the
mother of Devotion, turned with the Tide, and the change was even to reason
visible; for the Service being now in English was understood, or might be; yet
all the Protestants were not contented; but some apprehended a clearer and more
uninterested light to Reformation for they pretended neither to Bishoprics nor
Deanaries, nor any other spiritual promotion, so called; no places, either of
honor, or profit, but merely to do the work of the Lord for conscience sake;
these taught that the reformation of Queen Elizabeth was but rather gilding the
rotten pillars of the Temple, and Church of Christ, then doing indeed what
ought to be, build wholly a new.

For they declare that the Roman apostasy was Babylonish, and that there was
no more commixture to be had with her then with Idols; that all the ministry of
England, having no other calling then the outward, from Romish Priests, by the
imposition of hands, was Antichristian; that all the Courts so called
Eclesiastical, were unlawful, and any Liturgy or set form of prayer commanded
in the Church, was superstitious; that indeed Christ's Kingdom, which was of the
Gospel, would not admit of those profane mixtures, which the parishes in
England abounded withal; and that truly none was fit to be a Christian
Magistrate, who was not fit to be a Church Member; but with all outward
acknowledgments of Loyalty to their Prince, as aiming at no turbulency in the
State, but modestly to offer their opinions to the Parliament; and it seems
some of these opinionists, were gotten into the Parliament, if not one into the
chair, whose zeal would not admit him to take in consideration, the Message of
the Queen, or affairs of State, till prayers had been made publicly by the
Members for a blessing from God, and agreed (as per one Author) a day to seek
God by fasting and humiliation, with prayer, upon the whole work; But all these
were nipt in the bud by the Queens authority, who enlarged prerogative much,
through the ardent affection wherewith her virtues had enchained the hearts of
her Subjects to her; for she, being informed by some, how highly these things
might in future times be stretched, to the enhansing the power of the
commonalty in Parliament, it being necessary to keep them in due bounds; though
the Queen might not mislike the Acts, she did the manner, being done of their
own heads, without acquainting her; and although upon the Remonstrance of
diverse of these non-conformists, the Commons again began to stir: yet she not
only as we may say wisely moderated them, but trusting to the popular affection
she had gained, and I hope having no end of raising prerogative to a fatal
eminency, she politiquely overswayed, imprisoning by her own authority, a
Member of Parliament for a motion in the house, and did, unless my Author be
deceived, tie the house to agitate no business, but what they received in
charge from her; and the Ministers who pleaded for such a rough thorough
reformation, were not only silenced by dislikes, but by a new impoured high
commission, pretended against Recusants, were overawed, so that they were
forced to leave the Land; some who staid (as the event gave evidence) too
indiscreetly taxed the Queen and her counsel of State of Apostasy,
lukewarmness, nay absolute Tyranny; it is evident truth, that the Queen went no
further in reformation then needs she must; and truly the Spirits of most men
would have sunk under the burden of her undertaking, and had not God
wonderfully preserved her, she had perished an hundred ways; she thought not
fit therefore to stir all at once, she was troubled with some risings every
moment; and to have attempted such a work as these men preached up, it was not
only attended with difficulty and danger, but was accounted tending to Anarchy
and sedition, which was so earnestly laid to their charge, that some of these
suffered as Traitors, and the Laws were as, if not more, spitefully used
against these, so called Brownnists, or Sectaries, then against the Papists;
they were few in Number, but generally the chief for zeal and knowledge among
the common people, who instigated the final and total casheering of the Pope;
It is observable many Papists were found Traitors and abettors of Treasons
against the Queen, but not one of these, nay they died in her quarrel; they
taught, as it was objected, Treason, but practiced naught but prayers and
patience, yet even these suffered as the rest, and therefore being
over-burthened in spirit, they retired out of the kingdom into Holland that is
the united Provinces, whence they dispersed the books of their opinions all
over the kingdom, whereby many were (as it was called) poisoned and corrupted,
and now they handled freely all the controversies wherein they dissented, being
under no lash, and showed the Bishops of England in their Lordly power, the
Clergy in their lazy set services, and the people in their profane mixtures to
be no better then a mockshew of Christianity; that all their pretenses of
Christianity was but formal, their learning in the Scriptures was but natural,
Sermons rather rethorical flourishes then Soul-saving doctrine; and indeed the
lives of these professors were worse generally then heathens, the influence of
the Popish apostasy having so corrupted all the parts and Members of this body
that no sound part remained: neither Prince, Magistrate, Minister or people, or
the Laws themselves holding forth ought of the government of Christians, or
whereby they professing Christianity ought to govern themselves, and the
Magistrates neglecting their office, sin nourished, and virtue disdained,
naught (...) but pride and vanity, luxuriousness and villainy, the seats of Law
being become the places of oppression, and the Schools of learning the shops of
wickedness; hereupon they were cried out upon as Enemies to Government, and
haters of all learning, yea despisers of God and all goodness; for they were
sacrilegious, robbers of Churches; and this because they not only held unlawful
the honors of Bishops and all that temporal greatness which attended now the so
called clergy, but also all set stipends and parish maintenance, whether by way
of tithes or otherwise, many other things concerning politic and ecclesiastic
government they held forth, which the world could not recieve, at least did
not, no not their brethren in enmity to the Pope and Church of Rome; and it is
truth that though the Queen had separated from Rome as her predecessors had
done, and that not for the respects they did (which nevertheless were political
enough, for that hereby all the Subjects both of the Clergy and Laiety held
none paramount the King, which before they did in the Pope as before said, and
thereupon had arisen many rebellions) but for conscience, as taking him to be
an Enemy instead of the Vicar of Christ Jesus; yet she left all Ecclesiastic
honors and promotions, Courts, Jurisdictions, and Dependances in the same
condition as before, yea took the first fruits of Bishoprics and dues to Rome
as due to her successors by a supposed right of the Crown, together with the
right of investitures, and many absolute Popish superstitions were admitted
still, as Churching of women, Mattens and Evensong, all continued in the so
called Cathedrals, or Churches that were Bishops seats, Vigils of Saints and
many holydaies, the solemnity of Christtyde after the Popish account from the
First of November to the Second of February: Times for prohibition of Marriage
without a license or Popish dispensation; and in the politic Law the wicked
profane Jeroboam like so called justitution of saving Thieves and Manslayers
from the Gallows, to serve at Gods Altar so called, with many other things
which we shall have occasion to remember after: So prone and ready are even the
zealous of men and women to be content to set down quiet; and the dilatoriness
and chargeableness thereof was not at all eased; and though many good Laws
were, yet all the edge was taken off except against Papists and the now so
called Puritans, sectaries or factionists; for the good old Laws against excess
were much laxed; and what was never known before, two whole subsidies were in
one Parliament granted to the Queen. God blessed her infinitely and her people;
riches with trading increased greatly, and the hate of Spain had made her
potent at Sea; she was great relief to the distressed Hollander, and a
sanctuary of safety to the Poor Protestant through Popish cruelty no longer
able to live in France; and truly if reports be true, her Court was that of the
best nurture among all the Princes (so called) Christian; and though her
successor James were a wise Prince, and well seen in all the controversies of
religion for a King, yet he made little alteration, he loved not Puritans, but
he durst not hate them: he would not promote them, nor exasperate them; and in
his latter days he grew too flexible toward Papists, and offered indulgent
Articles upon the treaty of a marriage with Spain, which he much hoped and
labored for as was thought, being tired with their continual practices against
him; others believed thereby to strengthen himself against the Puritan party,
which notwithstanding all Court policies and Law devices did increase in all
Counties: and some did dare from foreign parts to tell their minds to him
plainly, while others at home did in Parliament with a little boldness stand
upon the privileges of their house; So that King James thought it not safe to
call them too often; But under pretense of remedying what was amiss, or
defective in the Law, he lifted high the Courts of Star Chamber, Wards and
Requests, but especially the Council Table; And that he might not stand in need
of money if possible, aliened many of the Crown lands, and loosing the good
Laws concerning apparel altogether, opened the door to excessive vanity in
apparel, which yet inhansed customs, so that I have heard what was thirty
thousand pounds at highest in the days of Elizabeth, was at the lowest two
hundred thousand pounds in the days of James; He was a wise Prince and of
great learning, but as unhappy in the improvement of it to the end he aimed at
as Hannibal was said to be of his victory at Canna; But his procedures were
with great judgment; for he exalted those called common Lawyers the then
supposed keepers of the English liberties to an imminent height; but those that
he found not absolutely buxome, that is without any scruple to yield compliance
to his absolute will, he by his power removed and displaced; to this end after
one contest with one, he changed the style of the Pattent; this raised an
odium, and at least he must bear the blame for, by whose insinuations or abuses
so ever it was done. Yet while no man can force a resolved man, who can force a
King? and the last and great Act being his, the whole was adjudged to him (yet
not alone.) An other Act of great judgment to his end was the constant use of
proclamations declarative not only of the Law, but his pleasure, in other lands
called Edicts, or Acts of the King alone, or his saying or will resolved into
Law; these were at first put out upon things benificial for the Subject, and
were as it were a temporary Law of exigency or provision by the King for what
the Law was either being antiquated, and now revived, or else that for which
there was no Law in the case, yet necessary to be provided for, and so was a
time of Trial or an Act of probation against the next Parliament. And these
powers were never denied Kings formerly, or but seldom, being but seldom used
and generally upon good grounds, so that no disobedience followed; but at last
his proclamations were diverse of them though carrying a color of Law slighted;
But he being of a very quiet spirit could not enter a contest, but sought to
work his end an other way, and that was to call Parliaments: And to create new
Honors, and so over-vote and consequently overpower the Parliament, debasing
Spirits by dependence; and this having a strong influence upon the Gentry,
dulled now with long peace (a natural politic of this Prince, and not the
least conducing to his end if he could or would have known when to have taken
up the sword) as he supposed they would; for they were generally so besotted of
these Court bables of honor, that upon his or a great man's letter, who their
Lordships pleased, was made a Parliament man; and the House of Lords and
Commons the Bar or Clyff against the Torrent of Tyranny, was become an inlet to
that Ocean; but there was one great jealosie still which was a bar, and this
was the Kings excessive prodigality to his own Nation, who were as greedy to
ask as he to give, so that the English grew a little, I may say a great deal,
discontented, especially the understanding sort. But more upon the judgment so
called, given concerning the naturalization of a Scot ( ipso facto) by the
Union of the Crowns in one person, as if all the rights, privileges and
immunities of the freeborn people of England were become hereditary to the
Scottish Nation by one born in Scotland being next of blood, and so inheriting
the Crown of England.

And though great and wise men had their hands in this work, and saw no evil
in it; yet they that were as wise, though not so great, and more uninterested,
and so less questionable, were otherways minded, supposing that this
extraordinary favor to that Nation and the seconding and approving of it by so
many wise men, and supposed affectionate patriots, zealous of the liberty of
the English Nation, though it seemed to them as but a wise and civil policy
and Act of munificence, not much to be supected of danger, carried hay in the
Horn, namely by this and such like plots fitted them to introduce and continue
quietly (what they all thought fit of necessity to be done) the order of
episcopacy in that Church, and with that, the whole liturgy of the Church of
England with all those rites and ceremonies thought requisite as in the Church
of England, which the King upon petition of some Ministers at his first coming
to the Crown was fully resolved in; I mean in the conference at Hampton Court
and the consequence of it. By which he was resolved not to alter what the late
Queen Elizabeth had established.

But these men believed that as this was indeed aimed at, and this aim
publicly allowed, so that there was an other intention which lay hid, and
undiscovered; and that was to force Scotland in case of opposition by English
Arms, and to provoke each other to these several works by a short kind of
policy; the Scot was engaged so as he must yield what was his chiefest glory;
And if he yielded not, the English thus disrellished, would be quick to the
quarrel; This I say not to be the Kings aim. No, I believe he might see no
more then the plain surface matter, and never be able to discover either this
intended by some, or that other politic which I now relate intended by
others, who yet drove on the same design; but as supposing, that it was a
certain way to involve the two Nations in a War, which their conditions
required; but his resolution was to keep all quiet; and truly knowing of the
Scotch temper, he urged, but enforced not; commanded, but compelled not; and
though he better approved Englands Hierarchical order, he would not utterly
reject the rigidity of the Scotch Presbytery, though he had found some cross
dealings at their hands, which in England would have been called the scandal of
the Crown, and were not altogether savouring of a Christian modesty and
humility; were it but for the Kirk to command a Fast on that day the King had
appointed a solemn Feast of State, and that after the Feast was publicly known
and divulged.

I mention but a peccadillo, and that under a supposition, because I would not
apply that to things, which may be, was, and will be only the error of
persons, during the reign of these two princes Elizabeth and James,
notwithstanding the many complaints of the excess and defects of the Laws in
their several respects; yet nothing was done truly worthy the supreme powers by
them claimed; there were some particular streams or rivulets of error amended,
or at least pretended by particular Statutes, both in giving Laws where none
were, and amending what was amiss; but out alas, the Ocean whence all these had
their rise, was still the same: Three special Statutes I must here remember of
James; one to punish with death him or her that had two wives, or two husbands,
but not made death to commit Adultery; yet as I have heard canvassed at the
same Parliament, this Statute severely executed: The second as rigidly, which
was concerning them that were or are delivered of Bastards, pretended dead
born, and having no witness present, to be taken as murderers: The last was,
the regulating of the number of Attorneys for good cause there specified, which
never was so much as in the least observed, nor a Judge ever questioned for it;
yet this as to the world, and in carnal respects, of as necessary concernment
as the other.

I shall not progress further here concerning ought, being now come to the
portall of the Theater of all Quaeries in the multitude of questions stirred up
in the Reign of King Charles, who succeeding his father with all the
expectations that might be of the vulgar, his entertainment to the Crown was
with all congratulations of a high joy, such as the high condition of his
estate required, in a settled Kingdom, having enjoyed a continued peace for
almost 140. years, whereby riches abounded exceedingly; but with them pride
increased, so that spirits grown high, they were ready to kick at the prick;
and the rather, in respect knowledge abounded, and they were not ignorant of
their own strength: And what the Romanists foresaw, was now held high time to
provide for; for whether it were the advice of King James, or the disposition
of Charles, or the natural jealousy of Kings, or the supreme overruling
decree, intending by degrees to fit things to the determinate end, I here
discuss not; but this bright day was soon ore-cast; for in the first
Parliament, which I suppose, was called in or about the third year of this
King, after some order taken for the regulation of evils against the civil
peace, and some kind of care taken for punishing the great prophaners of the
Lords Day; the King not well liking the Petition so called of Right, being
indeed a strong limit to dreaded Prerogative, yet grants it, and continues the
Parliament, until he had obtained seven Subsidies of the people distinct, and
eight from the so called Clergy, and then dissolves it: But there was another
special reason, namely, the people were grown exceeding high and fierce against
not only the special Favorite of the King, the then Duke of Buckingham, but
secretly taxing the King himself, as at least an Abettor to him, in the too
soon speeding his Father out of this world. I believe it is evident to most
that the Duke committed a crime, and notorious to all, that the King did by
dissolving this Parliament, hinder the trial of him; but this does not evidence
his guilt, though it gives matter of surmize; but this may be handled fitlier
otherwhere, if need requires. The breach of this Parliament gave a great
disgust to the people; the rather, because it plainly appeared, the King
wholly, and almost only sought himself; for although he had acknowledged by
Act, the necessity of continuing the Parliament, to settle fit remedies for
many notorious grievances, yet before ought expedited but his own business, (as
it was justly called) of the Subsidies, He, of his so called Royal will,
annihilates all by nullifying the Parliament, as he was said to do; and indeed,
it amounted not to much less; for he did at least, by his instruments which he
owned, almost with the same breath he assented to the so called Petition of
Right, or due Rights of the Subject, break it, and proceeded so far to
aggrandize the power of the Prince, that he made the Subject a slave, having a
speaker fit for his ends, a man of as mercinary a spirit as could be; for upon
some incivility, as it was called, of some members zealous for Reformation, who
loath to have the Parliament so fruitlesly dissolved, held the Speaker in his
Chair, to Vote a Remonstrance to the King, he imprisons them, seizes their
Trunks, searches their, not only chambers, but pockets, most of which dyed in
restraint, being accounted the Martyrs of the peoples Liberties, whom the King
thought the greatest means of subverting of them, as intending still to drive
on the contest betwixt the King and his people, which was begun in William so
called the Conqueror; and surely he could not but espy, that notwithstanding
all endeavors to the contrary, the people had still gained upon the Crown; and
surely what he expressed in full Parliament, and which is printed among the
Statutes at large, more then cleared his jealousies of encroachments upon him,
which is a sufficient cause to a Prince to stretch his power; and surely was,
as before is said in part, with those other reasons annexed, not only the cause
of that Sessions prorogation, the then Parliaments dissolution, or rather by
not keeping his so called Kingly word, annihilation; but the not calling of
Parliaments till necessity enforced, as if he had seen, or foreseen the fate
which has since ensued. I cannot believe him ignorant of all those, not only
so called prophesies, but of those conjecturall observations of those grand
Mathematicians, so called, which how his wisdom might prevail over, I know not;
but assuredly, Princes of all are most easy and subject to be entrapped, at
least the inquisitive part of them; neither shall I here treat of the power of
the Stars, if at all, although I must profess, little have happened in the
notorious part of his Reign, which such Artists did not more or less foretell:
But because out of his Reign, is, as it were, raised the fountain of all
controversies, both divine and humane, let us shortly run over the state of the
so called Church and Commonwealth, and begin with the Church, which though not
so furnished with large Territories, nor multitudes of Religious, so called,
Professors, as before those nests of Monasteries, Nunneries, Fryeries,
Fraternities, Colleges, etc. being dissolved and confiscated; yet to the
remaining Archbishops, Bishops, Provosts, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Vicars,
Vicars Charols, Chaunteries, Cathedrals, sub-Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. (pardon
that short enumeration of many glorious beasts of Babels forest) there was a
sufficient maintenance, to perform the duties required in a Bishop by Paul,
without any by-encroachment; but these men were now grown civil Lords, and
having contracted Marriage with the world, they lay with it, and neglected
their duty to their Lord and husband, the Lord Christ Jesus.

They had large Palaces of old Babel, the same seats in their several Provinces
called Diocese, the same structures or great Churches, the same Attendants,
(for their Courts Juridical were not taken away) these all required
maintenance, and that by reason of worldly pomp in great measure; but they had
enough for this, had not the itch of the flesh brought them as other men to
avoid fornication, to betake them to their own wives; and the same carnal
prudence which before prohibited Marriage, lest the care of the world, and love
of children, etc. should cause imbeselling the Churches, so called, Revenue;
the same now wrought unjust seekings of gain by any means, to the prejudice of
the Church. Before the storm in Henry the Eights time, many long Leases were
made, before Queen Elizabeth many more; so that to assure maintenance she was
enforced (the Father of the Church for fleshly children sakes, robbing and
wasting their spiritual Mother) to that prudential Law, that they, etc. could
make no new Leases, or renew any old, but for three lives, or 21. years,
reserving the old rent; but as children increased and worldly temptations,
these Church men could so far dispense, as either to coin old, or else new
Leases, with this blessing from the rule in Law, Valet quantum valere potest,
and these were to their children, servants, friends, or the best friend a good
fine; they had also always grants of Leases to such, and new concurrent
Leases: Thus were they made poor, who were rich, by stealing each from other;
and their first fruits which was the first years revenue, was now paid to their
Lord the King, as before to the Pope; their dependence by the Statute of
Supremacy, suffering that alteration; this made them look to all profits
narrowly; And what could be caught, was; Ordination bought at the worst hand,
Marriage at a set rate, and the usual public Declarations, so called, bidding
the bands of Matrimony, brought to a scorn; all that could purchase it had a
License; and the Wills and Testaments of men being canvased in every
Arch-Deaconry, Diocese, and Province, brought a settled gain. Batchelors of the
Civil Law capable of two Benefices, or Spiritual promotions, and so the
Chaplains of the King, Noblemen, etc.

And this Apostate order was universal: Again, the Bishops now made
injunctions, some one, some another at their own will; and the breach of all, or
any of these, was cognizable in any their Courts, from the Chancellors to the
High Commission (so called, indeed a pretty Spanish Inquisition) yea so far as
to punish the not-wearing of a Surplice at the reading the Liturgy, or so
called Common Prayers, or set and public appointed prayers in the Church, with
imprisonment during pleasure, fine of 1000. l. when a Blasphemer, for speaking
these dreadful words to the ears of any but an Atheist (he being admonished
for swearing, said) I will swear God out of Heaven, and sit there as God my
self, was fined but 100. l. and mitigation of imprisonment. I do attest this my
self, being present at the sentence of this Blasphemer, and at the Sentence of
Doctor Bastwick, for writing against Episcopacy; and Burdet of Yarmouth (for
non conformity) the same time, who had in that word two offenses, one not
wearing the Surplice, the other the Churching (so called, that is, declaring) a
woman purified according to the Levitical Law, after childbearing, without a
Veil or Rail which was the injunction of the Bishop. And now the Queen being
Catholic, that is, Roman, the Liberty of the Mass grew from the Queens
private household, to a most frequent household duty, and at least was public,
yet not with any toleration, that is, if toleration be taken for a legal Act
authorizing; but if for an impunity, notwithstanding many and often complaints,
there was a grand toleration; and the Judges had by special order from his
Majesty, command against them, under the name of Recusants; but with this hint,
that there was a more dangerous Recusant, called the Puritan or Brownist; for
then there was no distinction; so that the Bishops armed with the power of the
Civil Magistrate, under the late schismatic notion, so termed at Rome, of
his having both the Keys, that is, being the supreme according to the vulgar
acceptaion, both in Civil and Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, according to the
strict notion, having the supreme intendency, not only over, but in the Church,
which the Puritan urged with so much wariness, absolutely holding the Lord
Christ the supreme, and yet craving the Majesterial power, to aid and assist
with the name of supremacy, so far as ran even with his opinion; that it was
doubted he was as ill a willer to the absolute Jurisdiction of the Prince in
the Church, as the Papist was; so that he was exploded the Court, and no
allowance given to his Doctrine there; and indeed with all possible vexations
of the Laws, by imprisoning, fining, attending, delaying, stigmatizing, etc.
all that were so called were handled by the Bishops, and the so called Clergy,
with their Officers; no marvel; for these men, generally Lay men, preached in
their writings more and more edifying Doctrine, then the Clergy in their
Pulpits; and these men's lives and labors were as exemplary for godliness, as
the other for vanity, pride, laziness, and debauchedness; yet these (provided
they were conformable, that is, obedient to the Fathers of the Church, the
Bishops, be it right or wrong) were freely almost only allowed; for money now
could do all things, and necessity more; there was on the one side Symony upon
Symony, yea much legal Symony, for the great rich Livings; and whether the
Priest could preach or not, his Curate could, and where the Impropriator had a
large revenue, the poor Curate not above 10. l. per annum, and 20. l. a large
stipend, he must be of weak parts, that would so rest contented, and seek no
other preferment; this brought in together with so many Parishes as bad as
impropriate, being in the gift of the Cathedral Churches, where Bishops or Dean
and Chapters had the gifts, so many ignorant, lazy, debauched fellows into the
Ministry, that a Christian would stand amazed: And when some pious men sought a
way to purchase out these impropriations, and to settle an able religious
preaching Ministry, they were allowed to expend their moneys, which I believe
they never saw penny of again, but were so frowned upon and discountenanced,
that the beginners being wearied, the work even dyed in the first Cradle; for
these things made the Bishops plot for life, and as plain as words could
manifest the intentions of men, it was resolved, No Reformer, as they now begin
to call them, should stay in England; and indeed their troubles grew so fast
upon them, that they were forced for fear of being taken at a good and
Christian duty and punished by the Law of Liveries now called Conventicles, to
pack away, some to Holland, some to America, (or new England so called,) being
a gallant plantation, some to other places. The Bishops Chaplains become sole
masters of the press, and their licenses were as bad as an Index expurgatorius;
Popish books are now severely forbidden, especially those quant Tracts of
Caussinus, yet almost in every man's hand, as if they had been forbidden only to
quicken sale, an old yet notable Trick; The Archbishops book being a Tract
written against Fisher the Jesuit, is printed; but at the same time all the
great wits blow up the Quodliberts of Popery, the chief heads being publicly
and professedly maintained at both the so called Universities; And a Jesuit
(so called) Franciscus de sancta Clara, brings both the Papist and the
Protestant to so near an Union, that a good judgment might be decieved (it is
probable, for many were) to know the one from the other. Many so called
Arminians now appear; these are highly favored everywhere; and now the
Hierachy so lifts up it self, that not the Gentry only, but even the Nobility
themselves were discountenanced, if opposing; All preferments are now to these,
yet few of them knew well how to bear them, but a little time could give them a
relish, and the smack would never out of their fancies. The opinions of the
Romanists now on all sides, not only for hallowing places, or sacring them, but
even that one place of or among these so called sacred, was more holy then
other, from the duty there performed, or otherways: adorning Churches, the
several Manners, Places, Times of bowing, gesture, and order of pronunciation,
at or in reading, all not only discoursed of, but applauded, and generally
practiced; adoration at the entery of the Church, and also at departure, and
that to the East, all for uniformity, the great and special pretense of the so
called Church, that is the Bishops, the Fathers of the Church, according to
their own style: Bowing or Genuflexion or Adorations to at or of the name of
Jesus, Extreme unction, Confirmation, Penance, all practiced; yea a Nuntio of
the Pope, but not so owned, yet well known, and which troubled the people most
of all, a rail of wood or other partition betwixt the so called Priest and
people at the receiving the Sacrament so called of the Altar, and this of
necessity: and the words of administration purely Popish (as yet in the
directory.) But all persons without question in the parish admitted to the
Sacrament as by Law was established; these things settled, they haste for power
to the further setlement of the Church in power and purity; and by the Kings
power they are convened, and called the sacred Synod, where they Act with large
commission, and fearing counter-buffs of Providence by them called Fortune,
they denied the Pope, but admit Popery in its full height; and to evidence the
Antichristianisme, they establish their Hierarchy with an oath, with that
famous clause of etc. laboring as the brood of old Rome, to bring all Temporal
jurisdiction under ecclesiastic censure; and this was the condition of the
Church or Churchmen, or Clergy men so called.

I shall now as shortly give you a veiw of the civil State, as the necessity
of perspicuity will well permit. You have heard upon what a politic Basis
William so called the Conqueror, founded his Empire, which yet from evident
causes declining even in the space of his own and Sons Reign, did evidently
show the frailty of all humane wisdom, and therefore might well in the space
of six hundred years be brought to nothing; and truly once for all to say it, I
am in my conscience persuaded that King Charles did see the want of Law in this
land to govern the Nation rightly, and upon that foundation sought to mould the
kingdom to the similitude of other Nations; for it is a sure and certain
principle that States grow old and Laws etc. And if not reduced by reformation,
there is a necessity of a new formation. Now the chief thing which a Prince
looks at, is the power of War or the Sword; and this so far as the power
rested in the King, which was his Tenure, was clean lost, and gone; for the
many transmutations of possessions, had made many litigious questions, partly
through the corruption of officers, not duly awarding process against
alienators without license, partly other defects of certain boundaries, and
partly the evil of time, which had through diverse discents parcelled great
estates into many persons; So that there were many Tenants, but few Knights;
and what was at first an honor, to hold of the King or by Knights service,
because the Tenants Son and Heir should yet come to the education of a Lord
paramount or higher then the Father, and so should be bettered both for Arts
and Arms; the Kings of late years had made them absolutely but the fees of
their Servants, and the Heirs of gallant men were as bad as slaves to the will
of the Kings Grantee: whereby they were yoaked unequally in marriage, or their
estates were generally squeised of sometime a third, sometimes a fourth, or
fifth part in the Court of Wards; so that they that should have been the
Princes guard as it were, being thus prejudiced in their minority, and drinking
in hastily the complaints of their friends, bewailing their Wardships as an
insufferable vassalage, could not heartily seek to maintain that power whose
subsistence was their ruin to eternity in all their progeny; and through the
long tract of time it was grown to this, that almost any great or rich men's Son
must be a Ward; all Titles of Lands being so exceedingly intricated, that it
was almost impossible to clear it; and this rigor was never higher then in the
days of this King; so that it is evident, for a settled Militia for his own
defense he had none, but had left himself naked to the strokes of any timely
opposition.

Next, as he had robbed himself thus of power, so had the example of all the
Kings in part, and the power from jealousy in other part, divested the Lords
of all power military, by dependencies of Knights service.

The Oaths of homage and fealty the Kings had respited them to enhanse a
revenue, and the Lords were not willing to urge that which had been so fatal
to many their predecessors, through their dependencies; and being now grown
generally loose, lazy or worse, from the long peace we had enjoyed, they had no
contests but at Tennis, Drinking, Dicing, or worse sports, and sometimes a Law
suite; These yet sunk many of their estates, and they had no ways of raising
them but by the Kings sole favor; for there were no Lords now that had
absolute power in any County; this made them wholly quiet; and the rather
because to be of an active warlike spirit, gave cause of jealousy to a Prince;
especially of any who were not merely his creatures (namely, of ancient popular
Nobility, that is their Ancestors of great repute with the people,) Many
therefore retired themselves, lived privately and quietly, in respect of the
Court, but few of them with great love in the Countries where they were
resiant, carrying too severe a hand toward their Tenants, by racking of
Farme-rents, and otherways, as Lords of Manors enhansing fines, as all the
Gentry also at their own wills enclosing of Commons for private profit; and by
the evil example both of themselves, Servants and Retainers, bringing a
general Lewdness, Looseness, and debauchery in religion and civil manners into
all the quarters of the Nation.

For the Country still (at least as far as it may or can) imitates the Court;
and so downward; by this means a general almost universal pravity and
corruption stole upon, and got possession of the English Nation; not that I
think (to speak once for all) that England was worse in any respect eirher for
civil or Ecclesiastic government, then any other Christian kingdom; no, but
that it had departed from that purity of Government which it self held forth,
and had in some measure exercised, yet was then taxed to hold forth little of a
true Christian Government at all; for first, though the Sabbath was held moral,
yet it was profaned, and that by public authority, as by the book of sports,
which also gave such a loose to the power of the master of the family, that he
could not govern by an exact rule, that power being before too much broken, and
this opened a gap to all inordinate walking toward magistracy in other both
superior and inferior places.

But assuredly the foundation of this mischief was principally in the abused
practice of the Courts of Justice of this kingdom; which holding also a Jewish
dependency as before was hinted, there was no stint of strife; for the Law
admitted appeals, and what was so called the Subjects due, ought not be denied
them; so that if you had either a knavish or a powerful adversary to deal
withal (which power is manifold, as either a great rich man, or greatly
friended by the officers, or else powerful in a joint stock, as a corporation,
whose united purses have ruled over all justice and righteousness whatsoever in
many places) you could not get right but with repentance, that is loosing by
the bargain; the particulars I shall demonstrate after; this ruined many,
discouraged more, discontented all, (except the gainers, which were and are
such a rabble and bed-roul of names in both Laws, as would amaze a wise man,
much more a Christian;) for whereas a Christian says, let all things among you
be done in love, and let the brethren judge your differences; that is without
litigious pleadings after the manner of the world, but with that quietness,
gentleness, meekness, and botherlike affection, as the Gospel of Christ holds
forth; and the prudent man says, let it be before wise men, duly appointed, in
a time convenient, and with certainty; and what one Judge cannot determine,
either for difficulty, or doubting, let aid be joined and right done, and that
whither according to the exact letter, or the rule of conscience.

The Laws of England held forth all things in practice; I say in practice (for
the general rules or foundations of Englands Laws are good, wholesome and
sanative) absolutely contrary; for it held forth in the letter you should have
right for every wrong; this general rule was good, but descend to the
particular;

The Quaere now is what remedy for the wrong; an Action you must prosecute; But
first it is considerable by whom this Action shall be brought; for long suites
and expensive have bin had: and then the party ought either to have one or more
joined with them; or where the Action was joint, it ought to have bin sole,
sometimes in the respect of the nature of the Action, sometimes in respect of
the way of assessing or recovery of damages; next it is considerable in what
Court; for ofttimes 100. li. has been spent in the Court, and then the Court
had no cognizance of the business, yet the ablest Lawyers in England advised
within the case or so accounted as most favored etc.

But grant you hit the Court; then the Quaere is what Action; for one hundred
Actions have been prosecuted in the right Court, and before right and due
Judges, and by the right person, and then the Action mistaken, it was deceit,
and should have been a Trespass; or a Tespass where it should have bin deceit;
so almost in all matters of higher or lower nature; next agreeing what Action,
where shall you begin your suite? out of what Court have your process? and for
your process, whither from above, that is the Kings bench which now holds
cognizance of all pleas, or the Common pleas the proper Court of all Subjects
differences betwixt themselves; at least in the Common Pleas by original, in
the Common bench by Latitat, or else in the Chequer by a Surmise that you are a
Debtor to the King, or below in the County or City, if the sum be not above
their Trial; and for the Chancery and such other Courts a Subpaena; and then
the several Writs must be issued in due course, or all is naught. Next for the
execution of the Writ, there is for the Chancery etc. either the party
plaintiff or some other shows the writ to the Defendant, or leaves a part, or
the body of it so called as the case requires, at his house, and if he appears
not, process issues against his person; but upon the other, he must be arrested
by a Sergeant (of the Mace so called, the officers of a City) or a bayliffe,
whether common, special, or of a liberty, there is not much difference, they
are much alike. Now these men's livelihood is under the Sheriff to execute
writs of all sorts; to judgments and Executions they have a fee proper from
the party; but that was set so long since, that it is not a sufficient
maintenance now; and rather then take pains to raise that, well foreseeing the
trouble it would bring, to alter all Fees in the Nation, they let them gripe
the poor, and abuse the rich, and wrong all; Yea assuredly they many of them
take hire of the Debtor or Trespasser not to see him, and of the Plaintiff or
Creditor to see him; as the searchers or under-writers for customs formerly,
or now for excise may do, either for prohibited or custom stolen goods; So that
ofttime the charge of arresting, is as much as the Debt, and it is generally
known that these men are the worst sort of men; the old Law was, none to be
arrested but to find sureties that his cause was just, and that he would
prosecute with effect; but that just Law being too hard to many poor men, to
surmise the best, was not remedied, but by practice (that is the unwarantable
proceedings of Judges) Totally abolished; and now a bill of Middlesex may abuse
any man unknown, and the law is made a stale to the both foolery and knavery of
Sycophants or worse; there is much pleaded for this arresting by Bailiffs; as
first he is a known and sworn officer; I say only if he be so, let his Summons
without a Writ or attaching the person be enough; and if twice summoned, let
him be proceeded against as to his goods, who will not appear, provided he be
at or in Town; but this is beyond my task intended here.

There is another way of making the offender appear, which is by Utlagary, used
very unjustly, and so confessed but as good as the rest. The next thing is
where I must lay my action; that is, in what County. And many times the action
is laid in London for a matter of so small moment, that a journey to London of
himself, and witnesses, eats out all the gain justice gives, especially when
small matters are removed outof the County; justly, as I will say in this case,
they being indeed above the now proper rate of County or City Trialls; or else
unjustly, as when a man is arrested in a liberty for five pound, or forty
shillings only, which is there triable; he gets himself arrested also for a
greater sum, and so removes both to London: now for these proceedings in abuse
of the common subject of the Nation in Law-proceedings, believe not I can, or
hope to open all the sleights, tricks, quillets, fetches, deceits, knaveries
and abuses, with the irrelegious, abominable, profane juggles thereof, it
being in the whole practice; I say practice of it, nothing else but vanity and
wickedness; I am loath to say robbery, extortion, and such like epithites, which
some men's zeal bestow upon it, cauterised under the scourge and lash of a long,
pilling, polling suit, hurried from Town to City, from City to Country, from
Court to Court, Hearing upon Hearing, Order upon Order, Judgments and Verdicts
both so called, and yet in a labyrinth, not only Term after Term, but year
after year, and still almost as far off as ever, if not further: no, I aim but
to give a clear light that our Laws practiced, are not the Laws of the Nation,
that is, a set rule of Justice, but usurped upon us by evil men they are, as
practiced neither according to natural reason, the foundation of the Laws of
Nations, nor Religion the Law of the Almighty Wisdom; pardon my zealous
digression. I now return to what I had omitted; which is, that by Law, that is
the custom allowed, A Sheriff, or Undersheriff shall make Returns of Course
only for the benefit of Officers; as for example, that the party was not found
within his Baylewick; or that he has no goods, etc. when both are contrary;
yet he is sworn to excute all Writs truly; but this is no perjury by, or within
the judgments of any the English Judges, because not being within the niceties
of their wise sayings or resolutions, no more then thousands of other
perjuries, which though they may excuse themselves for, because the Laws of the
Land, so called, look not at them, as the Judges of such perjuries; yet that
they get no other Law established, seeing the great want for redress of such
matters they find before them, will be their or the Lands afflictions at last,
but to go on in a course of Trial. These difficulties over, I must now put in
my Declaration, that is, the narration of my complaint into the Court in
writing, and that not in English, but Latin, (though I understand never a
word) and that in the form the Law requires, (though I can tell no more then
the mere matter of my wrong) And in the same manner must my adversary, so
called also, though little wiser then my self: But to help out this, we have
Attorneyes, so called, allowed Deputies to answer for us, skilled in the way of
practice (and these men they do even do what they list) for the Client, so
called, is seldom knowing of practice; and he has so much first for his Fee;
then drawing the Declaration or Plea, which is, either general or special, and
though done with much difficulty and charge, is often mistaken the one for the
other; again double pleas are exploded; and though great advice taken which
matter to plead, the best is left, and so left remediless at Law, unless a new
bout in another Court help him, or else the Chancery; either of which remedies
is generally worse then the disease.

Now the reason of Attorneys was this; as riches multiplied, pride and outward
pomp increased, long suits came into fashion, and to maintain Officers, it was
labored for to avoid further suit, by these means to bring all Trials to the
upper Bench, or common Pleas, etc. And pleadings ordered wholly in form, and in
Latin, which, what for ease, and what for (the so pretended being so made)
necessity, namely keeping of Records as presidents they were admitted, and to
get an Attorney was difficult in such chargeable prosecutions, which to remedy,
they were allowed privil^dges, as Officers in some Courts; yet being the
Clients Deputies, they were the Pl^ders or Sergeants, (I say no more) servants,
and carried their baggs, as diverse of them did throw in their teeth upon
discontent, though they have now almost shaked the yoke off their shoulders.

Give me now leave a little to speak of Attorneys and their practice, which
almost overruled the whole Law: First, the Judges, though the Licenser or
allower of Attorneys, yet receiving great part of his extraordinary revenue
from him, as upon Fines, etc. Next the Sergeants upon all special pleas; and
the Sergeants and C^ellor upon all legal proceedings, the ^lient being
generally, if not wholly led by the Attorney, they were the principal men; and
Lawyers grown numerous, many would covenant to have half Fees with the Council.
I profess, and averr, that a late Judge did, being a Sergeant, declare it to
me, as an audacious part of I. B. whom I then found going from him, with these
words Paultry saucy Knave cast after him by the Sergeant.

But assuredly they were grown very knowing in the practical part of the Law;
and some of them have (among multitudes of more) had these abusive practices
laid to their charge against the Laws, as taking of Capias's from the
Common Pleas, yet never filing an Original; This redounding merely to his
profit, abusing the Officers of the Court to enrich himself, and not advantage
his Client; for the Cursitor, so called, loses one shilling, the Philizer one
shilling two pence, etc. So that the Writ which is six shillings two pence,
comes only to him, except for the Seal seven pence; and if this be discovered
before Judgment, though after Verdict, I believe it would overthrow the whole
proceeding.

So in suing forth the Capias utlag. For whereas upon true practice, a Capias
being awarded to the Sheriff, who (by wicked custom not looking after him)
returns a Non est inventus, that is, upon a Writ to take his body, the Sheriff,
though he might take him, returns him not found; whereupon another Capias or
Writ to take his body, wherein of Custom, as aforesaid, the Sheriff again
makes such a (perjured in Christian acceptance) return again; then goes forth
another Writ, mentioning what ado they have made to get him; and often times he
is out of the County indeed, it being done of purpose in another County, that
he might not know it; and then for his contumacy, he is exactioned, proclaimed,
and outlawed, and this often in two Terms, which ought to be done in five by the
Law; but little justice in any part of it, though spetious in pretense; yet if
the Capias were delivered to the Sheriff, there were some rule observed; but
the knowing Atturneys can do it themselves, using the Sheriffs name, who never
sees the Writ, and did he, not one of a hundred can tell what to do, but by his
Undersheriff, a late constituted Officer upon the high made difficulties of
Law, who being one of the same Tribe, calls discovering of error defiling the
neast, and so lets all pass as Custom leads: Thus is a man put out by the Law
of the privilege of a Subject, and this only to maintain Officers; for let all
the course be examined, and the issue will be naught else. I have known this
sued against a man, for that the Law gave no action, the party yet never
demanded the thing; and of a man not worth twenty shillings in the whole world,
and the matter it self not worth five shillings, the Charges came to nigh four
pound; and if he has notice, no way but to sue a Supersedeas, which is, I take
it, forty shillings to the Judge; otherwise to the Jail without mercy; of
which Gaoles a word after. Next, this is an ordinary course, at least so
reported, in petty trespasses they declare of course, merely to get Fees upon
agreement, though they assign no place; others having liberty to proceed as
they see good, and make an end, or do any thing, which is generally the course
of quiet poor people; there is favor promised to either party; he draws a
judgment from his adversary the defendant, yet sues on still, and brings it
down to Trial Per Nisi prius; then stops proceedings, with saying he will
confess a Judgment, and enters it the Term after; others enter up Judgment
without Warrant; (I have known worse abuses yet, but no punishments) often for
want of entering a Rule they suffer Judgment Per nihil dicit, whereby great and
extraordinary Charge accrues to the Client, and but small gain to themselves;
but hereby they pleasure the Officers; often times they plead or confess a Non
sum informatus, and this without Warrant, and then comes out a Judgment
unexpected; and this dealing is justly suspected of false dealing.

It was ordinary to enter false Orders, false Affidavits, imbezle depositions,
pack Juries, draw Witnesses, if not make them; I know the labor and pains of a
faithful and honest Attorney is great, and very painful and laborious, in
running from Office to Office, from Clerk to Clerk, Officer to Officer, Council
to Council, Judge to Judge, Court to Court; neither do I here question their
proceedings, who make either Law or constant practice their rule; But these
rude, ignorant, young heads, who think and make it their way to gain practice,
to overreach, etc. (though I in my opinion am as Mountague said of learned
Seldom, an Heretic in the faculty as to the whole managery of the Law) who
although the Law does sufficiently provide against, which were by the
carelessness or faithlesness of the Judges in their trusts, through dependence
as aforesaid, grown to an infinite number beyond what they were; I believe in
the time when by Statute of 33. Hen. the 6. they were limited in Suffolk,
Norfolk and Norwich, where they abounded; but they are now bound apprentice to
the Trade, as well as to tapping, whether of wine or beer; why not as well to
Brothelling? and it is thought unjust to put any by his practice, though they
ruin the Nation by it, at least bring a deluge of poverty upon the people.

Yet these put the Lawyers also upon hard shifts; for now the Office of an
Attorney is to practice all the parts of a Lawyer; he draws all pleas, or
generally all but some special ones upon some difficult point; and in that
some one old beaten book-man in a County is famous; but for making of Wills,
and drawing all sorts of conveyances or Covenants, with strange niceties of
form, and cautelous qualifications, limitations, provisoes, and such like, none
like them; they not so much looking at their first trading into reason, and
solid causes, or grounds of things, as into the superficial niceties, as the
readiest way to purchase practice with cunning knaves, and most affecting wit
and youth, and so are drawn into a way of evil before they be aware, and after
it is hard to reclaim them; and for keeping of those pestilences off of
England, Lords Courts, they take all the work, which was heretofore the way of
educating and bringing into practice the young Lawyer.

And in these last times there sprung up first under the wings of Noblemen, and
men of great estate, for the help of the Attorney in Judicial Courts, but as
Attorney in the Prerogative ones, a creature called a Solicitor; these men rob
both Lawyer and Attorney, and all the Subjects: They are often declamed against
by the Lawyers, but no course taken to restrain them, many of them practizing
as Attorneys, under the wing or name of an Attorney; what fee he has thus to
abuse the Laws and his own fellow practitioners, I know not, but many faults
and errors are hereby committed; and where to fix it, is not easily discerned;
and great men love not to take great pains in such discoveries, without
exceeding great profit; few I fear do justice for the love of justice; so that
having shifted from Solicitor present, to Attorney absent, it is forgotten; if
remembered, the fault is laid upon the Clerk; the Clerk he turns you back again
to them instructed him, which happily is neither Solicitor, nor Attorney, but
a stranger unknown, or a servant gone: But it is objected, you have your remedy
at Law against an Attorney in any cause against Law: So say I; but he has his
privilege that spares charges, he has council for nothing, and cunning (so
called knavery) to boot: And lastly, the Judge must as much as may be favor a
servant of the Court, that is, he shall have all lawful favor, and the other
all lawful disfavour; and put any Lawyer to sue an Attorney upon these terms,
and the Attorney will undo him.

To pass over the nicety of going to issue, pleading specially when the
general issue would serve the turn, or such like; nor to show how many several
sorts of delays the several Courts admit, I shall shortly come to the trial,
which is either in the ordinary set places, as the Courts at Westminster, or
per nisi prius, where there is such hudling, shuffling, quircks of law, unequal
hearing, and both for honor, as the Kings or Queens Council order as Benchers,
etc. except favor step in, and then the son of a Judge or Kinsman, etc. must
make all the Council attend till he speaks (nothing to the purpose too too
often) so that I have heard wise and learned men profess, they were ashamed to
see great men and Favorites manage the business out of all order and rule of
law, while they knowing in practice (as they term it) that is, versed in the
Ministry of the cause, could not be heard a word, as if they were retained
only to hold the paper and cry, My Lord; it is truth, there is another reason in
it, which is, they have such multitude of Council, that all cannot speak, and
the great men must speak best reason; for have not the Prince the choice?

Some indeed, either would be heard through boldness, or must be heard through
necessity, as undertaking Cases which others either durst not, or could not; as
Holborn with that noble Judge the Lord Chief Justice St. John, in the Case of
Ship Money; and this was a step to advancement, if they showed ability, and
could turn with the tide, or were thought fit of for some other by-respect, as
to have their mouths stopped against Prerogative, and opened as far as the Law
would admit for the Kings advantage: Thus were learned Calthorp engaged, and
the foresaid now Lord St. John, though as I have (to his honor be it spoken)
heard it credibly affirmed, he denied to be the Kings Servant upon the Lords
day at Council Table (pardon this necessary digression, both here and in many
other places purposely done to avoid treating of these things by themselves) so
that unless the Judge were very wise and resolute, having these so many traps,
he might ore-slip something, how just soever his intentions were; and the
Lawyer might by the like means be drawn to some error in point of Legal
advice, as well as the Attorney in practice; for it is evident, or will be
hereafter manifested, that to gain a certainty of Law, we ran into all
incertainty that might be. To speak of the errors of the Judges servants and
their Marshals, abusing both Law, Judge, and Country for expedition money, and
taking what fees they list, and new Fees, though it be material; yet carrying
with it the assured error of his master, who ought to know it better then the
Country can tell; I willingly pass it over; but must insert, that seldom a
Jury is legally pannelled; or if legally, having outward legal qualifications,
yet not knowing men able to discern into the now used course of evidence; for
it is pity to see, if not pre-ingaged, which is too too often; they generally
either follow the foreman, or hearken to such a Counselor, or else are tied
to what the Judge seems to incline to, when he repeats the evidence, which to
avoid such leadings, might be spared; but in the confusion of the Councels
thwartings, if not false speakings, and mis-recitals, in their so claimed due
of summing up the evidence, cannot be well forborne, without a greater mischief
then the other possible, yet seldom seen palpable inconvenience. I might
evidence the same course of unrighteousness in all subsequent proceedings till
execution; but I haste.

These with hundreds of more common abuses in the Law, which did indeed render
both Law and Lawyers odious; for this was grown usual, to get by any means, or
having gotten, though justly, to keep by any means, and hold play with the
others estate; for they could upon a Bond, for example, drive off with good
words a quiet man and fore-handed, or a poor man, or Orphan, in regard of their
relyance upon the penalty, which in regard of the possible evils, was now grown
double, as 200. l. for 100. l. five or six years, or more, then plead non est
factum; that is, it was not their deed, the Witnesses happily dead, and no
other or difficult circumstance appearing, Verdict is either lost, or hardly
gained, if it be a small sum, and the Verdict against the Plaintiff, he is not
able to get any advantage, but by renewing suit in Chancery to put him to his
oath, where the charges is so great he is undone: If the Verdict go on his
side, then there is motion for stay of judgment to delay; if that overruled,
then a Writ of Error; if that overruled, then the Cause is not sent by the
Judges or Justices to the Chancery, upon a sight of the equity of the cause, as
the ancient Law in Edward the 3. was, or seems to be but of course to delay,
except the Plaintiff dye in the time, and then all is lost without hope of
recovery; and the Chancery by right is held not to have any cognizance of any
case under 20. l. as if no conscience or equity were allowable in lesser
matters, where the falsity of formal customary surmizes be such, that the
simplicity, that is, sincerity or plain righteous dealing of the first Heathen
Lawgivers severely punished, when they first instituted complaints to be in
writing, punishing him that complained of what he could not prove.

O the excessive unwarrantable proceedings in false suggestions and surmizes!
yet by these with such like practice in proceeding as in the beginning the
cause may grow to 7, 8, 10, 12, 20. years continuance, although the late Lord
Littleton (who dyed in the strife betwixt loyalty so called to his King, and to
the Commonwealth, and was vanquished by personal respects) did openly profess,
at his call to that high and honorable employment, in his speech in the Court
at his taking the place, That he had heard causes had depended there 12. years,
but knew no cause they should depend 13. months, and resolved then to speed an
end of all lasting causes, and began with Peaeocks; But when the Bar began to
grow thin, I say not he changed his mind, but his course; pretense of other
business drew him like others before him, to hasty hearings, half hearings,
references, and subitane Orders, which with the laziness of Judges and Masters
of the Chancery, but especially the wickedness of Clerks and Registers is the
squeeze of the Subjects purse; for all men know who have had any experience in
the world, that the Register makes the Order, rather then the Judge: A chief
means of continuing which evil, is (next after the want of due care of the
Judges, to read the Order fair written before he rise) want of a set stipend,
while he by more work gets more gain.

The last, is, want of sharp and speedy punishment of an offender; this makes
Orders past the ordinary length, and infinitely beyond the rule of Justice in
Tale, above 40 Orders in a case (Mr. Noy) or I am deceived, moved before the
Lord Keeper Coventry, when he durst say, (that was Kings Attorney) my Lord I
move upon the 49 Order (to my best remembrance) so that the byword was upon a
suit in Chancery, you have gotten into a suit of Buff: These things never
pierced the conscience of these men, they followed the example of their
predecessors, and grew by degrees worse and worse; and thus it was also upon
all other proceedings at Law in all Courts, whether upon criminal causes, or
other offenses against the public or civil Laws so called, or between person
and person; another evil was both in law and equity, the privilege first of
places, then of persons.

That of places partly arising from Order, so called Divine, that is, from the
Relative and similitudinary holiness of the Temple; And therefore as the
Churches were in the time of Popery, and now new pleaded for Popery, as the
Cities of refuge of old; and the so called Clergy still as aforesaid,
Idolatrously continued with us, so other places were now privileged, and made
the Sanctuaries for offenders, which were the shelter for all insolences,
tumults, disorders, and wickedness, which places were first of separate or
special jurisdiction, as Cathedrals, Minsters, and such other liberties arising
from pretended Ecclesiastic Right and Title under the Hierarchy Papal.

The other was of the Kings Court, Lords Houses, Inns of Court and Chancery,
the Seminaries as they ought to be of good Government and singular examples of
order; the persons privileged were the King, whose person the Laws as lately
expounded had generally freed from all censure, and purged all taints by the
Crown, and punishing his absolute Ministers was labored much against; now the
reason of this was to uphold what was gained, and to gain what might be for the
King; therefore the Lords as the King must have their privilege; and as the
King must not be sued but by Petition, a Royal cheat; so the Lords must not be
arrested but by prayer, a Noble flattery; but a most grand abuse arose from
this; for much cost did many bestow to get the King, Queen, and Lords into
their debt, who never gained more then undoing (the recompense of foolery) by
their knaveries, and multitudes of debtors and trespassors bearded Law and
Justice both.

Now for Judges, Counselors, Attorneys, Lawyers of all sorts, or pretenders
thereto, the other persons privileged, they stuck together like brethren, so
that hard it was to pinch them, especially two, the Judge for his power, and
the Attorney for his privileges; but of this before sufficient for the present
intention. Thus were all matters in distaste, as to the great and principal
ruling part of the Commonwealth; and head, and heart thus sick, the body sure
was in a distemper: for all the Courts indeed, from the County Court to the
Court of Pypowder, which I think is (one at least of) the lowest, followed the
track in proportion of all the tricks, quiddities, niceties of unjust, dilatory
and expensive lawing, used in the high so called, and supreme Courts of
judicature.

I shall but hint the abuse in Witnesses, there being now grown visibly many
more just exceptions against men then the old Laws allowed.

But the great evil in all Courts, was, and is, that the indeed common and most
ordinary questions were not determined and settled.

Matters of Account, matters of Covenant, which hold partly an equitable,
partly a legal right, determinations of litigious questions in Wills; as in
case of a name mistaken, in case of a gift given to a child payable under age,
who shall acquit the party that pays it; nay indeed the ancient law concerning
acquittances real and personal, to me seems lost.

To ravel all and show the utmost of absurdity, error, and perverseness grown
upon our Courts, Laws and Lawyers, is not by one pen to be declared; all is
out of order; I will cease to tell what all know and complain of; there is
nothing sought but riches and honor, by what means soever; I wish the Seats of
Judgment had been clear of receiving moneys, so called, Damage clear, which
shortly is thus:

A man sues and recovers; now by the Law there is a supposall (and but a
supposall, if that be to be supposed, which is well known to the contrary) that
the Recoverer has his debt, or his damage and costs of suit; now the first Law
holding forth, and looking at a kind of equity, if the suit were for so small a
matter that it exceed not 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. recovered, then it took nothing;
but if it were more, then it took two shillings upon every pound. Now although
I suppose at the original this was or ought to have been a sufficiency to have
tried the Cause, and to be added to the Judgment, and paid by the Defendant,
yet now it comes only to the Master of the Office, who assigns Costs upon the
Judgment, and this is paid before Execution, which the party happily never
lives to see performed; this was as to a moity allowed in the Upper Bench. But
in the Term, called Easter Term, 1649. it was as an oppression; taken off by
the Judges; a small beginning to a great work, but fit to operate the clean
contrary way; but is still continued in the so called Common Pleas.

In probate of Wills, and suing out Administrations to whom it belongs, whether
accomptable, if diverse children, or the wife to have all, or the eldest child
all, and the rest nothing, with a thousand other things, are so difficult in
Law, though easy in Reason, as cannot but be the wonder of any one that sets
himself to consider it.

Now to speak a little of the Titles by way of Feofment, or bargain and sale,
what a world of difficulty in them! I dare say, never a Lawyer in England can
(especially in the most excellent tenure of the land) assure to any man a good
Title, neither Knight nor Lord; and all arose,

First, from the want of care in Judges authorized to enact Laws, who heard of
cheatings, and yet gave no stop; for this is sure, he that is able and sells
not for need, but for convenience to better himself otherwhere, will not
deceive grossly, because he knows it brings scandal as much as charge and
trouble, though his conscience be but loose; but the poor needy Prodigal, that
drinks away thrift, and hardly knows, and little cares what he does, he it is
that falls upon this trick, and he first entayles, then mortgages, then sells:
The entayle is settled by the wives friends to secure the estate to her and her
children; they keep this secret; but to keep their credit they will not borrow
the money, nor commonly witness the Mortgage: Thus has he all his deeds, and
the descent appears fair or the bequest, it is sold to redeem the Mortgage, the
deeds and state; all parts from the Mortgage, and the buyer thinks himself
secure, but is cheated, and the Statute of fraudulent conveyances shall not
help, etc. and all the recompense he has, is the Creditors body, if he can
catch it; Lands so settled, pay no debts.

Another way of cheat, is the Statute of Uses, settling of estates in trust to
deceive, making long Leases, and such like: This filled the world with infinite
jangles; and although an easy and speedy remedy were proposed both to King
James, and the late King; yet the interest of the Lawyers being now made
subservient to Prerogative, all was quashed; so that the Land was filled with
multitudes of oppressions, cruelties, cheatings, and extortions, and no remedy,
and the Lawyers only enriched thereby, with the Officers of Courts, upon long,
tedious and intricated controversies; they were also vexed with old sleeping
judgments, which no time being set unto, it was the fashion to keep money in
hand upon a purchase to clear encumbrances, and that kept was seldom paid; for
to say there was no encomber amid so many ways, was difficult; to swear it to
no end; but to prove it impossible: thus if an honest seller met with a knave a
rich and contentious, or contentious buyer only, he gat it not, or so that he
had as good have lost it: So for Annuities, Rents, etc. Again, for conveying,
there was livery and seisin, the supposed absolute strength, a fine, and the
late passage by enrolment; yet none of these absolutely certain; for the fine
though strongest, and the five years limited passed, yet if the seller had no
right at the time, as many had not being neither heir, purchaser, nor
possessor, the fine wrought not; yet this not to be discovered by all the
writings produced, which showed good title; the livery voided per some prior
lease, and the enrolment not done in due time: Indeed almost all good Statutes
are by the looseness of Judges invalidated; for so soon as honest men provide
remedy against an evil present, and emergent by act, it is the knaves work to
converse with a quick brained little conscienced Lawyer, and crafty Attorney,
to find a loose from the Law, which is too often allowed, and the Judge excuses
himself by the letter of the Law.

Therefore I shall now generally declare that the whole frame and foundation of
Englands Government was loosed, rotten, and vanished, which I thus manifest;
Look at the Lands, and its evident, that had Noy lived, or but the Parliament
been deferred, the most considerable part of the Kingdom had been Forest; upon
the claiming of which, what quick work was made in some places, few but know;
that which had not been Forest to the King, would all have been secured to him
by Office, as holding in Chief, or forfeiture otherwise, either upon the chief
Lords, or some inferiors want of Service: And as the King had dealt with his
great men, so would they with their Tenants, whether Knights or Soccagers; but
especially the Copyholders should have suffered without remedy; for it was
grown to this, that as no Jury durst find against the King, if a strong contest
were, that is, if it were a matter worth the striving for (and supposed to be,
or might be a flower of the Crown) so neither durst any find against the Lord;
nor indeed well could they tell how to do right, either to the Lord, or between
the particular Tenants; for the Copies were generally brought to this course,
only to name so many, etc. of the Tenants, R. or B. etc. the Rent they denied
to set down, so that the Bailiff cheated the Tenant, but especially the honest
or ignorant one at his pleasure, and exercised more power, rather Tyranny, then
a Prince; for the Fines, they generally drew them to the mere Will of the Lord,
and in that were absolutely illegal; and although it was pretended the
Chancery was the moderator, that was but to help the Lord; for not one man of a
thousand would contest; if rich, seldom but he was a Lord, for every Peasant
was now become the purchaser of a Manor; if poor, the controversy ruined him;
Now let us a little here look at the nature of Copyholds.

Which I conceive came in thus at the Norman Conquest upon the settling of his
Commonwealth, as he had laid his frame, that is, that all held of the Crown
mediatly or immediately; that is they by greater services, as Dukes, Earls, etc.
and the inferior Lords of them, so all these Lords had their inferiors under
them; that as they served the King in his Wars to preserve the public, so
these might serve the necessities of the ptivate Families, as Soccagers to
plow, sow, and cut down, etc. and Villains to carry muck, and do all drudgery
or meaner work, and were both but a kind of servants; the one yet more free, as
having his Land, only paying his Rent, Corn, etc. the other absolutely bound,
over whom he had at first power of life, and goods, and all; both yet of which,
as the Nation grew civilized and religious, got more liberty and privilege, so
that they became absolutely free; and their present conditions are so diverse
from past, though the names remain, that a man will hardly believe such things
were.

Yet from these, diverse harsh villainous Customs and usages are still
continued; all, or any, and every of which are unreasonable and unwarrantable;
for the villain or bondsman, his Land was his Lords, as was himself, his wife
and children.

After it was given him under a Service, but he could not give nor grant; then
Services were turned into Rents, yet he had no power to dispose, all was in the
Lord; after the policy of the Kingdom being depraved, and these villains being
grown too numerous, taking advantage of civil dissension among the Masters,
the Servants gained the privilege of inheritance, but not to pass it by free
Deeds, or grant, or sell, but to descend; at last they came to sell, and usage
only regulated all this, and then were used as free Lands, all but the way of
passing it, which matter of form is most highly penal, even to forfeiture, and
indeed these forfeitures are the sole end of most Lords.

Now these evils of forfeitures and the like, though for small causes are grown
exceeding penal, mostly from the difficulties and delays of Law, but enough
from the rigorous, unjust and cruel principles of the so called Lords of
Manors, which now each greedy griping rich man is purchaser of, and the value
according to usage set accordingly. Now these evils arise thus, First all the
Jury, who enquire of the forfeiture, are the Lords Tenants, and those that are
pannelled are not able or rich, or commonly of any great reach; and the Steward
most commonly an Attorney, he is the mere pentioner of the so called Lord, and
his improvement of his fortune is to improve his Lords Rents or estate, and
that is by searching out old antiquated Evidences for original Agreements,
Compositions, or the first or primitive Custom, and then pinch a poor weak
Tenant upon that Custom, and he submitting, another, and so on, till all or
the most be buxome, and who is able to withstand?

If it be quaeried why some rich man opposes not; it is answered, few rich men,
but are either Countrymen, and then either are,, or expect to be Lords; if
Citizens, their gains are great, and are not desirous to spend their estates
to enrich Lawyers; and thus Lords and Clowns got into things called still
Manors, broken, divided and shattered, no way retaining their original
constitution, through the baseness of Kings, Judges, and Officers, and the
interest of Parliament men, few of them whose cause it is not; the subject,
especially the poor, is kept in a base unworthy vassalage, under the
constitution of the Norman Conquest, and free men engaged by the tenure of
lands, and by prevailing and unregarded Custom, to a slavery which was
abhorred in the King, yet usurped by fellow subjects upon each other, and that
with Prerogatives higher then in any the Princes Courts; for the common
privileges of extraction and profession, are no way pleadable against their
Fines and Amerciaments; so that I have known a professing Esquire take of a
Christian, a Knight and Barronet, his neighbor, forty shillings for
Amerciaments for not attending at his Court, which was paid by him only with
this protest by his Steward, that that forty shillings should get his Master
twenty pound per annum; and where they may call a Court as often as they list,
and too often, as some widows, so called Ladys of Manors holding it but for
Life, do; it must be as burdensome as unjust. Besides, there is nothing certain
in any Court, either for the Ground, or the Rent, or the Fine, or the Custom,
but the legal pated Steward can, to wreack his spleen, find a flaw in, and
laying his land only by so much in such a place, if any ground be wood or
rich, that is the Lords at last; and though, as the Law held forth a plausible
remedy to all mischiefs, so to this in the Chancery; yet it has been generally
found the remedy was so far off, and so dearly purchased, that it was as evil,
if not worse then the disease; and though these Courts might do some good
heretofore, yet now there accrued no advantage to the Commonwealth by them,
except the multiplying of Atturnies, Alehouses, and suits were a preservative
for a languishing State.

To speak of Arbitrary Fines, how intolerable, illegal and inconvenient, were
to no purpose; but all these evils grew in the Reign of Charles to an excessive
burden.

An other growing evil was the multitudes of poor, which arose as naturally
from a long peace; and secondly, from a want of a legal approved way of
disburthening the Commonwealth by Plantations, other then voluntary, lest
privilege of the subject should be touched upon, so fell it out.

A third reason was the multitude of Inns and Alehouses; the Inns grew upon an
old Law, when the English scorned the lazy life of an Host, aad there were few
Inns, yea too few for to lodge Ttavellers; therefore the Law debarred none from
taking up that Trade; and the Lawyers not having a judgment against it, say it
is Law still, though the Reason ceased long since: The other is of Alehouses
multiplying in all places; sure for by-respects, as knowing much drinking
raises Malt, and that Barley; and so the Gentlemen let their lands, and rack
their rents more; so it fills the rich man's purse, and empties the poors: Next,
it was the ordinary advancement of a Knights, Justices, etc. over-worn
Cook-maide, or his Groom, or happily a cast Fallconers fee, or Huntsmans, as
the pentions which are now out of the casualties originally instituted for
maimed soldiers. Fourthly, and most imprudently, from the laxation of Laws in
the Justitiaries of the Nation; for whereas King James found the Nation so
governed, that they who could not maintain a wife, might not marry; for a
License they could not have, the Bishops taking care enough with their Officers
that the poor might not have lawful favor of a License, lest their Hospitality
might be charged, or impaired by their maintenance, and their public
denouncing the bands of Marriage the fist time; the Parish for the like cause
hindered it the second, if any cause were; and usually none were permitted
marriage till the man were thirty five at least, and the woman thirty, whereas
since they coupled at fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen a great
age; this has bred multitudes of poor, weak and tender poor; and so for want
of due provision roguish lazy poor; for many Statues are, but all to small
purpose; some men being so chary of particular privileges that they have
undone the public, and to save a Rogue or Whore from whipping, have starved
thousands to death; For this was the course of Englands good general
Government, they were all one body, and that as men, so as Christians; and
therefore what the Parish so called could not perform, the next must; if that
served not, the hundred must; if not that, the County, and so forth, and this
both for a stock for work for those could work, whereby they knew the laborious
poor, and lazy poor, and could afford encouragement or discouragement
accordingly.

Next for maintenance for those could not work, or not to maintain their charge
fully; This now was in times of Popery reasonably supplied, partly by the
Deacons, the proper Church Officer, and partly by the civil Officers of the
Town, Charity being then the high step to heaven, applauded by men, as declared
by Paul; and though the great Charity went to Monasteries, Frieries, Nunneries;
yet these were pipes which afforded some refreshment to the hungry, thirsty,
both strangers and domestike; but now there were new Laws, new Provisions, new
Officers, and all to make supply; yet the work grew so difficult it
over-mastered the Actors, partly from the reasons aforesaid, but more from the
niceness grown upon the Law; so that the Justice of the Peace knew not what to
do; whip a Rogue, or loose person, or such as the Law held forth seemingly
liable to the lash, he was sued, and there wanted either such cause as Master
chief Justice thought fit; a Warrant of Commitment, or a legal so called
Warrant, either it expressed no cause, or not thought sufficient cause, yet the
cause in it self more then enough; either it was to Bridewel where it should be
to the Gaol, or the Gaol where it should have been to Bridewel; this for
Rogues: Then for idle people that would not work, the due order of assessing
wages was left; so that what Rule to keep, who could tell? multitude of young
people living at their own hand; some commonly reputed to live whorishly,
others knavishly, others theevishly, for they neither wrought, nor had of their
own, yet lived highly; to complain was unneighbourly: so they went on; yet if
complained of, what could be done? they answered they would have Services if
they could; yet if in Service, they would do nothing, nor tarry but their own
pleasure, or do but what work they pleased, and wages they would have as they
list, and compound to do what they list or be gone; and the Justices were so
terrified by the Judges, and the Masters by the length of suits, as all was
grown to loose liberty.

For the binding out of Apprentises, a good and wholesome Law, that the poor
educated in better men's houses might be trained up to be fit for employment, as
Husbandmen and otherwise; truly through the pettish wilfulness or
niggardliness of some men in Authority, it was assumed to be against the
liberty of the Subject, to impose a servant upon him; and few or none will take
willingly, so that the Law requires it, but none looks at execution; if any do,
the particular Justices must upon refusal bind them over to the Sessions,
where he shall be plagued, and as he says, maliciously vexed with attendance,
and pay fees, and then nothing is done: It Is truth, the Law holds forth a way
of raising stock to put forth Apprentises; but this is as litigious; for there
is much ado to make a Rate; if they will not do it, bind them over to the
Sessions is all, and there Lawyers make such work for their Clients, as home
they go without Fine or other punishment.

And generally the great persons are most backward; many think scorn to be
rated by their neighbors, and if they rate them, they will pay nothing, or not
above their estate there, which happily is two or three hundred pound per
annum, and may come to six pence or eight pence per month and they have one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, ten, twelve, twenty thousand it may
be; and how do they spend it, but in pride, riot, vain excesses? for generally
they either live in Cities, and then charge them otherways then they like, or
list, they are gone; or in small Towns, that is, where they may have no
neighbors, and there they have Cottagers servants, but no other; and some by
this means pay not one penny in a year to the poor but their offall; well, they
make a Rate, the payment is refused, what course now to come by it? some Rates
are to demand, and within six days a distress, others within four days; some by
the Constable, some by Warrant from the Justice of Peace that signed the Rate;
some of any Justice; some the distress is taken to be sold presently, some
within four, some six, some eight, some ten days, some the overplus is to be
returned; some deducting charges, some certain charges, some incertainly; and
so for Forfeitures, and so Warrants; some things to be done by one, some by two
Justices, whereof one to be of the Quorum upon penal Statute Laws etc.

These variety of Laws were the Lawyers gins; for seldom but the poor Officer
smarted, for that the Justice to avoid quarrel with him, left his Warrant with
this general clause at last according to Law; which the poor Constable taking
simply, according to the literal Tenor of the Warrant, he seldom went according
to Law: Thus was all due proceeding, and the substance of Government lost, to
preserve a fair husk of so called privilege of the Subject; but the husks
virtue had this attractive, that all the idle money, and good money of the
Nation was dreyned into the Lawyers purses, and the difficulty of the Law was
invented by them assuredly on s^ purpose only to keep up the Trade, and not
discovered by the Judges, nor discountenanced, upon the principle that every
one had their times; so letting of servants at Petty-Sessions, and their not
departure without a testimony, and such like, all grown to disorder; and the
rather because now even the honors of the Kingdom were as aforesaid made
mercenary to the ends of Covetize and Tyranny; and the debauchery of the Gentry
spoiled the whole Nation, so that the ancient Gentry, whether of British or
Norman Race, was lost wholly in the puddle of foolery and fashion; so that put
a child into either a rich man, or Gentleman's house, and they learned nothing
but the foundation of beggary, they there growing only nice, neat, lustful
and lazy.

But to return, Thus were the Justices and all Officers made tender in
execution of the Law; and thus the Law extinguished: And hence it grew, that
even Felons, Murderers, and all criminous persons had at last as much favor, as
baseness, negligence and security could afford; for no Hues and Cries were at
all prosecuted with effect; for no punishment where they ceased, and the
burdens of Constables in their services were such, and the office now put on
the meanest persons for vexation, that little knowledge he had of his work; he
ignorant, and the Law thorny, both for understanding and execution, so that he
only put off the work; but to act vigorously, or with care he durst not, lest
his own fire should burn his own fingers: for if he were diligent, and
apprehended a Rogue, he was bound over sometimes to prosecute the Rogue or
Felon for want of an Attorney for the King, or his not executing his place
duly; yet all Processes were by indictment at the Kings suit, but however as a
witness; and Indictings, and Recognizance Fees made them soon weary, besides
three or four days attendance, and not one penny for all their charges. Thus
were Rogues encouraged, and obstructors, and disobedient to the Law, Government
and Reason, whether for Covetize, or worse ends sake is evident.

But the justly feared end of all this by wise men, was, that by the iniquity
of this frame now wholly and visibly naught and lost, the Subject might be
enforced to submit to such Rules of Arbitrary Government, as the King by his
Edicts, whether personal, or from his private Council, should send forth; to
which all they of his Council were fitted, and all his Lords and Gentry to them
by the means aforesaid.

Now that this evil is fallen upon us, is evident: is it not known to all, there
was no due return of Warrants by the Constables for execution of Justice twixt
man and man, but that the party must enforce or secure the Officer, or nothing
done? yea, the Sheriffs of Counties from the nicities of Laws would not execute
a judgment without security to bear harmless, rather venturing breach of oath
then the rigidity of a suit.

Now one Reason will manifest this was not unnecessary on their part; for their
at least practice of the Law did bear, that if execution were upon another man's
goods, though in the shop of the party, and of the same condition with his
Trade, yet upon a Trover and Conversion (a figmentious Action) the Sheriff must
be overthrown; these were the ways to prepare the Free people of England to
slavery and absolute vassallage, they doting upon their so called Laws: The
Bishops corrupted the Prince, the Princes corrupted the Judges, and they being
the speaking Law, the dead letter did little good; so that it was time for
Englishmen to look to themselves; here were Symptoms enough of ruin,
threatened both to soul and body and estate; but the ways were dark; for the
contrivances were fitted to every capacity; say Popery was intended, nothing
less, the Laws sharp, and execution visible; as to the first part, calling in
question, indicting and conviction, all this brought gain: The next step was
gain also, that is, discharge upon composition.

Say Tyranny was intended to be introduced; no, you have your Judges, both
sedentary in the ordinary Courts at Westminster, and Itinerary in the Counties,
and they gave the Law; where was the King to be blamed? this suggested, and the
evil continuing, the King walks higher, and by Pattents of grace so called,
that is, the mere Will of the King, he inhibits subjects their Trades, and
under a color of mischief brings in an inconvenience; that is, to prevent an
uncertain charge or loss, he imposes a certain charge, and this contrary to
Statute Law; these were called Monopolies; London gained as much by this
destructive chaffer as any place; truly engrossing all Trade to her self under
pretense of regulation, which is necessary for the outward formal pretenses of
Companies of Merchants, for well-making, ordering, selling, etc. of commodity
is good; but to leave them that are Masters of the company, to the sole making
of the Laws, and execution also, is destructive; they are like Benchers of Inns
of Court (no Sir, lets not make Laws to bind our selves) as if the place had
given all power to them, they make Laws only subservient to their own ends; I
shall exemplify but in one, petitioned against in Parliament; these Merchants
having places of Mart or sale, the Masters agree in private, send away their
commodities, and some days after declare where the Mart shall be; theirs are
either arrived, or half way, or prepared to the voyage, when time's so scanted
to others, if at all possible, that the Market is over before they arrive, or
near it. They also put exceeding charges upon admissions, etc. and no account
but to themselves, which in the consequences may be destructive, not only to
the private person, but body politic in amassing Treasure.

The lesser Corporations were, for marking, measuring, sealing sluffs, linen
and woollen, with a Crown Seal forsooth; and these were his Majesty's
gratuities to the Lord of, etc. Marquess, etc. Q. Mother, Lady Nurse, Groom of
the stool, that is, the Close stool, whether King or Queen (high and
advantageous honors) and this descended to outlandish, as in Land commodities;
yea, to pins and brooms; and it was said, to Rags for paper, and Marrow-bones
for Kitchin-stuff, or grease: Next, he found one so base, as being a Lawyer, to
take a pattent to have the first motion (in the strictest sense) or to be heard
in all cases before any other, which the Judges wisely quashed in the shell,
hearing him, and showing obedience to power, and fulfilled this Patent therein;
and then declaring by an intimation of a rigid dislike, that the Authority
pretended could not (that is with safety) grant it; for the Lawyers would be
stirred who had the key of Knowledge, and they once disaffected might be like a
spark in powder.

All these had their success, because they by degrees falling upon persons or
trades only, they even upon advice desisted generally from more then
expostulation; some few brought Actions, and were killed with delays and
frowns: Then the King intends a Masterpiece, which was at once to quash all
controversies by a slight and sudden judgment, having a color of Law, but no
substance; and this was by an universal charge upon the whole body of Subjects,
so called Ship Money, which had for foundation thus much:

The Kingdom was an Isle, the defense Shipping, the Navy was decayed, the King
must replenish; so he rigs his Ships, and sends them forth (to take the air as
the idle ones said, but indeed to inure bodies to the Sea, settle them under
pay and discipline, and so engage dependence) they return; and whereas
heretofore the Maritine Counties sent forth Ships, and the Land towns paid; now
the King would provide all Ships, and they all should pay; now this was clearly
done only to inhance the so called Crown Revenue; for the Subject saw no Enemy,
and so no necessity, the original cause of that Tax; a general peace was held
to the out side with all Nations after theslaughter of the gallant English at
the Isle of Ree, and the dismanteling of Rochel.

But the upshot was, the King must be judge, nay, sole Judge of this necessity;
and this is quaeried by the King to his Judges, which to prove the assertion
before they were all King trodden, that is, had engaged all their abilities to
his mere will, two only of twelve in this so important a business, as indeed
the whole life of the Subjects Liberty was involved in it, as to his estate at
first, and for denial of that to his restraint, durst assert the truth; which
two only I shall own as men noble and honest, Crook and Hutton; and though both
or one were by the plurality of Votes engaged to the first Quaere

Whether the King were sole Judge; yet upon the Trial brought by that true
Patriot Hambden, they righted themselves and the Nation to the utmost; and
honest Crook spoke true plain English reason, and good Law while mercinaries
blundred upon the work; and had they taken Barcley's Argenis, and read the
discourse betwixt Polyarchus and Hyanisbe, touching such taxes, they had saved
their credits, as only declaring the judgment of an Alien to English Liberty,
and reserved themselves.

But now 'twixt Truth and Loyalty so called, they were confounded, and gave no
satisfaction, no not to the well-affected to absolute powers; and by this
notwithstanding all power, the Subject was enboldned to deny, and at last,
after some two or three year, the King was enforced to desist; and surely his
cogitations were for Armies; how providence prevented, there being so many
discourses of it, I shall omit, only with this hint, That these forerunners
manifestly declare, that the Arms in Ireland raised by his Commission, and
continued in England against the same power of Parliament (Assertors of the
same Common Liberty by the Nation owned and petitioned for) were undoubtedly
the effects of the same cause; namely, the subversion of Englands Law and
Government, the peoples Liberties and all Rights, making the King by his mere
free will the absolute Arbiter of all actions civil and criminal: Thus in
brief, I have set down some of the visible preparatives to Englands
Climaterical Revolution, which it now labors under. In the discussion of the
State of affairs civil, and so called Ecclesiastic before, but especially in
the time of the late King; and all shows, that plainly there was left no more
then an outside Christianity, or formal Religion, the temper of the clay of the
world, the pravity of Reason in the depraved principles of policy; the iron of
reason in the variety of species of Government; and the gold of Christian
simplicity, the gold owned in the Scriptures, by Authority allowed; the iron in
the rational formal profession of the same, and the consequences thereof; the
Clay in the false and unconsequential glosses, to make man's rule and absolute
Government the higest and last refuge of every man, and that for a particular
persons end, though in publke trust; for that trust was said not so much to be
for the peoples benefit, as his own.

These things premised, I might omit the passages since, as being fresh in
every man's memory; but at the desire of some, I shall go on in the way of a
cursory Historical Narration; repinings and grudgings by and from the actions
of the King and his Ministers growing high, so that it was not thought fit to
proceed without some force ready, for fear of insurrections, which were indeed
desired; and therefore the people were afflicted, that they might rebel and
bring themselves into slavery.

The King having received the platform of alteration of his State from Thomas
Earl of Strafford, he is made his Agent to keep on foot a strong Army in
Ireland, who, to speak truth, were a company of men fit for as high an attempt
as they were intended for, but being Jesuited in great, if not the greatest
part, they might have double designs, that is, rather to embroile all the
Kingdoms, and fit them for the tooth of the Spaniard their universal Patron,
then for the Kings absolute settlement in England, whom they truly knew not to
affect the Popes interest, further then it stood with his own, which is truly
the Maxim of all Princes, however they carry it.

Upon the confidence of this Army, he is fooled into a quarrel with the Scots,
and was undoubtedly made believe, that to let the Spaniard land 10000. in
England, was the only way to set all right; and Wentworth a man of depth of
policy, and courage, might over-confidently accept these councels; the truth I
shall not prolixly assert, God having providentially cut of that Quaere by the
Sword of the Hollander; but their course, lading, provision, number and
quantity of men and Commanders, quality of convoy, and backs of carriage,
besides the testimony of diverse, all tend to demonstrate the same; nor for the
same reason shall I argue how cross and incoherent we see these Councels were;
for fools see errors when the cast is played, which the wise Gamester studied
for, and could not descry: This, as it hastened preparations on the Kings part
for war, so it enforced him while yet unprepared, to hold out the Ensigns of
peace; and what no advices could produce before, is now for interest sake
granted, namely, a Parliament, wherein all underhand proceedings for elections
not being able (such a general dislike being in all men to the King, and his
proceedings) to work and mould it serviceable to the Kings ends, he as soon
dissolves as calls it.

This breeding a deeper distaste, and he not yet fitted; and seeing the people
now fell upon petitioning rather then rebelling, relying upon the Parliaments
united power, rather then upon their single personal rights, and would sooner
venture to set down with an unjust loss of part from the Kings power, then
loose all to his mercy by an unwarrantable course,

He calls a Parliament again, and to this Parliament are brought so many
complaints, that I fear the bulk of Petitions and Remonstrances will affright
our Worthies for looking into them, and let much necessary work lie undone, not
giving due reparations to many persons against public Thieves and
Extortioners; Now the Parliament made no great haste, and the King was urgent
for money: which they taking advantage of, and of his former, not only
declining and breaking up or dissolving Parliaments, but his neglecting his own
Laws, that is, those to which he had assented; they upon the ground laid in his
third year, insist to have an Act for settling this Parliament, till dissolved
or prorogued by themselves, notwithstanding an act for calling a Parliament
every three years, thinking no knot too sure to hold what they still found
loose; which effected, with some other things, they then fall to work with the
Earl of Strafford, that had power enough to have done all he intended in an
ordinary course of providence, had not vain confidence that he could do it when
he would (as the Almighty determined) befooled him; he surprised who was the
Master-dear, the herd fly; and though accused by the Kings great Council; yet
his Majesty having affections personal, notwithstanding the supreme public
trust in ordinary, gives them his pass, and by the means of his Admiral, they
were set safe a foreign shore; and now himself labors to his utmost the
safety and preservation of that man, who had ruled in Ireland to his utmost in
that absolute way he intended his Master here should, as the Cardinal Richelieu
had done in his France; the great pleas on his side were, what he had done, was
for his Master the King, by his special command, for which he had his warrant,
and for all Moneys, his discharge; and if a further offense were, it was
against no existent Law; if Treason, etc. not within the Law of 25. of Edward
the third, which was made with much advisement, to preserve the Liberty of the
Subject, and consequently his life by a certain knowledge of his duty.

To which it was answered, that his trust was to the Commonwealth; to the King
in his Politic, not in his natural capacity: and his personal receipt,
warrant, or allowance, was not sufficient, but they had power, yea in case he
had had a legal allowance or discharge in ordinary, yet for the Commonwealths
sake which includes both king and people, to call him to an account: And to the
last part that it was against no Law existent, They said the Parliament was by
the Stat. Judge of Treason de futuro; and to orethrow the Laws and government,
was more then to destroy a person: to ruin a kingdom, then kill a king; and
therefore (I must agree by importunity) forced the King to assent to his death;
which effected, and not dared to be recalled, all plots and policies left are
used to break up the Parliament, by the King; yea an attempt made upon some
Members to sacrifice to the Ghost of Strafford; but all failing, and yet
manifested, the Parliament think fit to have a guard; the King practices the
Army; the Parliament Vote no less then 400000. l. And with that disband the
Army; the King thus lost every way, and the Army in Ireland utterly lost by the
grand Rebellion there, taking many of them part with the Irish, if not most,
and this still giving harsher resentments to the people, whose Liberty was now
grown great, and the Parliament loath to hinder them while they served their
turns, many not only sleights, but affronts were put on the Kings servants,
reflecting upon himself. The Bishops now show their sure Rock was he, and they
wholly cleave to him; the Lords, many join with him, many against him, and many
appear not; the Kings Agents, whose designs had been nipt here, being now in
Denmark, Holland, France etc. moved for assistance against the Parliament of
England, as the Irish Rebels do there, they seek the same things, and under the
same pretexts; so that the King is said, and not without some ground, to be the
chief Actor in all; so loath he was to call the Irish Rebels.

This causes the Parliament to talk of raising Arms, not only to defend
themselves against the King, and those with whom he came to the Parliament
House, and kept still about him, being generally a crew of Jovialists, debaucht
persons;

But to offend such public foreign Enemies, as under the Kings Name should be
brought from other Nations, or raised here; to which there was such an
unanimous loan of all sorts, especially the Religious, who found a change
indeed in their condition, That they from that took the hint of the strong
affections of the people toward them; and upon that Vote the extirpation of
Episcopacy, the which the King so long contending for, and so eagerly, ruined
himself with them. How far this is to be read out of the Revelation, I shall
not quaere; but say, it was long foretold out of that prophesy, and now fell
out; they gave themselves now to treat of Reformation of the Church; but this
rooting up Episcopacy took many from them; they had voted and acted against
pluralities, as to settle the Church, and gave the Judges a settled and
sufficient salary, pretending to take away all other Fees from them, but
proceeded not.

The King fled from London; the Convocation they follow his shadow, the
Parliament call themselves a certain number of men called Ministers from all
parts, and nominate them the Assembly; these sit as the Clergy of England; the
King, after many Traverses, having gotten together an Army, comes to Oxford,
whether many come from the Parliament to him, as well as went with him; there
he erects or allows a new Parliament. And by their advice, as his Parliament
at Oxford, demands Treaty with his Parliament at Westminster, which they
reject; and at last the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. London indeed stood true
to them, which by its Vicinity to the Parliament, and infinite populacy, awed
all other parts; they had a sense of former sufferings under the power of
Kings; they had a deep sense of the extremities the godly and most piously
affected people suffered in all parts of the Nation; and how far the vicinity
of the Court, and Archbishop of Canterbury, had violated their Christian
Liberty, prevailing over the quiet spirit of their Bishop, was though little,
not forgotten; they therefore generally followed the Parliament, especially
stirred up by their Ministers, as having in hand the cause of God: The King he
brands them all with Declarations of Rebellion, and taxing them with seeking
his life, and the rooting out of his Posterity.

They answer, that they were so far from seeking his life, as that they should
labor, by all means possible, to defend and protect the same, their just
Rights and Privileges preserved; and for his satisfaction cause the Nation
generally to enter the like Protestation; this not satisfying, but it being
still urged by the King, that the Protestation was but to establish their own
power, not secure his fears;

While their Armies were in the field against the King; they answered, They
were only on the defensive part; and such indeed was the Generals Commission;
and that they could not but according to their trusts preserve the Laws and
Rights of the Nation: Hereupon they open the Law, that the King was indeed but
the chief trusted person, and that for his peoples sake; that of this not he
only, but they also, and more especially being congregate into a body were to
judge, that his failings past demonstrate, his ends contrary to public
interest, and resolve that even the Law of Nature taught self-preservation, and
that it was too too visible he intended an usurpation upon their just
Privileges.

That they desired his preservation, so it might consist with the Weal-publick;
and therefore desired him to leave the company of evil men (so called his
Counselors) who misled him, and to adhere to his great Council, and promised
to make him on these terms the most Glorious King that ever was in these
Nations; and now a diverse part appearing upon several grounds and opinions
amid the Members of the House, the prevailing party to firm the union betwixt
the Scots and them more strongly, whose assistance they had had all this while
in the work, they frame a Covenant, which held forth security and glory to the
King and his posterity, in endeavoring to settle Church and State upon the
firm foundations of Justice and righteousness, which taken in Scotland is
transmitted hither, and they by Parliament made brethren; and this is tendered
to the King to sign, being first taken solemnly by the principal of the Nation,
with this condition.

That if the King agreed with them in it, they would still not only acknowledge
him their King, but make him more glorious, etc.

But this was so penned in such general terms, that an absolute Royalist might
well take it; for it was intended by the some, I say not the many, by the
leaders, not the followers, but as a measure to try the stretch of every man's
judgment, opinion, or interest; many no doubt took it cordially, many
formally, some strictly, some loosely; but though this were not only taken but
urged; yet Armies were continued against the King (as he said) in the field,
against his evil Council, as they said; it is truth, their evil Council was now
his, the Lesson of absolute power, and to be like his Brethren; the rest of the
Kings who had joined interest with the Whore of Rome, made him not only hold
correspondence with that Beast, not only at bed and board, but Council also, as
far as served his interest, who undoubtedly aimed to rule in all things
according to his own Will, which Will, yet, should have had Regulations; but
still with such dependence upon his Judgment, that he being the speaking Law,
would have had no Interpreter that should be able to cross him and his
determination: and so the Law must have spoken in all things to his lust, or he
would have made it; and this he thought, and I am persuaded believed to be the
undoubted right of all Princes; though their people as his in case of contest
between competitors for the Sovereignty might wring something from them of
Grants or Charters, or so called privileges or immunities, which yet he
believed they could no more grant to the prejudice of the Crown, that is, of
the heirs and successors in the Kingdom, then things sacred to God could be
employed to profane uses.

This doctrine admitted, which I dare avow was, and can prove sufficiently by
Witnesses yet alive, That our late King Charles said these words openly upon a
Hearing. (Mr. Hern, I have heard what you have said; What do you talk to me of
Law, Justice, or Conscience? (according to all which Mr. Herne alleged the
Patent signed by his Majesty to be) I tell you, said the King, there is nothing
in England shall stand that is not for my profit; There stands one (pointing to
Sir John Banks, then Attorney General, who had hundred of pounds, many I have
heard for the work, and drew the Patent) shall bring a quo warranto against the
Patent, and see then what you will do.

Now take notice this Patent was of the new invention of Salt, and opposed the
Monopoly at the Sheilds under the favor of deservedly beheaded Hambleton, and
the Inventor not complying with the Kings Interest against the privilege of
the Subject, the King brake not only his private word with him, contrary to
particular engagements under his Hand, carried by Sir Charles Herbert, but also
his public word as King; this sentence being so ruinous to the man, made the
Worm speak, and said, Sir, Dare you be a King and be thus unjust! I never read
of Tyrant said so, what ever he did (or words of like effect;) whereupon Lord
Dorcet, with a great oath (by his Maker, as I express it) said, lo (and if it
please your Majesty) these are your prick-eared Rogues, the Tub-preachers (and
indeed he was a Zealot) these are they will pluck you out of your Throne,
unless you dethrone them.

I pray take not this Lord for a Prophet, unless like Caiaphas. This word I
could not but insert for conscience sake, as a firm Index and testimony of his
real intentions; This kept him off from closing with his Parliament, and the
rather because they insisted to have the Sword in their power for so many
years, or during his life; tenderness of him caused the Parliament to venture
far; for it could not by this sole defensive way, but protract the war,
discourage the soldier, and in fine ruin them, giving the King time to raise
new forces at all times, if they could not gain his person; and this experience
taught them so, that after many cumbats, their Armies streighted and broken in
great part, their full purses being profusely clean emptied; for who being an
English man did they think would have opposed the power of the Nation for a
sole persons sake? but by the just hand of God, and to bring to punishment such
offenders as the legal sword would never reach, he inclines men's hearts to
follow the King, most of them yet Papists or mere formal Protestants and
debaucht ones; the generality of the so called Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy
especially all in honor, or that bowed to that Idol; among them were also many
men of very tender conscience, zealous of truth, and performing (at least to
men) righteousness.

On the other side were at first all the vulgar, all men generally eying God in
his ways of providence, poor despicable creatures, yet full of faith and
knowledge; these were of several opinions concerning God, his Names,
Attributes, Essence, our Savior, the holy Spirit, his service, their own duty,
public and private, that is, their duty to God, and one to another.

But two especially were powerful in adherents, The one called the
Presbyterian, the other the Independent; the main differences twixt which I
shall, as far as I can here, succinctly lay down, not upon their nice critical
distinctions as Scholars so called, but in the plain way of rational
difference. Now truly I see no difference as to the points of faith; they
acknowledge both the Father, Son and holy Ghost, the end of the Sons mission,
to offer salvation to all, but effect it only to those believe on him, whom he
has elected before the world began, in due time calls, and at last saves, not
for their works sake, or ought in them, but as he elected them, not because of
foresight of works, but of his free grace, so he saves them; that good works
and obedience to the Law, are the outward Testimonies of a Christian, but not
infallible, for the Law condemns, no ne can perform it; That Christ only
justifies.

They indeed seem to differ about obedience to what Law; the Presbyterian
having still an eye to the at least equity of the Judicials; but I presume if
thoroughly examined, easy to be reconciled: Their main differences then one
would think might be easily determined, but they are thought vast and
irreconcilable, and they are these:

First, whether an outward and visible succession derivative, not only from
the Doctrine of the Apostles, but also from their calling, so supposed, is of
necessity to the true Church, which is really the same difference betwixt the
Presbyterian and Bishop, and Bishop and Papist; the Papist urging it against
the English reforming Bishop, and so the Bishop against the present Reforming
Presbyterian, and the Presbyterian against the Independent so called; now the
plain Question has this involved difficulty in it, as I conceive;

That is, what necessity of imposition of Hands? for if it does confer Grace,
an Apostolic virtue being tied to the Successors of Bishops, Priests, Deacons
upon that promise of Christ, What ever ye bind on earth, etc. or I will be with
you to the end of the world; or inclusively from the effect of imposition, That
they receive the holy Ghost; then it is of necessity; but if it be but
declarative of the designation of the person to the office of the Ministry,
then it is not of necessity, unless specially commanded, which will also here
shortly determine the business of Confimation of Infants, which may seem to
have warrant thus far in Christian Congregations, That men and women baptized
Infants, and after they come to age, walking blamelesly, may and ought openly
before the admission to the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, be examined by the
Pastor, the Congregation, or such as will present, concerning the hope of their
salvation, which allowed to pray for the blessings of the Lord upon them, and
to confirm and strengthen them in this faith, I believe is, and will be
acknowledged, and duly practiced in covenient time.

And last, and in chief the Independent hold forth the particular Rights of
particular Congregations; that is, each Congregation is subject to no other
head but Christ in the things of Christ; that is, to govern it self according
to the Scripture, without any superintendencie of one or more persons, or
Churches so called, that is, Congregations of Christians.

The Presbyterian differs upon this, as holding forth no order, but
introductive of an absolute confusion: Now the reason of this high judgment,
is indeed upon very high consequences, which rather the practices then the
principles of the Independents declare: for let the Presbyterian speak out, and
he says, the Independent razes the foundation of Church Government several
ways; and to profess the truth, their Tenants tend to thus much and no more,
nor otherwise destroying Government or order;

That Rome is Mystical Babylon literally; That all the Nations, Provinces, and
Kingdoms who partake of the fornication of that spiritual Whore, that is, walk
upon her groundwork, shall partake with her in her plagues; that this Cup which
is in her hand, all Nations, at least called Christian, have drunk deep of;
That the so called Ministry of England, holding no Call but the outward, or
that principally, and this derived from, or by the corrupted Whore of Rome, is
no true Ministry, or at least not the true Ministry; That neither are the so
called Lords Bishops, nor the domineering Classis of Elders, whether Parochial
or Provincial, the officers of the Church, warranted in Scripture for the
designation of Pastoral duty or ability, That resting in the whole Church, or
community of believers gathered into Congregations; That all of them being
corrupted, nay, lost both in Doctrine and Discipline, are to be gathered anew;
all that are in the Parishes, though holding forth the profession of Christ,
yet walking clean contrary, are not by the power of Baptism, or that Covenant
(implicit, that is, being bound not by their own words, but the confession and
engagements of others) absolutely in the Church, and so to have right to the
Ordinances of the last Supper; but that before they be received they ought to
give satisfaction to the Church (that is, that company of believers to which
they shall join themselves) of their faith, and the hope they have of their
salvation, and walking accordingly; and these are hence (justly) called those
of the Congregational way, commonly called Independents.

Indeed the Presbyterian holds the same with the Bishop in every point, only
the person of the Bishop, as the Head or Angel of the Church, is he in whom,
says the Bishop, the power of the Church specially rests, and the great trusts
of Ordination, and Confirmation, and so Excommunication.

The Presbyterians say in the Eldership.

The Independent in the whole Congregation.

It is truth, these things were and are otherwise received by the vulgar and
multitude: The Independent so called, being burdened, both by Bishop and
Presbyterian with all calumnies; as the Presbyterian being envied much by the
Bishop, being as his Opponent, and by all their followers; and that just as the
Papists had in the first Reformation branded the Church so called of England,
governed by Bishops, but denying the Supremacy of the Pope, and therefore
cursed by them as Heretics, Schismatics, Adulterers, yea Heathens; for by
their rule we had no Ministry, no Sacraments, and so consequently no Church,
because not holding of their head the Pope.

And in the word of a Christian, so does the consequence of the Episcopal and
Presbyterian Doctrine brand the Congregational way; for they say, no Ministry
but so derived as by Succession from the Apostles; and that admitted, they must
hold none have power to administer the Sacraments. They all differ also about
Government in the Church; the Bishop and Presbyterian much what alike, both
indeed making the officers of the Church the Church, as Rome does; so as the
Church taking the Government solely into themselves, count all other Christians
as Laymen; they had as good say Heathens; if thoroughly scanned, and they only
the Clergy, the Priests of the living God, and so indeed claim a magisterial
power by the same Rules, Order, Arguments, and Distinctions and Differences, as
Rome does, yea, over the Supreme Magistrate, making him their rod of iron to
thresh the Nations, that is, all opposers of their Classical Edicts: These men
gave the Magistrate no more power then the Pope; for as he, so they were the
Church, the holy ones, the Saints, at least representative.

To these, men at first gave great regard; but many wise Heathen Laymen feared
these men's unskilful lording it over the Lords Inheritance; for they presumed
these rash Novices in civil Discipline would drive higher then the Bishops, who
had gone before them; Surely, if the Bishops, men trained up at the Courts of
Princes, after they came out of the Halls of Lords (for the Chaplains of great
men came generally to Episcopal Thrones or Chairs) and so had still had a
reflection upon the order of civil Government, and had undoubtedly improved
their natural, as well as so called spiritual Talent, if they had lost
themselves, and ruined Government, through error in Judgment, etc. or
dependence: what would these who came but from the Pedantical Tyranny of the
Universities, and foolish idiotisms of puer-putes? I intend this to mere
Scholars, and give them but their own language, which I presume they cannot but
apprehend.

These considerations made the Parliament at Westminster, while yet unshattered
otherwise then by defection (base unworthy defection! they should as men have
had resolutions worthy their trusts; but their cause, it seems, gave no courage
at first) to declare against these powers of Parishional Presbyteries to this
effect, that they did not intend to raise nine thousand odd hundred Seats of
Judgment, or Judicatories; that is, so many as there were Parishes of England;
the least of which should have more power then the Parliament of England.

And I think few men knowing but will agree, that the name only of Bishop
should have been suspended or extinguished, but the same power, yea, that so
called by the Presbyter unjust, being exercised by the Bishop, the pre-eminence
being now in the Presbytery, the same had been allowed; and indeed it pleased
God so farto give way, that these men were thoroughly tried; for the Parliament
did (not seeing all at once) constitute Elderships to be chosen, and improved
some men, whether intentionally, as supposing that Discipline best, or so
called, politickly to discover their temper, I determine not.

But these men presently fall hot upon the work, and what had but just before
ruined their predecessors the Bishops, and been their stumbling stone, namely
the Nonconformity of the now called Presbyter, becomes the Presbyters rock of
offense against the so now called Independents: And to assure this, after the
manner of the Apostate Church, they call for the secular power (or the power of
the secular Sword) and an Act was said to be prepared, they talked much of it.

That Non-Conformists should have a liberty to bear office, either in Church or
Commonwealth: It is truth, the rigidity of some its probable, seeking not only
the Supremacy of power, but an addition of wealth, for by them also were sought
outward honor, riches, Lay-power so called, and what else was of the old Babels
trash to adorn the Church, and by them called the Churches Rights, bounding it
to the so called Priesthood, was by these as much eyed as by the veriest
Babylonian in the world, and the Commonwealth of England still made the
Stalking-horse to their lucre; and the base men of a rout of people, so called
also Cleri or Clergy men, in whom, if St. Paul left the Qualifications right
set down, were rather the Priests of Bacchanals if not of Bacchus, then Pastors
of rightly constituted Congregations; and these altogether take advantage of an
Ordinance made for Tithes to give the denied treble damages; they also upon the
same grounds, get Acts, Orders or Ordinances for uniting Parishes, and could
inform untruths for advantage, which appearing, the union is for malice, not
conscience of the complainer dissolved; for could the persecutor have had his
Tithes but for half value, all had been whist, but the Priest saw not where
such agreement would rest; he might undo the Church, that is, his Successor by
that means.

Wills Probation fixed as they were under an uncertain irregular way and
illegal, till established; they continued the Marriage of persons (as a
Sacrament) to be the proper work of the Priests; Baptizing Infants the eighth
day, held, if not by the wisest, yet by the most, of necessity to salvation.

Yea, some held, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was a converting
Ordinance, and so to be administered to all to whom the Gospel was to be
preached, namely the most profane of any.

This to many seemed rather an allowance Politic, then Religious, to gain a
party then to give forth a principle, until some leaders were found publicly
to avow the Tenent; but this licentiousness lost them the best and most
considerable party. I shall not further wade in these Controversies, nor had I
gone thus far, could I have otherwise well cleared what is to follow;

Namely, that the Magistrate eyed these Tenets, as sorting with or against his
interest, and accordingly seemed to allow or disallow; The Presbyter struck so
high at the root of Magistracy, making them their mere Executioners, and
bringing by Text of old Law what was given to the Priests more imperiously into
the Cleri; and on the other side, the so called Erastian, giving all to the
Magistrate, not as of the Church, or in the Church, but merely from the Civil
Jurisdiction, and total subjection of the whole course of so called Priests
unto the mere will of the Magistrate, either by doing or suffering, not
allowing an equitable dispute, as both were thought best to be at present
rejected.

Now the so called Independent, or rather Congregational party, walking in the
mean, what ever the vulgar esteemed them, and how Idiot-like and simply they
conceived of them; yet the moderate and inquisitive found in their Doctrine,
more of the purity and simplicity of the Doctrine of Christ, then either of the
other held forth; namely, Bishop or Presbyter: yea, no such infallibility by
them pretended to, as both the other were guilty of, these holding that though
there was all the revealed Will of God manifested in the Scriptures, yet that
all was not discovered to the world, much less received by it all at once; but
that the Wisdom of God unveiled himself, and gave out to every Age their
portion.

The Examples they gave were clear as day, in the great manifestations God had
given the world in these latter times from Luther to his followers, from them
to Calvin, from him to this present; and therefore they propounded, That the
Rule of Gods Word held forth many things that to this Age seemed clear, yet a
future might descry doubts in, and therefore they advised moderation to be used
toward men of all opinions concerning matters of Religion of all sorts, and so
held forth the proposition of liberty of conscience, but not as agreeing that
each man might do what him lust, or live at his own law.

But that as no man knew the Father, but he to whom the Son revealed him, nor
the Son but by the Father, that is, the communication of the work of grace was
solely from the immediate hand of the Almighty; That man not disobeying the Law
Civil, that is, the proper Law of the Magistrate, as man, That the Civil Sword
or Sword of Civil Justice reached not the life of any man, no not his estate,
that is, had no just power over a man for what was only mere matter of
religion, that is of pure conscience; That is, to speak to the most men's
understanding, that the Magistrate was not (at least so the Keeper of both
Tables, as) to enforce an outward obedience to the religion he held forth; the
president of error manifest was in the diverse sounds of the Trumpets of Hen.
the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, James and Charles, all
various, some contrary; this summed up drew from contrary affected ones,
whether from interest, evil affection, or ignorance, two charges.

One of confusion so called, by affecting toleration for all opinions, yea even
to community of wives and estates, afterward called Levelling.

The other of new Lights, as if they had been merely skeptical, that is, ready
every hour, at every change of interest, or whimsey of the crown, by a
prophetic phantasy to admit a change of at least religious principles.

I have been in company with them, who after bitter invectives against
Independents (yea I may attest some of the black cloth) have upon the opening
of the Tenants, approved their enemies, and disallowed their own parties,
professing to have taken up the controversy but on trust; however the opinion
of the so called Independent agreed with the temper of the civil Magistrate, as
by him thought most suitable; yet not of necessity to the power by them
intended, which was regulated Democracie, as the King held Episcopacy best, as
most suitable to Monarchy; and the Presbyterian affected the (Lords) (however
degenerated) as sorting best with Aristocracie now corrupted: Now these
parties, though they held forth principles diverse, yea some seemingly
contrary, while the power of the King was on foot, yet they fell not right out;
many Independents looking at the outward letter of the Covenant took it; some
fearing, denied it; but this bred hot disputes, and though it were intended as
aforesaid, as a mere civil touchstone for the Commonwealths settlement, yet
from the different Interest of parties it was disobliged; but especially after
the sense was explained; and that so far from the pure natural acception of the
letter, for instance, that clause to labor uniformity, etc, according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, which was
interpreted of Scotland generally by the party.

This being on foot, and the Parliaments party brought low under the Earl of
Essex, the Defensive General; The Parliament had now found out a man, I may say
God sent them one, though of Noble extraction in the worlds phrase, that is,
born of rich parents, yea anciently rich, who would take an Offensive
Commission; for it is said Essex would not; the Commons were eager, but the
Lords opposed this, by this time resenting, their Interest also hung upon the
same chain with the Kings; but the undertaking was proceeded in too far to be
stopped, so that on they go, and now in a miserable low condition, they resolve
to new mould the Army, a work so improper and impertinent, both in regard of
distasting old Commanders, and getting new mutinies of old Soldiers, not
willing to change a General until all scores be cleared, as well as getting
new, when on the losing, nay lost side, and that obstructed with stain of
Rebellion.

But all these bugs past aside, it is ordered, and accordingly done; but there
is a rub cast in the way by the brethren of Scotlands friends; for it is
ordered none to bear office in the Army that should not take the Covenant; yet
this all this while held forth as a religious Oath, a Covenant to God, and from
thence urged to the end of civil settlement; and at last it went so high, that
no one should bear Office Ecclesiastic so called, Civil, or Military, that
would not subject his conscience to this Covenant, which as I have said few men
literally opposed, but obstructed with the late Scottish mist of interpretation
or explanation but as occasion offered; this also was not so pressed as to
retard the work which now pressed hard upon them; so that it was reported
diverse of the Members thought the Seats at Westminster too hot; for Leicester
taken, and the King with his Army coming on full and strong, the Parliament's
weak and thin, all was counted lost: I my self the day the field of Naseby was
fought, dined with four of the Honors so called, of Knight-Baronets, and two
Colonels under the Earl of Manchester, who avowed there were but two Soldiers
in the Field, the General, and Major General; Cromwell was known absent, and the
outlandish Gamester Vermuden gone, when tide turned, he had lately laid down;
which made them say, had they one thousand pound, they would not be in the
Battle for nine hundred, so lost was the Cause given; yet a Noble Knight,
though highly affected to the Interest both of Essex and Manchester resolved,
he had rather lose his 1000. l. there, then have it, and life, and liberty
taken away.

To this despicable Army in such a season and juncture of time, as there never
was the like for strength of all sorts on the other side, (as in all Battails
before) after a loss of the day in the wisdom and power of man's strength) did
the Lord give such a signal Victory, as being wisely followed and improved,
the Kings party were never able to make head again; but their several parties
in the several Counties, were, partly by the Scot, keeping them on work by
diversions; The English General, neither Winter nor Summer gave any stop, till
England had but two Armies, the mercinary so called of Scots, and the other of
English.

And the King, Oxford now only left unto him, was enforced to try his then last
shift, namely to betake himself to the Scot, having a strong Army before
Newark, thereby to engage a quarrel, as is more then evident to all; by whom he
is presently upon the surrender of the place, carried back to New Castle, and
they wisely finding the difficulties attending them, in case they should carry
him personally into Scotland, upon a Treaty deliver him up to the English, and
what was altogether unexpected, return into their own Land, what engagements to
a return I know not: And now the Presbyterian party so called, fly high indeed,
and urge execution to the highest of the settlement of their own Interest, and
having no other public enemy, bandy against their brethren in the Lords War;
the generality of the English was for them; the so called Independents, being
esteemed by the many, as the Christians of old, actors of all impurities, and
their fry of Confederates the Sectaries, but as so many legions of Devils, sent
into the world to give a stop to the erection of the glorious Kingdom of the
Lord Christ Jesus; and sure some in their zeal would have thought they had done
God good service to have killed them.

I can in my private thoughts compare their condition to none better, then that
of the Israelites, when they had the Sea before them, and an Army behind them,
and were in the wilderness; I know the passion of many a soul, when after all
their travails for Liberty, from the yoke so called of the Bishops Tyranny,
they found themselves ground to powder under the Millstone of the Presbyters
Rigidity, and all this for conscience sake; for the Presbyter began according
to the old Rule with Church work, and that was and ever will be long work;
especially where men take it upon them without the Lord, the builder builds in
vain.

From this the Commonwealth being still as over-burthened as before, the
distastes were great against the present Governors; still as before the galled
back seeks ease, let the plaster, cover, or saddle be not only gilt, but gold;
This opens a way to the oppressed for the righteous and just ends of the
undertaking of this war being held forth, that the ends of the Covenant, as
looking at Gods glory, the peoples good, and the just Rights of the King were
not ever intended to be denied; but the pretended ends, namely thereby to
ensnare the consciences of men by self-ended glosses, or the banishing their
persons, and confiscation of their goods, not for neglect of civil obedience,
but not conforming to the opinion of others, when as yet it was professed, that
grace was the free gift of God, that the rules of prudence or earnall policy
had no ground in Gods Word; if prudence only might rule, why not the Popes and
Bishops as well as the Presbyters? and to enforce conscience with the Sword of
the Scot was as evil as the Mace of a German.

These and the like matters dispersed abroad, and especially in the Army, some
Regiments rowze, and head, and notwithstanding all possible endeavors of the
Parliament both at London and in the Counties, the whole Army is fixed, and
both with life and Arms meet at the Rendezvous, and engage to prosecute the
just ends of Liberty, or to obtain the just Liberty of the people (and
hereabout the name of Levellers first arose) part of the Army actually seize
the Kings person at Holmby, and now the active Grandees of the ruling party, so
called Presbyterian, are accused of high Treason.

The King is under the custody of the Army, and all means endeavored, I
believe, to make him isntrumental to the ends propounded to themselves; how
far their Treaty proceeded, or what obligations were on either side, were and
are to me private; I can take them to be but politic Transactions with
respects to their mutual respective or particular Interests; and no further
carried on, but that either party had their safeguard, their way and place of
retreat.

But to proceed, there was much spoken now of the Scots return, and many
agitations, a great body was enforced to attend the King: And he of a politic
head was much catching and drawing; and it is likely that his great knowledge,
where he met with true conscience, not equally gifted, he must prevail; for
prevention of which and other evils, he I believe by stratagem and overreach,
was brought to carry himself into the Isle of Wight, where five hundred could
do more then ten thousand otherwhere; but see, this brings greater
preplexities; for many now wearied with war, and its effects of all sorts, or
so pretending, taking advantage of the Armies opposing of disbanding, cry out,
there can be no peace while there is an Army; and though it is truth they were
not a mere mercinary Army, but raised by Parliament, under the notion of
engagement, as free men, for their own just Rights: Yet it was plain their
Interest was now grown wholly into the Army, and that experience showed there
could be no just settlement while the Sword was unsheathed, That they intended
nothing but to take away property, and introduce confusion, and were Levellers,
haters of all Justice; so that now the Soldier was enforced to stand upon his
own guard; London was opposite, her Trade was decayed, her Assessments great,
and all places filled with complaints; The weaker party in Parliament being
sedulous and crying up the Common good, got not only many hearts, but had
enwoven many strong dependants into principal places of Trust and Office, both
at Sea and Land; so that all that the mighty men could do, was only to plot,
but they could not bring to effect: The Army was before much admired for
complying with the King; and who so high against them as the Presbyter? O they
treated, indeed it was the success (however carried) they maligned; sure I am,
they opposed not the thing, for they acted higher in it, then ever did the
other; but to prepare for the work about the eleventh of June, 1647.

The London Apprentices so called, made the foulest breach unto the Liberty of
England that ever was, forcing away the Speaker, and all partaking with the
Interest of the Army; and the residue of the Members to testify their
contrivance of the fact, choose a new Speaker; and declare them at Windsor, the
Headquarters of the Army, whither the Speaker and diverse Parliament men were
fled, or retired, a mere Juncto (as the Parliament of Westminster, and the
Assembly at Oxford had before mutually declared against each other) But by the
power of the Army they are re-instated again at Westminster, and declare
Pelhams Parliament so called, he being the new chosen Speaker, no Parliament;
but the lenity of the prevailing part went no further then imprisonment of some
heads, either not daring in such a difficult season, or prudently forbearing to
exasperate; but this lenity shattered much their work; for although in the
re-instating these Members, the Army passing through the heart of London,
showed themselves brethren, not enemies; no force, no disdain appearing; yet
London was full of hot humors; and no sooner was the body of the Army to that
end politickly dispersed, by the Members kept in, by every Voting, but they
break forth anew.

Yea, so was the plot laid, that each County in England should have their
embroilments, and the Scot should return to beat down the Levelling Army, and
re-inthrone the Presbyter; but declared to make way for a free Treaty with the
King at the Isle of Wight; a sure plot; for the Army every where distracted,
what could they do? But the plot works, let us see the event; Wales begins, the
remote part West; thither is Cromwell sent; He gone, all on the sudden the world
is full, but happily by degrees, not as intended, but occasionally; each party
of Rogues, who began the work, thinking themselves able to re-instate King
Charles; the next place was Norwich, where the Lord showed himself wonderfully,
both in the height of power, and depth of providence, of which only one word.

There was about two thousand persons in six hours time gathered together, not
intended until May day, the choice day of the Major by promiscuous popular
Election (I need say no more to show the evil in case of a future settlement)
but the Major being upon miscarriage sent for by a Messenger of Parliament; to
kill the Messenger, and rescue the Major, this multitude pretended to rise; but
up, they broke open one of the Sheriffs houses, and rifled the same, and the
Excise Office, and then seized the Magazine of the County, in which was ninety
eight barrels of powder; there were in the house, dwellers to the number of
twenty and odd of men, women, and children; the house was large and strong, yet
they forced it open, there being Arms also for two thousand persons; which
found out, they presently arm and charge; but the scowrers and worms being in,
and they in haste, their Guns became useless against the Horse, who came in to
the assistance of the Roundheads, as they were called, of whom it was resolved,
not one should be left alive by the next day after. And now both Presbyter and
Independent being in the same danger, they both met as friends, and accounted
the ones safety the others preservation; and as God preserved the Soldier
without, so did he also them within the house; for the house being blown up, as
is most likely by wilfulness of some of them (for it was declared the day
before, it would be blown up) and above one hundred of them found dead, not one
of the Inhabitants were slain, though under the same ruins; yea, a woman great
with child, formerly subject to miscarry, now near her time, though lying long
under a great wall, was taken out safe, miscarried not, but lives still to
praise the Lord, with those her brethren and sisters, who saw themselves in the
grave, and were yet raised; and this was done, April the twenty fourth, One
thousand six hundred forty eight.

From hence were the Soldiers, while the City was yet scarce settled, called to
Bury in Suffolk, thence into Kent, thence to Colchester; a small party brought
Holland's and Buckingham's partakers to their shame; and the Scot, before not
known whether Royal or Presbyterial, being (with much ado) disowned by the
Parliament, by reason, as was declared, of the insufferable cruelties and
rapines by them exercised upon the English; but the visible interest of them
was wholly Royal, commixing Councels and Interest with the renegate English, so
called; and although all the breakings forth were merely by the loose
multitude, and no appearance but for the Royal party; yet this hint was taken,
strongly to urge a close with his Majesty; and to make this the less doubtful,
the Navy in great part revolt, and the strong supporters of the Presbyterian
party engage in it.

Now whether the Independents were not true to the King in their Colloque, I
here quaere not, nor can more then before; This I am sure, they were true to
themselves.

But the Presbyterian party so called, were not true to themselves; for the
King out-went them as far as the other did him; not that I believe that they
intended it, but that their Leaders now seeing things at a dead lift, resolved
to make the best bargain they could for themselves, not seeking the Kings
Interest neither, but as it stood with their own; therefore they resolve to
please the King in all; and that the Treaty might be free, send him down new
Suits etc. and free him from the close imprisonment or restraint wherein he had
suffered; and this proceeded to a large Treaty, wherein the King and his
Creatures treated all matters as them listed; and that which was never heard on
in the world, a Prince alone to maintain Arguments both divine and civil
against the utmost wits of Lawyers and Divines, and as they were printed,
seemed to surmount them; yet to get himself into the Throne, and make his
enemies bow, he parted with what he had argued himself into; so they had what
they had, not of right, but grant still; and all this done with such sobriety,
such opposition, granting now a little, then a little, that a mere honest
eyewitness would have been deceived, notwithstanding he knew his Majesty had
declared himself a prisoner, not free, his Son the Prince now acting by his
command, avowing the Treaty forced, and the Armies of the Scots and English
engaged to break all off.

But God, notwithstanding all this, that breaks all the bows that were strained
against him, scatters all these clouds; only Colchester, the Scots Army, and
the Fleet are continued ^o exercise our patience; during the siege of
Colchester, it is wonderful that the poor Soldier should endure to fight the
same men so many times, still sending them to London, whence they escaped, and
yet he not execute them, but send them again; so that I have heard some were
taken above seven times prisoners; the Elements seemed to fight against them,
or bewail the obdurateness of some hearts, by a continual rain during all that
summer, especially at that siege, which though long, yet at last was effected;
And God so blessed the Lieut, General in the North, that though he had been
made specially isntrumental in most the great warlike affairs (as well as
conciliary) yet here he triumphed indeed; the General taken prisoner, and the
whole Army utterly dissipated, though above three to one, and disputed manlike;
but who can oppose the will of the Almighty.

Yet some endeavored therein still, and these successes against him whom God
would cast down, engaged them the more speedily to effect their intentions, and
enact a disbanding of the Army, lest the Army should disband them; This hastens
the Armies march to London, I am consident altogether unresolved what to do;
the work which God now called them to, was higher then ever, and the presages
were the ruin either of London, the Army, or both; certainly there were many
who would have put it to the Trial; but the Citizens wisely considering, that
the multitude of discontented persons, poor and necessitous, were as great, if
not greater dangers within, then the Army without, and that lose they what they
could by compliance, they must lose more by opposition, they admit the General.

The Parliament is now shattered, many of the Members being taken and
imprisoned, are declared as guilty of the bringing in the Scots, and might as
well, if not better, of the several mutinies in England on the Land, and
defection of the Ships at Sea; London is now Garrisoned, the Arrears which were
great there (intending by want of pay, if possible, to dishearten the Soldier)
are strictly ordered, (and the Seat of the beast there, that is Paul's Church
the Cathedral made a Court of Guard) and such Members as would avow the
proceedings with the King, excluded the House.

Ireland all this while was to the Parliament almost, as it has been with me,
a thing not regarded; but now there are thoughts of that, and the Army settled
under a certain number, with a settlement of pay respectively, and order taken
for the settling the Navy, and Generals sent forth; there is great thoughts of
the necessity of doing Justice; men's minds had run no higher generally, then
happily to bring a Lord or two to the block; but lo, God raises men's spirits
to that height, and brings them to it by degrees, that they bring even the King
himself to the Bar of Justice; O that every heart may tremble at the work of
the Lord! he has here manifested his power, let all Princes tremble; Charles of
England the best of Kings, I may admit, but the worst of all other men (for
none has such obligations) is the example.

No Nation had the like mercies with England, the hand of heaven had planted
and watered us, we were grown rich, our eyes stared with fat, and our bodies
sweat under the pride of apparel; but our Religion was formal, and all our
improvement of outward mercies were to licentiousness; the poor were naked,
idle, and unprovided for; the Law held forth righteousness, but the Judges and
Ministers made it crooked, or broken; the rich men only were employed, the
honor of Magistracy was rich clothes and a full Table, but they were too good
to take pains.

Now O all you Magistrates, see, God has plucked him out, who was prayed for
as the light of your life, and the breath of your nosthrils, the fountain of
your so called Honors, your Idol; and has broken off, not only the palms of
his hands and his feet, but by the Sword of the Lord has cut off his head, as
an offender against the Laws, which he was entrusted to be the chief Keeper of.
I write it, when I still see with grief, men great in riches, able in parts,
think scorn to be left out of Offices and places of trust, as neglected; but
put them in, and if they have nothing else to do, they think that a work below
them: I avow it just, if God should turn them out of all, and set the
Plough-man to be their Lord; but I see yet no Justice for man to do it; yet
that they should be punished, is most just; but of this more seasonably
afterward; men that will may see God in this, and admire.

I know many pious Christians, enemies to this Act, who yet adhered to the
Parliament in all the Wars, and contributions thereto, against the King, yea in
the offensive one; but their stick is the Covenant; I would have such rest
content (...) their own innocence in the fact they might have opposed; if then
they resisted not; let them now be silent, seeing the Lord is high in judgment.

That party of Parliament who transacted the affairs of State, now still
keeping the name of the Parliament (though assisted with, or guarded by the
Army) and in that saving to us our due Rights and Liberties, of equal Law and
property, After this fatal Sentence proceeds to the sentencing of others, both
of high and low estate, and enact the alteration of the State of the Nation
from a Monarchy, the Government being grown wholly confused; the due regulation
of the Prince, the privileges of Parliament, and the liberty of the Subject,
being rather not to be distinguished then destinguished; rather treated on in
the Schools then by themselves; and our Laws (though the ignorance of them
excused no man) by the Judges or Senate, then by the many concerned, whether
Executioners as Justices of the Peace, inferior Judges, Constables, etc. or the
poor multitude; yea, all our Cities and Boroughs lost in their Franchises, and
Towns lawless in all kinds, so that there was a kind of legal levelling or
theevery grown common: Was it not high time for the Parliament of England to
step up? God raised up some spirits, and but a few, they attempted high
matters, feared not the frown of a King, nor the combinations of all neighbor
Princes, which was threatened, but resolved to establish the work God set them
about: And I let them to know God has plained the way unto them, there is no
opposition but Self; they have been Gods instruments for great works, and must
be yet for greater; success does not always demonstrate the truth, God may
suffer them in many errors for one good sake; What he intends I determine not,
but may conjecture, that themselves saw God Almighty intended an alteration of
that frame of Government which was in this Nation. What to settle is their
work, and how; to oppose this settlement was now the endeavor; some things I
fear in the many Counterbuffs which God had given, were taken to oppose, which
were never so intended, though they might be tendered inopportunely, and under
the time of the grand design of Petitioning:

As namely some Petitions, which though not burned by the hands of the Hangman,
as that was presented to the ungarbled House, yet it was for some things, (it
may be justly distasted) in the whole disowned, and called, or rather miscalled
as seditious by some interessed persons, to render the whole odious.
Rainsborough is slain, and no due enquiry into his death, or Sir H. Cholmleys
supposed compliance with the Pomfreteers: This in an unsettled State (where
though faith was highly known and pretended to on both sides, little was acted
by the parties controverting, but as men) adopted enemies to new attempts, and
that from grounds given forth plausible enough; for the Engagements at
New Market, and Triploe-Heath, etc. were made the outside of the design: The
matter proposed might be just, but the way of undertaking disowned, and they
soon quelled by the valor and policy of the Lieut. General, who had also with
as much confidence, as cunning, strangled it formerly at Ware.

How warrantable all proceedings were, I cannot at large here discuss; but this
is evident, as soldiers they could not so dispute the matter, but their way
was unjust; what ever their cause was as Subjects, they could but Petition,
until a lawful power or just necessity headed them: This awhile obstructed the
relief of Ireland, together with some scattered scrupling objections; as that
the Land was theirs Originally, ours by Conquest only, etc. Which Arguments
admitted, would reduce us all to the mountain of Arrarat, and make all Nations
fight there (if they could find them) till they had the possession which only
they could prove was the first indubitable rightful possession of their first
Ancestor after the flood; not that I think it lawful for one Nation to
dispossess another at lust; but possession anciently acquired is just, till
lawfully evicted; and if the contest be drawn to the Swords decision, it is at
least lawful on the Conquerors part.

But really what ever appeared in it, all these were but the stratagems of the
defeated party of the King, to foment if possible new quarrels among the
Parliament party, to give some new hopes to their dying, yea, dead-hearted
cause, who meeting with discontented, hot, and eager spirits, were easily
seduced; yea, so as to declare for the necessity of introducing the Son, when
themselves agreed to dethrone, nay, execute the Father; and so far may men be
seduced by false interests: but some did highlier engage, declaring the
Parliament no Parliament; and charging of some men eminently instrumental (to
their own design) as absolute Traitors; yea, higher then the King deceased. How
things came to this height, is not worthy the controverting here; but this I
must say, the Author was a man of a high spirit, and good natural parts, a
great sufferer for the common Cause, and promoter of it; but in stead of reward
expected, slighted in what was acknowledged to him as duly merited; and upon
mistakes, as he avowed, imprisoned by his own party; thus highly exasperated,
he engages a strong party with him, who urging highly the failings of others,
by opening errors, lay the seeds of new divisions, as is objected against them;
and he is upon this miscalled, or called the Prince or Ringleader of the so
called Levellers, wherein I shall to clear all interests on foot, speak a few
words concerning Levelling; and that both properly and improperly, that is,
both as it holds forth a just Rule, and is scandalized, and an unjust end, and
therefore to be rejected; and the contest is but the same of Satan's old way of
malignity.

There are just things held out under the name of Levelling, which he would
hide, and his instuments; therefore I beseech all holding forth a profession of
Christianity, to walk worthy of their high Calling to which they are called in
the Lord Jesus; not to expound, take, or receive things, matters or persons
into obloquie or honor for men's sake, or because of Interest sake, but
according to the rule of our holy profession.

Levelling then may be considered, first, improperly, and so injustly, that is,
for a forcible taking away the property of rich men, or men that have any
property be it more or less: Now this is diverse, as first, under color of a
Title, I take away the estate, whether real or personal, of my neighbor, and
will by no means come to, either restore, or arbitrate the business; but
knowing the Law (as now used) will afford a debate lasting, and a trick may
overthrow (as aforesaid) my neighbors just right; and if he be but poor or
patient, he will be quickly disheartened, and I shall gain my end, and enjoy as
justly, even by color of Law, what was with detestable injury forced from
another (this was the great beam in some men's eyes) and called legal Levelling,
the most unjust of all, if truth it be so, which is much feared, being in all
men's mouths.

The next unjust Levelling was a Tenet, that the poor had an interest in the
Commonwealth as well as the rich; and that every man ought to have his portion;
and that the great rich men having hoarded up the Treasure, and joining house
to house, and field to field, they had so much care for the private, that the
public was neglected; yea, that the immoderate heaping of estate was unlawful,
and that there ought to be a proportion above which no man might rise; and to
remedy these evils, they would have all estates cast into a common stock, and
the land (at least) divided equally; and surely they had a great president in a
famous Commonwealth, which twice (in a short space for such a Revolution) or I
am deceived, did such an Act; but the Commonwealth was Heathen, and I know no
Rule for us to walk by their example, unless the Word of God allow it.

The next unjust Levelling, is, by forcing not an equality of division, but a
perpetual community, as supposing all evils to grow principally from the
infatiable thirst after riches; therefore these propound, Not now to apportion
estates, and after to settle propriety, and admit buying and selling, and
transmutations of possession, and so an alteration of the first settlement by
degrees; but to vest the whole interest in the body of the people, and to
settle allowances; first, for exceeding virtue, as Magistrates, and all for
eminent excellencies employed in public trust, according to their set and
unalterably appointed degrees; and next for the multitude, according to a like
set and unalterable proportion, except by the public Magistrate appointed,
respect being duly had unto the number, and condition, of Age or Youth, and
other qualifications, according to the plot laid down in that exquisite piece
of Sir Tho. Moore, intending, as I conceive the perfect Idea of a Commonwealth,
according to the rule of Nature, perfected by Evangelical Doctrine; and sure it
is, were such a State from a voluntary and unfeigned desire of well and
righteous living, voluntarily established, it were an earthly Paradise; and
that it is not impossible, the pattern of the Lacedemonian State overcomming
the most difficult parts of it, plainly declares; But its thought fit, not the
powers only, but the body are to be convinced of such things moderately and
wisely, not by indiscreet agitations, much less perturbations of a State, they
are to be left to their judgments, God will effect assuredly such things as he
has determined in his appointed season.

Another Levelling here called unjust, that is, from error continued, or by
force attempted, as was objected, (some so pretending, being instrumental in
renewing wars, and to cause out breakings) is in them, who were thought happily
to settle or attempt the settlement of their own private frame of Commonwealth,
by such means; but truly, though some assist, and others more wise declare
themselves not willing to oppose, yet I hope, yea, and am verily persuaded of
some of them, they did both respectively, out of a tenderness to men whom they
had known valiantly to oppose the common pretended Enemy, out of conscience of
the interest they now seemingly opposed, or at least cleaved not unto, though
they avowed they adhered to the interest always pretended, but the men were
changed, and acted not as they had declared.

Others were opinionated, that community was the Regiment of the Lord Jesus;
and that all Christians ought to submit to it; and they may say true, but that
time may not be yet; and when it is, surely it will not be a confused
community; the community among the Apostles (stretched only to voluntary sales,
and that) was, somewhat for the present necessity, but especially and for ever
to manifest they were all as one Family, under their Head the Lord Jesus; and
that no man called a Christian, could call ought his own, while his faithful
brother stood in need, which was, though not enforced, ever held by all
Christians, how ever weakly practiced, and in the declining State of the
Church, grew more obnoxious, ^o evident neglect.

Now such a community, that the poor Christian being laborious (if able to
work) should be relieved where his labor failed, or in what it reached not
unto (that so he might live comfortably, and rejoice in the Covenant of his
God) assuredly ought, and I hope will be reduced to its original purity.

Now there was another unjust Levelling talked of; which was an unregulated
community, that is, the setitng up the Law of Naturals without the Divine
regulations; that is, to live like beasts, to kill and eat, to live each man to
his lusts, and the stronger to overcome the weaker; which confusion having
ushered in a necessity of regulation, then and thereby to lay the foundations
from that necessity, of a holy or just Community among the people; supposing
men, while enjoying ought assuredly, would not be drawn to an uninterested
Polity, wherein, though the end be approved, yet no just man will allow the
means, if he remember we must not do evil that good may come of it, no not in
this juncture of time when the floodgates of Liberty were broken up, though
that some may think, to that end Providence so ordered the matter; and to men
so settled, there is no chain strong enough.

O Lord, I pray thee open such eyes, especially of those that from a sincere
heart desire thy glory, least their zeal, not according to knowledge, make thy
truth and zeal for thee evil spoken of; and most like it is, of such spirits
were they, who were seduced, if seduced, or that they drew away themselves and
others with them.

But let them know, that in such unruly breakings out of parties into
contentions of divided interests, it is more lawful for their opposites, being
in present power, to subdue and punish them, then for them to labor and
endeavor by force or disobedience to subdue or cashiere their opposites: And
now I am come to the more particular discussion of just Levelling (or just
things held out by men, no way aiming at any by, or corrupt end, or interest
whatever.)

Just Levelling then so called is an impropriety in regard of the acceptance of
the word, a propriety in regard of the end; for it looks at just things justly,
however it is scandalized; and is in a word, but the rule of proportionate
Justice: I say, not only Justice, but proportionate, that is, that there be
not only one Law, but that Law held forth with due respects of equity and
righteousness; as for example, To charge a Gentleman that has three hundred
pound a year, a horse for Service, and to charge him for 300. li. a year, to a
Rate is just, for such an estate there is; and to charge a Gentleman of three
thousand pound a year, a horse also, is just; and to charge him for three
thousand pound per annum is just; but this is not levelled, that is, brought to
the proportion of equal distributive Justice; for if you will do so, then the
proportion must, and ought to be thus fixed; (first, admitting that
qualifications of the mind, though honored, be not charged; for that of the
Poll-money was in that exceedingly unjust; diverse Knights, Esquires, Doctors,
Attornyes, etc. not being worth the money they were assessed at by the Poll)
but I say that excepted, they must fix a Rule for the value of a Gentleman,
Esquire, Knight, etc.

To which end, Suppose the estate of a Gentleman be 300. li. per annum, as
before, and that this shall be charged one horse: then a Gentleman of 600. l.
must be three; for if that three hundred maintain a Gentleman and one horse,
six hundred may maintain two horses more; and so in proportion in all charges
and duties in the Commonwealth.

These Levellers prefer the integrity of a Religious conversation in all things
answerable to the strictness of their holy profession, above all policy and
carnal interests; therefore they honor rich men, but they especially esteem
and trust virtuous men; and therefore desire, that in public Administrations
the basis and settlement of the Commonwealth may be so tempered, that the
virtuous, and experienced judicious man may not be cashiered a fit Regiment for
want of Riches, being well knowing that the purity and corruption of interest
are the props and decays of a Commonwealth respectively as they are admitted.

They deny not that the foundations of England settlement were just, nor that
there was always a politic settlement held forth; but they say it was never
practiced as held forth, and yet held forth far short of what the perfection of
our profession enlightens unto; whereupon they urge, that the whole frame of
our Government, Civil as well as Ecclesiastic, ought to be brought to the
Standard of Justice, at least to that the Declarations of Parliament seem to
^old forth, which own as much in Generals, as they desire in particulars;
wherefore they say, that they are confident it can now be nothing but corrupt
and partial Interests that can divide; and therefore they desired, that the
foundations being assured, the superstructure might be answerable; and that in
not only the clearing of the Rights of the supreme Magistrate, but of the
Subjects in all Offices, Trusts, and Degrees, in such a plain, evident
Christian manner, that no man might complain justly, either that through
ignorance he knew not the Law, or difficulty that he could not perform it, or
delays that he were oppressed instead of relieved by it; and to that end
desired the Laws in English, all fained actions and intricacy of pleadings to
be annulled, Courts of Law and equity with all other legal proceedings to be
in the respective Counties; Bargains and Sales, and all conveyances to be
enrolled, all Lands to pay debts, Creditors to be paid equally out of the whole
estate of the Debtor, not preferring fraudulent Judgments before honest Bills;
all actions under such a value to be determined by any two Justices of the
Limit by their Warrants without Writ, especially at monthly meetings, but more
especially if they were both poor, that is, not worth one hundred pound clear,
or if but one of them, the poor being grown lately as well enemies and
devourers of one another as the rich.

That there might be but one weight, whether Troy or Aver du-poiz, in the
Nation, and so one measure; and one tenure, that is Freehold of the State, not
grantable to any person or persons, so called mean Lords, as tending to the
high advancing of particular interests, much more subject to destroy then
support the Commonwealth; especially that basest badge of slavery, and the most
prejudicial to the interest of a free Commonwealth, the so called Villeni or
bond service, urging that the Rule of Littleton, That Land being the less
worthy cannot engage the person of a free man which is more worthy, and so that
Villenage, or now so called Copyhold, is incompatible with freedom; and the
evil effects of this have appeared in choice of Representatives, as dangerous
as ever did any Feife service of the Barons to their Sovereigns the Kings; and
they say it is just the Comminalty should have right done against inferior
Lords, now the Lords have right against the King or State, that so while we be
freed from the Tyranny of a Prince, we may not be worse slaves each to other;
for they can instance more wicked, unchristian, merciless, and cruel acts in
Copyhold Lords, then in all the Princes in the world.

They also desired, if the State took Tonnage, and Poundage, Customs, etc.
that the Seas might be guarded (and some said, if they did not, it was lawful
to steal Custom, but I put that opinion in a Parenthesis) they desired that no
person or condition of men might be secured from Law; that all evils as
appearing, might be at appearing, rectified; and to that end, that an easy
address might be to Courts of Justice, settled in power in the respective
bounds, both for ending and determining according to Law settled, and preparing
for remedy to emergent evils by certificate of the matter.

They said they valued their privileges as high as any, but they would part
with their privileges of men, to enjoy the privilege of just and wise men;
they therefore would deny themselves things lawful, if found inconvenient; thus
did they submit to the Magistrate, and thought not themselves wiser then them
whom God set over them; but this also admitted, that Magistrates were men and
might err; that the rule of their Government being but perfect reason,
(supposed that infallibility was not tied to the Seat of Justice, if not to the
Throne of the Prince, and Chair of the Bishop) that it was the duty of the
Subject, with fear and humility to advise of the Law; and that no man might
oppose the Law but lawfully; not to be the Authors of disturbance to the State,
lest each man might contend for his own opinion, until there were as many Laws
as men: They said that the poor were a parcel of the body politic, which ought
to be provided for setledly and sufficiently (some propounded Commons, some
concealed Lands, some one thing, some another; but these were mistaken parties,
generally, though well affected they might be; for Commons were the Tenants
Rights originally, not the poors; and concealed Lands might now have proved as
fatal a Hawk to the State to whom they now belong, as Forest Lands did before
to the King; for, as I have said before, all Tenures, Titles, etc. being grown
so difficult, what might not have been adjudged now concealed, as then was
Forest?)

These men further allowed and desired, that persons should be brought into due
degrees, the due power of all persons respectively settled, the primitive order
for security of the Nation by the enforcing the Laws of Tythings for idle
vagrant persons, Hues and Cries for Thefts, Robberies, and such like, that due
orders of Cities, and Walled Towns, Bridges, and great Roads for Watches, etc.

Regulations of all Trades by certain and just Laws might be renewed, Prisons
not made the Schools of all Villainy, but places of due laborious restraint and
safe keeping, and that specially first for persons criminous, next dangerous,
lusty, riotous, lazy, and idle.

Public Offices to be born at the public charge, and no just Office to be the
burden or ruin of a man, such as to be a Reader of Inns of Court,
High Sheriff, Constable, Major, Sheriff, etc. of Counties and Cities.

That all Customs be certain, all Fees of Officers, with a thousand things
more which experience had rendered manifestly holding forth Justice, or the
foundations thereof.

Now these just things being so diametrically opposite to the Interest of
multitudes who had for their corrupt interest sake, or to make a fortune in
their own Idolish phrase, joined themselves to the Parliament party, were
heard, but neglected, then scandalized to commix Interests with the errors
afore-supposed in Levelling in the grossest acceptance; so that each rule
almost of moral honesty, was now miscalled Levelling.

The reason why I call these just things Levelling, is to unmask these Satan's,
and to manifest to all men the strange artifices used to obstruct the truth,
and take men off from the entertaning true apprehensions of it, suggesting to
them these jealousies; that though the Propositions held forth nothing but
seemingly just, honest, and Christian, yet no doubt there was a Snake lay in
the grass, to eat in pieces the root of Government, and debase the Supremacy of
Magistracy, destroy order, annihilate property, and introduce the confusion
(which some, as I have said, are said to intend) and we may justly fear, if
some timely and just order preventive be not applied, will by these
self-seekers be assuredly perfected.

But all these just Levellers had not the same foundation or principle for
their designs; though know assuredly, all honest men real and of public
spirits, Papist or Kings Protestant (that is, he that would walk no further in
the way of Christ then the Laws of the Land taught him; that is, believing as
was by Law established, according to the Canon, etc. yet zealously making
conscience of being wiser then his Teachers) Presbyter or Independent, or of
any Sect, Opinion, or Religion soever, were nicknamed Levellers, by them that
found it best fishing in troubled pudled waters.

But as I say, they had several principles; The Presbyter founding his
Levelling upon the Judicials of Moses, stuck to that Rule, that the Judicials
were Gods own Law given to his own people, with whom he had entered a Covenant,
not only upon Mount Sinai, but in the loins of Abraham, father of the faithful,
that so Abraham is our father, and we by faith his seed, and so bound.

Again, that the people chosen of God, were Types of all Gods people, to whom
that Law was given in them, and living according to that Law, should thereby
manifest themselves each to other to be the people of God, that Christ had not
destroyed this Law, he came to fulfill it: And lastly, they enforced this from
the rule of reason; If man had no boundary to his Reason, no rule to make his
Law by, reason would be infinite, which error had been the foundation of so
many dreadful alterations as States had suffered under, in such clymaterick
revolutions as now this Nation labored under; and therefore they desired the
drawing of Englands Laws to their primitive rule, namely the Judicials. This
was objected against by others, who yet desired a rule of righteousness,
alleging, that if this were the Rule, then it must be all so, or but part; not
all, for the Ceremonial Law being the shadow, fled away at the coming of Christ
in the body; and that the Church of Rome had done evil, yea, that it was the
foundation and root of their so dangerous Apostasy, to carry the shadow along
with the body; for, from thence had come their high power of the Pope, their
sacring of Churches, as well as persons, their Altars, Trinckets, etc. their
Jubiles, Pardons, Indulgences, etc. Canonical hours, holy Vestments, and all
the rest of their trash; and that one admitted, all would follow; and as the
entertaining the amusive or formal part of worship into religious services, had
under the supremacy of the Ecclesiastic power defiled Church and Commonwealth,
taking away all sense of inward, serious, conscionable, moral duty, as well as
religious, and resting only in the exterior form, either the pomp of the
action, or the act it self: So now, in the reformation of the Ecclesiastic
power, by the Magisterial Civil power, the Commonwealth would at last lay the
foundation of a new defilement to the Church; and that this might be, was too
too evident by the precedent example: So that we should but change the Tables,
and keep the false Dice still, which would never better our game; and therefore
they said, that unless there could be showed exactly which part of the
Judicials, by an infallible word, and that as given by Moses, (that is, not as
confirmed by Christ or his Apostles) was the rule of Christian duty, they would
take none at all (as so given) for if man were Judge of a part of that Law, how
agreeable to the Nation, whereof he or they were rulers, then of all; and if
so, then as good take pure reason, not contrary to the Law of Christ and his
Apostles, but founded rather upon his Doctrine, in the general rule, though the
particular application might vary in respect of circumstances, so not rejecting
the judicials, but not taking them as obligatory, as given to the Jew, the
people of God, or typing out all Christian Nations, or an Ensign of the faith,
but as a wise Law, yea the wisest, as being the dictates of the prime wisdom,
the same God that the Christians worshipped, they not only admitted, but
desired such as were consonant to Christian reason to be established amongst us.

There were some particular contentions, as first for Tithes, secondly Appeals,
next the Sabbath, then Theft not to be death, then Adultery and Blasphemy to be
death; and these were things of principal Interest indeed: But the Interest (in
part, which discredited the whole) was so visible, as I cannot allow it, though
I may them who sought the thing as afflicted in spirit, seeing the want of
conscience in multitudes, thinking ill of all called Ministers, for some evil
men's sakes, open profanation of the Sabbath by those professed a Sabbath (and
by the last Act restrained in part, and left in other part as loose as before)
petty Theft, death; yet in the same State common and manifest Adultery go
without any punishment or question (and all for want of a rule, for we hear of
long debates about it) and Swearing and Blasphemy almost as ordinary as
speaking; yet proof made difficult, and punishment easy, but no conscience of
reforming; for few thought it a sin; for the great men and the wise men were
most guilty and gloried in it; so that it was evident, that as some sought the
re-establishment of the old frame of Government, and that both in Church so
called and State, according to the old pattern of the Erroneous Church, or
Apostasy of Rome, founding upon the equity and useful allusion (so called) of
the Mosaical Judicials and Ceremonials; some nothing but confusion: so others
desired one wholly new, avoiding all the errors which corrupt interests had
introduced; and that not only because the way of Error was before tracked, and
therefore easy to be trodden anew, but as being builded upon a false
foundation, as well as by time and error corrupted and perverted.

Some of these, though holding the truth, were by a part of themselves supposed
to be in an error, while presuming upon the wonderful mercies the Lord had
bestowed upon them, they were over-rash in their desires of a change; for the
evident symptoms of unavoidable ruin, say they, threaten us, the multitude of
interests are so diverse, and contrary; how few are there to manage such a work?
not one to ten, if one to an hundred: this were to tempt God, To expect
miracles in a day when miracles cease; God bade the Jew not destroy all their
enemies at once, lest the beasts should prevail against them; it may hold forth
the simplicity of the Dove, but not the subtilty of the Serpent, which is
requisite in this case; for you see, say they, what a contest has been with
the single interest of the Clergy, and the scattered fry of their corrupt
Courts; but if you engage against all the remainders of them, with the numerous
offspring of all Courts, as of Judges, Sergeants, Counselors, Sollicitors,
Attorneys, Protho-notaries, Secondaries, Clerks of the Crown, Clerks of Assise,
Clerks of the Exigents, Clerks of the Papers, Clerks of the Warrants, Clerks of
the Essoyne, Clerks of the Juries, Clearks of the Pipe, Clerk of the Kings
silver, Clerks of the Seal, Clerk of the Peace, Custos brevium, Chyrographers,
Fillizer, Marshals, Cryers, Waiters, Chancellors, Remembrancers, Six Clerks,
Registers, Comptrollers of the Seal, Examiners, Clerk of the Hamper, Clerk of
the petty Bag, Cursiters, Sergeants of the Mace, Ushers of the Court, Clerks in
nature of ordinary Attorneys, with many more, and all these having their
adherents; for which of these but come in under some corrupt interest or other?

But generally, the chief in Offices, at least of profit, as Judges, Sergeants,
Counselors, Advocates, Doctors, Proctors, Attorneys, Six Clerks, Clerks of
Assize, etc. are all the younger Brethren, or sons of Lords, or of their
Families, however of the greatest Gent. and of the Parliament men themselves,
and settled by the Bastard so called the Conqueror upon a politic Maxim,

That the Land in England being appointed for the safeguard of the Kingdom,
might not be brackled away; therefore as all the Land went to the eldest, these
were the ways of educating and maintaining the younger, make them Lawyers, and
make the Laws dubious, Offices plentiful, and there would be (as experience
has proved it sufficiently) a plentiful portion; then settle Tithes, increase
Gleabs, build Monasteries, etc. and there is another portion, Colleges and
Halls I will reckon to them, then Physicians and Merchants; so that if you seek
due Reformation, you will make each one your enemy, and the whole world will
be against you; and nothing but confusion can be ushered in by the pretended
Reformation; you will have Parliament, City, Country, Lords, Gentry,
Comminalty, and all against you; nay, if you will purge thoroughly, you must
alter the whole course of all commerce.

For there is no Traffic according to a rule of Righteousness.

Let Errors as they came by degrees, so by degrees be reduced, pull out a
crazie stone, but put in a good one; the contrary party objected, that this was
to dawb with untempered Mortar, not to serve God but themselves, that it was to
pretend to do good, and do evil; that this was the Error of the King and the
two first Parliaments; that they had upheld following providence, to mount into
the Carr of Government; that they had dared enough then against all interests,
Kingly, Parliamentary, Country and City; by their executing Charles, and
imprisoning the members, Garrisoning the City, and Quartering in the Counties:
Thus were matters bandied, and some parties grew so fierce (as anger is always
a short madness) that they did they knew not what; which yet testified that
their anger was selfish; others more wisely wrote, but unwisely in that they
remembered not they stirred a Lion; they depended so much upon their first
engagement to the Parliament, that they thought they might have said any thing.

Let truth bear sway, she always carries a Majesty and will prevail; but many
tell truth, some with upbraidings and revilings, some with cursings, and others
(almost all) with bitterness; truth is ashamed by these frailties, and suffers
for a weak servants sake.

But these men concealed their names; and though some wise men did so, yet
their writings were such as could not justly be traduced for scandal or
sedition; and these men neither owned their names when their books were most
acceptable; nor in times most dark and dangerous; but some of these others
owned them sometimes, otherwhile they denied them, whereby they were suspected
of no great integrity; others did openly own their works in times of great
danger under the King, and also under the Parliament, yea even when they
opposed them in their highest privileges, some debating one thing, some
another, yea some against the public transactions of the State, and some for a
general liberty of all opinions, and printing and publishing (which to be
settled with safety to the State, and no prejudice to the light of truth, is a
matter difficult, but of importance, not to be neglected) they also urged to
the men in power the hand of God upon the Nation, how introduced, that the same
or worse evils were now upon us, our Courts of all sorts having changed rather
their Judges then their justice, that Committees were worse rather then
ordinary Courts, as being made of those persons who were the supreme Judges;
and they erring, all the inferior wheels might well move out of order.

And proceedings in Parliament were the same, so difficult, dilatory, and so
expensive, that men were even tired in body as in spirit; they did acknowledge
the greatness and difficulty of the work, they considered interests, and yet
they thought there was not that expedition or integrity requisite to so high
trusts in such a season of judgment.

And this was evidenced by the expedition in matters of interest private (so
called) that is to the assurance of the acquired Supremacy, and raising the due
assessments, but not in the general settlement as was propounded; this draws
some men to that piece so called the Agreement of the people; a thing, which
were the people capable of such a work, might, if rightly stated, be of great
avail; but indeed to put into the hands of so vast a multitude, of such diverse
interests, and that without an assured and competent number to carry on the
work, which in probability they neither had, nor could have had, without
employing the Swordmen (which in it self had totally ruined the nature of an
Agreement) had unravelled all the work, and set us as far back as at the
beginning; but that the propounders of it were turned recreant to their
principles (some particular man might) or had joined interest with the Royal
party, I cannot believe it.

But I suppose really they were by that party and some others of eager spirits
it may be, really longing and breathing after Righteousness, and settling the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ (I fear yet in their own strength) encouraged to go on
in their design, (which some of them politickly saw tended to divide, and that
was to let them reign) but surely these Royal instigators were men of lost
condition: for what could the issue have been, but renewing a more deadly and
confused war? for the multitude being by this Act publicly appealed to, and
that by the sole existent power Civil, they must have assumed the absolute
supremacy into the mere vulgar Ocean; and sooner can you set bounds to the
Ocean then their appetites: This foreseen, this piece was after long debate,
with much wisdom, for the present, cast into the number of Petitions,
Remonstrances, etc. of Parliament, to be by their mature advisements qualified,
fit for propagating common interest in due time; but this obstruction
imbittered the more, and made some spirits, under concealed, or not owned
names, to set abroach the failings, errors, and miscarriages of all the Members
in Parliament, or else scandalize them; and pinching still the ablest and
activest, they hoped to foyl so, that some soil should remain, though most
would not gain credit.

Far be it from me, pretending integrity, to assert what I know not, but I must
hope the Charges against some men, if not the most, are merely suggestions of
envy to eminent virtue; for I see great things done by them, and their words
are sweet as honey: Truth is, I am not so blind neither, but I can see and hear
that favor and friendship is the Mistress with the State, as it was at Court;
and oppression and covetize is not banished Englands Commonweal; but I must
say, that retorted, is as true, namely, that it is incident to men neglected to
complain, and so to men oppressed; I would allow an equal and speedy trial
according to my rule, even to my deadliest (manly) enemy; the want of this has
much exasperated many, and gained none cordially.

Now in all this enarration, you say, what coherence is there 'twixt Christ and
his Doctrine; his professors, and their conversation? had we not better have
sat still? How many thousands, nay ten thousands has this War cost, as in
the Kingdoms account is evident? But I cannot agree the Doctrine, it was
necessary to purge, it is evident there was need and great need of Reformation;
let not the particular errors of Reformers cause us to fall out with duty; But
while they fail, let us as we should, seek the Lord with double diligence. I
know there is much objected, but the matters most eyed, are first of
purse-concernment, as the Taxes or Assessments for the Army, the Excise,
Customs, etc. wherein many that are contented to pay, do yet much repine at the
inequality of the levy.

But as to them I must say, I know they in Supreme trust have of late done
much, nay, almost as much as in them lies; its particular interest now
obstructs; the real truth is, corrupt principles have such root in us, that
gain is above all godliness; men eminent could be willing all others should
have Justice, so they might be favored.

Yet this one thing might well be yet provided for in the Act, that persons of
not above four pounds per annum, and not able to work; or having a charge of
children, and no personal estate, to the value of ten pounds, and not being
Farmers, but living upon that, should not be charged; many now paying twenty
shillings per annum to the war, who are fitter to receive collection; and many
worth four or five thousands, nay ten thousand pounds personal estate, not
taxed at all; or if at all, not above one shilling or one shilling six pence
for three months.

The next matter chiefly eyed was (after the alteration of the State from a
Monarchy to a Free State or Republike) to consider what should now be done to
make good that freedom promised; and the first, or one of the first matters
existent as a Law, was the Act for Treasons; the Objections against the
substance of the Act as to the matters what is Treason, I for the present omit
to relate, but pass to the forfeiture, which is to the State as to the King;
and this some humbly conceive not agreeable to the rule of just Freedom; hear
their reasons shortly.

They say first, That it is unjust to punish the child for the fathers
offense; that it is evident that this was not the original Law of England,
Nature, or Nations, but the usurpation of Princes Heathen, imitated by
Christians for profit sake; that it is a folly to think love of the estate, or
of wife, or children, will deter, where the life is not considered; and that
this lays the same foundation for the State to seek by the rigor of Laws to
gain estates to it self, as in the King; so that now our condition is not
bettered in our Liberties; for as our Supreames may be more merciful; so they
may be more rigorous; the settled equal Law is the Subjects best privilege.

Again, In the Act for Treason, they say, this seeking of interest is evident
in the particular of Coynage of money, Clipping, etc. which being a work
private, much evil may be done, and no legal discovery made, as late frequent
practice in all places has evidenced; but to put a penalty upon the offerer of
it, would soon give a full stop to it; and that is the best Law which effects
its ends with least public or private detriment; now to forfeit the piece so
clipped, filed, or rounded, would stop the current; but to forfeit that, and so
much more, would dry it up quickly, especially if it had an easy Trial, as
before the next Justice, or two next Constables, or some certain number of the
neighborhood, and the faulty money immediately to be cut in pieces: I speak not
of Coining, Stamping, Counterfeiting, and Washing; let due penalties be (by
Law) imposed; only trial speedy and easy.

The next Act controverted, is that of Printing; the Objections against which
being publicly avowed in Print, though some may say more wittily then with
found Christian consideration, I shall here only say thus much, that as is
there in part held forth, it is likely to be found the best expedient to stop
the current of calumnious Printing, not to do things subjecting to scandal; and
assuredly all moderate men will assert the Magistrate against the Calumniator,
if to this end the Press were open, provided that each man would own his work;
and like the old Greekish propounder of a new Law, write under the peril of his
life; it might be an useful expedient to take off Tryflers, though it might
endanger many, whose zeal were either too much, or knowledge too little.

I am now come shortly to the great rubb at present, which is the Engagement,
against which none sure but preingaged persons can (as matters stand) object
justly; for otherwise to resolve Conscience, we must ravel the Successions of
all powers; for if the actual possession of the Supreme power, does not enable
to require all Political obedience, then surely acquests without just Title are
void, if so time cannot remedy it, if so it concerns all powers to justify to
each Scrupler, not only his pedigree, but the justice of it from the beginning
(I may say of the world) but it is plain the Boglers at the work are such as
look for an other change: It is certain, Protection requires Obedience; and it
is as certain that they are happy in Politics, who in the Changes of
Government are so disposed by the Supreme Wisdom (for man's alone will not
avail) that they exercise the extreme or height of Rigidity or Mercy aright
(for one is ever found necessary.)

And now I am come to the last great contest, the peoples Liberties: The
questions are first concerning an extraordinary Commission to try sitting the
odinary Courts at Westminster.

For the holding up the hand, opening of doors, both which were pressed; I fear
rather to make a party, and oppose the present Power, then out of Conscience I
omit them here.

The next was, Whether in Case of Life a man may have Council?

A third, Concerning the lawfulness of requiring, and taking the general plea,
not guilty.

The last, Whether the Jury be Judges merely of fact or of Law also; and to
these well may be added two things more, namely the Queries concerning
maintenance in prison, And arresting by an armed power in the time of peace.

All which indeed are of main concernment to the Nation and people; yea, even
as much as Lives and Liberties, matters of the most precious respect with men,
and justly to be inquired into, wherein I shall only shortly give the general
Opinions and Arguments of men wise and desiring just things, but withal
entreating briefly of the criminal part of our Laws prosecution which hitherto
has been purposely waved.

I take it, that the Law of England, according to the rule before said down,
owns a twofold way of bringing persons criminous to trial; which is, that of
appeal, of which I shall only hint what it was, being now a thing, as before I
said, wholly disused, namely, it is a prosecution of the party, be it for
Maihem or Felony of any sort, and in the name of the party appealing; which
suit he might by the Law compound for, and release, yea, if it were for murder
(at least it was so used) which liberty being much abused, the parties, who
upon the heat of the blood, that is, while the injury was fresh complained,
were bound over by Recognizance to prosecute for the King; and so were the
Witnesses; (but if the party, or the Witnesses, should refuse it, it might much
be scrupled, what by our Law ought to be done to enforce them justly; but
Custom has prevailed) to go by steps: The places of Trial of Crimes, are
either the Ordinary, as King's Bench, or Statute-Sessions, or the Extraordinary,
and yet Ordinary, viz. the Commissions of Oyer and Ter. and Gaol Delivery
carried down always with the Justices of Nisi Prius at the Assizes, or the
legal Extraordinary, which were an assotiation of more men then ordinary,
according to the novelty and exigency of the cause, most legally and usually
made up of all the Judges of all the Benches, and no other, and heard in the
Checkquer Chamber. Now these are not to be scrupled in themselves; the other,
and which are extraordinary and scrupled as illegal, are mere Royal
Commissioners consisting of Judges, Lords, and other men, according to the
pleasure of the prime Magistrate; and these were rare, and but in case of great
offenses or doubts of imminent, at lest so pretended concernment.

And there were two Causes, the one professed, which was the resolution of many
wise men sworn to do right, according to Law, betwixt the King or State, and
the Subject, who by concurrent Votes assured the interest of either party; and
surely, were the Law by which they judged as plain and evident, as the reason
or foundation of their extraordinary judgments, there would be no exception;
but the fear heretofore on the peoples part which is the ground to the present
jealousies, was in respect that Commissions pretended of that nature, were
aiding to the inchroaching virtue of the Supreme Power, to the advance of
Prerogative, especially after King James had made the Judges (which were the
leaders in both these powers) his mere Creatures by absolute dependence in
altering their Patents, as aforesaid, from during their well abearing to during
his pleasure: How the Judges Patents are now, I know not; but except the
present condition of affairs make that now lawful, which in it self is not,
surely such Arbritrary Patents are introductive of the heights of vassalage;
for if they in each Punctilio advance not the intendments and interests on foot
of the Supreme Magistrate, be it good or evil, for God, or against Liberty or
Bondage: A Writ of Ease is next to be expected, and that engages to the slander
of every malicious enemy, and he now lies open to the lash of every accuser;
especially if any litigious person has been overthrown before him, O how the
man bustles, and now is his time for revenge! our eyes have seen this, and this
I suppose to be the ground of fears of such Commissions.

I willingly avoid Ravelling Controversies upon presidents, which in our Laws
are so many, and so diverse each from other, and multitudes so contrary each to
other, as supreme or most excellent reason must bear sway; and then the
arbitrium of the Commission will not be so much the question, as the Law by
which judged. If it be objected against the adjoining in Royal Commissions,
that they are nor Lawyers nor Judges in Ordinary, but Merchants, etc. I say,
there lies an Appeal to Parliament, from any Court, Ordinary, or Extraordinary,
which receives Commission under the Parliaments Authority.

If it be objected, they are merely the States Pentioners, then the Argument is
against the Supreme Magistrate mediately, against their Judges immediately, and
is remedied by appeal; but this is manifest, that there is no necessity of
these Commissions; they were continually declaimed against, and denied as one
gap to invade the native proper liberty of the Subject, and if now enforced,
can but foment jealousy against the State.

Having now found out the proper Courts of Trial of criminal persons; let us
see who the criminous person is, and how to be dealt withal; the criminous
person is vulgarly taken to be him that is accused, Legally him that is
convicted, not differencing where upon examination before the Justice there is
confession of the party, full evidence upon oath, violent presumptions, or
barely suspicion; but all are dealt withal alike, except they misdemean
themselves; and in case the matter be baylable, baylable alike, few Justices
looking at good bail, but all the Clerks at their Fees; in which case much
error is where the Clerk is Justice of the Peace, or etc. and the Justice not
able, or too proud to draw a Warrant himself.

Now by the Law of England, and just reason, men's liberties being highly
prised; heretofore men were to be tried the next Gaol delivery; I mean at the
Sessions for the County; but now by a Statute made in the time of Philip and
Mary, or at least under pretense of it, all matters criminal being death, that
is, out of the Rogues City of Refuge; that is, to which they cannot readily
plead guilty of all Felonies within Clergy, the still continued shame of
England; so that some use a hateful Proverb, (All Rogues to the Clergy, and all
Clergy to the Gallows) they must be tried at the so called Assizes.

This Statute was a great friend to the Clerk of the Assize, above the Clerk of
the Peace; and those Justices that will not see this Statute, the Inquisitive
Clerk of Assise can spy his time to fit him if he comes in his compass, which
may be every Assizes; and though present, put him down absent, so he is fined
forty shillings; and to remedy it, will cost twice so much.

Now in the Gaols, the Schools of Iniquity, they are not employed; and if any
one will employ himself, he must purchase his liberty to use his Trade at the
Gaolers discretion; for there is no Law for it, no not for Debtors; so that
having nothing to do, the Prisoners confer notes; and the older Thief,
Cutpurse, etc. still instructs the younger in the revealed quidities of the Law.

Vain people think highly of these nice evasions of Law; but the serious sees
it makes the Law ridiculously difficult; the great Rogues escape, but the
ignorant and unexperienced dye for it: All honest men love mercy, and are as
loath simple Felony should be death as any; but they would not men should by
Custom abuse just things, or endure unlawful ones, or connive at wickedness.

Yet these and multitudes more well known, have long, and do still pass
unremedied, or are provided for but in part, or for a parcel of the
Commonwealth; So that it is certain, the generalty of men which once come into
Englands prisons of all sorts (as now used) are spoiled for ever, both as to
industry and honesty; yea, so notorious is the evil, that I have known many
Justices avow, it was their sorrow to be in place, to be instrumental to such
evils, by sending one for his first offense to Gaol, and likely to be amended;
but sent to Jail (whither he must go) he was irrecoverably lost.

Now for maintenance in prison, originally in such cases as the State was
forfeited, as in Treasons and Felonies which were tried very speedily, the
State was seized by a public Officer by way of securing, and the wife and
children if any were, continued in the house, etc. giving security the goods
were not imbezeled, and naught removed or sold, unless for the mainteance of
the prisoner, the forfeiture then reaching from the time of the fact committed;
and then though this were just, there was this injustice that the forfeiture
paid no debts, an unjust and unchristian thing, yea if opened, the loose or
inlet to abominable, cheating cozenage and knavery.

Now the Law is (that is, practice constant) that the prisoner maintain
himself, till himself, wife and children are undone, by selling all they have
for the maintenance of the prisoner, and paying Jail Fees (though he be not
guilty, a most wicked thing) and this happily for acts or words no way
Treasonable, Felonious, etc. or for such matter, which none but a malicious
Adversary would have prosecuted.

And to say the King paid his prisoners Fees, is but to argue from matter of
fact; for take a prison properly, it is but as a pound to dammagious beasts,
and in the proper pound the owner must provide for them, and they that offend
must provide for themselves, or rely on charity; It is truth, it is but just,
that in case of (so called) illegal, or in cases dubious, whether baylable or
not, or where baylable, yet for good cause denied; and in all extraordinary
imprisonments, that is, by absolute power in limited Monarchy, being causes for
which the Law provided not, it seems reasonable, that the same power that
commits should sustain, until the Law adjudges the offense; for in that case
the restraint of a Freeman seems punishment enough; now for such a man how he
comes into prison, that is, whether by the ordinary Officer of Justice, as a
Constable, or by an extraordinary hand, as by armed men, is not material; but
the Quaere must be rightly stated;

That is, whether in a time of full peace, no enemy appearing, nor to be
feared, a Subject may be by Law arrested by an Armed power; as to this it is
said, that considering Law to be the issue of perfect reason, it is a matter
worth mature advisement; for the life of liberty lies in it, that is, the
refuge of the Subject against the powers or authority, call them what you will;
for commonly the Soldiery are either in body, and so obey no common Arrests
and Processes of set Courts; or dibanded; and seldom an active man in his own
County, and well known, will appear in acts of high dispriviledge; so that
offenders in this kind are seldom worth suing upon a trespass, and the law of
retaliation rather satiates the brutish then the manly passion or affection,
and bondage for satisfaction has been hitherto exploded.

Others say, the crime is to be looked at, and then no matter who executes it;
as in Felony, each man may by Law arrest; and then if every man will, it is
neither Riot nor Conspiracy, what ever it may be called: Others rejoyn to both
parts, and say that they are sadly distressed to see the various interests of
persons, leading one way to day, another to morrow, which their diversity of
opinions fully demonstrate. They desire plain truth with Justice, and to that
end they say that both are lawful, time and person considered; and that this
consideration is and must be left to the Magistrate, who must not stick so in
the bare letter, that he lose the evident meaning of the Law, and ought to be
punished as a defaulter against his trust, should he not in some causes use
extraordinary power; for the Commonwealth must not be without sufficient power
to defend it self.

And therefore they say, that if the Law does not provide for such emergencies,
he ought to be defaulted if he improves not his power to the discharge of his
trust, that is the peace and safety of the Commonwealth, though he incurrs the
lurch of the Law according to the old Letter.

The example was under the late King James at his coming to the Crown, when
after the death of famous Elizabeth, the County of York raised men and armed
them against a sort of outlaws, which Act was by the letter of the Law
Treason, etc. but upon debate, wary enough, it was resolved their duty, and
they had their pardon; against which only some object, saying, that if in
reason they offended not, why should they be pardoned?

Now this is answered, others might else be imboldened without due cause, which
say the objector's is nugatory; there is nothing of weight in the case more
then the Officers Fees of suing out the pardon; and to stop that scandal, let
such pardons issue of course by a day at the Officers penalty; so that the
party shall not need pay for expedition; but as to the case in hand, it is
propounded, that in cases of doubting it were better to assure all fears, to
let the Soldier be but assistant to the settled officer, and not used but in
evident necessity; but the thing is the same; I must agree the prison may be
any where by the law, which men in point of favor easily plead; but touched,
then the Court of guard is a prison, then White Hall, the headquarters, every
thing is odious; but were this same man put there under what he counted a
civility, it should be acknowledged; it may be therefore of great policy this
was left in the Judges breast, to endear by such circumstantials where he saw
cause; but this was altered upon good reason in part, and prisons made public,
set, and certain, etc.

The next thing is, to bring the prisoner to his Trial, wherein the Law as I
said, favoring life, gives privileges of no evident reason, in case of crimes
worthy of death, especially the certain offender present.

Truth is, if the pretended Law of England did, as many of the Officers of it
do, think one thing, and speak another, tell them they are to dye, while the
prisoner knows Mr. Ordinary (say the Judge what he will) will openly,
profanely and unchristian-like of course lie out a Legit (though he knows
never a letter, and his conscience never grumble to give sentence accordingly)
it were not worthy question, but evident reason being its guide, why should
they question thirty six men without any cause, or with a wise Sheriff, etc. is
that so called privilege ought at all? yet this in some cases is highly
advanced; this past, and that he is to plead, which ought to be openly, the
doors not shut during the Trial, (the Law of God, of England, common reason,
and constant practice of Nations agrees it)

First, he may make all by the Law void in the Letter, by an appeal; yea I take
it also without showing any cause.

Next, by pleading to the Jurisdiction:

Next, by denying himself to be the party, with multitudes more, how evident
soever.

Which Laws in the letter, being taken advantage of, as one for example; one
first called said nothing, then showed his name was not John, but John-as
Jenkins, therefore not the party indicted: That amended, the Clerk goes on,
John-as Jenkins of, etc. he answers not after much debate; there is two Towns,
one Hoph. Pet. the other Jo. and the Indictment is general, he knows not which;
that agreed on, then his addition is mistaken, as he is Baronet, indicted
Knight, or Knight and Baronet; but all agreed on, he is then to plead, and to
this he pleads,

First, strange dilatory pleas, as that the fact was done in another County,
etc.

These breeding great trouble and great delay, were both in Civil and Criminal
cases in great part rectified; but so jealous was the Parliament ever of the
thing called Privilege, that all was never done (though it may be the greater
evils were removed) so that there are causes enough still to dally in Law, to
general disadvantage of honest and public good, and no liberty but of general
capital offenders.

Now the reason of this was evident, because the Subjects Liberty was by
Princes sought to be totally enslaved; the best and wisest were most active in
opposition, and to save these good men, we ensnarled the Law, and till now had
never opportunity of rectification; if yet we have this seen by the Crown side,
they engage three ways, by Judges absolutely depending, A Jury of Conformists,
and the general Plea, not guilty: And thus Prerogative and Privilege fought;
And surely the Law holds forth matter so clear in the Year-Books, on the one
side by Presidents, Rights of Supremacy, dispatch of business, etc.

On the other side, by Presidents, reason of Privilege, for safety of Life,
that the controversy seems endless, and yet Justice is plain; let him plead
not guilty, but withal give what other matter he can in evidence, which the
Court ought to accept, and upon the whole matter, to give judgment, hearing
himself and Council; which surely if in any other Cause, Matter, or Plaint, a
Subject ought to have, then much more in case of life, especially if the Law
favors it; and more especially where the Judges are the mere Dependants of the
Prince or State; which jealousy cannot be satisfied without, if withal other
things can be supposed any way requirable; and therefore it has been accounted
for Law, that the Jury were not barely Judges of the fact; but were surely
intended as a bar to Prerogative in some sort or dependence thereon; for they
may be without all doubt so far Judges, as to find the matter specially, will
the Judge or nill he, and if themselves will venture an attaint, may be Judges
of the Law indeed against the plainest evidences.

So that it is evident these questions are easy to be controverted, and hard
to be determined, yet not in themselves, but only because of the diverse
interests in this, as in most matters in our Law, wherein the Crown had any
hook, according to the prevailing of their party, having laid foundations for
their own benefits, and advancing their particular designs, which is the first
rise of the controversy about the Militia, which never was in England in the
Kings hand, otherwise then that of Tenures, the posse Comitatus being always
the proper defense of the County, and not subjugated to the Kings will or Royal
Commission.

Now the reason was, War and Peace was nominally in the King, really in the
Subject, because of Moneys, which could not be charged without consent in
Parliament; some upon this, ground a Quaere of main concernment;

Namely, what are the Laws of England, or where to be found? Some as I have
said, answer, the Law of God; others say, excellent reason; some the Law of
Nations peculiarized by use; others say with the Lawyers, That the Law of
England is founded upon the Law of God, the Law of Reason, principles called
Maxims, Customs not contrary to reason, received time out of mind (and proper
quarto modo to the people of the Nation) Statutes, and the resolutions of the
Judges: To this it is objected, that these generals teach or edify not what
the Law of England is.

For the Quaere is, If the word of God, whether all, or part; if so, the
infallible, or at least certain Rule (pleadable) to know which part; they
require the like certainty in reason, and the Exposition of Principles and
Customs; for they say all these must solely depend upon the Judges, and then
the Law in their opinion is wholly Arbitrary; for if their only word makes it
reason, and their only word determines the end and meaning of the principle;
and so whether custom be good or not, then it is merely at the will of them;
and this they say experience manifested in the great Cause of Ship Money,
wherein had not the Sword been the better Arbiter of their privilege, the
sentence had been irrevocable to enslave them all to the King; Therefore they
say, there must be common reason, or some head-Rule, which must judge most
excellent reason, not that they intend vulgar decision, but a judgment must be
tried by its conducing to public good.

The Rule is; Good, the more general and common, so much the more precious; and
from this they conclude all these heads of the Law of Nature or Reason,
Principles, or Maxims, and Customs to be all the same with the dicta sap. or
resolutions of the Judges; and then whose creatures they are, and from whom
they have their honor, pay, etc. to them they will be bound, which they cast
not by way of odium upon them, but common to them with all men to enforce and
improve all their abilities by the first principle of nature, to the preserving
self; and this they do, and better self, in advancing the Title and Interest of
them upon whom they depend.

But they say, this is as fatal a hawk to liberty to have such an absolute
dependence upon a State, as upon a Prince, tending to the same end of enslaving
the people,

Yea, reducing a State from a Democracie to a Tyranny, as well as from Royalty
to Tyranny; for they say they have heard from Lawyers, and it is a general
complaint, That the Laws of England are they know not what (at least a wise, or
so called Politic Judge, may make them so, and that this is easiliest done in
matters of highest concernment.)

Take them to be the Law of God, no such matter; where is ought according to
that rule? (They exemplify in Henry the Eights Law for marriages made merely
for private interests, and now for the same neglected) for Gods Name is
scandalized, profaned, blasphemed, and not regarded; horrible adulteries, and
some say, incests unpunished.

Yea, all the rabble of Popish, Episcopal, and now so called Presbyterial
Professors (that is, the baptized Christian) are guilty of walking clean
contrary to their profession, yet no way punished; Gods Sabbath contemned;
god-Mammon, that mental Adultery of Idolatry is most of their sin, common to
them with their other brethren in the flesh, by what names soever called or
known.

And for the duty toward Neighbor, there is nothing but envying and malice,
furfetting, gluttony or drunkenness, the Nurses to Adultery and Lasciviousness,
with pride in apparel, and abundance of idleness, which increasing, poor
increases, and by them necessity, and that brings Theft, or Covetize or both,
and sure among such to swear in truth will not at all be regarded; it will be
thought cruelty not to tell an (Officious so called) lie to save thy brothers
life, which now makes it nothing to have lies sworn; this brings scandals upon
seats of Justice; for these things known and not remedied, if possible, will
asperse.

But some say, some Judges make no conscience of such acts; they exemplify,
not only in Ship Money, but in ordinary Trials, while they deny justice by
delaying, and admitting the continuance of delays in justice, and sometimes go
against their own knowledge in the Law; as in the case of admitting such to
read as they know cannot, and more evidently such as are not capable by Law, as
those branded before, not once, but seven times, whereby the Rogue is as
preserved, so encouraged; and this because due notice is not taken of persons
branded in the Calender, nor Records penally presented in Court; to which,
though ignorant persons answer, they will not come there again, but act their
Villainies in another County; wise men will not, who know the Law admits no
going out (for it will prove wandering in such of necessity) but with
Certificate; but the true reason, though it cannot wholly excuse, is the best,
namely, they think the Law too hard, and would rather have constant
workhouses; but there is two evils in this so just, so righteous a proposal,
to change this Law; for if either workhouses or due course of certificates
were settled, the Commonweal would be quickly rid of such vermin.

But then the first evil appears, namely, Clerks Fees would cease.

The next evil is the matter of charge in building, repairing, and maintaining
the houses, and Officers, etc. for a workhouse in this age, where building,
back and belly cat up all, will hardly be maintained, much less raised; but to
be well provided with stock and Overseers, rather venture all.

There is complaint against our now Judges taking Fees (if so they do) having
yet 1000. l. per annum, that Fees might be discharged.

But these Complainers have one word more to the Law, that is, they say the
great Charter of Normandy they own rather to be the old Norman Laws before
William the Bastard, then the Law of England, though he might well labor to
introduce the whole plot; Truth, it will serve to discover the Reasons of our
bondage, and that is all, which while Copyholds are not discarded, together with
Crown Tenure, we are not freed of.

For Fleta and Bracton, they say, they are the mere heads of Justinians
Institutes a little corrected according to the guise of Englands Principles of
liberty above the Ancient Roman, or State of Greece in the height of the Empire;

Yet for that, exploded by the Kings Judges. For Horn, Britton, Glanvil, they
are reputed more English, but may be as well Scottish, Sweadish, or Danish,
especially Glanvil, who if compared with R. May. Scot, the old Tenures,
Customs, Services, Writs, etc. are the same word for word; the other were they
who drew the Traditions of our fathers into form, by insensible degrees,
raising debased Engl. to a glimmering of Native liberty in the use of a body of
law; for it is plain Englands Law unwritten could not be well known by the
vulgar.

Fortescue taking the advantage of the contest betwixt York and Lancaster,
declares more freedom (happily then consists with reason in the letter) Now
all these books were altogether exploded; Fleta and Horn not permitted to be
printed, but hung up by the license liberty; and all that was the common
reading of the Lawyer, was the resolutions of the Judges in the so called
Year-Books, which have no date beyond Edward the Third, there being then a
stipend given to certain men constantly sitting in Court, to report the reasons
of the Judges, so that let them answer at their peril; for now their reasons
were permanent, and brought to strict judgment.

Yet they still had their evasions in cases of great interest, either for one
Kings Title or other, for Prerogative or Privilege, as particular respects
engaged, and providence favored, as was evident in the case of R. 2. and his
Judges which lay asleep from him, till our late Charles revived it, and suffered
publicly for it, as Richard did privately; far the more manly and exemplary
way of the two, and rational it is; for if it be lawful for man to give Law, he
may and ought to enforce; and no way can be more consentaneous to order, then
that of the body Representative, which is not in this case denied either by the
Regular Presbyterian, or violent so called Interdependent; only they deny this
a Parliament, as before is said.

These Reporters wrote till Henry the Seventh; there are some fragments of Henry
the eight, Edward the Sixth, and Q. Mary, and Elizabeth, taken by Students
then, and since, which are called by the names of the Authors, as Kelway,
Petty, Brook, Dyer, Plowden, etc. with some particular assertions of others,
but none durst write freely. Lord Cook put out several Books of Reports, all
which being principally matters of Title; or betwixt party and party, swam down
stream: Now in most of these were matters altered at pleasure; for out of these
books it is easy to argue black white, and white black; Reason was cut into
such fine shreads of wit (and form which is as vain) that judgment was puzzled
to find something where there was so much of nothing; and if any thing were, it
was so disjoynted a piece in 1o. Ed. 3. debated further 18o. further, Process
in 23o. and finished 31o. Jan. 24o. ultimo Regis Caroli Rex ultimus
Brittannorum.

A subtle Oracle, true and not true, let matters pass as they will, so that in
such a confused study who could learn ought, though helped with Fitz-Herberts,
yea and Brooks Abridgement; for the old Books and the late Indexes, the least
too big for any book of Law for a Nation, where each is to be supposed knowing
of it, and no man excused by his ignorance.

Now for the Crown Law, of which we had no complete Tract but Stamford, the
Lord Cook treating of that particular and tacitly in his both Jurisdictions of
Courts, and Expositions of Statutes, holding forth not only the bare letter,
but a rational disquisition of the Texts, they also were estopped; and well is
it, say some, if they have not met with a concealed Dominicane Expurgator, or
Jesuitical Emendator, there being such hard hold on all sides, for them, and
against them, since published.

These things resented as grievances in the Kings times, and promises to be
ruled better then under the best of Kings; the King gone, the enquiry and
expectation is, what alteration.

If we quaere among the Professors, O Lord what cause is given to the Adversary
to blaspheme, while many seeming Saints, earnest Professors and zealous above
multitudes, count God a mockery, his Scriptures politic observations of
prudentiall men!

The Devil, every man that is opposite to their worse then Heathenism; and how
few glorify the Lord in these things, and magnify his mercies to them, that
they are not withdrawn, but rather make use of it, through the subtilty of
Satan, to upbraid the Truth with Error and Heresy, Contradiction and
Confusion; and these assure themselves, that the godly wise Bishops foresaw
this evil which is now befallen the Churches of God, and admire their way, when
they and their way are perished together with their revenues, which were
according to their own method totally abolished; only the seat of the Beast is
by providence reserved, to what end I will not prophecy; And who mourns in
secret for these things? In the Commonwealth they see little; but hope, though
the unseasonable oppositions hinder at present, they shall see it in due time
effected.

If you look at the other party of Professors, whether Congregational or
Presbyterial, their jealousies are as great; and notwithstanding the
Independent (so called) had the right hand of fellowship in the present power,
and was not so rigid toward the Presbyter; yet the root of opposition
sprouted, though I hope the light of grace will nip it the bud.

But the Presbyters interest is the root of the image, the stump, and will not
easily yield, I mean humane prudence to be admitted the Church.

But look to the ordinary Parish Priest, of what opinion soever, they are as
disaffected in the generality to God and goodness as before; for as in branding
the Clergy Rogue, there was no Register, so that the Rogue had privilege six
or seven times; so the ejected Clergy for want of registring and transmitting
to every Committee the ejection, the scandalizing ones are admitted five, six
or seven times over; and let a stander by judge; he cannot find this to be done
upon any rational ground, other then more work for the Committee, and so more
fees for the Clerks.

And if it were not such listening or trusting to Clerks, what could draw from
such wise men, sober, grave, and outwardly pious, things so dissonant from
reason, and their profession, and the intention of their original constitution,
by this means as probable or the like? the work is great, much done, and never
the nearer an end; for turn them out of Norfolk, they go into Suffolk, thence
to Lincoln, etc. And just and good men are ejected upon small matters rather
then contend.

And the pious zealous Christian against the evil one is tired out with
vexation of mind, labor of body, and purse-paiment under renewed evils of the
same stamp; so that the most and worst still remain, and many ill ones new
settled, they are discouraged in the removal; and the great root of this is
Tithes, which it is clear for the Parsons sake few regard; but the chief man
favored is the rich Impropriator; I pray, is not Tithes more due (according to
the original ground of Tithes) to the Priest, then the Patron, or Lay-person;
by the old Levitical analogy, then Hen. the Eights new policy? is the old
inheritance in Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, of less strength, or less
inheritance, then that in the impropriator, who has but upon grant upon a
politic forfeiture? or is it not evident to Reason by the rules of Scripture,
Law, and Reason, that he is not capable of them?

He is not the labourer, not the Ox, not his lips that preserves knowledge, not
Gods Husbandman, and himself dares not own either Evangelical, Pastoral, or
Priestly Office; and it were well he practiced but as an ordinary Christian:
but it is said, the reason of all is Interest; for the light has manifested
Tithes no way due to the Gospel, nor any certainty but a sufficiency; yet this
sufficiency resting in the arbitriment of the people, but these gathered into
Churches, and the Church is then a Judge: Some from the inspection of error,
past, and present, that is, the general ungodliness which is in men, fear that
Tithes put down, there would be no maintenance allowed, and the same confusion
would follow, as in Germany, the best Minister most contemned, therefore they
are continued; this argument is agreed a principal motive to continue them.

But it is answered, That the groundwork is too weak; the Disciple is not
better then his Master, nor Englands Pastor then the whole worlds Apostles;
there is no command for it; why then enforced, and that to them who Preach not,
Preach evilly; persons not qualified according as the Gospel holds out, either
in the first of Timothy the third; or in the first of Tit. 9. but commonly all
contrary.

Neither are the persons qualified in the promiscuousness of Parishes as the
brethren ought to be by the Word of God, yet these duties enforced; therefore
say they, so long as these corrupt interests are, there can be no propagation
of the Gospel; consult not only every Friday, but all the week; they agree the
common liberty (which is the interest) is a great mercy of God, but if not
sorting with interest, if matters mend not, they fear interest may take away,
as well as give liberty; they hope better, but in the fluctuations of matters
they fear; let the cause of complaint be taken away, and they will count it
their sin to complain.

Thus you see the Church so called generally as it was.

A short view of the Commonwealth, and we will leave our Historical part.

First, in the so called Parliament (as men commonly term it) a few only
existent, the only accused kept out (no further charge, no legal expulsion,
nor new admission, nor no way of ejecting members by their Representors in case
of failer of duty, as Non-attendance, etc. They advise to remember how many
went to the building the material Temple; therefore they would rather then
eject, double the number) So that many Counties have no Representatives
admitted, others not appearing; and there being false principles in all
estates, degrees, persons, etc. they are jealous that our Senators may not be
wholly pure, especially they having heard of the great strife men make in
Parliament for the advantage of the places for which they are chosen; and he is
highliest accounted of, who benefits more his particular trust, then the
general good of the Nation: men may, as they have been, be carried away; they
fear much, and therefore desire a filling of the house by an equal
Representative, not desirous at present of a new, to avoid some fatal evils
that are foreseen in the same.

In case of the Counsel of State, which they oppose not, they only desire it
may be so limited, that it grow not from an Oligarchy into a Tyranny, which
gives just cause of fear, while of Parliament men, and those perpetual, and no
power visible to question them, they are not responsal for any wrong, and to
put any into office with them, not Parliament men, and so responsal, except
their brethren in power beat them out; there is injustice that one should
answer, another not for the same fault.

They rather desire some fit way of choice, of one man out of every County in
the Nation; from them come to Committees delays; the complaint now foreruns the
new instituted Committee of Accounts; all Receivers, Treasurers, Collectors,
etc. will have fine work, no Rule, Order, etc. but bare placet of etc. But the
Officers of Sequestrations will have the best share of trouble, who have
accounted in the County to the Sub-Committee of Sequestrations among themselves
to the Sub-committee of Accounts there; Now all must account at Goldsmiths
Hall, and then to the new Catholic Committee of Accounts, as if Officers were
but to drive a Trade of maintenance by whole sale and retaile, from one
shilling per pound to nine pence, then to six pence, then to four pence, three
pence, two pence, one penny per pound; and that drawn out again in two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine pence, etc. per sheet, to Writers, Clerks,
Accountants, all after the form of the corrupt Commonwealth past.

There are honest men of all sides say, That they fear no policy will prevail
against truth, that is, they hope, though it be so feared; upon which they
offer to confideration, whether it were ought but corrupt interest that made
good men bad Bishops? And whether it will not upon the same Rule make good men
corrupt Officers of all sorts; therefore they hate as much to hear of one
shilling per pound, as of Patents during pleasure; or to some for three years,
while all are not so; and then not capable of so many years more; for the
remote contingent dependence is evil, though not so evil as the more immediate
and absolute: Indeed there is a great complaint, that not only things
complained of, etc. remain still the same, but grow worse; Inns, Taverns and
Alehouses multiply, to the out daring Justice; irregularity in all Trades, etc.

Neglect of all inferior Powers in ordinary Jurisdiction; The orders issue,
That all is left to be done according to Law; but that so dilatory and
difficult, that no wise and honest man dare meddle with it, so that many faint
and say, what they expected to be be the Lords deliverance is his Bondage; many
while in the Wilderness, wish they were in Egypt again: there are that call for
Kingly Government (as you well perceive.)

Yet were they the instruments to his overthrow, vain and impatient spirits;
some rebel against you to make themselves high, indeed like Corah and his
company, for they say, What are you, that you shall reign over us?

Therefore they say, Let the old Race come in again, let not upstarts, etc. now
these are the Lords Remembrancers to you; you are of the same frame and temper
with other men; And you know man's condition since his fall, he has shaken off
the pure Law of Righteousness, as an insupportable Tyranny, and we are wholly
led away of our own lusts, and Satan snares us under the notion of Liberty.

Thus are we become mighty in mischief, the devils policies are easily learned;
but his stratagems difficulty, if at all, but by grace discovered; this makes
us more subtle to deceive our selves then others; but God assuredly will not,
cannot be mocked; this makes many fear mercies are given for a snare, that is,
for future and greater Judgments, (which the Lord prepare us for, if so
determined; but if it be his gracious Will prevent by our returnings.)

By all which now it is evident, that the Apostasy and defection has over
spread both Churches and Nations; the people of God, as well as the men of the
world; that this Apostasy has been, yea is in England etc still working as
vigorously, if not more then ever: Satan now rages, and the chaffer of the
Whore is not yet expulsed the Camp of the Saints.

The stone hewn out of the Mountain without hands in the Regiment of the Lord
Jesus, has been rejected as Chyliastical, a notion too obstruse in learned
Scripture sense, how plain so ever in the vulgar letter.

All that I say to them so reject it, yet look for Christ's coming, is, let them
take heed, that as the Jews eyes were blinded in looking for a Prince, and lo a
Servant; That we be not blinded in still looking at a Servant Christ when he
will be exalted, lest in stead of one we raise up many Antichrists, and set
them in the Seat of God.

I would not be mistaken, I plainly mean with what limitations we intend the
Magistrate to be the keeper of the Keys, which I fear can rest in no man's hand
but the Lord Christ's, let him have all the power the Pope, or Bishop, or
Clergy could claim.

But I say, the fellowships of Saints are freed from the enforcing power over
conscience de Jure, though all evils (as well as sins) may befall them with
others for disobedience to unjust Laws de facto; You whom God has called out
to the work, have a great task, be not found idling, or about other business,
that you are securing your great estates, or laying out your hundred thousand
pound in a settled way of lands; etc. will be a weak answer at the great day of
account. Give not occasion to evil men to speak evil of the Lords people, and
of his ways for lucre sake.

England offers it self as a white Paper to receive any Print; you need not at
present out of fears of a change pretend a new Representative to quiet spirits;
No, the people are as the Israelites at Mount Sinai, feared enough with the
thundrings, lightnings and Trumpet of quarterings, Sequestrations, and dilatory
attendances, that they are resolved, speak you like Moses to God for them, and
what he says they will hear; there are some or other particulars ready to fly
out, and say as Corah, Am not I as good as you, as wise, learned, virtuous,
godly? etc. in impatience of spirit.

But blessed be God, all the Congregation have not yet said as they, You have
slain the people of the Lord: We know, say some, the difficulty of the Work, if
there were no opposition; how much must there then be where there is so much?
sit not still, find time to settle least God take you away; let us at least see
the fruits of your labors; and if you think it not yet the time of Christ's
personal, yet it be of his vertual Reign here; let there be a plain, sure,
certain, easy, settlement of affairs with that charitable affection, that
sociable, suitable behavior; that clearness, and that in simplicity which by
the Laws of Nature is due to our fellow creatures.

Enforce unjust men to cast away the masque of hypocrisy in simulations of
Piety and virtue, to gain advantage to savage gripings and extortions.

If you cannot allow the heights of the Gospel-Liberty, allow us but a just
settlement upon the evident principles of natural equity, or ruled by (to avoid
contests) the Mosaical Judicials as the boundary, or prescribe your own way;
this will admit satisfaction to many interests; and if rightly regulated, none
in themselves corrupted, else we deny our holy Profession; For the grace of God
that brings salvation unto all men has appeared, And it teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live righteously, soberly and
godly in this present life;

Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, who
gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to
be a peculiar people to himself zealous of good works.

Now these good works are shortly laid down in the Gospel thus, in obedience to
Principalities and powers, etc. and that not only Kings, but inferior
Magistrates, yea Husbands, Parents, Masters; yea, to Teachers, Elders, etc. or
any set over them, of, or in the Lord, taking care for all sorts of persons in
the relations political, both Public and Domestic; and also in spiritual: Its
truth, the qualifications of Magistrates under the Gospel are not directly
spoken unto in the Gospel, which gives a ground to some to altercate, whether
Magistracy may be under the Gospel.

But Generals may sometimes be gathered from particulars; the principal scope
it is true of the Gospel shows the worlds enmity with the Spirit, and the special
enmity rests in the Princes; Powers, etc. These are the men with their carnal
interest.

But the Powers simply considered, cannot by that be opposed; for because I
will not admit an evil Magistrate that is a terror to the good, shall I not
allow him that is a terror to the bad? because it was a shame that the
Corinthians went to Law before Heathen Judges, shall each one do what is right
in his own eyes?

No; St. Paul's Let Us not sin that grace may abound, includes much; And so that
qualification of an Elder of a Church; those mental excellencies,
soul-beautifyings of a spiritual Ruler; no Mitre, Crown, Bells, Pomegranates,
Breast Plate, Ephod, etc. are to be allowed; no outward blemish; Though that
was admitted among some Bishops of the Primitive Church, is now just exception.

If such purity in Elders for the Church, then surely also for the State: by
this all the Typed Mosaical qualifications, and more also are required; Indeed,
the words are mean and low; but the meaning is transcendent; I shall therefore
shortly, according as the grace of God gives me, give a short essay to the
principles of a Christian Government, and resolve most of these Quaeries which
here seem but barely controverted without determining.

I truly faint under the burden, knowing my own weakness, and the mighty
wisdom which I know in some, whom I cannot believe, think an alteration
necessary, while they have accepted so great places of honor and profit, in
what I must think wholly corrupt, and the world calls the profane
Commonwealth, or Babel in the Magistrate; that is, they are feared principally
to adore the Amusive part of Justice in the formalities of Robes, as Judges
Caps, Furrs, Blacks, Sergeants Gowns, etc. the same with Rochets, Caps, Hoods,
Gowns, Tippets, Surplices, etc. So for Officers of Courts, so for Appeals, the
same for dependances upon the Supreme Magistrate in degrees by way of variety
of Courts, Officers, etc. as in the Bishops course, from the Chancelors and
Archdeacons Courts to the High Commission.

So in the Presbyterian way, according to the course of the Sanhedrim, from the
Parishional to the National Assembly; All which has in it but a form of
Justice, and is delusory: necessaries I admit, but no more: I affect not the
Laconick harshness, nor the Stoical superstition, nor the Anabaptistical
confusion, nor the Persian pomp and vanity.

Yet I think it was the more honor for the Greeks, that they were learned,
valorous, and free, though with little pomp or ostentation, then to the
Barbarians, that they were pompous and bondslaves; rich, but had nothing their
own, cowardly and ignorant, obedient even to shadows; an Ape or Hound of the
Kings in the formality should have ruled them as well as the King himself, for
they were ignorant: I would therefore have Order to prevent confusion;
Obedience flow from Knowledge in civil things, as from Faith in divine, yet all
for conscience sake; otherwise the Law will never go further then half way, and
that will rule and persuade where no Promoter or Officer of State can.

Therefore I say, pretending to a Christian Commonwealth, I there explode all
bare Forms, they are above them; necessary Forms are admitted, for they must
be, but Forms of bare interest cannot, will not.

Happily you will say, This will put the Magistrate to a demur, whether then he
should have two Forms to govern by in the same Nation, but that Quaere will be
useless.

For it is intended the Christian Magistrate should wave all those Amusions,
and only in the power of Righteousness do Justice, keep the Law of God with
his whole heart, make it his study; and due execution of Law, and propagating
the knowledge of it in an easy civil Chatechistical way will soon show, that
Form is a very Idol, no more then the Goddess Opinion; to which I fear not to
say, they sacrifice who so much exalt Form. Now know Forms are also in delays;
as not to give Judgment in a plain Case of Law the same day it is complained
of; it is Custom not Form to weep lamentably upon the Bench at the giving
sentence of death, when this passion arises not from compunction of soul, but
weakness of Spirit, and this weakness is evidenced by no care for soul after
sentence past.

It is then therefore suspected to tend specially to self interest. Truly our
sweet Fountains of Justice are imbittered; we looked with the Prophet for
Justice, but its turned into mourning; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry; the
excessive Fees of all sorts, the Selfish formal hearings, the dilatory
attendances, the usual squeesing, griping Officers, as Undersheriffe, Baillffs,
Registers, Clerks, etc. all continued, whereby the poor is sold for nothing,
and Justice at the rate of Customs, and Clerks Fees, which I nor no man can
call a bribe.

O you that sit in Seats of Justice, beware; the Lord has a controversy with
the mighty, and to pull down those in his glory, he does it in Justice, and his
Judgments are true; good intentions so called, will not excuse before him that
searches hearts, yea to the dividing of soul and spirit.

Know this you great men, if you seek to uphold any interest against the Lord,
it will down; yea, your own hands shall work your own overthrow, you may have
seen it in the mighty works of God hitherto; and if you will not perceive it by
whom it is desired, the merciful hand of God to you in correcting of others, he
can soon lay the rod upon your shoulders also; and think not that because God
gave you long since to see this change, and then to seek him and his glory, and
that he has (if he has) made you instrumental to him in this his work, or
thereby, or has given you places of honor or great profit at present, that
therefore you are in the right, and under his protection.

No, then you must break every yoke, and pluck down every Idol, and labor to
bow all interests, and powers, to be subject to the sole Regiment of the Lord
in truth and righteousness, and in so doing, the grace of our Lord God will be
with you, and guide you by his grace to glory.

O Lord, let the prayers of thy servants for this be heard of thee, and make
all men through thy power to improve every place, talent, and opportunity to
the advancement of thy Truth in Righteousness.

There is now but one word concerning the Court of Chancery, which was the
Court of equity for the Subject in general, as that of the so called Requests
was in his proper nature for the relief of the Kings Servants upon any
equitable matter arising within the verge of the Court, where at least one
party was to be the Kings menial Servant, however the pretended necessity of
some, and real of others abused it.

But that of the Requests gone, let us hear the opinions of men concerning that
of the Chancery; and they say, that this Court of Conscience is grown as
unconscionable as any; and the interest of profit to the particular Officers is
as great and as destructive to public good as of any Court, if not more; for
suits in Chancery, are as common and as obnoxious as Writs of Error.

They say, the use of the Court is intentionally just, that is, that where
accidents which could not be foreseen nor avoided, casts the right the contrary
way to what the justice of the Law intended, that it should be there remedied.

But they say, this ought first to appear at the Common Law, and then the whole
matter transmitted from the Judges there to the Chancery, to be there decreed
shortly.

Now the matters proper to that Court, can generally be manifested by no better
an example then by those for which a man is Essoinable at Common Law (upon duty
of appearance, however that is made now a couse of practice also, and Essoyns
are of course, for the whole Law is perverted) whereas now men are tossed from
Common Law to Chancery, and then to Common Law again, and no end of Suit, and
the charges so great, and issue so uncertain, that Free Quarter was not more
ruining then seeking right; for who can prefer a Bill under three pounds? and
then for a Copy, the Defendant he must pay eight pence a sheet, and six pence
thereof goes to the so called Six Clerks for taking out the Bill, which are
places valued at about two, some say six thousand pounds a year; and if he can
write, he sets his name to it; examine it he should; but it is not believed any
one of them looks on one sheet of a thousand; and if he did, were it worth ob.
to read it, if but two pence to write it? Take a Copy from the Plaintiff you
cannot, though he would so favor you; you cannot put in your Answer till that
due be paid.

After the Answer, comes an Injunction that must be moved for; there is ten,
if not twenty, thirty, forty shillings often, three pounds in eminent Cases, and
to eminent men, that is, one great in power, as in Offices of Honor, or highly
favored: This Injunction comes to eighteen shillings; why not for one shilling
all of course? I have seen Orders made by those honorable men now sitting
tending to it; but By-practizers hear they are detrimental to private profit,
and so the Orders are abroad to catch birds to the lure. You may now sue at a
better rate, the Court has reformed; but come to try, and you must pay as
before.

These Six Clerks are wholly needless; the Register alone can do the work; but
particular Judges, Keepers, etc. must not make these orders in any Court, they
will be overballanced, or may be; for generally they have been.

It must be enacted into a Law, That the Subject may require it as his due, or
complain, and have, not only redress, but satisfaction; References to the
pretended Masters are worse, as more dilatory, but ought not to be so
expensive, by reason the Master ought to take but half a Crown.

Now I like that Master best that will clearly say, I have viewed all, and see
the right, and will report it, you see my great trouble and pains, you know my
due is but two shillings six pence, I will do you right; for my recompense I
leave it to you as you are a Gentleman.

Too little wages is a wrong and a snare to any servant, much more a public
one, and most to a judicial one, or isntrumental thereto; all ears hear
complaints; but I who cannot accuse, will not charge, though I may believe
there is some fire where there is so much smoke.

I will reckon up no more of the Six Clerks tricks to the perplexity of the
practizing Clerk, and detriment of the Clyent; this alone is enough.

Nor will I allege ought more for the Court, then that old Rule of the
Learned, which none but the Learned can understand; There is no remedy in the
Chancery for what there is no remedy at Common Law. But now, for poor people
not worth ten pounds in the world, quiet persons, to be sued by contentious
knaves, how shall they bear the charge? for though that the Subject Defendant
is (contrary to the express rule of Law) admitted of course to take out a
Dedimus, whereby their journey to London is saved, yet when they come but to
take out the Bill at eight pence per sheet, before they can take a Dedimus, and
next pay after the rate of eight pence a sheet again for writing the Bill in
the Dedimus, which alone is the evident great gain of the practizing Clerk,
half the estate of the party is gone.

O the intolerable oppression that is amongst Christians! I fear all the Turks
and Heathens in the world will not own so much; I admire not, if any height of
wickedness be objected to a Turk, his detestation of it is expressed thus (Do
you think me to be a Christian?)

The sharking of the Subject by feigned recoveries, and by the great ado to
release women's estates, at such chargeable rates, only to maintain a company of
idle bellies, and nourish corrupt dependencies, is of a like strain.

And though the Verdict by twelve men be accounted the chief flower, or one of
the chiefest in the Garland of Englands Liberties; yet I must say the baseness
of men is such, that it is one of the most destructive; for there is no
conscience of an oath with the most; and though it be visible, there is no due
punishment.

Gentlemen, you that are at the Stern, whom God has lifted up in the height of
his power, and placed in seats of Eminency, do not trifle away your precious
time, let speedy care be taken to settle this poor distracted Nation; look not
to your own works, and let the Lords lie still; there appeared in you a strong
dependence upon God; give not wicked men cause to blaspheme; Rowze up your
selves, and consider God has a controversy with the Nation, and will not be
appeased with all Offerings, except Justice and Righteousness be done.

Let the Complaints of the poor, afflicted, distressed come to your ears, who
have great wrongs, injuries, and oppressions, and none to relieve them.

Yea, let the cries of quiet peaceable men come to your ears, who are oppressed
only because not willing to return evil for evil, railing for railing, stroke
for stroke, action for action:

To sue, is to perplex their minds, ruin their estates, if they have it, and
bring them at least to a wanting condition, who lived well; not to sue, to be
sued and forced to compound at the legal Thieves Will.

If poor, the Law is chargeable, equity unreasonable, and get a Lord Chief
Justice (Warrant so called) Order of Reference, it is derided, not obeyed,
after much expectation, loss of time, and some expense by the poor Suitor.

You are on earth in Gods place, and must to him give an account; let not your
eyes sleep till these works of Righteousness be settled.

There is great complaint of Inns, Alehouses, Taverns, etc. increasing under
your Regiment; for the Lords sake look speedily about you, let not your
Officers, as the Kings, set your honor to sale for the increase of their Fees;
you are yet in a slippery place; the promises and engagements upon you are
great, and the expectations of the people high; and those most considerable of
your own party, are the highest; their spirits breath after just Liberty, they
see how you toss and tumble all the Rubbish of the Government of the world, to
find fit stones for your building; Truly, they dare say, among all the
Christian Princes, practiced Rules, Edicts, Orders; Statutes, Laws, etc. you
cannot find materials enough to lay one step to the Throne of pure Justice, in
the supremacy of power; and they therefore much fear lest you should stumble at
the same stone of offense with them, and place the excellency of your eminency
in power to do, rather then doing Justice; and when you get a little strength,
to stand on your selves, to think, and by power make good, you are as they
accountable to none but God; there is no clearness in the walkings and actings
of men, because yours are not so.

But most will hope as they pray, for better things; and although they knowing
the great burdens which are upon your shoulders, cannot desire so much as some
do, neither will they, nor dare they (as others) think, much less say (most
likely to render your actions odious) that you seek nothing but your selves,
and because you do not all that is desired, therefore cry out, you sit to do
nothing.

No, all may see you have done great things; but it is desired, that some
things of conceived necessity for your establishment be speedily ordered, until
with the whole they may be in due time established or settled.

As first for the breeding up of all youth, that all Schools be supplied with
able, honest, and religious Schoolmasters, all according to one form and rule
settled by the Supreme Magistrate.

And so the Universities, where the youth are yet rather poisoned then
profited; and though the humerous conceit of Caps and Capping, and such like be
justly waved, that such a decency be ordered in the habits of youths, as may
not adapt the mind to licentiousness (many wise men placing much in things of
that nature) and to that end that all youths habits (of both sexes) at least
may be ordered throughout the whole Nation, but especially apprentices and
servants of all sorts.

So as at least to distinguish, not shame; that of shame only affronting, not
reclaiming; and for all servants to be admitted their services by Testimonial
under a penalty to the Master or Dame; their wages to be set by the Magistrate;
or some appointed universality and absolute conformity in these even to unity
may be pressed without just scruple of conscience.

For to speak once for all, to make acts of common reason, intendment, and
benefit for particular places by them in supremacy of power, because by them
asked, and not by others, is exceeding selfish, which who ever has purchased
out a particular act can easily resent.

Therefore it is justly desired such things to be generally the same; For
prohibiting of new Inns, Taverns, etc. and ousting those erected within seven
or ten years, unless allowed by your Commissioners, and upon due and set cause
to disable the remainder, and allow others, or fine to some purpose, as
receiving any to tipple on the Lords Day, or days of public either prayer or
humiliation.

And that all things may hold a proportion, that all Offices Honorary,
fiduciary, or profitable be so distributed, that the work intended may be done,
or the neglecters punished; and that such as are faithful, may know certainly
to whom to make their addresses; for many errors are seen and felt, and the
State is sensible of them in part, as by the careful Orders issued out from the
Right Honorable the Council of State appears.

But how to execute them, and not be caught in the witty springes of our
present Cabalistical Law, no Justice of Peace can determine; and generally the
more knowing and able, the more wary, at least in opening of the fruitless, or
rather destructively fruitful niceties past, whereby the many are cooled to
action.

For if they apprehend men dangerous, That live high, and yet can give no
account how they come by it; what should they do? To imprison for no cause
visible, is hard to some; not to do it, destructive with others; to prison in
the Jail, chargeable; and the place having no labor to busy body or mind,
fatal; in Bridewell, shameful; and generally work they will not, and all this
from the want of due Law.

Next, our Lawyers are eminently favorers of nicety of Law, and open it to the
ruin of public safety; for from an opinion that Lead is parcel of the
freehold of the Church, to rob all Churches so called, is so frequent, that it
is feared they will soon come to pull down houses: No, says the Learned, sue
him, and he has naught to recompense the same; so there must be visible
actual force with Guns, etc. to evidence a forcible detainer, or the
indictment lies not, whereby possessions are kept often times ten years together,
many seven; sue they dare not, the Law is so nice, dubious and chargeable; this
is destroying property in honest English; for cutting up young Timber, felling
young stands, underwood, and the like, with many other wrongs, no law, no
remedy evident or practiced.

Alter but the Law of hanging for Felony, and this and a thousand things will
the learned make Felony straight, if you give but twofold restitution or
servitude for a set time to be by you appointed.

But especially look to give speedier Law in the proper places, to at least the
poor, or small matters; it is necessary to Commissionate some for the special
Counties, and that to determine all suits both in Law and equity; the want of
this is the main root of growing poverty; and that upon Petition, without
formalities of Bill, and Answer, Declaration and Plea; give a stop to cursory
Writes of Error, and regulate executions; for under Sheriffs and their Officers
have need of it, if any.

I love the Reason of our Laws, and am as much against Tyranny, or pure
Arbitrary Government, as any man; I honor the learned and upright Lawyer, and
would have virtue, learning, yea and service in all due Offices should be
regarded and rewarded; I allow the necessary dependances of inferiors in all
ranks upon the supreme or absolute powers respectively; it is but the
unnecessary, fruitless, or destructive interests that are opposed, which every
just man will stand for both with life and estate.

And by you, Right Honorable, in your prosecutions thereof, let no private
respect take you off; it is not only reason, but necessity calls to you for it;
therefore on in the excellency of strength; fear not a clash with any corrupt
interests whatsoever; only what is just, let it be done justly; it is the
eminency of Virtue alone can make your enemies hearts yours, though power may
conquer their persons.

By this time it is time to wind up my Clue of History, wherein I profess in
the presence of God, I have to the utmost of my skill and knowledge, waved all
bitterness, and what ever might justly give occasion of offense.

I yet know some will be taken by men of all tempers; I, nor no man that will
speak truths in such a season of interests, can expect to please all, if it be
hardly possible at any time; I shall as God shall enable me, go on (the
assistance of whose gracious Spirit I humbly crave) and hold forth what the Law
of pure reason, agreeable to the divine word has established to be the Rule
for the exercise of Justice and of Righteousness among Christians.

But some will expect, that I should speak one word to our so much pleaded
boundaries to Preregative and Rule of Privilege, Magna Charta, so called, and
the Petition of Right, more then what has been said. I suppose needless to
show that they respectively in their seasons were but the beginnings of that
freedom which the Subjects of those times breathed after; they are to us, or
were before these divisions brake out, but the reducing, as I may say, of
speculative or notional Liberty into a way of practical or real Freedom; for
what was before only in the breast of the Judge, was now in English letters
made obvious to each man's sense, so that they after pleaded that Letter against
any contrary walkings, whether in the King or his Officers.

So that Magna Charta is not pleaded as the utmost due of the English Subject,
nor the Petition of Right, but as those things which are so essential in the
generalty to any Nation, that even the Kings must afford them, or they are not
just.

And the Rulers must act accordingly, or they are betrayers of Trust.

And if it be impartially discussed, it will appear that the private interest
of Princes, or the power entrusted for public benefit abused for self ends,
has been the ground of the principal opposition to Prices; for where has the
excess of power, or stretching the Law for public benefit, or honor of the
Nation, or against public visible offenders been impugned? no, the lives of
many Citizens, and the confiscation of their estates, not to speak of taxes, or
restraint of Liberty, have been by the generalty praised and allowed, though
some prudent one might Stoically out of the foresight of mis-improving these
presidents by evil men disallow such Liberty.

If a free-spirited understanding Englishman look upon the first Chapter of
Magna Charta, unless enforced through necessity to make use of any shaft to
wound an Adversary, yea, though it flies in his own face and wounds him, what
will he say to it? for after the freedom granted to the so called Church, the
Preface or Assumption on the Kings part, is, That he having God before his
eyes, for the salvation of his own soul, and the souls of his Predecessors and
Successors, of his own free will did give and grant, etc. the Liberties
following to be holden of him, his Heirs and Successors, etc.

And these Liberties are there called Franchises, which intimates the Kings
gave them the freedoms there set down now, who before had none; and let any
uninterested man look upon them, and he will see they indeed hold a reason of
policy, but still subservient to the first settlement of the Bastard William;
there are many notable just things in it; and surely such as by which the
people were judged before the Charter granted; but the people not having ought
assured, and before the power of the King, the interest of Nobles, the
corruption of Judges, other matters rendering the Law then wholly uncertain,
they sought this to clear up and assure their right, as far as might be; for
Justice ought to be like as the Elements are by the first intention, wholly
free.

Therefore the true understanding wise man says, That he inforces not Magna
Charta as the boundary to English Laws, or just Freedom, or Christian Liberty,
but as a Catalogue of such immunities as were granted by the Kings to the
Subjects formerly, according to the then light the Nation had to ask, and power
to enforce; for so they were pleaded by the Grantor, many of which are now
wholly ceased by time, others have been altered, some enlarged by subsequent
judgments so called, and Statutes; and it is evident, that the English now
long and thirst after a rational settled Law in all the parts in the whole body,
taking the Law of God for the Rule, as the Charter-Grantor did, though the face
of man was the visible Engine to draw the pleasant streams of Liberty out of
the Ocean of Royal Power; and although that succeeding Princes did never keep
the Law wholly, yet it was always evident, that a noble Prince that sought not
himself so much as the glory of the Nation, the Acts of such a one were seldom,
if at all questioned: So that to give satisfaction according to the deep and
often reiterated Engagements of the Nation, it is requisite that some selected,
impartial, honest, understanding, Religious Patriots be set apart as a
Committee wholly to attend the collecting of a body of Law, out of all Laws,
making Gods Word at least generally, or the Moral Judicial, that is, that which
in point of Reason is equal and just to the Samaritan or Egyptian as to the
Jew, to whom yet an Hebrew was an abomination; Now it is worthy serious
consideration who to employ in this work; to employ Lawyers, is to give no
satisfaction to the people, jealous of these men whose interest depends so
specially thereon; not to use them, is to stir up the prime men of parts, and
of vast revenues to a contest of great importance, and some think not of
evident necessity; for there are many wise, just, and outwardly religious
amongst them; out of Englands Law Books its desired it should come, the head
Rule of Gods Word, and Truth preserved still in the eminency of Power, and then
let the Rule of just and good be by such of them as you shall appoint, and such
others as you shall choose to commissionate with them, drawn out of those deep
fountains of Wisdom (then which none are more excellent generally, nor more
divinely rational) and laid open to the view of each one to judge.

I shall give you but one example; we all agree that the civil Law here reigned
originally, and by it the next of kin, whether of fathers side or mothers to
whom the inheritance did by Law descend, was Guardian of the Infant. The Law of
England now is, the next of kin to whom the inheritance cannot descend, is
Guardian; the reason of the Civil Law was, because alliance of blood was the
bond of Love, and who would take greater care? but this Law of Nature was found
to be most unnatural; many (by accidental passions, being corrupted for pride,
covetize or envy sake) brake the bonds of Nature; and, for the inheritance sake
became the murderers, or instrumental to the murder, death or captivity of such
infants, thereby to keep the estate for ever, or gain to themselves the estate
and inheritance, saying, this is the heir, let us kill him, and the Inheritance
shall be ours; so that it is evident, Supremacy of Reason bare sway, but the
reason is founded upon the divine Rule; but look at other cases, which are
diverse, and the reason diverse, and yet all hold force in Law, and that for good
reason sake.

As first, The Law gives in some, and most places, all the Land to the eldest;
and the reason is, because he is thereby enabled to give greater assistance to
the King in his wars with horse of service, as William the Bastard plotted.

In Kent, there the land is divisible equally among all, because all stand in
equal relation to the father: and where the Custom is, its Law at this day.

A third rule is Borough English; there the younger son had all the Land, as
least able to maintain himself; there were no great evils found in these, and
therefore these all stand; but its believed by most, that were a double portion
given to the eldest and no otherwise, it might be the ground of a better
settlement then this Nation ever had, who it is agreed did never yet submit to
that Law. It cannot be denied, but that it will take off much from the vastness
of estate, which is now ofttimes for many generations continued in the stock of
noble Ancestors; but it is answered, That it will keep from the Gallows, and
other places as infamous and more miserable, many noble and gallant Sprouts and
Syences of Royal stocks, who (having (as it often falls out) more active and
ingenious spirits then the Elder brother, and) brought up by the indulgent
Parent, according to the rank and quality of his father, he dead, and either
none, or a small portion no way equal to his breeding, but infinitely short of
his birth, as he calls it, or of his spirit left him, he being before fired
with ambition, is now madded with envy, and in a kind of desperation, puts
himself upon looseness and villainies to support his indigency.

This Law has therefore much need to be seriously considered, as also that
concerning Estate in Tail and Feoffments upon condition.

It Is ageed, none will be more able then the religious Lawyer in this part; but
as to the settling of Courts, Fines, Officers Fees, Times of Trial, Process,
Execution, and the like, its conceived wholly unfit to have Judge or Lawyer
empowered, if holding places of profit actually, or pactising in any Court under
a Fee; for the Nation complains not so much of the Law of property and right
and wrong, as in the discipline or execution of the Law; its found to be
corrupt interest that troubles both Church so called and Commonwealth;
therefore in this let Lawyers object, but others determine, and that according
to a Rule of righteousness, namely for Justice sake, not to maintain interest,
as hitherto the puny Clerks and unfavored Lawyer, and young Attorney, and
heretofore some puny Judges would be content with Reformation, for they could
not be worsed by the bargain; No, it is those Officers that have places from four
or five hundred, to ten or twenty thousand per annum, that are loath to be drawn
to the Standard of Justice: It Is this and the like casts odiums upon just things
under the name of Levelling, destroyers of property, despisers of Governments,
haters of Order, projectors for Anarchy, enemies to Caesar, that is, the
Supreme Magistrate; we have seen, and most do believe, that many no way
affecting Reformation, have held forth just things only to deceive and delude,
and lull the State asleep, until they were fit for their design. But these
also admire that the State do not these just things, to take away the color of
such men's aspersions, and mutinous clamorous, and hinder others from being
drawn into such Toyls by too easy credulity, while they after renewed
complaints find no amendments; they hear and listen day after day, and month
after month, but there is no end of their expectation; God has changed, and
changed, and changed again, but their bondage is they say the same.

It Is most true, it is not possible to please every pallat, especially when each
pallat has most visibly a disgust; we are fallen into many pieces; God has
taken us, and dashed us one against another; yea now the Evil is come to that
pass, that the wound of carnality is most evident in the Envyings of
Professors: O what bitter enmity among those call themselves the people of God!
and though Discipline be pretended, its evident the root is Government, the
high-gate of Preferment, eminency of Power, multitudes of followers, and the
like. Brethren, is this of Christ? Is this according to his Rule? He that will
rule, let him be servant to all.

I cannot but apply to such heady ones, that of Festus to Paul without cause,
to you with cause; The knowledge of the world has beguiled you; You deceive
your selves and others, while you contemn all men but your selves; and all
judgment that agrees not with your opinions. Where is the Image of God? Look
upon the Magistrate, by what names or titles so ever distinguished, they
execute not the judgment of God, but of themselves; they rule to satisfy
their lust; they glory in outward power, riches, honor, and the like; the great
men, both those that are mighty through wisdom, as the learned Lawyer,
Physician, Divine; mighty in strength, as the Commander in war, Military Power;
or the Magistrate from the highest Judge to the lowest Constable, who are
clothed with civil power, all as the Supreme in Trust do lead, follow the
dance of eying the splendors and glories of the world; and can we think that
the multitude will not follow?

O all you mighty men, What has made you thus haste to destruction? What was
it that by degrees made possible, what confidently none of you could once think
on, the executing of a King in the chief City of his Realm? what made you seek
a change? and what prepared the way to the Judgment which God had appointed?
was it not Self-seeking? was it not reigning for Self? was it not Oppression in
Justice? was it not altering the end of the Law, more then the Law it self,
though that was laid to his charge, as fittest to draw the people to a sensible
interest?

Those that came in place after, what was it rendered them obnoxious to change?
was it not driving on the same trade? and most assuredly it will in Gods
Jnquisition for righteousness and Judgment, ruin all that shall tread the
same path; you cannot wholly ruin the native Liberty.

I avow to have after a total expulsion of the Kings Power, and settling an
other by your only visible Power, submitted to the Engamement, to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth of England, etc. I by this acknowledge my self
bound in my Place and Station to be actively to you, until as fully subdued,
while at liberty; but if under the Sword of your Adversary, I must submit unto
the force, and not act against them, not you; this the Law of Nature teaches,
the Law of best and Supreme Reason; further you cannot expect, no nor your
enemy, unless you will be Tyrants; and this either of you may require. I allow
not of seditious words, writings, or deeds. I only say, Give the liberty you
would take; sure none but evil Magistrates ever would disallow a liberty to
complain; some say it is all that is left them: But I shall desist from such
enlargements, and speak only upon some few matters arising in the Verge of my
trust, I am bound by a necessity to declare the evils of them.

First, Concerning the Tax for the Army; It has, as to its great and unjust
inequality been long complained of; for some paid but two pence per pound; that
is the rate came to two pence per pound in those parts, and they gave in but
half value of their lands, as twenty: True value was rated at ten; and no more,
if so much; and the Towns adjacent were at full value, one shilling two pence
per pound: yea, some in other places one shilling ten pence; so that in the
highest rates to the E. of Manchester, British Army, Newark, the Garrisons,
etc. the poor owner, and some rich ones did freely offer their whole Revenues
to discharge Taxes. This burden was long labored against; after this comes an
Act for an equal pound rate; this by them who had good bargains was opposed and
delayed; so that the Armies necessities enforced a return to the old way of
error; Some just men renew this work more rigorously, and an Act comes down for
six months, beginning at 25. of December. last; the Act comes so late that its not
possible to act toward the first three months; and that there might not be
such delays and evils as had fallen out upon the former three months, which gave
no power to the Commissioners to act otherwise then by a pound rate; so that
many feared Premunires; this gave such a power in case of not being able to
compass the work in due time, to return back again. The business of the second
three months was not thought fit to be put on foot till the first three months
were ended, when the time comes, the old Opposers are the new Opposers, and
plead several pleas, which will inlighten much to the truth of what is before
Historized. The main objections were three or four; first, It was Levelling,
and that it was as just to reduce all men's estates to an equality, as the rates
after so long continuance; this a grave and wise man otherwise, strenuously
asserted. The second was, It was an obstruction to the service of the State;
for alteration of Customary Rates would be long in settling, and the moneys
would not come in, and then the Soldier would return to free quarter; and the
next, The Garrison of Lin were earnest not to alter, fearing, as they said,
That they that took free quarter, when it was not due, and more then was due,
would outdo Reason if really behind. The last was, when we had done what we
could, we could not make a truly perfect Rate: There was a fourth, but little
to the purpose; and that was, we knew not what nor how to rate, and so we might
over-rate as well as under-rate, and for that we had no power. To the first it
was answered, That a rule of Justice was desired, not equalling estates, but
equal rating of them, the best way to quiet spirits from thoughts of unjust
Levelling. To the second, That it obstructed not the service to alter the rates
from evil to good; the soldier should have his money, and would but each one
lend their helping hand, as soon as in the old way, and to avoid raising more,
they would raise less, and then rate a new, as the Act ordered; but if
obstructing Service would bear a rate absolutely contrary to an Act before,
that reason would allow a little over rating now; and the rather because it
should truly ease the next Assessment, the Accompter would appear, and no evil
done. To the third, it was said, That the evil unjust rate had continued seven
years, and no remedy, as unjust as at first, and must be so for ever; for the
rule was to rate as formerly.

This was now provided for, and what was now pleaded, That the Parliament did
not intend any alteration, for alteration could not be without obstruction:
Thus Self makes use of all weapons for her advantage; and were it possible to
trust men in chief places not so selfish, or that those in Supremacy were so
clear that right might be expected, we should soon see an alteration.

The next thing which I hold my self bound to give notice to the Nation of, is,
The Assizes for Norfolk were according to evil Custom, if there be so much in
it, kept at Thetford on the brink of the River parting Norfolk and Suffolk; the
use arising from the High-Sheriffs heretofore serving for both Counties, it
having no prison fit to receive the multitude of prisoners in Norwich Castle,
being as per Calender 144. The civil part was there only determined, and not
the criminal. Now I shall omit to speak of the abundance of forfeitures by this
means, though falling much upon the poor, it helps forward the necessity of
Levellers in the grossest acceptance, by reducing them to absolute beggary; I
shall only speak of the trial of the Gaol, which will hint matters of some
concernment. First, there was a Commission of Oyer and Terminer; next, a
Commission of the Peace; These Commissions are not settled by Act of Parliament
in the County, but are a part of Prerogative, and grantable at pleasure of the
Supreme Majesty. Now there were many Prisoners which were bound over to the
next Jail-delivery; these the learned in the Law upon mature deliberation, and
after great advisement, resolve they cannot try: consider the reasons which I
must own Legally, of great weight, but hear them; by the Commission of Oyer and
Ter. they could not be heard, for the Recognizance was only at Jail-deliver,
therefore they could not be called by the Commission of the Peace; they could
not try them, for the Sessions of the Peace had before referred them to the
trial of a Superior Judge (of course) for difficulty of the matter: but if was
agreed that had a Commission of Jail-deliver come, the same men without a
Superior Judge, or more skill or knowledge in the Law then they had before,
would have tried them. Is not Form the Idol of the world? I appeal to the
Supreme power for the privilege of the Nation, and beseech them that the due
rights of a Free Nation may be established in settled Judicatories in the
Nation. Here also fell out another Quaere at this great Sessions, namely, what
to do in case of an Undersheriff, who should execute his Office beyond his
year; contrary to the Statute we found this. The High Sheriff of the County (as
usually before, to the great prejudice of the people of the Nation under the
late King) did make a bargain with an Attorney, to be, or find one to be for
him, such a one as he would undertake for his Undersheriff. This man contracts
with the Kings Sheriff accordingly, and himself and his son (a young boy, as
the Justices upon view judged him of about eighteen years of age) execute the
Office, both at the last Assizes and this Sessions, and the intervals, not
having taken any Oath; it was demanded of the boy, who was Undersheriff? he
answered, his father, but his name was used; he was tried by the Justices to
read a precept, he could not do it; so for double disability, he was disallowed
by the generalty of the Justices; by this practice if the Father were
Undersheriff, he lost two hundred pound by the Statute for this year, and two
hundred pound more for a year before; for it is said he has served now three
years, and I believe unsworn all the time, if due inquiry were made.

Next, the son forfeits 40. pound for executing without Oath, yea though unfit;
but notwithstanding all this, two Justices of the Peace present at the debate,
do the next day swear this Boy, thereby sure intending to intricate the
business, and give the Father leave to plead against his Forfeiture of 200.
pound, or question for executing the Office unsworn.

I say no more, but I think they deserve a Fine above his, besides forfeiture
of their Trusts, and the rather because the man's integrity, and so fitness for
the Office, is as much questioned as any man's in Norfolk. Gent. To sue for this
in the Travailes, Expenses, Delays, Tortures of the Law, who will?

You are the Fathers of the Family, if you please to take this notice according
to your Trusts who are in the places of Eminency and Supreme Power in the
Nation, from a son, a brother, a Citizen of the Commonwealth, do; if not, I
have satisfied my Conscience, the evil lies at your door, if you think as they
who have gone before you have done, to salve all with The Law is open, It Is
begging the question:

We say, the door was never so fast shut as now, either in the settled Law
Courts in Ordinary, or new ones of Committees; for, though the doors be open,
that is, there is easy beginning suits, that is, it is easy to complain; yet
the journey is great from the remoteness of places; and in Committees it is so
difficult to get them together; in the other Courts there is so much business,
that there are so many obstructions to right, especially of poor men, or quiet
spirits; and especially, the men of Law are so favored, that there is a dead
heart in all men to seek Reformation. Remedy this, and you will find
complainers enough.

But if a great man now be complained of for just things, as have been offered
to be avowed upon Oath, yet rather then stand the shock of a suit, the wise
man's Council in Ecclesiastes is the poor man's comfort, Go not to suit with him
that is too mighty for thee; compound with him is the way, though he requires
all thy substance as too little to satisfy his wronged honor, brought into
question, such a one as he scandalized, though all his friends know the truth
of the case, how wisely soever carried, that is legally, avoiding the reach of
the practical (Law so called.)

I know no truly wise and prudent man desires a measure exactly just, that is,
such as against which no objection will lie; no surely, if there be such bad
Christians, there will be evil men; what is desired, is not only possible, but
feasible, were there but just endeavors after it; were not the diversions so
visible, it were tolerable; but when its well known, that all eyes are upon
you, when all engagements and Artifices which the Religion held forth, or
prudence at best suggest, have been not only proffered, but penally enforced,
what but a seared conscience will not relent, or a nealed face blush?

Former services do not acquit latter offenses; the instances of the elder of
the Horatii, Manlius and other among the Romans, and multitudes of other in
other places, evidence.

The greatest and mightiest Princes are subject to the same proportionable
changes with their meanest Subjects; and the Subject has this advantage, he is
best able to bear it.

Our evil has grown from lenity; our remedy must be at least necessary
severity; and if you be not guilty, you may use it freely; It Is offenders cry
out so sternly for mercy; you are now by true interest and obligation, to
labor a well grounded peace to this; the occasions of public disgust must be
first taken away. Remember natural and rational Privilege, the clearing of
interested Dependancies; take them away, they are visible and visibly known.

Next, settle such plain and evidently rational Laws and proceedings; as may
assure Justice in the end, and that Common and Universal Justice, that as
England is one, our Law may be one, and that known; this will unite spirits and
affections, whereas plurality of parties or interests nourished, they generate
and consider advantages, as has been evident in the traverses of this Nation.

You have seen the standing out of the King against a few just things made at
last, that many that would have been granted, would not serve the turn: I
profess, it is mere zeal to Justice* has produced this.

I have avoided bitterness to the utmost; My only hope, desire and prayer is
for the welfare of the Nation, and the establishing of it upon the firm basis
of most undeniable verities; I shrink under the opposition Truth is like to
find. I know the alterations of Nations come not till Nature as it were almost
stifled, labors for life, it must purge or perish. I know where knowledge is
greatest, Satan is busiest; here must be great, if not the greatest opposition;
what God has I hope dictated to my spirit, I have held forth to you of this
Nation, who are in supreme Trust. You know how dangerous a thing it is to alter
the frame of Ancient Government; you yet see its easier far to pull down then
to build; to you I say, it must be extraordinary Justice and exemplary virtue
must stablish you.

The temper of our old English Government in the mixtures of the three main
Regiments was in Christian Politics heretofore held the soundest of all, most
just, and so most durable: As for evil Government of Kings, through usurpation
of power, the purity of it being destroyed, they did admit and do to this
Establishment without King or Lords; yet if the contrary drawings of the
Democratique estate, or insatiate interest, as old Writers have objurgated of
many equals, tend to the continuance of pressures, either of purse or person,
the issue will be dangerous; it is evident the looser knots have been untied by
the halter, I mean the Robber, Burgler, etc. but the treble Cord of the
Religious, Necessitous (poor which are a multitude, joining with the pretending
Leveller) and Hypocritical Opposer, will know their time, they look for the day
of their necessity: There is nothing of Justice or Civil Righteousness in a
strict survey more then what mere form produces, or necessity among the many.
If there be not a speedy settlement, there must be a dis-settlement; the people
are prone to, as well as stirred up to disobedience; did you command never so
well, if Subjects shake off the yoke, or loose it but in what or as long as
they please, Empire must down.

We are now as it were in the dregs of so called Populacy; the Kings attempted
alteration, and alteration was just, but just things must be done justly; and
as he suffered for seeking himself, so will others in their day (if the
expected one come) mete out to you.

You are compassed about with difficulties every way, God give you eyes to see
your way still; we looking at your transactions afar off, have seen God going
along with you; Be not deceived, you see it was not in eminency of Justice,
Righteousness, Mercy and Truth acted, but held forth; no, we saw your failings,
but hope of your integrity; for we saw God evidently changing your Errors into
a question of foresight and prudence to your Enemies, so that they believed
that Stratagemicall which was Casual, or rather of providence.

O that all this might but raise a heart in you to serve and trust God; do not
only hear Sermons; and for you of other stations, labor Righteousness in your
places; your divisions show your carnality. Learn the nature of the one
Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and ratified to us Christians so
distinguished from time, as of Faith and Works, that as much of Works is now
requisite under the Covenant so called of grace, as was before of Faith under
the Covenant of works; contend not so much, whether Magistrate or Congregations
be the Keeper of the first Table, as both to give due glory to God, and educate
the people faithfully in the knowledge and practice of the Doctrine of the
Gospel; and you chief in power, to see to govern them according to a Rule of
Righteousness, upon a sure foundation in all places and callings, which
according to the Talent God has given me, I shall here hold forth to you, and
that out of the so called Law of England, or usually accepted Law Books of the
same with the Word of God, and the approved examples of our most free
Progenitors, wherein that I name not the Authors, I have before laid down the
reason; I shall only now hint, That its the duty of Magistrates not to regard
the person of the man from whom the work comes; grant it but my mite, if it be
pure Gold, put it into the Treasury; I will give much light to some, and though
others know much more, let them also improve their talent; make use of this
till then.

Some say, it is the nature of Englishmen better to follow in the dark, then go
before in the light; give no more occasion to that proverb; I am no enemy to
Powers or Authorities. Here is nothing difficult elevated above ordinary frame,
so austere that the practice is impossible for a time, or dangerous to many;
for it is salutary to ten times so many more; It is the reducing Government in
as much as may, and the progresses thereof to the Rule of our Savior, My yoke
is easy, and my burden light, laying forth Justice in a due proportion
betwixt the Duty and the Power; so opening the reason of the Magistrates power,
and the Subjects obedience, that the ancient Quarrels of Interests on either
side, must be little, if any at all, stinting the many mutterings and
murmurings against the State from the default of Officers and Clerks, not of
the Judges themselves, which if not done, do all the good you can, and you will
be still aspersed and scandalized, and there is some reason; for they and their
Clerks are alike; for their care is neither for public good, nor common
honesty; all they look at, is private gain, the great dishonor of a State and
Nation.

Now the God of Heaven give me wisdom to hold it forth in such order that it
may carry such an evidence of Truth, that all Interests may submit to this one
Interest of the Regiment of Christian reason in a Commonwealth; and what ever
is defective, may by your power and industry with the advice of such whom you
shall choose, be speedily settled to his glory, and the comfort of this
afflicted Nation; and set as a light upon a hill to be a direction and
president to all the Nations of the Earth; That you as faithful workmen may do
great things to give free liberty to the word of salvation, and build up the
Jerusalem of God, and set on the Gates and Bars, Locks and Bolts, whereby the
Congregations of the faithful may be kept pure within themselves by the power
of the Word, and free and secure from the violences of Enemies carnal and
spiritual; and through the might of the Lord Jesus, may so live here, that we
may reign with him in Glory for evermore. Amen, Amen.

AN ESSAY OF Christian Government Under the Regiment of our Lord and King, the
one Immortal, Invisible, Infinite, Eternal, Universal Prince, the Prince of
Peace, EMMANVEL. Presented to all them that bear Office, and are empowered by
God in the Government of Nations, but especially to the Commonwealth of
England, and to all the Magistrates and People therein, expecting and hoping
for the Glorious Appearing of our Lord Christ Jesus.

Ezech. 33. 7. 6. 4. 7. O Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman to the house
of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the Word at my mouth, and admonish them
thereof.

6. If the Watchman see the Sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and the
people be not warned; if the Sword come and take any person from among them, he
is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the Watchmans
hand.

4. He that hears the sound of the Trumpet, and will not be warned; if the
Sword come and take him away, his blood is upon his own head.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for T. G. and Francis Tyton, and are to be
sold at the three Daggers near the Inner-Temple-Gate. 1651.

To the English Reader.
READER,
WHoever thou art, of what ever Calling or condition, know, God calls thee by
his Judgments to a serious consideration of thy duty; thy duty is toward him,
and those to whom he has given power over thee. They hold forth desires of
settling the State, and that both in Religious and Civil respects sincerely. We
all agree all out of order; that which naturally draws most men, is present
benefit; this makes some cry out for the old Government, others one wholly
new; others to settle their Condition, would patch and dawb, and join iron and
clay together: I ask thus, Is the privilege of an Englishman, and old Laws,
and carnal Interests above that of Christian, Christ's, or Gods Laws, and the
inheritance of Eternity? If so, to them say so, I am silent. To the Christian
Englishman I say, I have propounded a Model of Christian Government, I say not
perfect, nor according to that perfection which I do, as I conceive,
comprehend; but such as may be constituted to fit by degrees to a more pure
settlement. I intend not all should be as here set down; its but an Essay; I
have gone as near the Original Law of England after the Nation received Christ,
as I could; This, if accepted, must, as in all alterations, destroy many
interests, and advantage others.

All that submit in all things to the will of God, will not kick against him in
his dealings; they will say, its the will of God, I submit: How it shall be
done, I leave to the great Council of Parliament, beseeching the Almighty to
give them wisdom to govern the people rightly; we are a stubborn Nation
naturally; where grace polishes, look for assured help; where wisdom settles,
you will find no resistance. Go on Worthies, God is with you, and good men are
not against you; cheer their hearts; go on to settle; be not always pulling
down; its harder to build then destroy. I know many of you, then much more the
people, will think some of these Tenets against privilege; what, the
Magistrate to superadvise private actions? be not disquieted either to think
your care will be too great, or the Subjects Liberty straightened: The
opposition is only to evil men in evil things, and that when notorious; the
only thing you all fear, is Magistrates may abuse their Trusts. To all such I
say, the Law is just still; for the man, punish him.

I shall not enlarge but in one word to the Politic man; Sir, I have I confess
not stuck so close to the rules as many do, at least of late; but you may see I
offer things as I think they may be now received, to fit for better by degrees.
To all I say, the intention of my undertaking was only the peoples good, but
especially Gods glory, who knows all our hearts, and knows that I speak truth,
to whose guidance I commend your Spirits.

The Table to the Second Part.
Chapter 1. Page 101. and 102. showing 1 WHat is Monarchy. 2 Its divisions. 3
Whether Obedience be due in things unlawful, and how. 4 What if bound by Oath,
and that both voluntary and enforced. 5 Limited Monarchy lawful and cautioned
freedom, or freedom contracted for due. 6 The best way of gaining it by a
Representative. 7 Who and how to judge of the clashings, or differences of the
Representatives. 8 The duty public and private of Representatives as such, (
viz.) in their Trusts. 9 The necessary issue of a Monarchy devolved into
Tyranny.
Chap. 2. page 102. showing What is Aristocracie.
Chap. 3. page 102. showing What is Olicharchy.
Chap. 4. page 102. showing 1 What is Democracie simply so called. 2 Democracie
settled in promiscuous choice. 3 Democracie refined, and that both in Electors,
and Elected. 4 The end of Government.
Chap. 5. 102. 103. showing 1. Wherein a Kingdom or Commonwealth precede each
other negatively and affirmatively. 2 Kings no weasiest to be corrupted and
hardlyest reclaimed. 3 Where a Kingdom hereditary is best. 4 The evil of that
in the issue. 5 The evil of the three other sorts of Government. 6. That evil
and good is not properly in the nature of the Government, but in the good or
evil of Governors.
Chap. 6. page 103. Wherein is showed 1 That States are subject to alteration;
agreed if so. 2 That what was in the Supreme Power as such, goes along with it.
3 That England has right to Estates the late King had as King. 4 The reason of
all.
Chap. 7. Wherein is treated page 103. 1 That whatever the nature of the
Government be, ( viz.) whether of one or more in chief, Laws ought to be set. 2
The reason of it.
Chap. 8. page 104. and 105. Wherein is handled 1 The evil of tying Magistrates
to the strict letter of the Law. 2 The evil of too loose a Rule. 3 Magistrates
in Supremacy, their duty in this case. 4. The supposed excellency of Englands
last settlement, and wherein. 5 The reasons why Magistrates inferior must not
be tied too strict. 6. A caution for them in Supremacy of power in unsettled
times. 7 Rules of bounding inferior Magistrates tendered. 8 No Officer to be
punished for executing the command of his Superior. 9 Judges offenses to be
speedily determined; and if he acts but for just things by these Officers not
to be punished. 10 Generally they that act legislatively, not be permitted
Judicial places.
Chap. 9. page 105, 106, 107, 108, 109. 110, 111. Wherein is handled 1 What is
Dominion, Power, or Authority in it self. p. 105 2 What is the end as to
others. 3 The reason of men's subjecting to Powers, etc. particular good in
universal. 4 The various ways of seeking it. 5 The high respect given by
Heathens to just Lawgivers. 6 Why they pretended to receive their Laws from
their gods, and that both in respect of Magistrate and people. p. 106 7 That
Christians ought to live under Laws, and the reason. 8 Authors waved, and the
reason why Reason is only allowed. 9 The inference that the Magistrate in
Legislative power ought to make Laws by a Head Rule, and the Judicial
propounded, and the reasons for it examined by several Instances, specially in
life, liberty, and goods; and this proved by the New Testament. 10 That the
Judicials did not properly mislead us, but the Ceremonials.
Chap. 10. p. 112. Wherein is showed 1 That the Magistrate keeping his Head
Rule, his power extends all vice. 2 In that liberty his boundary general
manifested by an example.
Chap. 11. p. 112, 113, 114,. Wherein is cleared 1 What the general acceptance
of Prerogative is. 112 2 What it intends as looking at the Supreme Magistrate,
and that either in absolute Powers, or limited. 3 The vertual power of
Supremacy is ubiquitary. 113 4 How its intended in Law that the King can do no
wrong. 5 The error causing our Divisions, heightning, giving to the person what
was proper to the Power. 6 Several benefits given to the Supreme Magistrate by
Laws, and called Prerogative. 7 The reason why lapse of time did not prejudice
the King. 114 8 The reason why the King was admitted to be deceived in his
Grant. 9 The insufferable abuse of these. 10 And of the Kings dispensing with a
non obstante in a Statute, and not so bound unless named. 11 A further grant of
profits to the King. 12 Some Honorary Grants yet used to profit. 13 How the
King takes or parts with ought legally as King. 14 Some unfitting profits
evidenced. 15 Deodands, a mere allusive Judicial. 16 Of the special Judges to
try his Rights. 17 Three abuses of Prerogative in not having judgment final
against him, acting all particularly for which no Law was, granting Charters
and privileges. 115 18 The special badges of Supremacy, what, and
incommunicable. 19 That these were never in the King of Englands hand.
Chap. 12. page 116, 117. Wherein is showed 1 That the Supreme Magistrate is
Judge of Public good. p. 116 2 That this must yet in the issue be evident to
others. 3 The abuses and benefits of Monarchies, and Republics further
debated. 4 How Englands Laws admitted her King Judge of public good. 5 Some
complaints against mere Prerogative Officers remembered. 117
Chap. 13 p. 117. Wherein is treated 1 That the Supreme Magistrate may grant
inferior so called Prerogatives. 2 How he may grant them, and the benefit and
necessity thereof.
Chap. 14. p. 117, 118. Wherein is declared 1 That there always have been
diverse Opinions of the Magistrates and Churches Power, with the Reasons of it.
117 2 That the Magistrates Power is chiefly preservation of the Peace. 3 That
much of the Duty of the first Table lies upon the Magistrate, and how, but not
solely, nor principally, and the reason. 4 A touch of Christ's Blessing left to
his Church, the Apostles, and their Successors in Doctrine.
Chap. 15. p. 118, 119, 120, 121. Wherein is treated 1 Of the end of
Magistracy. 118 2 That evil men may be good Magistrates, therefore obedience
is still due to them. 3 The necessity of this; or good Magistrates will be
ousted by evil men. p. 119 4 That the Pope through the abuse of this difficulty
became the sole umpire of all controversies. 119, 120 5 Limited Magistrates, or
that rule by Law must not go beyond their rule, and the reasons of it. 6
Absolute Monarchs questionable only by the whole community. 7 How dangerous an
evil this is, and therefore waved. 8 Christian Princes from the Kings of Judah
(especially) have all pleaded to be absolute. 120 9 In limited Monarchies, the
Assemblies, Dyets, etc. may judge the Monarch. 10 The way to distinguish
absolute and limited Monarchy. 11 The necessity of well tempering popular
States. 12 There are evils in having as in not having bars to Supremacy. 13
The punishments used formerly to them called Kings or Monarchs. 121 14 The
benefit of such punishments.
Cap. 16. p. 121, 122. showing 1 The original end of Parliamentary meetings.
121 2 The privileges given to the persons met, and the reasons thereof. 3
Protections to other then mere menial servants in ordinary, unlawful. 4 Their
Speaker not to be disallowed, but upon good cause. 5 They have a liberty to
treat of all matters freely, etc. 122 6 They are the Guardians of the peoples
Lives, Liberties and Estates, etc. 7 The necessity of them to keep Kingdoms
from devolving into Tyrannies. 8 These to be limited to time, lest they grow
Tyrants, or as bad. 9 That their errors, if any committed by them, might be
amended. 10 They are to be paid by an equal rate, upon all that choose, and
ought to do if they had not dispriviledged themselves.
Chap. 17. p. 123, 124, 125, 126, 127. Wherein is showed 1 The necessity of
Magistracy. 123 2 The principal ends, manifesting wherein the Privilege of the
Subject generally consists; Examples given thereof; first negatively, then
affirmatively. 3 Affirmatively to be governed by righteous Laws righteously.
124 4 That these Laws extend to persons in all places at all times, etc. and
that in respects requisite to common or more public peace or safety. 5 That
its requisite the Supreme Magistrate set the example to others. 6 The Supreme
Magistrates neglect, a ground to hinder Reformation. 7 Ill Customs or Laws to
be altered. 125 8 Matters of public grievance, especially if arising from
particular interest, not to be continued. 9 Placs of public Judgments to be
fitly settled, and not altered but in case of necessity. 10 Privilege wherein
respecting the Subjects generally, wherein it consists, illustrated in many
particulars heretofore questioned. 11 Privilege not to be pleaded to them
convict of crime. 126 12 A general Law can be no dispriviledge. 13 Exempting
particular persons for particular and special reasons, can be no privilege or
dispriviledge. 14 To be Master of Arms, or admitted into Military trust, a
special privilege. 127
Chap. 18. p. 127, 128, 129, 130. in which 1 Nature gives like privileges to
all men. 127 2 We lose them either by compact of force. 3 Just that force
should be submitted to; And that to equals obtaining Supremacy by power. 128 4
In rational subjection, or subjection by compromise or agreement, there is to
be no difference betwixt the Prince and Subject, concerning good, better, or
best; for of that the Prince is absolutely judge, and so on the contrary, but
in manifest evil or good. 5 The absolute Powers Christian are under a Law. 6
Powers must look to be just. 7 Self-safety considered in a queried particular.
8 Opposition makes Conquerors hard-handed in the first settlement. 9 Providence
considered, and where its to be allowed, where not. 129 10 Nations not to make
others their Pattern without a just rule. 11 Nations subject Nations, as men do
men, and are so enfranchised.
Chap. 19. p. 130, 131. Wherein is considered 1 Why the Law distinguishes
'twixt the person and power. 130 2 Princes seek to avoid eternal Decrees by
ensnaring the consciences of their subjects. 3 What are Powers simply
considered. 4 That obedience generally must, when settled, be given to them. 5
What duty Subjects owe to usurpers against their lawful Prince, after a total
expulsion. 6 What the Subjects duty is after he comes under his first Princes
Sword, before expulsion of the Usurper. 7 What is not the Ministers duty. 131
8 The reason of all this. 9 Dangerous and unsafe opinions concerning this
ensnaring consciences from ambiguity or cruelty.
Chap. 20. p. 131, 132. Wherein is cleared 1 Good the more universal, the
better therefore. 131 2 The life of a particular Citizen not to be esteemed
with the Cities safety. 3 For this particular privileges are to be dispenst
withal as necessity requires. 4 The mere Lawyers error in this. 132 5 Why
personal estate is seemingly preferred to real in some cases. 6 Dangerous to
allow contests of privilege in times of necessity. 7 Compensation must be made
where dispriviledge is for public good.
Chap. 21. p. 133, 134, 135. wherein is asserted 1 That its necessary to a free
Nation to have Laws in the Native Tongue, and in limits and bounds fit to yield
speedy and easy Justice. 133 2 Walking Courts destructive, and the reason. 3
To look and settle these, is the Supreme magistrates Duty. 4 Its a true and
just Rule, Ignorance of the Law excuses not. 5 Therefore the Laws as in tongue,
so in number and phrase ought to be fitted to vulgar capacities. 6 The Norman
Conquest made our Laws speak French. 7 The Roman Yoke and pretense of Learning
made our Pleadings, Writs, etc. in Latin. 8 The end of both in legal French, or
Latin, and is lost. 9 Gain of the Practizing Lawyer, the sole stop to
Reformation. 10 A subtlety to unchristian reason of the Lawyer for continuance
of strife and legal wranglings. 134 11 Magna Charta's Rule true, To delay is to
deny justice. 12 What the best men naturally counted delay. 13 All liberties
broken under pretense of difficulty of Laws. 14 The general evils of delay
known and visible. 15 The evil of Remote Courts as bad as Arbitrary. 16.
General offers how to settle Judicatories. 17 A way propounded to keep the Laws
certain and one; and admit Appeals, and yet take away the Injustice urged in
them.
Chap. 22. p. 136, 137, 138, 139. showing 1 The duty of Supreme, or
Legislative, or Law-giving Judges 136 2 The eminency of trust requires gifts
answerable thereto. 3 That no minor be capable of the offense of a Judge
judicial much less Legislative; with the reasons for both. 4 Not decrepit in
age mature nor green, nor rotten; the ages propounded and the reasons. 5 Able
in mind as of body. 6 Free from obligations to injustice and dependances. 7
Various dependances considered, and their preservatives 137 8 As first to have
a sufficient salary. 9 To settle strictly what Bribery is. 10 To punish both
giver and taker. 11 Judges must be such as evidently fear God. 138 12 By whom
Judges are to be appointed, and their duties that elect. 13 Qualifications
requisite in respect of temper of passions. 14 Weak justices or Judges make
judgment despised, and all Judges contemptible. 15 Constables are Judges, and
Jurors; therefore ought to be able men. 16 The duty of ordinary Judges. 139 17
Their punishments considered if offending. 18 The best way of enacting of new
Laws considered of.
Chap. 23. page 139, 140. Showing 1 How the Supreme Magistrate is to look at
unity of law in all Counties in his Regiment. 139 2 With Christians wise, or
honest men, the variances will not be material. 3 It is requisite all Courts to
have like Officers, proceedings and Fees. 4 All these to be published in Frint
as allowed. 5 The Evils, if this be not. 139, 140 6 Judges must be fined, if
in a set time the case be not determined or dismissed. 7 All Processes to be
returnable at one time.
Chap. 24. page 140, 141. Showing 1 The reasons why appeals were made
customary. 140 2 What is truly a legal foundation for an appeal. 3 How such
appeals are so allowed. 4 Punishment in case of Error. 5 How false Judgments
are to be remedied. 6 The evil of Writs of Error, and the necessity, and how to
be allowed. 7 Further consideration of Punishment in case of Error. 141
Chap. 25. page 141, 142, 143, 144, 145. Showing 1 The extent of the Magstrates
Power in chief must be to all things necessary to the well Being of the
Commonwealth. 141 2 What the Magistrate has to do as to Divine worship:
considering the case of Uzziah stricken by God etc. 3 That in case of doubt to
whom the Power is, the Civil Magistrates right is clearest. 4 The difficulty to
setle the Magistrates Power wherein it consists. 5 The civil Sword to help the
spiritual, a gross vanity. 6 What the Magistrates Power is, considered as to
Blasphemers, dolaters, and Witches, and how the Judicials in these rule us. 142
7 Why the Judicials are not our rule. 8 Paul a Blasphemer, and bids only, From
such turn away. 9 What the Magistrate is to do when he wants a Divine rule. 10
The Magistrate may inflict death on profane wicked ones, not on Civil doubting
Christians, though their doubts may amount to blasphemy as spoken. 11 Witches
may be put to death as murderers, etc. 12 Why the Apostolical writings urge not
punishments. 143 13 The Christian Magistrates and Churches distinct Power
settled. 14 This not to extend to Heathens blaspheming God. 15 A caution to the
Magistrate in case of doubt. 16 A general comprehension of the Magistrates
Power. 17 Some Judicials disused with us, fit to be renewed. 144 18 A reason
why the Magistrate should not press conscience so called. 19 The distinct
Offices and Powers of Magistrate and Minister further considered. 20 Cases are
when conscience cannot be pleaded, and the reason being that things doubtful
but Civil. 21 Evils concerning Church service to be moderately prosecuted. 145
22 Some further considerations who is keeper of both the Tables; and the
reasons.
Chap. 26. page 146, 147. Showing 1 Each mother ought to suckle her child. 146
2 Riches enable, but the better thereto. 3 Through the abuse of comforts,
better now to nurse by poor people. 4 A hint to professors to be moderate in
the use of creature comforts. 5 Magistrates duty to take care for Education of
youth. 6 That it extends to Arms as Arts. 7 The best way propounded with the
reasons. 8 Rules to be observed by the masters in the ordering of them, and
that as to habit, diet, study, exercise, etc. 9 The benefits hereby arising. 10
Separate Jurisdiction not to be allowed to any of them. 147 11 Books of
learning to be appointed by the Magistrate. 12 Set times of respit to the
Ministers. 13 Further benefit considered with the possibility of effecting it.
Chap. 27. page 147, 148, 149 Showing 1 That to fit children for public
employment, is not dispriviledge. 2 That if the Magistrate takes this care, its
better then the Parents can be, it eases him and ought to be submitted to; the
benefit is most to the poorest who are aptest to repine. 3 All to be done by a
public equal rule. 148 4 Further considerations of the causes of unequal
rating. 5 The duty of a wise Magistrate to disburthen his Land when
over-numerous. 6 Settled ways to make the work acceptable. 7 No place, or
Person, to be freed from payments. 149 8 How personal estates are to be rated,
that equality may be. 9 The end of all punishments public good.
Chap. 28. p. 149, 150, showing 1 That the Magistrate ought to regulate, or
give Rules for Families. 149 2 The Jewish Husbands Power was absolute. 3 Some
men cannot rule their wives. 4 Necessary to settle some Law to avoid known
evils. 150 5 The like for children. 6 The like that Parents may provide duly
for their Families. 7 None to keep servants but such as are able to maintain
them. 8 All servants to be enrolled. 9 None to depart, etc. without a
Certificate. 10 Birth and Age of children to be kept by a sworn Officer. 11
Inholders power in their Family, and duty to their Guests.
Chap. 29. p. 51, 52. showing 1 Parents heretofore naturally had absolute
dispose of their children. 151 2 They unnaturally exposed them. 3 Their duty is
to sustain them till fit for labor or marriage. 4 Reasons that the Magistrates
may, and ought to appoint the Ages of Marriage. 5 Contrary reasons refelled.
152 6 The Magistrates power after set Age, to allow the child their choice in
some Cases, and to enforce the father to some portion. 7 The act of Marriage is
properly the work of the Magistrate.
Chap. 30. p. 152, 153. showing 1 The municipal Law of England, better then the
Imperial Law in appointing Guardians and Tutors. 152 2 The Magistrate yet to
appoint the Guardian answerable for the value at the time. 3 The discharge of
such Guardian ought to be valid in Law. 4 If a Guardian prove unfit, the money
to be paid to a public Treasury thereto appointed, which shall allow some
maintenance. 5 To appoint how inheritances shall descend, and by whom division
to be made. 153
Chap. 31. p. 153, 154. showing 1 How Cities and Corporations or Towns first
arose. 153 2 Its fit to continue them. 3 To enable them by certain Laws to
maintain their Societies. 4 These must be according to the nature of the place,
Maritim eor Inland. 5 They must have Laws for all inhabitants according to
emergency; evil Laws, that is, where a better is seen, must not be sued upon
after confirmed, but complained of, and continued till a new one made, unless
absolutely destructive. 154 6 Particular persons not to question, or disobey a
settled Law.
Chap. 32. p. 154. showing 1 Customs ought not to be pleaded as Law, till
allowed by the Magistrate. 2 They ought to be after allowance, Published and
Recorded, yea Printed. 3 A book so allowed to be kept in each place where the
Custom runs.
Chap. 33. page 154, 155. showing 1 The Magistrate is to defend against private
force as well as public. 154 2 A further consideration of the Magistrates war
against internal vanities. 3 The Magistrates Power and Duty as to observation
of a Sabbath. 4 A way to know the Masters diligence in a Family. 155 5 A
consideration what to be done with Heathens in that case. 6 A consideration
what to be done to Absolute Popish Papists. 7 A consideration upon the whole,
whether the Christian Magistrate may go to war.
Chap. 34. page 155. showing 1 That its unsafe to trust Strangers with Arms,
but Natives. 2 The Reasons against it confuted.
Chap. 35. page 156. 157. 158. 159, showing 1 All humane settlements how wise
soever, vain without a blessing from heaven. 156 2 Absolute dependencies are
the Nurses of feuds and jealousies. 3 In case of civil broyls none justly to be
suspected to be entrusted with Arms, after dominion obtained. 4 Otherwise all
to be appointed to arms or works, or payment toward both according to
proportion of estate. 5 Wisdom not to charge many arms upon vast estates, but
to abate some for payment; and also 157 6 Toward maintenance of these all
Lands and Stocks to be charged. 7 Fit to allow abatement for money as for Land
after discovery. 8 Commissioners to be Judges, and apportion charges out of
lands charged arms where Rents issue out. 9 Jurisdictions for this ought to be
settled. 157 10 The best way as yet to charge Arms. 11 All Arms to be Recorded
and owned the Commonwealths. 12 Fit men considered. 13 A Military Oath, fit
both to Officers and Soldiers; Reasons discussed. 14 Other offers of
Settlement. 15 Some consideration of our present condition. 16 The general way
to root out heart-burnings. 158 17 The vanity of mere Machivilian Policy. 18
Pay considered for Officer and Soldier. 19 Whether fit to pass at all in time
of peace. 20 How Officers are to be tried and punished. 21 Some necessary power
to be in Judges of Arms, as in appointing makers and sellers of Ammunition, and
keepers of public Houses of Resort, as Tavernes, Inns, etc. 22 An advice to
Judges and Officers at Arms to be wise and strict in Order and Discipline, in
regard all Government receives strength from them. 159
Chap. 36. page 159, 160. showing 1 The difference 'twixt an Appeal and an
Indictment. 159 2 How Appeals come to be wholly discussed. 3 How fit it is to
compromise, both the interest of the Prince and Subject. 4 A way to do it
legally propounded. 5 Creditors also to have a portion. 160 6 The Error to want
Commission always to try all offenses in all Counties. 7 Deodands
superstitious. 8 Security in case of words threatening life. 9 The benefit of
this proceeding.
Chap. 37. p. 161. showing 1 That violent presumptions and lesser suspicions
are to be considered. 2 In violent presumptions any one to apprehend a felon,
etc. 3 In probable ones only the Justice must grant a Warrant. 4 In either of
these cases no suit, unless the cause feigned or a mere conspiracy. 5 The
Military power may assist the Civil.
Chap. 38. p. 161. showing 1 The benefit of speedy trials. 2 The evil of
delays. 3 Prisons to be nowhere but in walled Towns. 4 There to be reasonably
maintained, unless able of themselves. 5 The Jailer to have his stipend, etc. 6
Treasurers to whom the States Attorney should account. 7 To use their Trade in
prison, if it may be, etc. 8 Better restrain private Liberty then endanger the
public.
Chap. 39. p. 162. showing 1 That one word ( viz.) Bail be used for all
undertakings for appearances legal, or duties enjoined to, or by Courts. 2 No
bail in high Treasons, but in misprizion. 3 Speedy Trial necessary here. 4 If
the ordinary Judges be not meet, give sufficient assistance. 5 Manslaughter
Bailable by a certain imposition. 6 All idle persons not able to give account
how they live, to put in good bail, or go to the Workhouse, or etc. 7 Council
to be admitted all men; but one and no more; and he only to speak as to matter
of Law; if dissallowed, and the Counsel will appeal, let him put it under his
Hand, and then the Itenerant visiting Judges to allow or disallow, and punish
as they see cause.
Chap. 40. p, 162, 163. showing 1 That debts are to be recovered. 162 2 First,
out of the personal estate; if that suffice not, then out of lands, 3 The abuse
of this discussed. 4 The way to enter a Plaint opened. 5 If satisfaction be
not, what to be done.
Chap. 41. p. 164. showing 1 Wherein the great Charter of the Subjects
privilege principally rests. 2 A speedy and safe way for trial of doubts for
lands propounded. 3 Affidavit under Hand and Seal of a Justice, with another
witness to make two witnesses in Law. 4 Obedience must be rendered to mistaken
judgments. 5 The unjust complainer or detainer to be fined.
Chap. 42. p. 164. showing 1 Courts of Equity may be allllowed, but 2 Not till
the Equity appears to the ordinary Judge of Law, and be by him transmitted to
the Chancery upon his Oath. 3 Let then the Decree pass within a time prefixed
under a severe penalty. 4 Let all Orders be read and engrossed, as made in
Court and signed. 5 Objections against Courts of Equity.
Chap. 43. p. 165. showing 1 That experienced evils must by lawful ways be
remedied. 2 The work of Equity is fit generally for a diverse Court.
Chap. 44. p. 165. showing 1 Students of the Municipal Laws of any Nation
worthy honor. 2 Its necessary to have sufficient incitements thereto. 3 These
were heretofore too great, and were grown destructive. 4 The duty and end of
Pleaders laid down. 5 The fit way of their due engagement to the Commonwealth.
6 The respects due in that course to them. 7 The Objections vain, or of little
weight to the benefit.
Chap. 45. p. 166. showing 1 The use and convenience of Practizers, as
Attorneys. 2 That many must not be admitted. 3 Their Fee to be set by the
Magistrate. 4 They and Lawyers to be fined in case of misdemeanor.
Chap. 46. p. 166. 1 That its fit to administer Oath to the Debtor of the true
value of his estate. 2 If this will not satisfy, its more beneficial to the
State, and to the Creditors benefit, unless to satisfy the appetite of
Rereage, to make the debtor a servant then a Prisoner, if servitude be lawful.
Chap 47. p. 67. showing 1 That the all-wise God instituted servitude,
therefore not simply unlawful. 2 The real wisdom to a rational man of that
institution. 3 Boundaries must be with Christians to the Masters power, if
allowed. 4 Reasons why debtors should either be prisoners or servants. 5
Whether the wife and children are to be servants with the husband and father. 6
Good government will make that few servants thus will be engaged.
Chap. 48. p. 168. showing 1 What Usury is. 2 The reason why it came to a
settlement, and was made a Law. 3 That farming of Lands came in upon the like
reason. 4 The loser and ill husband only complains of both. 5 That its
looseness of Government, pride, laziness and gluttony more then moderate use,
that undoes any man ordinarily. So over-purchasing. 6 That Usury is not
forbidden Christians. 7 No difference twixt that and letting lands if any. 8
Money more advantageous. 9 Both fit yet to be moderated by the Magistrate.
Chap. 49. p 169. showing 1 That tortures are against the light of Nature. 2
Against Christianity. 3 That though evils have been d^ected by it, yet not
being a certain rule, its not to be practiced as a Law by Christians.
Chap. 50. p. 169. showing 1 That all public Offices are to be born by the
public purse. 2 That the Offices and stipends ought to be made certain. 3 What
is the public Revenue.
Chap 51. p. 170. showing 1 That idiots and mad men must be adjudged and
provided for by the Magistrate. 2 Their estates ordered for the benefit of
their wife and children, and self. 3 For this, Judges in certain must be
appointed, and their power.
Chap. 52. p. 170. showing 1 That Bond or Copyhold tenure was but a dependent
upon Knights Service, and the rest; and they gone, that should go. 2 The Nature
of the thing wholly ceases; so should the Law. 3 That the continuance is not
only illegal, but visibly destructive to the Commonwealth by unjust
dependences. 4 How to settle it legally, if not oust it.
Chap. 53. p. 171. showing 1 How frauds grew notorious. 2 The difficulty to get
Laws against them, or punish them, nourished and encouraged thereto. 3 The best
way to prevent them. 4 The Legal cheat of custom contrary to Law. 5 Fit to
settle Disputes of Inheritance justly. 6 The punishment of frauds.
Chap 54. p. 172. 173. showing 1 Errors in Magistrates or Laws breed dislike of
both. 2 How England stands so affected to Juries. 3 Justice is above Magna
Charta, and works no dispriviledge. 4 What to be done with Christians before
suit commenced. 5 No suit till a Magistrate legally deputed allow the same. 6
How to be entered for a Trial. 7 Within how long time after cause of complaint.
8 How the Defendant is so brought to Answer. 9 Trial to be speedy. 10 Jury to
appeal; how many to a Jury. 11 How to be qualified, and the reason; 12 How
Judges of Law; and how to be punished in case of Error. 13 Bound to give the
Court reason for going against their evidence. 14 Other Qualifications
requisite. 173
Chap. 55. p. 173. showing 1 That judgment ought immediately to follow the
Verdict, unless just cause in Law appear. 2 Execution ought to follow
judgment; and for both let the value be secured or deposited. 3 If the person
be present, to sign the judgment, and give caution to perform it, or be
imprisoned, if able. 4 If no Execution within twelve months after judgment,
Judgment to be void.
Chap. 56. p. 173. showing 1 Offenders in putting in unfit Jurors to be fined.
2 They also that draw Jurors.
Chap. 57. p. 173. showing 1 That no man should be distreined in that whereby
his Family immediately lives. 2 That due apportionment of distress for public
Service ought to be.
Chap. 58. p. 174. showing What punishment is fit to be in cases of waste.
Chap. 59. p. 174. showing That Commons are one of the great sores of England.
2 The several sorts of Commons, and why, and how granted. 3 The rule of
Commoning is now lost. 4 The evils arising thereby. 5 The Remedy. 6 Free
Warrens and Fool courses considered. 7 Now an opportune time to settle all
advantageously, and how.
Chap. 60. p. 175. showing 1 That certain Magistrates must be appointed to
ore-see Bridges, Rivers, Causeyways, and all that is now within the
extraordinary Jurisdiction of the Admiralty and Commission of Sewers. 2 This so
be settled, that errors in Neighboring Counties may be quietly remedied. 3 The
Error of purchasing Commissions.
Chap. 61. p. 175. showing 1 The necessity of good witness in case of
controversy. 2 Legal objections difficult. 3 Wicked men may be heard, not
sworn, and the reason. 4 One such evidence alone not sufficient. 5 Objection of
Alliance how to be accepted.
Chap. 62. p. 176. showing 1 The necessity of promulging Laws. 2 The best way
thereto. 3 Punishment till then unfit to the common Subject.
Chap. 63. p. 176. showing 1 How vain light apparel works upon nature 2 The
Advantages public from this no way equal to the damage, and is unlawful. 3
The Magistrates duty to repress the excess of Apparel.
Chap. 64. p. 176. showing 1 That Titular Honors as now flowing from a King,
give a tendency to the establishment of that Government. 2 Good to decline
them, and that by exalting proper virtue.
Chap. 65. p. 177. showing 1 No offense but under some general head of Law; but
the want is no set punishment, where circumstances aggravate the offense
exceedingly. 2 Fit the Judge to punish according to the head rule, or consult
his Neighbors, or secure till resolved legally in circuit. 3 No Judge to be
punished merely for defect in form.
Chap 66. p. 178. showing 1 The necessity of providing fit remedies for the
ordinary causes of Duels. 2 Words and light acts when grown obnoxious, must
have punishments suitable. 3 Speedy remedy in this case of necessity. 4
Uncertain Trials, as by fire and water, how best to be settled. 5 If the
suspected walk still inordinately, how to be dealt with.
Chap. 67. p. 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184. showing 1 Questions 'twixt
Magistrate and Church, must be wisely discussed; and here only hinted, to open
clearly the controversy, so to pacify. 2 Wherein the controversy as now
stated principally rests. 3 This so far troubles the outward peace, that the
Magistrate must umpire. 4 Certain questions urged by the Congregational way.
180, 181 5 Some private Quaeries concerning the Ministry, and its maintenance.
6 Age of Pastors and Baptizing Infants only hinted. 7 Wherein Christian liberty
principally consists. 8 This opening the matter, how it settles peace. 9 The
right of Tithes and how. 182 10 What Religion the Magistrate must settle. 11
Wherein the Churches power principally consists. 12 Whither there may be two
Supreams. 13 How the controversy rises. 14 How they of the Congregationall way
settle it. 183 15 An objection answered arising from the supposall of the
necessity of uniformity. 16 How far outward or sword Power reaches. 17 What are
impropriations and appropiations. 18 Some things making Reformation difficult.
19 That Prescription is but a particular man's custom. 20 It ought to be
adjudged lawful, and recorded before allowed.
Chap. 67. p. 185, 186. Showing 1 The Imperial or Roman Civil Law to be the
foundation of our Justice. 185 2 How the multitude of their cases came to be
digested. 3 Why that Law was with us rejected or not used. 4 Why those Lawyers
were neglected. 5 The evils of having two diverse Laws to Judge by in one
Nation. 6 When a Church or State are in evident Error or Apostacy. 185, 186 7
A well constituted Nation must have a known settled Law proper. 8 As little
form as may be. 9 The habits of honor kept distinct, I say not sacred.
Chap. 68. page 186. Showing 1 That to put Offices to sale in any kind, is the
inlet to all injustice. 2 That wise and honest men have approved, is no
argument now. 3 That there is a sufficient Revenue to carry on the work of
Reformation with satisfaction to the Office and advantage to Magistrate and
people. 4 A consideration of the succession graduall of Officers. 5 The way to
have good Officers considered.
Chap. 69. page 187. Showing 1 Breeding able Mariners of necessity to this
Nation. 2 How to breed them, or how they be best bred. 3 How to encourage and
settle them. 4 A consideration of the season called Lent. 5 What the Magistrate
may do in it. 6 Objections against it; Religious and Physical. 7 Two ways
offered to salve all; the first Religious, the other Politic and not unjust
for its general. 8 The benefit considered, and some laws fits to be established
universally.
Chap 70. page 188. Showing 1 Customs received engage to secure the seas. 2
The Magistrate not bound to secure all, but to employ a sufficient guard. 3 Yet
the losses by Piracy are to be in some sort defrayed out of the advantage of
prizes. 4 Cases wherein there ought to be no satisfaction admitted.
Chap. 71. page 188, 189. Showing 1 That all officers that receive the revenues
of the Commonwealth, ought account. 188 2 That its fit this be done in the
particular Counties; and the reasons. 188 3 Judges must be thereto appointed
and have power, etc. 4 All Fees settled, and Offices, during well abearing.
Chap. 72. page 189, 190. Showing 1 That the Magistrate has all power to
preserve the Peace. 189 2 As King he has no power in Church assemblies. 3
Prudentially yet what ever done by him not simply unlawful, is lawful. 4
Reasons why no public Church Conventions should or way be without particular
allowance of the Magistrate. 5 If upon disturbance of the peace the Magistrate
settle a Law, the Churches are bound to obey. 6 The Right of calling Councels
for settling matters of Religion so called, cleared. 190 7 The reason of the
Authors undertakeing. 190, 191, 192. 8 The Authors Prayer for a Spirit of
turning to the Lord, etc. 192, 193, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 102. l. 10. r. cautious. l. 18. r. govern all. l. 19. r. of force. l. 22.
r. as. p. 112. ca. 11. l. 24. r. fancles. p. 113. l. 27. r. transcendency, p.
115. l. 10. dele this was derogative. l. 36. r. groundage. p. 118. l. 6. r.
swerve. p. 119. l. 47. r. now. p. 120. l. x. r. at his. l. 27. r.
conquassations, p. 123. l. 9. r. handed, p. 225. l. 36. r. run, p. 141. l. 45.
r. simular, p. 142. l. 24. r. objectors. p. 146. l. 40. r. under. p. 149. l.
10. r. that, p. 151. l. 31. r. do we not rather, p. 154. l. 40. r. into, p.
158. l. 7. r. practice constant, l. ult. r. none. p. 162. l. 13. r. without
delay. l. 17. r. twenty pound, p. 163. l. 44. r. the fourth. p. 165. l. 7. dele
equally, p. 165. l. 26. r. adjudged. p. 173. l. 28. r. verdict, p. 177. l. ult.
r. person, p. 178. l. last but 4. r. discuss. p. 186. l. 26. r. eighteen
thousand. l. 28. after Lord Au. r. etc. p. 187. l. 15. for I, r. It, p. 192. l.
27. r. act vigorously.

AN ESSAY OF Christian Government.
The first Quaere, what is Monarchy and its Divisions?
FIrst, Monarchy in General, or absolute Monarchy, is the Government of one man
according to his own Will, without any regulation. So whether he rules justly,
or injustly, has seemed needless to quaere, supposing that the people having
simply submitted, what ever he does is just, though just reason with just men
be his Rule.

But here is to be quaeried, whether such absolute subjection bind the parties
so subjecting themselves to obedience in things unlawful and evidently
destructive to public good.

To this it is Summarily answered, that they themselves are not bound; for as
Nature does nothing in vain, so neither communities of men, who act together by
pure Naturals, that is, look at what they call good, therefore as for
preservation of the whole, they agree to be subject, who were free; so for the
same reason visible, they may reassume that subjection into native freedom; and
this the examples of all Ages, Nations, etc. manifest to be the Law of pure
Reason, whether their attemps were successful or no.

But what if bound by an Oath?

To this I say, the Oath must and can work no otherwise (intentionally) if
free, then to the general end aforesaid, common safety, and that destroyed,
they are loosed; for the Law of Nature, and for Freedom sake, all reason
annexes, and must annex such a condition to every such Oath.

But what if the Oath were enforced?

I say, it is absolutely and simply void; all Laws in all Nations in pecuniary
contracts, the Minima hominis, damn enforced Oaths, then much more in main
matters of liberty, though the interest of Princes and great men, under
colorable shows and pretensions of peace, and quiet thereby, have caused great
Wits, and great Pens to abandon Nations to the lusts of particular men.

This cleared in the absolute Magistrate, it will be more then clear in the
limited, that cautioned Freedom, how ever obtained, and by whom, ever must be
observed; and though that the best ordet is a whole Representative to act in
enforcing and judging matters of so high concernment;

Yet the declarative act of breach of Trust past by the major part, execution
as with us may be just; though some say not justly done, (that is, in manner
and form, I here admit of Form:) But some say, it had in the formal part ample
satisfaction, according to the letter of the Law, and so was done justly; for
if a force were upon the house, it was by the house; and they not questionable,
but either by the whole people, or a new Representative; and this till recalled
by a more lawful power, must be just; This was done by Parliament at
Westminster, the place, and a sufficient number of persons to make a Court in
Law there was; and the Law gives no power to inferiors to take notice of the
jangles of equals, especially in Supremacy of Power; this in Law, in Conscience
they must look to themselves, who did the Act; if unjust, our conscience is to
look to the preservation of just liberties which we have; and in a due way to
gain those which under pretense of Conquest, past, or present, have been gained
from us, and by time usurped, which these men have promised who are our
Representatives, that is of the whole Kingdom; for their general and great
Engagement is,

First, to do the Nation Right, next to serve the particular places faithfully
for which they are chosen, and to see they have no wrong;

Now of these Monarchies; some are Elective, some Hereditary; this alters not
the Cause, but may make men more cautions, in case of the Nation, whose Kingdom
is constituted by Hereditary succession.

For if strict Order be not held with those Kings, they at last devolve into
Tyrannies, that is not only (one) to Rule, but his Rule to be without any Rule
not according to the Law of Righteousness, but at Lust, and then there is no
way but alteration of the frame of Government in Supremacy.

2. What is Aristocracie?
WHere all the Noble men, or great rich men of such an estate Rule, it is
called Aristocratia.

3. What is Oligarchy?
WHere a few men of the rich and noble or powerful overn all, it is called
Oligarchia, and is seldom but a government of few.

4. What is Democracie, and the ends of all Government?
WHere there is equality, and the greatest number Rule, that is called simple
Democracie, which ever was a dangerous State, as newly drawn out of confusion.

The next is where is the whole body thoose never so vile a wretch, he is fit
for the place, a Tribune of the people, and his Yea, or No goes as far as Any's.

An other Democracie is settled in several choices, refining the grosser pars by
degrees, and by wise limitations, restraining the way of confused meetings, and
yet giving just freedoms, and to keep Justice pure, limiting the Electors as
well as the Elected, and that not only by restraints of not such estate, or no
Vagabond, or that has been such, no Thief, no outlawed person, no perjured
person, no servant; but some have Christianly added, cast out of the Church, a
common Swearer, Liar, Tavern-haunter, Prophaner of the Lords Day, a Gamester.

Some now may as well say any one not received into a Church Fellowship.

This yet being the work of the Supreme Magistrate, the more warily ordered the
State is in reason constituted, the more durable.

By this it is plain, that all subjection was admitted for protection; and that
protection merits, and may require subjection, and subjection protection; that
this power employed against the end, is in Law (that is the radiance or glympse
of Divine Reason in man) utterly void, and all of them intend but the same
thing, namely public good, although they seek it diverse ways.

5. What form of Polity is best?
THis past, I now come to to quaere, which of these forms of Polity is the
best? Wherein I cannot be of opinion, that Aristotle only out of affection to
his Pupil, raised Monarchy to the top of Excellency; for why should he not as
well have set his King above the Laws? but this indeed he did not, resting in a
limited Monarchy, wherein the Law was the Kings boundary; and surely he knew no
King limited but in Greece, specially in Lacedemon, where I take it, he was
subject to the Ephori, and by them to the Ax, and the Halter, etc.

I find the excellency of a Kingdom above a Commonwealth, rather by not having
the Evils of Ambition and quarrels for Supremacy, then the good of Common
Justice, Right Laws, and gallant Spirits, begotten and educated.

It Is agreed, a King is more easy to be corrupted, as is, and has been ever
manifested in all ages; and though it was then preferred as more easy to
reduce (for few would then stand against public interests) yet now it being
made the Idol of vain men, and the Christian world wholly over run with vanity,
it is hardest to be reclaimed; for things are evidenced to be easy or
difficult, as interests are.

Yet Divine Providence has here blown upon all interests, for they were
corrupt: (Oh you that are in power, build not with such hay and stubble still,
for surely your work is like to pass the fire.)

But assuredly a Kingdom Hereditary, is far before any other Kingly Government,
where the Nation is small, bounds large, and spirits content; for Peace is most
durable in that Government. And that will give Riches, and the people shall
have ease and plenty, and grow numerous, ( for emulation the mother of discord,
is restrained at least.)

But then the land will be too scant, and that Nation must fall upon others, or
break within her self, or transmit Colonies.

Now Democracie must be in War abroad, or else she breeds Fevers in her own
bowels.

Yet Aristocracie and Oligarchy seems worse, as partaking in more selfish
interests; but assuredly in all, they are best or worst, as the men Ruling are.

6. Whether the acquests of Kings belong to the State in Case of alteration of
Government?
SEeing now alterations are incident to States, it may be justly Quaeried,
whether what is gotten by the Prowess of a King, or Marriages, come to the
Supreme power Governing, or return back in such Alterations, or the Heir
Natural to enjoy them?

The answer is easy; for all these things rest in the King as King, as they
were acquired, whether in an absolute or limited State, they go to his
Successor Politic, not Natural, not in the ordinary course of inheritance, but
according to the Transition of the Crown, how great Jumps soever it take, and
this person dies not; so that it is evident the supreme power has all the
acquests, and rights, whether Warlike, or Civil, as by Marriage, Permutations,
Emptions of State, or Mortgages Real, as Cautionary Towns.

So that this Change of Government has not divested England of any Title to
ought due to any former Kings as Kings of England; whether in Ireland, France,
Castile, Cicily, Cyprus, Jerusalem, united Provinces, or else where.

And should Kings come in again, sure they would not hold the intervening
settlement of a Reipublick a Bar; and the Reason is evident, for they have the
Supreme power, and are as Capable to give Protection, and enforce Obedience
each as other in consideration of Reason; so there is no inconsistencie in the
thing.

7. Whether better to be Governed by Laws, or without?
HAving seen the Governors, let us see how they are to Govern. I take it that
the same reasons against Arbitrary Government in a King, will serve for a
State; for grant a Choice of the most excellent men in knowledge, and Justice:

Yet can we say they shall be always such, or those that succeed them?
therefore no doubt it is better to be Governed by good Laws, then good men,
taking care that those Laws be executed under severe punishments.

8. Whether better to have general, or particular Laws?
I Now must come to the hard task of all Politicians, That is, to set the
Medium of power in Magistrates, wherein it is plain, that to tie a Magistrate
(in any Government) supreme or inferior, yet administering Justice to the very
strict letter of the Law, is to have all the safety of the Commonwealth shipped
in a Vessel without sails or oars; slip but the letter, and no Magistrate can
meddle.

Therefore generals must be the way, but limited they must be, or else your
venture is as much on the other side; for to give him no bound, or too much, is
to put him into a vessel overladen, and the sail too full, which upon every
gust is ready to sink, or be over turned, or run under water.

Now to pass this Scylla and Charybdis, is the hard work in the first
settlement: That the supreme Magistrate has his due boundary, and after for
him so to dispense to inferior Magistrates, that the equal Temperament in every
part may assure the safety of the whole.

England, before the late fatal infusions into King Charles his head, of the
absolute power due to Princes Jure Divino, whereby they were rendered
accountable only to God, boasted against all other Nations of the happiness of
all these Governments, in a sweet and admirable admixture of power; for they
had the freedom of a Commonwealth, the opulency of Aristocracie, the glory of a
King.

Yet he so bounded by the Laws, and so watched by the Emulators of his glory,
the Nobles, and by the Conservators of our Liberties, the Commons, that it was
hard for him to break.

Yet break he did, and that so suddenly, that it was evident the settlement we
gloried in, was but as we say, A last gasp to the decaying state of the Bastard
William, so called, the Conqueror.

And now is the time for them to whom God gives the Honor of a Settlement, so
to mould and temper Government, that it may be most durable, which is the glory
of a State.

Now to do this aright, after the Assurance that nothing be done, how politic
or advantageous soever it seems, contrary to the light of Christian Doctrine, I
come to the difficulty abovesaid, that is, What Power is to be committed to the
Magistrate, whether Supreme or Inferior, respectively?

To which I answer generally, That the Magistrate, whoever he be that is
entrusted, ought to have more power then its commonly requisite he should
improve, that thereby by acts of Grace he may endear or suppress, as occasion
shall offer:

The Supreme thereby obliging all parties, as well inferior Magistrates, as
other Subjects: the inferior Magistrate to engage the equals (in all but
Magistracy) and all the vulgar, and that without punishment from above, or
scorn below.

For it is evident there are ever ambitious or insolent Spirits, who if the
Magistrate be tied too straight, will draw him to the end of his line, and then
dare him; I wish from my soul Magistrates were all wise and just, fearing God,
and hating Covetize; but in the choice of these men for interests, it will not
be so; therefore I meddle not to prescribe rules, as some do, for a man who
prefers private interests, but him that only and principally fixes himself,
and his endeavors upon the advance of Public and Common good; therefore to
them I address my self, with this Caution;

That the great ruining danger, is, in times of Commotion to be over strict,
beyond late presidents, and Examples; for that blows the coals of Sedition, yea
sparks to a great flame especially if public ruins build private fortunes, so
called, or partake with any selfish interest.

They therefore that are in Supreme trusts, and would settle, or continue their
Governments quiet, must themselves in their places, and whom they empower
respectively, with (not only faithfulness and diligence, but also) wisdom and
discreet activity, moderate that power which may be lawful, much more that
which is exorbitant, or but to be used against persons exorbitant (that is,
violent Rebellious (and that in acts) disturbers of the Peace) for against
such, to spare one guilty, is to venture the destruction of a thousand of
innocents; In evident just things settle the power.

Now I come to the Rules of bounding the inferior Magistrate, wherein I
conceive it is principally requisite to add to the general Rules of Law, or
head Laws, particular Officers, by which only it is lawful to act in time of
peace, or not imminent danger.

That to this Officer being sworn, or tied under a set penalty of faithfulness
in his Office, the Magistrate send his Warrant, expressing the cause of the
Warrant, as now to Constables; and that this Warrant discharges the Officer,
and then the complaint is and ought to be against the Magistrate.

For no reason one should be punished for executing his Office by command of
his Superior.

Nor is it fit the Magistrate should be too suddenly liable to Question;
therefore it is requisite to have some appointed near hand, to whom the
Magistrate in Ordinary, and also the Subject may have recourse, who knowing the
Law, may speedily determine; for otherwise the Judge or Magistrate is
discouraged on the one side to act, and the Subject on the other side fears his
liberty to be infringed, both which must be provided against speedily and
certainly.

For it is assuredly meet, That every one not acting Legislatively, but
judicially upon Laws set, should be under the jurisdiction and Cognizance of
some one or more person or persons, and to make returns to them of at least all
matters doubtful.

And again, That they that act Legislatively should not act judicially, nor be
the same persons, (unless in case of visible necessity) least otherwise Justice
fail.

As for example, if the Judges of the Common Bench, Common Pleas, and Chequer
were Judges in Parliament, could we think the Parliament fit to determine their
Errors; lets have the best Laws that could be, Laws would be but dead letters
still in themselves.

9. Whether the Laws ought to be according to the Judicial, or what? and
whether a head rule, or not?
I Come now to that great and old (difference, or) difficulty, what is the
boundary to humane Power, or Authority, or Dominion, call it what you will, it
is the executive virtue in the Magistrate Supreme, in dictating, or giving
forth of Laws.

Now I in this shall wave treating of Law, in its variety of objects, and
shortly give you this description of it.

It is the Rule of well ordering Societies of men, or many Families of men
living together; and aims especially at preserving the poor and weak, against
the rich and mighty, etc.

Now it is truth, that many Nations have diverse Laws, yea, great variety, and
all just; and some Nations have a few Laws, and many unjust; naturally, each
one seeks particular good.

But as this grew obnoxious to particular persons or families, they joined
together, and that under agreements, wherein there being still particular
respects according to the advantages and disadvantages of the Covenanters, so
were the Laws more or less unjust; but ofttimes that which was seen unjust
after, was not discovered such at the time of enacting.

Hence some have, to take away all wrangles, fallen upon a Community; some from
Community, to Property, still looking to avoid the present evil; yea from hence
indeed spring all the Commotions, and hurries of the world, which so Rent and
shake people and Nations.

So that there was nothing so highly honored, as the enacting good Laws; I take
it to be the Original, at least one of the chief Originals of the Heroes, or
Daemones, men Deified (so God himself styles Magistrates, because of their
Representation of him among men) and all these Lawgivers pretended at least to
receive them from the gods, or the friends of the gods.

For even to natural men it seemed just, that what wise men had instit uted,
wise men might alter.

Now if these Laws were only some Prerogatives of the Princes, or Privileges
of great men, which men had sought to usher into the world with such pomp,
there might have been a ground for obstruction; but these which were the Laws
of well living, the Laws tending to public quiet, repose, riches, and honor,
(custom of living being equal to, if not above nature) were of necessity thus
brought in, only by fear of the supposed Gods; yea, also the future Magistrate
was by this (superstition, call it so) only kept in aw, not to break forth
into exorbitant affections, or decline action, either not to make the Law like
the knife of Delphos for all purposes, or else for no purpose.

So are men biased by private respects on the one hand, and loving supremacy
of power on the other, that unless there be some over-awing decree, some settled
boundary, beyond which we must not pass, there is no safety.

Now if it be said, this is indeed true in the cause of natural men, but not so
to Christians; Grace perfects nature: I agree, it is truth in some sense, but
not in every part; for it is rather true in the future, then any other Tense;
for it works here in the flesh not so intensively, but more remisly, yea,
sometimes the effectual work of grace seems dead; that this is true, the agreed
failings of the Saints evidence.

Yea those in whom the work of Grace was begun sure enough; as witness David's
Pride, Murder, Adultery, etc. Samuels sufferance of his sons, Hezekiah, and
all others before Christ.

Peter, the sons of Zebedee, Paul, Barnabas and others, under the Gospel.

So that it is plain we must remember it to be truth in some sort, which was
objected against Aristotle's councelling Alexander, (as was pretended) to use
the Greeks as friends, and carry himself as their Guide and Conductor; but to
use the Barbarians (meaning thereby all other Nations) as enemies, and carry
himself toward them as Lord and Master.

The reason of their objection was very acute; for say they, there are many
Greeks wicked, and many virtuous Barbarians.

So that if any Quaere, whether Laws should be diverse in respect of diverse
sorts of men, it is shortly answered, Laws are to restrain and punish only
evil, whether men or actions.

This being cleared, the next thing is to come to the more close and plain
resolving of the question, wherein I cannot urge antiquity; for I wave all
Authors more then as illustrative, taking none as Authoritative; the
superintendency of the Expurgatorian Classis abroad in foreign Authors, and
our Licentia, or Placet at home, making them speak what they list, or as they
list who are masters of the Press; for if so done to some, why not to all? or
who can tell to which? and indeed there is no necessity of either ancient or
modern testimony, the Almighty wisdom having the same fountain of endowments,
graces and abilities as in any age, and the same as plentifully poured out now
upon us, however it is improved.

This premised, I then Quaere, what law is existent among any or all the
Nations of the world, like that which is called Moses Judicial, holding forth
such fit and apt punishments, as are there laid down, carrying with it such a
visible reason for it self, agreeable to the Rule of Proportion?

I may say that the law of England did own this as its necessary pattern (it is
seldom denied) but if any do oppose, or doubt, let them first consider, That no
law in England was settled (generally at least) until the Pope had come to an
obliging power, and that agreed; sure as he aped the Ceremonials, he did engage
a conformity in Princes as far as might be to the Judicials.

I shall now see the only or main objections against the Judicials, which may
be reduced, I take it, to three chiefly.

First, they were given to the Jew.

Secondly, they are not, or cannot all be performed by us; for some were only
proper to the Jew, some no way fitting this Nation, for they were never
received; and there is a necessity of altering laws as vices increase, and grow
more Obnoxious; and also in regard the Judicials themselves are not all so
clear that it can be said which are all the Judicials, by reason of mixtures of
Ceremonials with them.

Thirdly, The Law of Christ is a Law of Love, not Revenge, to pray for enemies,
do good to them that hate us, turn the other cheek to him strikes one, and give
the cloak to him takes the coat, and go two miles with him enforces thee to one.

God assisting, we will endeavor to clear these Heads; and then in
consideration of the particular Laws, answer some particular Objections, if any
be seen needful.

Now as to the first, That these things were immediately directed by the
Almighty wisdom to the Jew, it is agreed; But what does this hold forth? Sure
only this, That the Jew was bound by them, God having commanded them to that
Nation, that God required not obedience from the other Nations to whom he had
given no command, but that any other Nation might not use them, it proves not;

But rather that those Laws, as far as holding forth a rule of Justice to them
which had no Rule, or a better, where defective, ought by these Nations to whom
they were known, to be established, is sure out of controversy, while
Legislators have Just and Good for their Rule. To the second, That they cannot
be all performed by us, Let us see the hindrances.

First, Some being supposed only proper to the Jew, if we come to search what
those be which we cannot perform, there appear here visibly but the Law
concerning the Trials of Adultery, and Virginity; we allow these ought to be
inquired into, and satisfaction given to the jealous spirit; but we presume the
special Law binds not; That in case of Virginity, being, though natural, yet as
it were only proper to that Nation, and that by some extraordinary power of
Divinity, giving forth Testimony to his own Law.

The other simply extraordinary, in regard the same water wrought so contrary
effects; so that the virtue was evidently not in the water: and if we should
search the depth, the seeds, though conceived by of the Adulterer, could work
no more then of a husband in the ordinary course of Nature.

There is also some particular Laws of two wives, humbling of Handmaides, with
some others.

The next sort of Laws are such as are said hold no proportion with the natural
condition of the people of this or other Christian Nations; and therefore the
Nations settled others, and never received them.

To this part I answer; That if it never received them, there was no trial,
whether agreeable to the Nation or not. Next if tried, how does this
indisposition in Nations generally to the receipt of particular Laws appear?
sure it is not by way of Antipathy, so that the Nation fails, dies, or is
removed upon receiving of them; truth is, we all agree, Nations may be altered
by Laws, as the Romans brought from natural savageness to a more moderate
temper by Numa's Laws; and the Lacedaemonians by those of Lycurgus; and they may
be heightened and debased in spirit, as well as moderated; but all this rests
not in the Law, but the executive part or power of it.

Now that force will naturalize Laws, it is plain; why then not Reason? It is
evident, Laws are the reins of Reason over the beastial part of man; therefore
now to the reasonable man any just Law is approveable; as to his obedience, he
is a Law to himself, and happily gives far less liberty to his particular
beast, his appetite, be it to, or in what it will, then it is fit the general
Law should hold forth; and this has just wisdom in it; hereby are the good and
wise distinguished from the vain and idle, even by the subjection of natural
appetite: from whence it is hereby clear, that to govern a fierce Nation, the
same Laws will not serve, as to govern a quiet peaceable one.

But now our Quaere must be, whether there be not be a just Law in the
generality, agreeable to the light of Nature, set down in the Judicial heads of
Law, which will agree to govern all Nations by; take two Laws for example,
Murder and Theft.

The first is the head-Law of mankind toward his like, the prime end of
Magistracy being to preserve life.

The next is goods; Now in this I find no loose to the Magistrate, but life
must be for life; if murder, that is, lieing in wait, or as with us malice
before hand; in this the Magistrate has no liberty to ingratiate in refined
Reason; it lies upon the Land, if not expiated with the blood of the offender,
and so upon the City, and so upon the Army.

But the chief guilt surely lies upon the chief Magistrate, who is the prime in
trust executive as to the fact; this sure is, and ought to be death in all
Nations.

The like head-Rule of common Justice is in the Law of the manslaier at
unawares; and surely of this sort there will be no doubt, nor of the expiation
of uncertain murder which ought to be settled rightly by an Oath of Inquisition,
etc.

But the great quaere will be concerning Theft, which is the matter most, or
with the most to be considered, as a grould of controversy.

For the most of Christian Nations have made it death, yet the Judicial makes
it death in no kind, That punishing life with life, and goods with goods, etc.
in the rule of proportionate Justice.

Now this alteration is not without reason as things stand, that is, upon the
received principles forementioned out of the seeming contrariety which
Christians have gathered out of the Law Judicial, and Apostolical.

For they have gathered, that Christ's Kingdom being of brothers, there should
be no servants; that is, no slavish servitude, or bondmen, which was the issue
of not satisfying what was stolen with the Jew; and upon this presumption,
they at last wholly abrogated, as to Theft, the mulcts of two, three, four, or
sevenfold restored for his life, and took away his life; now this being only
practice, cannot determine the Controversy.

Let us then see the Reasons if any be, whereof the most eminent is that of
Magisterial Interest, whereby he would wave a limitation, or rule in ordinary,
and make himself absolute in every condition.

For Supremacy generally aims at absolute Power in all estates, Royal, or
Republical, or mixed, though they maintain their interest diversely, according to
evident principles, upon which their foundation stands; this therefore is a
Politic rule; but how warranted by Supremacy of Reason, upon the pure
principle of common or universal good, or what Rule in the Word, must be
examined; in the written Word there is owned nothing as clear; for sure then
the controversy with some one good Magistrate, or Commomwealth or other would
be determined, and the interest of Righteousness would cloud the interests of
riches, honor, power, etc. This therefore failing, let us see the Reason; the
first part whereof is in necessity of altering Laws, according to emergencies;
to which it is answered, That Laws in inflicting just penalties may be higher
or lower according to emergency; and the rigorous, or exact execution may be
justly enforced; but the incompatibility or disproportion of the Law of Death
for Theft is, in that all the goods of a Prince are not of equal worth as
goods, be they Horses, Kine, Gold; Silver, etc. to the head of a Slave,
consider him as man: nay, the Lord touches not man's liberty for goods merely,
if he had wherewith to restore; therefore this Reason will not avail.

But if we consider the Quaere a little further, there will appear less reason
yet; and that is, that even Christians themselves doubt not, but that would the
Magistrate wave his advantages, both to himself, Clerks, Officers, etc. by the
death of Felons, and strictly see to the Execution but of restoring two or
three fold, Theft would not be the one hundred part so frequent as now it is;
for though generally it be truth, that preservation of life is the prime
principle of Nature, and he will part with all to save that:

Yet the spirits of some men are such, being not polished by divine precept,
that they scorn to live but as they have been educated; some will dye rather
then labor, and so Thieve, or commit any villainy.

Now it is by some thought these may be put to death, but these do not put
these men to death for Theft, but not having to restore, they imprison them to
satisfy by labor, their wrongs; and if they break prison they dye for it; so
that death is now inflicted upon them, not only by the equity of the Law
Judicial, but universal reason cutting off this disobedient son, rooting out
this Moth of the Commonwealth; and there is sure much of Justice in this; for
now with Christians to prosecute a Felon (as any other criminous person) will
cost a man in expense of time, and Fees, and other charges, as much as would
have kept his Family a month, which added to his loss who would prosecute, yet
compound the Law forbids, but I intend haste.

The next reason is, the Judicials are so mixed with Ceremonials:

To which it is answered, that many are clear, use them; the other search out
how the mixture stands; for if there be a plain Law of distributive Justice, a
necessary rule for the benefit of Societies, take that; and if there be no
corrupt interest in it, sure it will be accepted by wise men, though mere
Politicians may baulk it, as well as enact it, as King Hen. the 8. did in case
of Marriages.

I am now come to the great head of all, namely that the Judicials were a Law
of revenge, which now is proper to God, Christians must not fight, war,
revenge, etc.

I could with some say I admire the wonderful goodness, mercy,
long-sufferance, patience, etc. of God, who willing to show the Riches of his
mercy, forbears the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction.

Art thou a Christian that objectest against the Judicials to elate another
Magisterial power then that of the Regiment of the Lord Christ? for though they
were given by Moses, they were the Dictates of the prime verity: And where O
man have thou such a pattern!

But thou will say, We are Christians, and we have no need of Laws?

I answer with Paul, If thou be the Law to thy self, the Law punishes thee
not; Rulers are set up for the punishment of evil doers: So said the Lord to
Cain in the first two thousand years; And so says the Spirit to the world in
the last two thousand.

But say you, we acknowledge a Law to men, but not Christians; Brethren, be not
deceived; remember what Peter says, The unlearned and unstable wrest the
Scriptures to their own destruction; the place I pitch upon to clear up the
Righteousness of the Law even to Christians, is that of the 1 Timothy 1. from the
8. to 14. There are multitudes of places hinting the same, I at present know
none more pregnant; for thence it is plain, that there were then many
controversies stirred by the Christian Jews, or so pretending, concerning the
observance of the whole Mosaical Law, whether Ceremonial or Judicial.

Paul had beaten down as much as in him lay, the Ceremonial, showing it was but
the shadow, the body was Christ.

Now concerning the Judicials particularly there is no question, but from the
following verses, and from other places it is plain what was intended; for in
the 9. verse, he shows wherefore the Law was made.

First Negatively, not for the Righteous, (the foundation of great errors while
misapplied.)

Next Affirmatively, for the lawless and disobedient, ungodly and sinners,
unholy and profane; these are general.

Now he comes to particulars, Murderers, Manslayers, Whoremongers, Buggerers,
Men-stealers, Liars, Perjured persons, and against all other things contrary to
sound Doctrine, etc.

There is an objection against this, viz. these things are Moral.

To which I answer, that if you take Moral for the Law of the ten
Commandments, they are not literally there; if you intend Moral for what ever
is contained virtually under these heads, the two generals whereof comprehend
the whole duty of man to God, and to his brother, all mankind, then the whole
Judicial at least must be therein comprised.

If you intend by Moral, what the light of perfect reason holds forth
concerning just and good, no man dare say the Judicials wanted the height of
perfect Reason.

If you look at it as rectified by Evangelical Doctrine, then it is answered,
that the primitive error is the cause of our now wandering.

First generally seeing the errors which have flowed by the Church to the
Commonwealth, we confusedly judge this to rise from the principle of the
Judicials, and lay all the pride, covetize, and various interests of Princes
Courts, Judges Fees, and unjust and unnecessary dependancies, Nurses of
Heathenish and detestable wickedness, villainy and ensnaring dependencies to
life and liberty of common Societies as well as particular men upon the
Judicial.

Next it is believed, that Christians take the Judicials proper to them, as to
the prototype of the Jew, which might be; but now a clearer light manifests
higher things, or is so pretended to.

The main particular and worthy consideration is our formation of Christian
policy according to the Jewish Model; for we held all Baptized as Circumcised
to be Christians.

Now of these, how excellent Christians we have, the Gallows, Gaoles, Houses of
Correction for punishment, and all places of vanity, such as almost the Heathen
would blush at, Drinking, Dicing, Drabbing, etc. publicly known, manifestly
proclaim; and though no rents to the State, as at Rome, for the Stews; yet to
the Statesmen they enhance Farm Rents, etc. for surely, were there no
advantageous interests, they would not against common profession be upon so
weak reasons as they are, tolerated, while winked at; yet what is done with
these Christians? lo they are punished, are they not? Surely no, not one of
ten, if one of a hundred; and this punishment is the sacrificeing for sin; and
this past, they are if it be but commutation, as clear Christians as the best;
and being now become more serviceable to corrupt interests, these spied out the
lawful Liberties of better Christians, which the Judicials not affording a whip
for,

The Magistrate must be loosed from his restraint rather then not have an
honest man punished; this raised error upon error, and opened this loose to the
Christian to seek freedom from an unjust Law; and to the Magistrate, to seek to
punish at lust: But if you see through all the Apostles Writings, they only
forbid the sin; and for punishment, look at the Law in general, which surely
they could not intend but of the Judicial.

Now for the Commands of Christ the Lord, and the Precepts of Love, Charity,
Patience, forbearance, etc. they are certainly true, and to be observed; and
then the Quaere or Objection is, what need of Law? The Answer to this is as
evident as the other, That the purest Congregations, Churches, etc. have had,
and ever will have evil men among them, not only hypocrites but open sinners;
The error of the Congregations not ejecting, or Magistrates not punishing, or
not due regulating by punishment, rather shows the necessity of Law, then the
uselesness of it.

Now grant that the whole Nation were purely Church Members, of which no
visible cause of ejecting or rejecting communion appeared; yet there would or
might arise many debates, differences and controversies, which would require a
Magisteriall Authority to determine, if but for difficulty; And surely the
Congregations of Christians never so little declining, could not avoid
litigations and wranglings; and there being no word to extirpate the Civil
Magistracy, it becomes not Christians to wrangle, much less violently to
oppose so approved, so necessary an Ordance; That opinion that in the
simplicity of the last Age, as in the beginning, the father of the Family shall
be King and Priest, has little warrant; that has more, that each Saint shall
be so; and yet in the mean time, as hitherto, subject to the powers; yea, the
Heathen ones, for conscience sake, of the radiancy or glimpse of the Divinity
holden forth in them.

It is truth, pure Christians will not be contentious, some meek spirits may
and will obey the letter of Christ; and sure they that do so in faith, shall
not fare the worse for their exact obedience; but in the mean-time, this is no
binding rule to us, except the words be so intended.

It is truth, the child of God seeks not his own, etc. he is wholly taken up
with God, etc. shall the Magistrate therefore see evil against him go
unpunished? Again, love and not avengeing wrongs, and praying for enemies in
the spiritual sense, may stand with the punishing, afflicting, and bringing to
judgment the body of the transgressor in the literal; yea, God is thereby
glorified; otherwise how can the peace of good men be preserved against the
wicked, but miraculously? which we have no warrant to expect at present, and
what shall be hereafter, as the light manifests it self, the Lord grant we may
walk in it, and also up to it; and that our Laws may be established according
to a rule of Righteousness, even according to the wisdom revealed by God
himself; and that all emergent Laws may flow from the same fountain; for for
every action contingent there is as is agreed no particular Law already settled,
nor well can be, but the Christian Magistrate ought to provide that not the
least wrong or trespass but be righted or punished.

I must yet remove one rub, and that is, the Judicials have been our misguider
hitherto, therefore better any other Law then them; it is the same that was
objected for using of forms, whether of prayer or otherwise which the Church
of Rome used (and was partly spoken to before particularly) in that all our old
errors having sprung from that root that it is necessary, yea, some say of
necessity, to wave that for our rule lest we tread the same trace of error,
that was before our ruin; and therefore better take our Laws from Turk or
Persian, or etc. then from the Judicials.

Now let us examine this, and all will appear vain; for first it is denied,
that the observing the Judicials, yea though as binding as the prototype, was
the error of Christians, so as to bring so horrible a defection upon our
Judicatories.

We maintain not (I desire to be rightly understood) That this Nation
professing Christianity, is bound to the Mosaicall Judicials in the command to
the Jew.

But assay to manifest that those Judicials were not our misguidance. The
Decalogue or Ten Commandments we all agree (except in the set day of the
Sabbath) to hold forth but even what Natures light determinately approves,
whereby it is evident that sin is the same to us as with them, which all the
writings of the Apostles manifest.

Now the sin in the head Law being the same, what difference in the branches,
either in respect of the several species of transgression, or manners of
punishment.

Now as to these we all agree the error an error, but we must differ concerning
the ^nfliction of punishment, which I drive to this head;

That the Law prescribed in the Judicial for punishment, holds a due
proportion, punishing life with life, goods with goods, etc. if so, then that
these mediums or rules of due punishment ought much more to be observed by the
Christian Magistrate under the Law of the Gospel, the glad tidings of peace and
mercy, then by the Jew, and not to outbound, unless after the utmost of
execution the Law be found evidently defective, which I presume it never will
be under prudent Magistrates.

Now to him that says the observation of these Laws was our ground of error;

I say in the Ceremonials of Moses it was; and that the receiving of the
Judicials might open a gap to introduce that error the more facily, I will not
deny; but that this must either cast out the Judicial, or make us take the Rule
(for this in any just Law I presume must be) from the hand of a Heathen rather
then from the word of promise, is the fruit of strong contemplative zeal; for
the punishment, so it holds its due proportion, take it from the Turk if you
will, or Persian, it matters not.

The Turks punishment, so it be not Torture, may suit best the spirit or genius
of the Nation; for to burn, hang, behead, or stone, all is but death; and this
difference, had Ceremonies so called been lawful to be enjoined, might have
stinted our controversy of old between the then so called Protestants and
Puritans for the receiving the gestures, set forms of Prayers, Ornaments and
Forms of and in Church Service so called.

And assuredly it ever has been one of the Devils gyns, to fright men from
truth and right by miscarriages in the manner, etc. hence comes the scandals
of profession from the errors, if but of one or two hypocritical or misled
professos; we may as well refuse the Scriptures because Heretics use them;
and that they lead to Judaisme is a great error; for surely Judaising was
intimated in no part of the Judicial Law, of which any question can be.

For the exception in Fornication, things strangled, and blood, the last two
being meats, we are now freed from.

There is a holy jealousy which is for God, and is commendable; and there is a
pertinacy from interest, which is Idolatrous and wicked; the Lord open men's
eyes, especially those in Authority, rightly to distinguish that they be not
found fighters against God.

Now who are to expound this Law, and settle it, and how far their power
extends, is our next task.

10. Who have the power to make Laws, and how far that power extends?
SOme may think, that the Judicials being laid down to be the fittest rules for
Christians, or any men to live by, That this Quaere is needless.

For what have we to do with Lawmakers, of or among men, when God himself has
fitted the work to our hand?

But these men must know, that time brings to light new inventions of sin,
Satan goes about in variety of shapes and deceives daily, and these offenses
many of them will be difficultly referred to the proper head of Transgression;
therefore it is requisite that there be a superintendency to oreview these
errors and apply a remedy in time according to their rule, yet to punish life
with life, goods with goods, etc.

Now these are various according to the either condition or constitution of the
Nation, or both; the constitution according to settled Law and constantly
received; the condition time of war or peace.

Now the time of war being only accidental, we are specially to consider acts
done according to the settled constitution of the Nation, be it by Monarchy
absolute, or limited, or Republique; Republiques of all or any sort; and their
boundary is common and public good, and that either according to emergent
necessity, as in case the elders of Gibeah had consented to have all their eyes
put out for National advantage; for in such a case the elders had turned
evident Traitors to their trusts, but to lose one or either eye. This will
receive somewhat more ample satisfaction, if we consider seriously

11. What are the proper Rights of the supreme Magistrate, so called,
Prerogative.
NOw in the handling of this Question it is fit a little to open what is
Prerogative; now this simply taken, is the Privilege or pre-eminence that one
party has, either above, or before another, and so is no more then to have
that of right and duty, which others have by accident or by favor, as to have
the most honorable place, to be heard first, and such like.

But to take it in the proper latitude, it is the sum of all those powers,
privileges, Rights and Immunities necessary to the Supreme Power, whether
person or persons (according to the strict rule) that thereby the people may be
the better governed, according to the loose rule, that the people may be kept
in subjection, and the glory of the King or Ruler exalted, and that as to
absolute Power over both body and goods.

Now therefore to treat of Prerogative in such a sense, is vain; for
Prerogative is absolute power; and what the Prince pleases is his Prerogative,
and this was assuredly aimed at here.

Now Prerogative, according to the strict Rule, is of two sorts, that is, more,
or less strict; as for example, some Prerogatives primarily usurped, by time
are agreed to, and after constituted, such as our vassalage of Tenures, whether
in Capite, or that by grand or petite Serj. Escuage, Knights Service, Soccage,
or Villenage; all which the estates of the Nation have looked upon, and not
annulled, but regulated, and the Kings sought to avoid those Regulations.

Now the more strict Rule of Prerogative, is, to give the dues necessary, and
that both for honor, and order, and safety, which both the other are but as
handmaids to; for the etymologicall fautaries, I pass them, intending to hold
out truth in her native simplicity, without the ammusive garnish of needless
witty vanities.

This then agreed, what Prerogative is in general, from hence it may be
collected, that what ever is necessary, or rather of necessity, to the well
being of the whole, is to be in the Supreme Power: Now this which is by some,
and generally alleged as proper to Kings, yet must be also in all Supreme
Magistrates, as Dukes, Earls, etc. yea though Vassals or Tributaries to other
Princes, and must be also in Republiques, or where the supremacy of power rests
in more then one person, whether Aristocratical, Oligargichal, or the pure
Republique, viz. the Democratique State.

For the Prerogative is incident naturally to the Supremacy of power, and that
of necessity; for they are the Superintendents of the whole body, and are to
have requisites to that Office, as necessarily as the father of a Family or any
inferior Magistrate under him ought to have, to govern in their bounds,
precincts, limits and places; and therefore the Law of England justly in the
matter (however in the attribute, or that to admit comparison with the
Almighty, might or may offend some men's ears) by way of illustrative Analogy,
gave a kind of ubiquity or omnipresence to the King, and so to the supreme
Magistrate, as the first part of his Prerogative, his diffused power (for
common good so ordered) manifesting it self in all Offices whereby the public
peace (so called the Kings peace) was preserved, and was necessary every where.

But as more necessary, so more apparent in the Courts of Justice, all of which
were called the Kings Courts, and the Process the Kings, etc.

Now we being ruled by Laws; for to avoid the inconveniences aforementioned
of pusillage and folly, and alterations accidental to the best of men depraved,
through the fall, make this supreme power vertually to rest in settled Laws, and
by them they rule, and so neither death, folly, nor any kind of wrong, or
injury, can by the estimation of Law be done or suffered by the supremacy of
power, so that truly the Law says, the King can do no wrong, that is, the Law
by the supremacy of power, enables him not to do wrong; and to speak out the
whole truth, to men of the meanest understanding; This law, and the right
understanding and executing of it, is the highest Prerogative of any of Gods
Vicegerents, in higher or lower spears, and is the agreed Rule of common good,
as before-said.

Now our great error and delusion of late was to give that to the person, which
was due to the Office, and to subjugate the Office to the person, and not the
person to the Office, which the Law would never admit; for the Law, that is the
purity, yea, tanscendencie of Reason, leaves the person of the Prince naked, in
case of Male Action, though it censures not in all male administration, where
it admits him positively to judge.

I shall give you an example to illustrate; for if the King enters a man's house
disguised, and offers to vitiate his wife, daughter, etc. and be slain of the
father, husband, etc. it is but as the death of an ordinary person; and truly
by the principles of the settled Law be he known, it is no more.

I shall put but one Example more; A Traitor is by virtue of the Kings Writ,
brought before the Judge, Arraigned, and Condemned; the King grants no pardon,
(which I suppose he in such Cases cannot generally, though it was done
customarily) nor uses no legal peaceably way, but by force personal sets
himself in Act by his Guard to take this Traitor out of the hands of that
Justice to which in his Politic capacity he has Sentenced him; and the
Sheriffs men defending the Law; and the Guard by the personal command of the
King, seeking the overthrow of it, by taking away illegally the prisoner; and
they fighting about it, and the King running in, he is slain, it is no murder
by the principles of the Law, which owns not the King in this Act of Tort and
Force, and takes no notice of the death of that person as King, who in Law dies
not; for the Law cannot now take notice of it, because out of his Sphere; by
this it is evident to what end the Magistrate is clothed with so called
Prerogative, namely the advance of public interest.

Now, as in this sort, it gives to the supreme Magistrate the glory of the
Courts of Justice, and the disposings of them, as one part of Prerogative; so
knowing the honor of the Supreme Power cannot be maintained but by some set
way, as it seems the Ancients provided here, so much of all sorts of provision,
both for the Kings Family, as also for his Stable, at the so called Kings price
exceedingly abused, besides the so called settled revenues of the Crown, namely
Crown lands, Fee-Farm Rents, etc. So it also provided for Emergencies, and that
both for charges upon the sea, and also for the land by Customs now so called,
Fines, Forfeitures, (wrecks of the sea how unjustly soever) land deserted of
the sea, lands of Idiots, Treasure found, goods without owners, Tithes of lands
out of Parishes, and the like: And upon these, or any other matter, if any debt
did accrue, it was satisfied to the King, (that the Commonwealth might not
lose) before any private person could be satisfied one penny, (the abuse of
this was grown intolerable, but I here treat of Settlements) and how long since
it was in the Kings case it matters not; for no slipping of time could
prejudice the Kings Title, as in case of a common person, who was tied to sue
within such a time, or the time might be pleaded in Bar as was justly enacted.

Now the reason of this was just and good, preferring public and universal
good before private and particular; yet this proved offensive oft-times,
because it was made the instrument to absolute Injustice, while restitution was
made to the King, to the evident destruction of a stranger, that is a third
person whom the Law left remediless, yea though utterly undone, and begging
from door to door.

It was also for the same reason construed to be Law, that in all Grants made
by the King, they should be taken most beneficially for him; and that they
should not err to any other construction then what was manifested in the body
of the Grant, that is, the plain letter must be taken, and no implicit
construction of Law shall be taken advantage of, against the good of the
Commonwealth, as against a particular party.

And lastly, In case of Grants it is void, if it appears that the King was
deceived in his Grant; truth, these originally just things, after the fatal
wisdom of the Law was politickly perfected, came to be made the Mystery of
Iniquity; for it was said, the Grants were made according to these received
Rules for the Kings sole benefit, whereby he that was once made the Kings
Officer, was ever after scandalized for a Knave; and he that was once the Kings
Farmor, Grantee, or Debtor, his estate was always after esteemed incombred.

Now this was more feared when it was granted to him by Judgment of the
Judges, that he in Temporals might by a Clause of Non obstante, dispense with
any Statute Law; and that though the Statute says such dispensations should be
utterly void, as it was in the time of Henry the seventh; the beginning was in
Edward the fourth, not so plain; Acts of Parliament bind not the King unless
especially named.

Now these unhinged all our Liberties; for by the one he was not bound except
named; and by the second he might dispense how-ever named; therefore these, how
ever used, I cannot reckon as legal Prerogative.

I now proceed with Prerogative called Just; that is, That the King, or Supreme
Power for the benefit of the Commonwealth, have the estates of those that die
without heir; for no private or particular heir being, the public is rightly
preferred; so if they purchase who have no right, as Aliens; they have also
given him those Royal Mines of gold and silver, lest such things in Subjects
should raise them so high, as they should be able by leavying Arms, to contest
for the Supremacy, and attempt a Tyranny.

Now this, if agreed, as agreed, is most just; They gave him some honorary
respects merely; as for example; That the Lord should not seize his Villein in
his presence; how justly, may well be Quaeried.

For if just to be done, why not more just before him? To which may be added,
That Amerciaments, Fines, etc. which had no exact literal Rule, as offenses
made by Statute punishable by the Justices at Sessions with unlimited Fine or
Amerciaments, were said to be by virtue of his Prerogative as his Justices,
that is, they were to Fine at discretion, that is, according to the nature of
the fact, respect had to the Law; that is, saving his Freehold, or not to the
value of his Freehold; or so that he should not for to pay that Fine be put to
sell his Freehold; all which are argued for, with much nicety, little
Christianity.

Now as for the benefit of the Commonwealth the Law put the King into
possession of others (though by matter of Record) so it kept him in the State
of the Commonwealth; for, for Lands Jure personae, or hereditary at Common Law,
the rule of Law extends not to it, as I conceive; therefore the King cannot be
disseised; and many other such things, as the goods of Felons, murderers, etc.
which is, or may be just in murder in some sort (but in no case in Felony, but
they ought to go to the person wronged) and in manslaughter, and defense of a
man's own person, there ought to be no right to the Checkquer, not in the
Self-defence at all; and in the others it ought to go to the party; for if the
Law in forceable strikeing give damage, and more in wounding, and more in
Maihem, then most in killing, where the life of the criminal is saved.

That of Deodands is in the Law; and I see no warrant for it, but the mere
allusive equity of the Judicial: It is also said to be a part of the Kings
Prerogative to have special Judges to try the right of his revenues as is the
Checkquer; and the differences of his immediate Officers and servants, as the
Steward and Marshal of his house; and instead of Action against his person, The
Law by the Ordinance of Edward the third, for honor sake, framed it in nature
of a Petition; but the Process was as against an other person; and so if
Justice be upon that, it is just, otherwise not; it will also admit no wager of
Law against him, and which proved a great abuse, and was unjust; and is no way
either honorary or necessary; he did take men under pretense of being his
debitors, into his protection to the overthrow of many particular persons and
universal detriment; thus was Derogative.

Again, Judgment was never final against him, but with a figmentitious
advantageous evasion of a saving his right; and this was also new and not
necessary.

I come to two main and principal steps to the eminency of Prerogative, always
afforded the Supreme power; which are, first, That the King has by his public
trust, power to do whatsoever there is no Law against; So that from hence has
arisen the obstructions to Laws upon new Causes; namely, settling that in the
Law which was before in the King; and so abridging the Royal Tenure: By virtue
of this he created Corporations, and made Denizens.

The other was (from Gods appointment to Moses surely) to appoint places, so
called, of Privilege, like Cities of Refuge; but undoubtedly this was a
civility betwixt the Kings and Popes, to raise a benefit to the King, by
priviledging: That Charter had many Fees, and then the Pope made it by
allowance a Sanctuary, and so secured by both powers; what can be doubted? that
must be just where Moses and Aaron join; and these men, both Pope and Prince
did well, they saved the life, but squeised the purse; and none afford such
milk more freely then Rogues and Whores, as all Histories evidence.

This is the sum of all the Prerogative so called; that I in this haste
remember, just, or unjust, that the Laws of England hold forth. The three main
pillars upon which the Edifice of Prerogative stands, all these being but the
Ornaments thereto, are the absolute power to make Laws, War and Peace, and
raise moneys.

Except in some few scattered judgments, arising upon Emergencies, and are not
indeed worthy the name of Prerogative, though in our Topical heads of Laws,
they be so ranked, but rather privileges or Royalties; many of which were
obtained by Subjects; for what a Subject may enjoy I count not Prerogative;
therefore not Copning of money, etc. nor Royal fishes, nor a hundred matters of
the like nature; and wreck is generally detestable, and the Royalty of grandage
abominable; but the generalty of them are justly belonging to all men with the
Supreme Majesty, especially those favors of errors in pleadings, etc.

Now this Legislative power was never in the King, nor no reason it should;
which alone shows the Kings in England never was since the establishment of the
three estates the Supreme power; for the making of Laws was always since in
them, as the body Representative of the Nation, and so the Lords and Commons
were put as a Bar to invading Prerogative.

Next for war or peace, it was not in the Kings power; his Knights were bound
according to their Tenures, but not otherwise; and the special of them not
performing their service, were to be fined nowhere but in Parliament. The last
of them which are the sinews of the war, were always in the peoples hands,
never denied by any King, however subtly obtruded upon, as by loans, privy
Seals, etc. which were always declaimed against, and damned by Parliaments.

These were and are necessary to the Supreme Power, but never trusted to
Englands Kings, a sure sign the Supremacy was not in the King; he knew it
necessary to aggrandize his power, and for an absolute subjection of all
interests to his, to claim that these were incident and appendixes to the
Supremacy absolute, which he aspired unto.

And though the Forts, Ships, Magazines, and appointing Judges, Governors,
Captains, etc. were actually in his power; yet hereby it is plainly seen to
what end, and how traiterous they were to the then true English Interests, who
stuck to the King against the Parliament in this war; but that controversy is
besides my task here.

Therefore I proceed, and say that it is necessary still, that the total and
absolute Supremacy has these powers, viz. of making or giving forth Laws,
making Leagues offensive and defensive, denouncing Wars, and establishing
Peace, and also to raise moneys.

Now this I know not denied by any public and approved Judgment; but these
men have their bounds, their limits also; for general, common and public good,
is their limit, their chain, and to see the end of this, it is fit next to see

12. Who is Judge of public good, and his Rule of Restraint? and whether it be
fit to admit this absolutely in the Supreme Power?
THe Kings formerly were not unskilled in the issue of this mystery, they
boulted out what others will bake, who ever eats it.

Now it is plain, this also is required in the Supreme Power; for it is
impossible to settle particular Laws, suitable to each particular occasion; for
in the corrupt state of man, as the Law is profitable or disprofitable, so it
is rellished; as for example, in an equal rate, the just man likes the
equality, and so does the covetous; but he says, no rate at all; and if an
honest Miser can be, he approves equality, but he repines at the payment.

Now the boundary is evident public good, and of this in the manifest parts of
it are all men Judges; for though in transactions of the high affairs of State,
the progression may not be fit to be made public, yet the winding up as it is
evident, so the reasons of that issue, may, as some conceive, fitly be
accounted of, at least to some specially appointed, who are to be empowered to
that particular end, as the Ephori or Spartan Court, who judged their Kings
Actions, the Tribunes at Rome, and Democratie at Athens.

To this it is answered, That the condition of the Commonwealth, where the
Rulers and Law givers are transient and personal, are naturally inclined to
more equality in dispensations then Kings, who wholly labor to bring all to
the power of their Successors, Princes like them; but the sons of the other are
like to be under government.

The other reply, that with all men present interest works; and power present
may if not bound and limited, prove obnoxious, and for private respects,
neglect public profit in the Republike, as in the Monarchick State; for all
are men; nay, experience has manifested, that many Senators have been
corrupted, to the betraying their estates to the Empire of a Foreigner; never
yet a King, but to assure his Kingdom, and so he was not corrupted.

The other return that these accidents of the world do not at all conclude more
then what was done; The ambition of most Princes has made them true to
themselves, and the Covetize of some Senators made them false to their Country.

But the Question here is only of the absolute judgment of the Supreme Power,
and that is concluded positively to rest there in all dubious matters most
unquestionably; but for matters destructive to common good, or to common
Justice, or against Reason, they are allowed to be accountable.

Yet it is again replied these were the boundaries before to Kings, and are the
boundaries to all Powers; all have generally broken in all sorts of
Governments; the examples of submissive accounting Supreams are rare; one was
found in Rome, and one in Greece; and to find two more in all the world is
difficult; for who as these will be buried, and have their daughters married of
the public purse, when they have the Treasures of a Nation in their dispose,
and may benefit themselves much with little or no hindrance to the State? Pity
it is, the injustice of great men should give such cause of suspicion; and
folly were it while men may, not to set a bound; and not to set it in the first
setlements, makes the proposal for the future difficult, the establishment
dangerous: Therefore they propound, that the Law be established as agreeable to
the light of Nature, examples of other States, continued experience, and not
against divine institution.

The wise and just man will submit to that in himself which he holds requisite
to require from an other.

The Parliament of England allowed the King a Judgment of the necessity, but
not che sole Judgment, but that was because the Supremacy was not absolutely
in him; and all held fit not to vest absolutely Supremacy anywhere but in Law;
so that until established by Law, the matter is in question.

And though the time past when the Legislative power depended upon the Kings
will and pleasure, by his calling or not calling Parliaments as he pleased,
there might be some difficulty to settle dubious matters; yet that Bar broken,
where can a let be, unless we convert our mercy into a judgment?

Upon all this it is plain that there are many difficulties in the nature of
Prerogative, whereby to understand it clearly and truly. All States, that is,
the Supremacy of power, do labor naturally to advance the so called Prerogative.

And the people generally aim as much at liberty, but Kings most, and they
more specially where the Crowns go by way of succession; for the great part of
personal Prerogative of a King dies in a State, except the Supreme power will
continue it (but then it is requisite in such an alteration to settle justly,
and remedy fore-experienced and evidently foreseen evils) therefore it is
requisite that the continued complaints of men, especially against the Kings
Butlers, the Clerks of the Pipe, Chequer, etc. in their fees be settled; for the
paying and gaining of a Quietus upon a duty to the King, is almost as much in
Fees as the Rent it self. Now I come to see

13. Whether the Supreme power can grant the inferior Prerogatives, such as
Wreck, Forfeitures of Felons, Royal Fishes, Treasure, Trove, etc. and How?
NOw for this, it is plain, first that the Kings have done it, and these
honors were never denied; for, for most of them, generally the charge of
obtaining, was as much to the Crown as the thing it self; Therefore whereas
they had Officers and Offices in every County, attended upon every Court, and
some special Courts for Sea matters: The Kings did give these as rewards to
their Nobles, and great men, within special Precincts, where in the primitive
settlement of the Nation, their dwellings were, and so he was discharged of his
Officers, and the due Courts were let down, and the Trials were reduced all to
his Court of Admiralty, which as in all cases, was, and is, a burden
intolerable to the Subject, and to all impoverished persons Justice is by this
turned into Gall and Vinegar, especially to distressed persons by Sea; for the
poor people all along the Coast, are like so many Harpyes; wreck or no wreck,
all that comes to their net is fish; and thus to save a little charge, we are
infinitely inhumane; but by this it is plain, all but the power of making Laws,
war and peace, levying Moneys, and some say Royal Mines, are grantable by the
Supreme Power.

Provided that due means of Trial of Right be preserved for the public
benefit; otherwise not.

Some say, that this is generally true, that is, the Supreme Magistrate has
power in all Laws merely Civil; but in cases religious, or wherein properly the
conscience may, some say does scruple, the Magistrates power ceases; therefore
it is fit to look a little at that, and quaere,

14. Whether the Magistrate be Keeper of both the Tables so called?
THey who make this controversy, are not presently to be thought enemies to
Magistrates, nor enviers of Ministerial Dignity.

Some have admitted the Popes Primacy, who have denied his Supremacy; others
have given Princes all power; some a Negative, but not an Affirmative power in
so called Ecclesiastics or Church matters; others take away the Popes Primacy;
for they take him away, equalizing all Pastors, and that that special
designation befits no earthly person; others bind up the Magistrates hands
wholly; some by denying Magistracy; others by restraining him wholly to the
name of Civils, not sufficiently caring for (by assured and preventive means)
those errors which have heretofore clouded the excellency of Magistracy by the
pride of Churchmen.

For were inherent holiness visibly and setledly, and so infallibly tied to
either of these, the Supremacy were determined; but while they are all men,
they must have their bounds and limits.

Yet in the Kingdoms of the world, the Prince must bear sway, and has the
pre-eminence; The Heathens in glory of the Prince annexed the Priestly Office
to the Superior Power, not the Kings to the Priests; and under Gods Law, Moses
was Aarons Prince or Father, Aaron Moses Prophet.

Next the Civil part of Judicature was ever, and now is clear and manifest,
except where interest or humor prevails, and let that humor alone, and it is
ready to swarm into interest immediately.

But this you will say determines the first part of the Question, but the
latter is undetermined.

To that it is generally answered, that what power is necessary for the
preservation of the peace of the Nation or Government, is proper to the Supreme
Magistrate; but an obliging power, that is, that simple obedience is to be
given to his determination of but dubious matters in points of either Doctrine
or pure Church Discipline, I believe never was nor will be yielded to him, in
matters circumstantially Religious; otherwise barely civil, was, as generally
agreed, and will not now be denied, as concerning the time of Congregating, the
place, and other Circumstantials for preservation of the peace of Church and
Commonwealth; yea, if it were upon good reason, the number that were to
congregate, provided there were enough to constitute a Congregation, might be
set by the Supreme Magistrate, and Christians bound to obey; but this is only
as keeper of the first Table, not of the second.

Now to clear this, it is to be known, that if it be taken to be the Keeper of
the two Tables, so called, to promote by all lawful means the glory of God, as
the good of men, as all good and just Magistrates will and ought, yea if it be
by preaching himself, or themselves, and that either by word or Doctrine as
good life, they and all Christians are the keepers of both Tables, and he or
they as supreme in power, and so as more entrusted with means by God, to do
most for God, then he or they who have the supremacy, are by way of eminency
the special keepers of them, but that they are designed more especially to
represent either the Kingly, Priestly, or Prophetical Office of the Lord Christ
as head of his Church, without the manifest tokens of more especial Grace and
divine Revelation, whereby to periodize the Controversies of their own
Subjects, holding forth to us under the same rule the will of God as the
Priests under the Law, is not easily discerned, nor will I believe be
strenuously urged.

The blessings which our Lord and Savior held forth, were merely tending to
his spiritual Kingdom, and the propagating of it, and given out to the
Apostles, and in them to all the Church, as most suitable to not only reason
generally, but the reason of that our King in his Transactions amongst them; of
this enough at present. I come now to the last Quaere of the Prerogative of
Princes.

14. Whether Male Administration does ipso facto dethrone Princes, and give
their Subjects power to depose them?
15. And whether Kings and other Supreams may be punished, by whom, and how?
THis is a great and weighty controversy; truly Magistrates that desire to be
flattered, stand off, you can hear nothing safely; for your safety is your
danger; Now what we have said before, tends much to the illustration of this
point, that is, the due consideration of the end for which Magistracy is
ordained, (for by the Law of pure Naturals no one is above another) namely the
preserving few against many, weak against strong, and right against wrong, in
Scripture phrase to be a terror to the evil; and to that end not to wear the
Sword in vain; so that while evils are or may be, Magistracy is necessary to
be.

Now generally the defects and failings of Governors in themselves, are not
simply and alone a cause of neglect of obedience to them, or the Laws by them;
for evil men may be good Magistrates; but in case the Magistrate seeks to
overthrow laws, and all Righteous Government, altering or crossing wholly the
end of his ordination; it is in this case clear he is not a Magistrate, but he
is a Tyrant, an usurper, an Enemy to Justice; but then it is believed by some,
that the light or interpretation of this defection is in every man, and so each
man judges, and may justly withdraw obedience and oppose. This is gross
ignorance; no then every unjust man punished, would be ready to rebel, and
miscall his deficiency Revenge of injury to the public.

The Pope by the evil management among Princes of this quarrel, brought the
decision of all these controversies to his Tribunal, and by the steps of
seeming justice, mounted the Chair of Antichrist; for he finding that the
Ambition, Pride, Lust, Covetize of earthly gods, had raised up men against
them, and that many halings and pullings were, between the Princes and
Potentates of the earth and their Subjects, the one to have all the power in
their own hands, the others to defend what they called sometimes Privileges,
sometimes just Rights; one while the inheritance of their Ancestors, as what
they had contended for and delivered to them, sealed with their blood;
otherwhile their proper and natural birthright, as dues to the people, which no
Power or Usurpation of a Prince could divest them of; he politickly holding
forth the necessity of an Umpire, got absolutely into the Chayr of
pre-eminence, and deposed Kings for pleasure, and Kings and Emperors and all
for his profit.

Who would believe, that now after five thousand years experience, the world
should not be able to unriddle this mystery? the source of all our
controversies is the Judicials not rightly understood; for assuredly, the Acts
of their Kings is no rule for us or ours; we are to follow them no further then
they follow the light, which God gives us all to walk by, that is, if you will
look at their King, it must be as bounded, not as imitating the Kings of the
Nations, as not exalting himself over his brethren, not as taking away the
excellent young men and beautiful Maidens to be his servants; and if so that he
be under a Rule, then he is not to rule, not only not evilly, but not so well
as he presumes he might, unless it be made parcel of his Rule.

But if he breaks this Rule, who shall enforce?

Now in this case it is plain, that a Prince, Ruler, or inferior Magistrate,
doing greater good then his Rule limits, is in an error, especially if
opportunity were of having that enacted into a Law; for men are men; and to do
so, opens a door of jealousy 'twixt him and his people.

Next it stands as a president to his Successor; Lastly, it absolutely
intimates either a neglect of the Law, or seeking freedom by degrees from it;
but if this were evil or detrimental, what remedy?

To clear this, there must be a difference taken betwixt things partly
destructive to the end of well reigning, and wholly; for unless wholly
destructive, threatening the whole community, there is no cause evident; but
grant it so, we must then see whether the Prince be an absolute Monarch or
limited; If absolute, then it i^ the greater difficulty; for there being no
bar in such cases, betwixt the Prince and lust, the decision of the difference
must be by the whole community, at least the greater part; and if they break
out, woe to the Commonwealth, etc. It is the difficulty to do just things in
such extremities, not the injustice of the thing puts so many bars in the way;
and the evil truly is so great, that prudence has totally waved a liberty of
such judgings, finding the dear rate Liberty is in such cases purchased at.

But some Princes have by renewed Tyrannies, trusting to their power, enforced
the multitude to lash out, and great men for safety to head them; but when
matters come to this pass, it is surely a judgment on both sides.

Now all Christian Princes held this, that they being all Typed out by the
Judicials, they forsooth were absolute Princes, anointed with holy Oil, and so
apply all the Texts of David's not daring to stretch out his hand against Saul,
his heart smiting for cutting off the lap of his garment, hindering Abishai
from killing him in his Tent; yet agreeing, the Lord had delivered him into his
hand, and that after the Kingdom rent from him, and given by God to himself,
and he with holy Oil also anointed.

And lastly, for his slaying the Amalekite, who pretended to have killed Saul
ahis request, to themselves, as anointed, etc. and upon this they get the heart
to trangress Laws at liberty, and even do what they lusted, yea inverted the
just ends of universal good, for the enhansig of absolute power to their own
ends only, neglecting the public, claiming propriety in the Rights of the
Nation, as in private inheritance, though truly to that end alone any power
absolute or limited cannot be pretended to.

Now therefore I said the evil of common Rebellions, etc. hence arising, The
Pope the Lord Christ's servants servant becomes the decider of the controversies
of Princes, when the Lord himself would not be a Judge amongst ordinary men;
and by this string were the Princes of the Earth drawn to commit Fornication
with this Whore, and she thereby sat upon many waters; but if so be that there
be none but the Pope that has right to depose Princes, surely they need never
fear.

But in case they be limited Monarchs, such as all Christian Princes were,
having their estates Judges of their Actions, whether they were called Dyets,
Assemblies, Conventions, or Parliaments, they are to be judged by them.

Now to know whether they were Judges of their Actions, or not, it is only
considerable in whom the main and principal part of supremacy rested, for
making and annulling of Laws, war and peace, and raising Moneys.

For as these were entrusted, so was the supremacy and trust of absolute power
more or less visible; and if the Estates had the most, then no doubt they may
call to account, yea and for ought I can see can be fetched from any the Texts
aforesaid, or any other, may be punished, but not by David, no nor Abisha, nor
David's six hundred; The case was personal as to all Israel, so the enmity was
private, and David and all these were but particular persons, private men.

Now therefore to avoid the danger of general Concussions and Conquassions of a
Commonwealth, settled in popular order, it is requisite so to temper it, that
the constant acting Magistrate may have a kind of superadvisor, and the truly
wise and honest will soonest yield.

Such as would be Tyrants, if Kings, will only seek unlimited power in
Commonwealths; let not this seem unreasonable; to give presidents were easy;
but you will say facts prove not, I have given reason, and if that will not
prevail, what will? the reasons are evident; give a divine word, and I am
silent; for all Saint Paul's give obedience to Magistrates, and let every soul
be subject, will bear no more water now to free wicked Magistrates from due
punishment, how high in trust soever, so the punishment be done duly, then that
of Paul, Give not a Virgin in Marriage; Force may suppress the opinion, but
wickedness of Magistrates will raise up their own strengths against them; yea,
their confidents will betray them; and if from hence you conclude I hold
Magistracy a humane Ordinance, then you must agree to what I hold forth; for
what man establishes, man may pull down, alter, punish, etc.

But I say, Magistracy is Gods Ordinance, established for man's good, and by man
admitted under various names and notions; which persons and Offices particular,
are the Conventions of men, either by force, which are void, or Conventional
and by compact, which being civil, are and may be enforced.

Now this is to be known, that this is intended only still in Civil matters,
wherein just and good for the well being of men as men, is intended, not of
power or obedience in respect of Religious Duties.

There are, as I have said before, evils in all States, through the pravity of
man's nature; so that it is not the form of Government, but the men, that in
Religion and Reason gives forth blessings unto a State; and the degeneracie of
men was never more then now, and never more then among so called Christians.

Blame us not therefore, if we endeavor to beat out the truth; we have seen the
glory of absolute States, and also of limited ones, and that both in Royalties
and Republiques; we know the vengeance of the Lord at the last, which he, we
believe, will repay upon the heads of highest, proudest, stoutest, yea and
their children; also in outward calamities, whether one or more, whither Kings
or States, all their abominations with judgments answerable to his Mercy; and
upon this ground we are willing to let the Supreme Power loose.

We have seen the abuses of these boundaries, and bars to Prerogative, and how
they have often upon unjust grounds engaged people to wars, and brought great
evils upon the Nations.

We have on the other hand seen the lawfulness of their Bars, together with
their conveniences, tying up the ambitious nature of man, and as they were
instituted, ofttimes preserving a Nation from the gripes of a lusting Tyrant;
yea under them we have seen the excellencies of Order, Government, Temperance,
Chastity, Humility shine in Princes as in meaner men; and in the Chief
Magistrates, as in the industrious so called Commoner.

We have lately seen at home, and do still abroad, that great men in power put
the evil day far away; and if they have no aw upon them but the general Audit
at the last day, it is so far off their consultations, that they are in a most
lamentable woeful case who find no mercy with them till that day.

I come now to the last part of this Question, and that is how they are to be
punished.

To which it is generally answered, That they who have the power absolute, and
can punish, have no rule but prudence, in enlarging or restraining them; they
generally used banishment; but this in successive or hereditary alterations,
upon the same ground of prudence, cannot be safe; therefore some have immured
them, and starved them, some imprisoned them, some cloystered them, some
privately murdered them; but all these were acts of pure power and force, and
left but an implicit construction of Justice on their actions.

Our new and unparallelled Transaction does I know to many seem Heroic; and if
established by Law, upon this president, would be an admirable adventure, to
hold an aw upon the spirits of great men; and to that end, they desire the
explanation of the supreme (power or) Magistrates Trusts, and in what cases* it
shall be lawful to arraign them, with the same legal provisions as King Charles
tied his own hands in the Act for a Triennial Parliament; but I leave treating
of this, lest I grate to no purpose. I come now to see

16. What are the Privileges of Parliaments, and in them of the Bars to the
Supreme Power?
FIrst, we must consider, that these meetings are according to the Rule of pure
Native Law, by the advice of many, and those duly elected out of the people, to
avoid confusion, to take care for the settlement of all those errors, which
intervening time produced since such an Assembly last Congregated; and that
both as to the Actions (of the King in his Officers, where the King was held
unquestionable, and therefore which was unjust in some part, his servants were
punished) of the higher Magistrates, and inferior Subjects, either in a legal
way, according to the ordinary constitution of the Nation, or extraordinary in
case of emergencies, for which no Law was provided.

The examples are manifest in both; Now the privileges of these men were, and
ought so to be wherever such bars are, first (that the due right of the
subject might be preserved) that those who were to be of the Parliament were
duly chosen, that is, neither by fear nor favor, which was from either open
force, or private warnings or requests to the friends or dependants of great
m^, which were commands, (which how broken and still are even by Reformers
themselves to their shame not of Reformation is evident.)

The next privilege is, that being chosen, they being now of special use and
employment for the public, themselves, horses, goods, and menial servants,
were privileged from Arrests, distresses, etc. and only they, (for the law of
entertaining by giving protections was a dispriviledge of the common Subjects,
for whose sake only they were privileged) and no more (that other being but a
mere Royal corruption, by degrees to make them all seekers of interests, upon
that base Maxim that trusts were to their own benefit.)

The next was, to have free liberty to choose their Speaker, who was not to be
disallowed but upon good Cause, and that Cause they were Judges of; for all see
else, the vanity of the formality, if the approbation be upon mere will; for
then there is the power of Election, and this Speaker they may also upon good
Cause put out, by the Votes of the greater number.

The next privilege is, That they have a free liberty to treat of all
matters; the assembling by Kings Writ, the being called his great Council, are
honors of Time, and formal, and cannot abridge their necessary liberty of free
Treaty, etc.

But their power appears, in that they had the Guardianship of the peoples
Lives, Liberties and Estates; and though in the variety of changes, they did as
all mortal Powers do, sometimes submit, sometimes enforce, as the condition of
Times were; we must use a true foot, and ascribe no more to them then is
needful, not plead presidents, but Supreme reason, by which they therefore
might and ought, during the forty days Session, a convenient time (which by
convention seems the time set, during which the King could not dissolve them)
to receive Petitions from all places, by turning themselves into Committees,
and hear how matters went with the Nation, upon such Representations, from the
particular Counties, Cities, and Town therein, addressed to the particular
Members, chosen by them for the aid of the whole Nation; and upon these, to
call some say the Kings, all agree all the Kings Officers of all sorts to their
Accounts, as Treasurers, and that both for Land and Sea; yea Officers of Peace,
as all Judges, etc. and of War, as General, or Lord Marshal, or by what other
name, or names on Land; or Admiral, or etc. at Sea, Captains of Forts; and all
others, who managed the Revenues, so called, of the Crown, that is for the
public benefit; and this power is coincedent to every Bar to Supremacy.

And truly where this is not, it is easy to believe the Supreme Majesty may
soon pretend all is entrusted to his own Will, and for his particular benefit:
then they may adjudge, and sentence, but not in Committees, but in the whole
house; otherwise there is no legal proceeding, and really and purely; this did,
and was to rest principally in the Representatives of the people, who are the
Commons, (the separation of the Houses as with us, and the single power of the
Lords to Judge, the Commons to accuse, yet one Court, is much differing from
excellent Reason, if not contrary to it) that so right might be done to the
whole Commonwealth, against the out-breakings of the King, and also to every
particular person by restitution against the wrong doer; yea, though by the
Kings Command, or Commission, if not agreeable to the Law.

Now the limited times of Parliament were necessary, lest otherwise they
should abuse their Power, or usurp Supremacy absolute, and also become
desperate debtors, because of privilege.

And lastly, that while being men and capable of erring, their false
judgments, if any were, may be rectified by a new; for it was, and must be the
privilege of these highest Courts, not to have ought done there by any of the
Members questioned in any other Court, only Treason, Felony, and the Peace,
which being flagitious, the excellency of Reason admitted no privilege to; for
how could such enormous Transgressors of the Law be righteous Lawmakers?

The last privilege is to have pay for their pains, by a (it should be equal)
rate, upon all the Freeholders in the County; that is, they who legally had, or
might have had a Vote in the Choice; and this allowance was to be set by
Parliament; and who could they better trust with a little of their estate, then
they whom they had formerly instrusted with the whole? and this was not due
till the end of Parliament: So jealous is Reason of all Supremacy in the
corrupted state of mankind.

And surely none that is not actually in this height, but will agree to this
just Reason; and he that is in, if he intends only a due use of it, cannot
deny it, this is just, betwixt these powers and them for whom they are
entrusted; for it is plain, as before, that all eminency of power, is solely
and only for the safety of the people; wherefore it is fit to see wherein that
safety does consist, and to that end we shall Quaere.

What is, and wherein the privilege of a free Subject does properly consist?
HAving seen the great and due care of the Law, for the well providing for the
Supreme Magistrate, and that it looks at due (both) power and maintenance, and
sets limits in it self against all excess and out-boundings;

We now come to see after the privilege of the Subject in the body so called
Representative, the privilege of every particular man, wherein the Supreme
reason has also looked at every one but as a Member of the whole, and has
settled that as the greatest privilege, to do most for the public welfare, and
well and orderly government of all these, in such sort, as not only the
principles of Nature, but the long experience of of so many Ages, and above all
the inlightenments of divine Wisdom, have handled out to us in such manner as
they are without all question.

And therefore as it is sufficiently manifested, that particular men are
through power, favor, riches, malice, and such like, as ready and as desirous
to deal unfaithfully, injuriously, and inhumanely with their neighbors, as the
Prince with the people; therefore most excellent Reason, so called Law, and
above all the divine Wisdom has held out Magistracy to preserve as aforesaid,
against these evils by due Laws; and the justness of these, is the greatest
privilege; and to have them like Gall and Wormwood is the highest
dispriviledge.

The special matter wherein we usually place privilege is, first, to Life;
secondly, Liberty; thirdly, Goods; and fourthly, good Name; and the Law for
good Cause restrains a man's self in the abuse or ill use of these, as well as
preserves them to him against others.

Now that which gives, is of more value and more honorable then that given: The
Heathen expressed it thus, More glorious is it to rule Kings, set up, and pull
down Kings, then be a King; whereby it is evident, That the privilege of the
Subject, is not to live at lust, do as he lists, revenge injuries, and act Will
for Law, whether in higher or lower estate, that is, the Magistrate inferior to
Tyrannize over the people without control, nor to execute what laws he has in
his power as he list, but according to his rule; nor the subject to abuse his
fellow-Subject, in word or deed, much less to arraign the Magistrate and his
actions with a forked tongue of envy at his pleasure, no nor to misuse or abuse
his own time, his estate, his liberty or power in his place, and disobey all
Law, or at lest question and wrangle it, how just so ever, if contrary to his
interest; and how plain so ever, yet to enter a contention merely for pleasure,
and through his purse-potency, to make evil good against his meaner, or less
favored neighbor; In short, it is not to do what ever evil Custom, or
corrupt Practice, or Selfish interest calls Law and due right. I shall give you
but one example or two among the many thousands of Englands Plague-sores, not
at all, or not sufficiently provided against; viz.

A. Being a great Merchant, and might be trusted upon his own Bond for an
hundred thousand pounds, takes up sixty thousand pounds, with which, and twenty
thousand pounds with a wife for his son, he purchases five thousand six hundred
pounds per annum, settles it upon the son, and his wife, and after breaks;
this, and a thousand such gallant Cheates are ordinary, and remediless, though
it will be pretended otherwise.

So again, A. Merchant of London sells upon likeing, at a set rate, to B. a
Merchant in Yarmouth a barrel of Nutmegs, and sends them by sea by C. Master.
B. dislikes them, pays double freight, as per agreement and returns them. A.
sues B. for them, and recovers. B. sues C. for them and recovers; the value is
thirty pound originally, the costs of suit comes to one hundred pound, which
is as much as C. is worth; C. upon this being cast at Common Law, flies into
Chancery, or upon Affida. discovers that the truth is, A. had the barrel of
Nutmegs, which upon the Trial betwixt C. and B. had been fully proved; but that
C. not knowing the servants of B. though he knew the name of him to whom the
goods were delivered for A. his Master; and C. coming to Subpoena him to appear
as witness, A. justly believing at it ought, that the shame and damage must at
last light upon him, shows C. a wrong man, who takes his monye and the
Subpoena, and appears, but can evidence nothing, and B. is overthrown.

Now such, and the like Cheates, Thefts, yea as bad as Robberies, are not at
all, or so slightly, and that with so much charge, punished, as is too much
shame for a Barbarous Nation holding forth common Justice to allow.

So the wretchedness of Juries, and the like, which are so clean perverted from
the first institution, that though many honest, just, wise Patriots eye the
first institution with great consideration, yet they now see them with hearts
of Regret, abused and abusing their high trusts, and all is pretended the
liberty of the Subject: So far has the corruption of interests prevailed upon
all estates.

To rake in this puddle of Negative Privilege, were to draw almost all the
ordinary actions and litigations of the Commonwealth into question, and arraign
all persons in our Apostate pretending Reforming Age.

I will not therefore expatiate, but come to the Affirmative part of the
Question, and see wherein the liberty of the Subject does consist properly, and
consider the same, as I have done the other, (though tacitly) generally and
particularly.

First therefore I say, that the privilege of the Subject is to be governed by
righteous and equal Laws, the Magistrate executing without partiality, his
power, in, and for the preservation of life, goods, liberty, and good name,
according to a just, known and manifest Law, for all enormities,
transgressions, offenses, and crimes whatever.

This in general; In particular, it is to have the Supremacy of power so
settled, known, and declared, both in point of Revenue, honor, and power, as
consists with the best safety of the whole; and that whether it be in a State
Monarchical, or Republical.

Secondly, That the Laws by which they govern, be as far as may be certain,
plain, and easy to be understood.

Thirdly, That this Law may extend to all offenders; and the higher the trust,
the greater the punishment; and the higher the injury, the greater the
recompense.

Fourthly, That as the Laws be evaded, or difused, or misused, or new evils
increase, for which no head Law is provided evidently; that this at the charge
of the public be speedily remedied, that so the vicious nature of man may be
deterred from acting old, or inventing new forms of sinning.

That these Laws may extend to the Magistrate and Subject, Superior and
Inferior in all degrees, Political, and Oeconomical; yea, to the superadvising
the estates of constant, vain, idle Spend-thrifts, (if such should grow in a
decayed State of a Commonwealth, which in a well settled estate cannot) as of
persons under age of management of their estates, or Idiots, or Lunaticks, for
that vitiousness in full sense is worse then in a depraved one;

Yea, To look to apparel and diet, especially drinking, and also recreations,
especially so called Gameing; for each man's time growing famously irregular
ought to be limited by the public Magistrate; and so in barganing and selling;
yea, where a medium may be, to set it, or the Rule for it; Let not this only
be laid upon the preciseness of Religion; No, the Greeks and Romans did by
Nature such things; and they without the Law becoming a Law to themselves
condemn us who have the Law and yet break it; is not deficiency of Judgment
worse then that of age? and the Law of property is not by this broken.

Again, It is the privilege of the Subject, that they have fit Judges,
Officers, and Ministers of the Commonwealth, qualified according to the Rules
of the Law; and can there be better then men of wisdom, fearing God, and hating
covetousness?

Next, That their Salaries be such as may be fitting for their places, and not
burdensome to the Commonwealth, nor their numbers, and yet enough; and those
fitly distributed for the ease of the poor, as justice to both them and the
rich.

That all prosecutions in the Law, whether criminal, or other trespasses,
injuries, wrongs, or debts, be duly punished, lest the Land in general bear the
burden of particular offenses* well knowing that there are abominations that
bring desolation; That the necessities of the Nation for War and Peace be
levied equally and justly (and the expenses in a settled way audited and
allowed) and that not only for, or upon man compared with man, but Township
with Township, Hundred with Hundred, and County with County.

The great reason of many Counties not going about, or so long delaying the
equalizing rates, as to Towns and Persons, was, lest the injust interest of
Parliament men, appointed for particular Counties, should upon the true value
of one County appearing, hoyst that up, and never regard the due balance with
others; and therefore that the Law of righteousness ought to be above the Law
of interest, must, as may be, be assured.

As for example, If a Town were a poor small Fishing Town, as great Yarmouth in
Norfolk was and not able to maintain a Minister, as it seems it was not, and
that it had forty pounds per annum allowed for one out of the Bishops lands;
after it is able to maintain ten Ministers, and have but one or two, that it
should yet have the forty pounds per annum, and other places starve; to take
this forty pound away, and make it pay duly an equal portion with others, is
general and just privilege, and no dispriviledge.

So Dunwich, Riseing, and forty places in the West, to send Burgesses to
Parliament, is a dispriviledge, though originally a due and rightly
constituted; for the reason ceasing, the Laws ought to cease, and such
rechanges are our Settlements.

So ill Customs to be continued for Interest, and public Grievances tolerated
for private commodity, whether of men or Townships, as the unjust, illegal, and
destructive keeping the so called Assizes at Thetford at the Brink of the
County of Norfolk in Confinio Comitatus, which is against Law, is a great
dispriviledge; for it ought to be in the body of the County, or Head-Town; but
if that were seated inconveniently, yet this is unjust and destructive; for so
incommodious is the place, that the very issues lost there (the place not being
able to receive the necessary attendants) are worth, or I am misinformed by
knowing men, as much as the revenue of the Town is worth; yet in driving on
this corrupt interest against public good, I hear good men and great
pretenders are engaged.

And it carries little of weight, except for honorary interest sake (which
always hitherto has been an usual inlet to corruption) That the Judge, a
stranger to the County, should appoint the place, or indeed that the place
should be but fixed, except in cases of evident danger to the public, as
plague, famine, public inundations, besiegings, devastations, or the like; so
that of two accidental evils (not things absolutely evil in themselves) the
least might be chosen.

It is likely it will after appear better to take away the so called Assizes,
as to Trials of general actions, and such controversies altogether hereafter,
as being now become a burden, rather then ease to the Subject; for it is
evident, the corruptions of those meetings continue, if they do not increase;
now such things, which were good originally, when depraved, are dispriviledges
if after complaint continued.

And I wish therefore only I could tell where the privilege of Englishmen
were; I know where it should be, and it may be found thus by parcels; but there
is so much rubbish and lumber amidst the multitude of Officers, Courts, etc. It
is hard, but we will attempt, as briefly as we may, to offer at least, which
will discover somewhat, though we cannot come through all particulars.

In a word Shortly then, Justice, and that both for Law and Equity ought to be
in the proper County; the Officers known, Fees certain, and not exceeding so
much upon the pound clear damage; and equity ought not to be sought till
Common Law determines the thing fit only for that Court.

Lastly, As to this, that no man be out-ballanced in Law, by power, favor, or
riches, as Townships, Cities, and Corporations against a mean man, yea, if he
had never a penny; nor awed from seeking just things for fear of forfeitures of
his lands, as Coppy-holders; all of which I shall in their particulars further
enlarge as occasion offers.

So that it is plain here, That having and executing just Laws justly, whereby
public peace and safety, against the Superiors, and between equals, and well
ordering Manors and Estates, for public peace, quiet, and benefit be
observed, and renewed Laws, is the proper privilege of the Subject.

But as to this point of safety, we must proceed a little further, and that is
to look to the power of the Supreme Magistrate in due providing for the peace
and welfare of the people, both among themselves and also against others, not
by way of Monopolizing Trade for benefit or gain, but security of the State:
therefore its no dispriviledge of the Subject, that none should sell Ammunition
or Weapons of any sort, except Swords and Knives, but such as are authorized by
the State; So also that no one keep an Inn, Tavern, Victualing or Alehouse, for
that these houses are, and ought to have the Magistrate their Superadvisors,
and an account from them of the nature and number of their guests, least any
danger thereby arise to the State. And in case of error or default, the
offender to be punished; and in case of inconveniency, the place to be
dispriviledged. Again, Its no dispriviledge to a Freeman to have men attainted
of crimes severely punished; yea in some cases, not agreeably to the letter of
the (at least present practical) Law. As for example, a person dangerous and
often suspected for criminal matters, as Robberies, Burglaries, Thefts,
Cutpursing, and the like, is acquitted by the formal, ignorant, or packed Jury,
for want of a clear, more then noon day evidence, which is now with Jurors,
through the servile terrors of selfish Judges, expected; if such a one for the
peace and welfare of the Public be detained in Prison, made to work, etc. so
one who has had his Clergy several times; So of gallant Rogues, who live
high, and can give no account how they come by their expenses, to secure such
is no doubt the great privilege of the Subject.

These matters can never prove prejudicial to just or good men in a well
ordered State; they tend to the well settling of any State; and although some
may abuse such power against good men, sometimes; yet this is well known, That
that is the evil of men, not of the power; punish the men, and appoint better;
but necessary power must always be upheld.

This may be much opposed by some whom I have found earnestly to contend that
prisoners convict of Theft and Vagrancie, common Milchers and Pilferers could
not by the Law be polled, that is, have their long hair cut off, no not when
it has been proved they have made that instrumental to their roguery. The
Custom of old will not prevail, but their new fancy, that nothing of reason is
Law, but what we have an adjudged case for; this must be maintained; for this
is their Diana, who so stickle for Rogues; and therefore they will not do this;
but advantageous customs are revived or created, though no better and less
reason; thus they Tyth Mint, Annise, etc. Its no dispriviledge to be enforced
to plant; yea, if a Law were to plant the North and West side of each enclosure
with fruit trees, and the South and East with Timber and other wood; and when
any Close were above four Acres, to have one row of Timber or fruit in or about
the midst.

It were no dispriviledge to have all Commons enclosed and improved, a certain
quantity only kept for the mere poor of the Town; nay its the only way to
advance the Nation, provide assuredly for the poor, who now all are eaten out
by one rich Clown; and make good roads for Trade, and take away the Nurse of
poverty.

Its no dispriviledge to alter the Heathenish days of the Months and weeks,
and idolatrous ones of Saints days, Feasts, weeks, etc. Nor to admit no Market
or Fair of special note, save on Wednesdays and Thursdays, so called, that
going and returning be not at all on the Lords Day; No, nor to take away
multitudes of old needless Fayrs in England, the principal end as practiced,
being only drinking and wantonness.

Its no dispriviledge, to have a Law, that no ground within a certain space of
a City or walled Town be plowed, but all for pasture, except allowed, and that
only once in a set quantity of years by the Magistrate thereto appointed for
necessity, and then not, except only for Roots, Turnips, and the like.

Its no dispriviledge to be punished for keeping Swine, or using certain Trades
in the heart or great streets, or near thereto, of Cities and great Towns;
always provided they be not tolerated under a rent or any payment; to be
enforced to sweep streets, cleanse Vaults, avoid Dunghils; yea if it did extend
to the avoiding or purging the belly of other excrements then water, in any
place, and not bury it.

Its no dispriviledge to have the Magistrate set a rate upon what can admit it,
nor to punish the inventors or wearers of new Fashions.

Its no dispriviledge to enforce by Law to Tyle or Slate all houses in Cities
and great Towns.

To conclude, a general Law can be no dispriviledge, nor any Law which truly
intends public good; the not equal administering of that Law, is a
dispriviledge; but then the fault is in the Judge, not in the Law, though it
may prove very burdensome (as in times of Prerogative) nay destructive to a
particular, which evil will and ought to have a speedy remedy by complaint and
due punishment, not by alteration of the Law.

I come now to the last controversy of Privilege and dispriviledge that I
remember, that is, That men of such Estates shall not (keep Hawks) keep
Greyhounds, Guns, setting Dogs, Nets, and the like; many have questioned me
what benefit we had by all our labors, hazzards, payments, etc. if this were
practiced, they had as live the Lord Matravers should take away their goods, as
the Justices of the Peace; but being informed, what they did was according to
Act of Parliament, what he did by mere power; what he did was to break the
hearts of the people, and fit them for slavery; what the Justice did was to
restrain the vanity of youth, and keep poor people to labor, that through the
vain delights of sporting they might not neglect their Family; what he did, was
to enslave poor and rich equally; what they did, was only to regulate
exorbitancy, and looked only at inconvenience; they all resolved the thing was
just, they would willingly submit, and desired a certain enforcement of so
just, so necessary a Law. 2. That trade should be regulated; which most
assuredly, as to well working, making, fitting, and trimming of matter, is out
of all doubt necessary, if not of necessity; but as to the times and places of
sale, wherein one Merchant or Tradesman may outreach another, and may border
upon particular interest, that is not so easily determined; only this the
Supreme Magistrate must take a note of direction, that there is two evils which
to well settle a free trade must be provided against; First, to loose a rule
which is to place the superintendencie of power in the vulgar Artificer, which
will at least end in confusion; the next is too strict a Rule, giving the
Masters of the Company as you may call them, such a power as they shall make
Laws, and enforce the execution upon such terms as shall out all Freedom, but
only in name; therefore some general Rules must be laid down, and every County
must have a Conservator of Liberties of Trade, to restrain from unjust
encroachments, either of the poor by multitudes, or rich by power; and this
will sureliest settle the foundations of all Privileges.

But there is one Privilege more yet remaining, which is as it were the
essence of all, or rather that which in the enmity of the world does secure all
the rest; and that is, that the Subject himself (unless he forfeits his
liberty) be master of his proper Arms, and employed in the settled Militia of
the Nation; For it is by too frequent experience manifested, that the constant
use or general employment of Foreigners (or mere hirelings, though of their
own Nation) is an introductive to pure or mere vassalage; and surely you
Englishmen, who think Arms beneath you, as most of you of late years have done,
are only fit, (as men I speak it) to be the servants servants whom you employ
in that so eminently powerful service; And surely, the loss of a Nations glory,
is, to enervate its Militia, by casting the honors of that employment upon men
unworthy such trusts, as if they and all other places fiduciary, and therefore
more honorable, were only agreeable to rich men, which was done only to ease
public charges, and that made way for this public ruin.

This I speak to, as taking it for granted, that the time of the lawfulness of
wars cease not among Christians, nor that it will, so long as there is sin and
error; and so a Magistrate; for what the ordinary Sword cannot reach (yea the
supreme Magistrate himself in case he offend) The Sword of the Lord will. But I
haste, and therefore shall not enlarge, but open this more by another Quaere,
which is,

Whether all Subjects have their Privileges? And whether, and how they may
lose them and regain them?
IT is manifest to all men, as it has before appeared, that there are Subjects
by Covenant, and Contract, and by power; Nature gives like privileges to all
men; but it gives them not like hearts to seek after them; all account not
privilege the same; yea, we hear of them who esteem it an honor to be slaves;
but we look higher then those Glo-worms; there is no fire or light in their
reasonings to us who say we have the Sun:

We therefore consider the state, first of men, who have joined together to
maintain or acquire freedom against Enemies or Invadors, and have been
overcome.

Now here we hold them absolutely bound to the Law of the Conqueror, and count
it not natural wisdom in case of utmost extremity of Tyranny to break out; they
can claim nothing of just privilege, they are his servants, they might have
been killed, and to make them servants was a mercy.

And truly I see no way for just (take just for a prudent) heading of these men
against the Conqueror; if for life, they have sworn obedience; what have been
the issue of such out-breakings, I pass not of; matters of fact prove nothing,
and this conquest without an Oath, if he uses them but as men preserved,
ingages to faithful service until freedom acquired; their privilege is to
live.

And if an equal gets power over his own Nation, it is the same accounted, how
unjust soever the ground of War first was. But in case of trust convented for,
and submission granted, as to a Prince without Covenant, there it is otherwise.
By this we now are come to just Originals of Government; here I say the people,
the body, or evidently the Conservators of the Trusts, or Guardians of the
peoples Liberties, have a power to call to their aid, and vindicate if the Case
requires, by Arms the peoples Liberties.

For here is rational subjection; and that which is most reasonable in the
single Government, is the Obligation of the Prince for his mere trust; yet that
reason must rest in the judgment of the Prince; but this does stretch no
further then to things good, as in two evils the least is to be chosen; but one
man thinks this the least, and an other that; and sometimes that which was
generally thought the least, in the issue proves the greatest; so in good, the
Magistrate may think that, and the people this, but both evidently good* The
Magistrate may settle either; Now as the Magistrate is Judge of good, so is the
subject of evil; that is, what is destructive to natural privileges; for this
subject voluntary subjects himself for well living, (the Subject to absolute
power is only to live) until convention either by Petition or force ingages
the Prince.

Truth is, absolute powers acquiring their power by force, have a law upon
them, by God among Christians, light of Nature amonst Heathens, To do as he
would be done unto; but he is while he has not engaged himself free; but if
engaged to man, bound to man; and man if he has power against that power may
enforce.

It will be objected; Princes will then only seek to hold by Conquest and
absolute power and never come to any Convention.

To which it is answered, it is agreed they will not; for its easy to believe
that men will not do what they never would be brought unto; We see Christian
Princes by Covenant seek absolute liberty; yea, from the Oaths of their
Coronation, which is the condition of the peoples submission; and wherever an
Oath is, the people are free Subjects, if the Oath be required by the
constitutions of the Nation, whether the Prince thinks so or not.

Now this is plain to him allows he end of Magistrates to be the peoples
safety; so that the sole difficulty will rest upon the powers; but he that
looks well into the work, will find that the use of power is originally
Magisterial, or Magistratical rather; and that excesses of power, that is, that
power which is not used and improved duly, is as subject to restraint as the
failing of particular persons.

So that then the powers must look to improve themselves justly, both backward
and forward; behind it shall see the Subject free in Nature, and happily before
his invasion, usurpation, or just defense brought him to vassallage.

Now then looking at him as a Subject, he ought to yield him protection against
all men, and then due means of subsistence, that is, such as consists with the
just safety of the Conqueror, not contrary among Christians to the Rule of
Christianity; always yet preferring Self-safety; for undoubtedly we must
agree, that if one hundred take one hundred and fifty, or but one hundred
prisoners in War, and have three, or two hundred, or one hundred and fifty more
come against them, and they can see no visible way of safe ingageing against
this three hundred, or two hundred, but by the death of them before prisoners,
they may slay them, yea in cold blood; and they that have written otherwise, to
aggrandize the mercy of a particular Prince, have flattered; for in War (if
anywhere) my own life is above that of the Enemies.

And if Occurrences so fall out that some do not such actions, it is rather the
immediate working of Providence, then the reason of man, or Rule of legal
Prudence; for all know, the imprisoned will seek their liberty with the death
of their adversaries.

And this makes many Conquerors hard-handed in the first generation after
Conquest, till the State be settled; and to give the due loose to these men
after settled by Conquest, is difficult; the men of the world are various in
opinion, and much unsettled, they are at last forced to Providence; and yet who
shows what Providence is? and vain it is to talk of Providence, until we see
what are the tokens of Providence.

Wherefore before I come to handle how particular men may lose their
privileges; I shall a little discourse of the tokens of Providence whereby a
Nation may apprehend deliverances, and see whether there be any certain enough
to engage a Christian in what may be called opposition to Powers.

For to a Heathen to have power to try the event for Liberty, is enough to hold
his conscience in suspense, till the issue to him manifest the present will of
Providence; but to morrow he will attemp again.

But the Christian ought to obey for conscience sake the Powers, knowing there
are none but of God; and that he sets up and plucks down whom and as he
pleases; therefore Christians submit to Usurpers in Acts just and lawful, yea
to Tyrants; and being enthralled, they seek liberty justly, that is,

First, When God shall upon their Petitions stir the heart of the Prince to
afford them their just dues.

Next, They seek help of their Conservators of Privileges, if any be; but
these are natural, and just to all men.

Again, These seek not out evasions for Rebellion, such as some call Providence.

Therefore let us see further what we can find in Reason; Let a Prince come to
the height of private wickedness, is this a sure sign God has rejected him? No
sure, let him err in many acts of Justice to particular persons; yet this will
not do, simply considered; that is, if it stretches not to an universal end.

Now some would bound this to the life only; that is, if the King, or any
Supreme, did not adventure upon the breach of Laws for safety of life, there
ought to be no opposition.

Others make liberty, others call goods Privilege; but all agree, that when he
holds none of these, he loses the nature of a Prince, and is an Enemy, a
Lycaon, a Wolf, and with Lycaon or Nebuchadnezzar to be driven into the
Wilderness till they know the most High reigns over all the Kingdoms of the
sons of men, and gives them to whom he pleases; and that no Tribe, Family,
Lineage, or other relation can engage a Duty, but he will incline all hearts, as
he did in several cases among his own people.

Some Quaere this yet if it were so; and surely God may do it for Judgment:
But O Kings, Princes, and all Supreams, know, while there is a body joined to a
soul, your foul exorbitances will not be continually brooked; but you having
led the people into sins with you, God will either punish you together, or one
by another; therefore look not wholly to the ingageing the conscience of your
people, while yours have no bounds; yet this is certain, Providence is
allowable in difficult cases and doubful; if we be in bivio in a straight, at a
loss, and Reason and Religion both seem silent, or speak not out plain enough,
Providence following just means, is a warranting sign of approbation of the
righteous God.

But in things evidently against the light of Religion, settled Law, and good
Reason, Providence I say only so (and most men expect no further) assure not
at all.

Yet if effected and settled, we must obey; but till then it is our duty to
oppose, which clears us of Turcism.

By this it is clear and evident, That for any Nation to make an other its
pattern merely from Similitude is no way warrantable; but their several
conditions, in all regards, not only of Nature, but of civil Reason, is to be
considered, lest we swerve into the puddle of confusion, while we seek the pure
streams of Government, walking upon the slippery bank of Providence.

These general heads passed, which will to some clear all the rest; yet to all
men of all capacities to which general sort it is most fit for me to speak to, I
intend this Treatise.

We come now to see how particular men in their own free Nations, may become
absolutely bound, or more, or less.

Now to this it is plain, that as Nations may acquire power over Nations, so
men over men; yet the generalty of Nations Christian have avoided slavery, so
called, of Christians; but why they should do it to others, is not apparent,
except only in the disuse, and that disuse come from the evil of servants
multiplying to danger, as shall be made apparent afterward.

But now, as some offenses become dangerous to life, some to liberty, some to
goods, and some to honor, some for a time, some for ever; as the Law is, so are
privileges of men, lost, or regained, and that justly; As the Roman
Mutineers, some banished into Sicilia, and never suffered to return, some but
for seven years, some until released by the Senate, as they were guilty in
degrees, just as now they are by Act made incapable of office for one, two or
more years, or for ever at the liberty of the Supreme Magistrate; and surely
such penalties will, if prudently improved, prove the greater incentives to
trust and politic virtue.

Now as particular men are indulged, so are Nations, and by faithfulness or
necessity, are incorporated into Free Societies, as Wales was with us, by which
you have the ways of regaining freedom made plain; the justice of them is
before discussed; but the right of particular men, while acted in due course of
Law, how ever usurped upon, affords little matter, at least at first to raise
objections against the Supremacy of power.

This asserted, to clear all things, if it may be, we will briefly consider the
nature of subjection.

Whether Subjection and Obedience be due to the Person, or to the Power?
Whether it be local or universal, and how conscience binds?
BY what has been said before, it plainly appears, that the Law does, and must
distinguish betwixt the Office and Person of a Monarch, King, etc. and all
other Supreams upon the like ground, by attributing to them properties
incompatible, or no way agreeing with the person, not only ubiquity and
immortality, but also infallibility in their Spears, that is, not to be able
to do wrong, while observing their rule; this might be enough to some men, if
interests had not made us wise to destruction.

Therefore to the opposers we may seem to look back a little by resolving
conscience more clearly, That the interest of Princes (by all means seeking to
avoid the eternal decree of altering Kingdoms at the pleasure of the Almighty,
by setting up, and pulling down at his pleasure) seeking to tie the Subject to
blind obedience, as well in the universality, as particular persons, without
hesitation simply, because commanded, is not held forth so much to assure the
quiet of the people, as to exalt the absolute power of Princes, to the dishonor
of God, and thraldom of Nations; And as before, either power or consent giving
this power, the same respectively may take it away, except it be a special
Ordinance of God; which few, if any, do attempt to make good; neither can that
Rule (upon any ground Scriptural or Rational, except God in Scripture gives a
liberty to things simply unlawful, which who dare aver?) of obeying, etc,
either by doing or suffering, be extended to whole communities, but to
particulars, as aforesaid, because that Nature in the purity of it, intends
universal good; and if the whole body of the Nation agree in it, it seems to be
very evident; but in a knowing Nation, if the most knowing, it seems most
reasonable; but in a wise Nation, if the wisdom be corrupted through
licentiousness, as to Gods glory it often falls out, if the prudent of the Nation
not carried away with these corruptions, agree it, and empowered, though not the
greater number, it is lawful, but they cast themselves on Providence to support
them.

An other thing in this must be cleared, that is, to satisfy interest ( viz.)
what is the power? To which the Answer is at hand in a double consideration.

To clear the Cause, You must consider, that as persons, so Powers also may be
unjust.

Now to the first, It is clear, that Obedience is due to the power; That is, if
an Usurrer gets tht Kingdom, while the true King cannot yield protection, you
are to give obedience; and if the Usurper requires an Oath of fidelity only,
you are to yield to it, that is, lawfully may; but if he requires you to assert
the lawfulness of his Title, it is unjust to ask, and for you to take, and
seems only a picking of a quarrel, to banish, or confiscate, or etc. which he
may do by his power.

But you will say, what if the right King comes again?

I say in such a case, you in your place ought to seek the welfare of the
Usurper (if behaving himself justly) and so not condemned by the community; for
I give no loose to particular conscience, to judge of public good or evil) if
a Soldier by fighting for him, and so all in Trusts;

Then surely the Minister ought not to preach against him, though not for him,
no not to hint such matters.

And if he that thinks the Prince driven away has Right, comes under the Sword
of that Prince, his oath of fidelity is not extinct, but suspended, until the
right King has totally ousted the Usurper; that Prince may put an oath of
opposition to the Tyrant upon him, but it seems not just.

Now the reason of this is because God has only appointed the Office, not the
person, and power and convention are the means usual of acquiring, and God
has been seen in both; and man not to be wrecked or racked in his conscience,
must submit when God has determined.

Some men think the Prince is to be slain, and his posterity rooted all out;
but these men plow with the Devils Heifer; from this opinion have horrible
cruelties, murders, devastations, and inhumanities more then barbarous
proceeded, and that among Christians, to secure their unjust and also just
acquests.

No, it is far safer to determine his rejection by such a total expulsion, and
make obedience so far universal, not so merely local after oath once taken; but
he that thinks otherwise, and burdens his conscience with it, ought to abide
by that particular witness, in doing what he can for the particular right he is
engaged unto, until he either sees him resetled, and receives the recompense of
his voluntary (I call it only so) faithfulness, or perishes under the wrath of
his Adversary, or being better informed reconciles himself, and submits to the
power; now this is far more due in doubtful cases, or where two powers both
lawful contest, or where a lawful power is of many persons, and part of them
enter contest, and sub due the other; This, as I take it, is sufficiently
cleared. I shall now proceed to clear other things.

Whether Common Good may be enforced against particular Privilege?
IT has been showed that universal good of mankind is the first matter eyed in
the rule of excellent REason, so called Law; next that of Nations; and in
Nations under the prudential settlements of their own, the Rule is, Good is
more or less good as it more or less respects or reflects upon the public
interest and Common Concernments.

Therefore, though the Spirit witnesses that it was done by Prophecy, yet the
reason of the high Priest went no further then Common Safety, urging that it
was better put the Lord Christ to death, then the Romans should come and take
away the City and Nation; so the wise woman of Abel in the case of Sheba.

Now this is plain, that the life of a particular Citizen, is not to be valued
with the safety of a City, etc.

But put case, that a Prince requires unjust things, or denounces wars, may the
subjected Kingdom, City, State, etc. stand out? or if he requires the life of a
particular Citizen, it may be him, in whom the safety of the place rests, yea
if it be the King of Right; as Jehu demanding Ahabs son, (it was before Crowned
though in a Kingdom successively established) I say, it is meet in this case in
prudence, to consult second causes thoroughly; they seem to do so; Two Kings say
they stood not before him, how then shall we? And in case of extremity, they
may deliver a just man, but not slay him (as they did Ahabs 70. sons, that was
wholly unwarrantable) life is the most precious.

Now to them that object they must stand out as long as they can, we say so to:
but we may say prudence may avoid evidently soreseen dangers, yea with the
danger of some just men, to save many just men, and seemingly unjust.

For this case also the estates of particular men may be dug up, high ways
made through them, Bulwarks, Forts, etc. reared, whereby property seems
annulled, yet is only suspended; but though the Law with us agrees this
generally, yet our so called Municipal Law seems to deny it in several cases.

First, though it seem to agree the Law as to Lands, yet it denies it to so
called personal estate.

For suppose invasion, as for example, the Scots (having now many Emissaries
laboring (in Pulpit and Press especially) a subversion of our new Commonwealth)
invade England, the Governor of a Town may order erecting Forts, and for
pulling down some houses in the Suburbs, etc. But for enforcing Moneys from him
they know have abundance, and yet know no other means of supply, the Governor
cannot do it, but by Parliament, he must be authorized.

But the reason is not through paced; for if Lands being the real estate has
the preferment, why should the personal be better guarded? therefore to seek
Cases for the reason is fruitless.

Truth is, that the difference is not as the one is personal, and the other
Real estate; but as the one is more properly the sinews of war then the other,
and more subject to be irrecoverably lost, and being private destroys in
search the Law of property.

Therefore we shall not state the case as the mere Lawyer does, of forcing away
money, but of imposing Taxes, as for the preservation of the place entrusted;
And surely, though to avoid the usurpation of Princes in the Jealousy of
Liberties, such resolutions have been; it is as lawful to lay just Taxes upon
the estate, as to erect fortresses by the labor of the Citizens, and charge
them upon Guards, Watches, etc. And to confiscate estates, or inflict
punishments, and that to death, upon obstinate and deserving offenders.

And this must be, or the folly, wilfulness, or pride of some few, may be
isntrumental by evil example, to render all desperate, as too often experience
has plainly manifested.

But the truth also is, that the sufferings of particular persons ought in
equal Justice to have some sort of compensation, those especially which come
from the own party, and not from enemies; for a full recompense if in all
cases, would but lay the foundation of Civil Jarrs for interest sake, in the
purest Commonwealths, among men; and have therefore been avoided.

By this it is clear, that it is not so much the diversity of Reason, as of
interest, that has brought forth this seeming Law of contradiction, both cases
being in time of eminent visible danger, war at the door, allowed and acted by
prudent and Just men.

Now in our case let us see whether the Subject may be so dispriviledged in
time of peace; This will not extend to life, but to liberty and estate only,
or most properly; As for example,

Commissions to Salt-peter-men to dig in the houses, Cellars, Hosteries, etc.
of private persons, and the like much Quaeried, as almost every thing is in
preparations to great alterations of States.

So the putting down of Fayrs, cutting up of Woods in places of Robbery, making
Causywayes through Marshes or Fens of particular men, yea forcing the sale of
Lands, for works of public necessity, or it may be of special convenience to
the public, as put the case upon the making of Salt, or to plant Sugar, or
make Gunpowder, or the like.

Now there is no question, but they who have ultimate power, have the liberty
to enact Laws which shall with equal Justice relieve the public necessity,
and satisfy the Right and Claym of the proprietor, yea though he were
obstinate, not only not to admit the entry of his house, but also to convey
away his Lands, without the scandal of Ahabs forcing away Naboths Vineyard; for
no supreme Power can do that either for honor, profit, or private pleasure,
without incurring a censure of unjust; only the public good, and that in a
more then ordinary manner, can make such Acts lawful.

For though we may have salt without the Nation, and so Gunpowder and Sugar,
yet these being matters essential to the well being of a Nation within it self,
may and ought to be, and will be provided for in a well governed State, to be
prudently improved; And for Gunpowder, and such like, the State may assuredly
become the sole masters of it, both for making, vending, etc. for such things
ought to be in the public Cognizance, or there is little assurance:

Not that I would open a gap to Tyranny; for let unjust Rulers know God will
find them out, and their own storehouses shall be made their enemies Magazines,
but to wicked men if they have power, you shall not need hint what is lawful;
they regard naught but interest; for the Judge of this common good I refer you
to the former Quaere of the same Nature; and having asserted that the chief
privilege of the subject is just Laws justly executed,

We come to handle the due execution of those Laws, and Quaere,

How and where the Laws are to be Administered; and whether in the Native
Tongue? etc. and the times of Judgment.
I Find not any Nation in the world, but had ever their Laws in the Native
Tongue, and in the due bounds of Cities, Counties, Provinces, or what you
please to call them, except in case of Conquest, or absolute power, though not
at present conquering, yet claiming by conquest; and mostly admitting no
gradual appeals, but at a jump from the lowest Judge to the supreme; I agree an
abundance of Reason in Gradations, and also of unreasonableness; and as with us
now practiced, insufferable Tyranny and Extortion in most cases, while seeking
Justice doubles the damage original.

We all agree walking Courts destructive; and therefore our Ancestors got those
of the King's Bench, and Common Pleas made sedentary; and wherein lay their
insufferableness, but from the excessive expense of the suitor in Travail and
attendance? if so, then it is the duty of Judges in Chief, or Lawgivers, so to
settle judicatories, that the remedy be not worse then the disease; and be
salutary, not only for the wronged, but to the Nation and people; for it is the
duty of all members, much more the Supreme ones of a Nation, to see to the
evils and sufferings, oppressions, cruelties and extortions acted against any
fellow Citizen.

For what is this man's evil to day, if once made but a president, will be
justified as of Right against another man to morrow; And if this be anywhere
held forth in the Constitution of Government, it it most evident in a
Republique.

We all agree the Law is our Rule of well living, and that each man ought to be
punished if he transgress; And the Law it self says, That no man shall be
excused for his ignorance; And therefore Laws ought to be fitted both in the
Tongue and phrase to the meanest Capacity; otherwise the Law becomes a snare,
as ours has been too long.

And neither ought there to be so many, that a man may not well comprehend
them; and multitudes of particular Laws is but Civil Popery, as well as holding
them forth in an unknown Tongue; And sure in reason it is as great an error and
obliquity to the body and estate, to speak to me the Law in an unknown Tongue,
as to the soul. The open and evident reasons of this mystery is,

First, the Norman Conquest, settling the Law in French.

Next the Roman yoke, making pleading in Latin; and the Reasons making good
this, is the pretext of Learning, which as to the French part can never be
approved; for it is an antiquated Language in it self, now wholly disused; and
when used, then only in one Province; but ours is neither written, pronounced,
nor understood, as that old Idiome of Normandia was.

And our Lawyers, to make it wholly private, have used all means to draw it
into the form of a Canting, or Gibberish; for it is punishable in Moots to
pronounce in the true Dialect; but we must use the English reading to the
French writing, or rather French corrupted by ignorant Clerks, which rendered
our books exceedingly imperfect, and even the best of them but by the sense not
to be wholly warranted.

The private reasons are, first, this breeds difficulty, that contention, and
that gain to the practiser.

The next is a quaint one, and would Justice and integrity warrant it, might
bear some weight, but there is nothing in the balance against Justice but wind
and dust; This Machivellian reason is of the corrupt Court, viz. men by these
private litigations, wranglings and contentions, are fired in spirit each
against other, and so are taken off projects against the public peace of the
Nation; but a Christian will easily believe this reason heightens both public
and private vengeance.

Besides this blind reason makes no distinction betwixt poor and rich, just and
wicked men; but put all to the Oar, and let them tug for Mastery, and the
Lawyer sets on the bank, and with their labor is carried into the Ocean of so
gotten riches; this I presume sufficiently evidences that the Laws ought to be
without any question in the Native Tongue, plain, and few, and nigh at hand.

Next let us know how we should have them administered, wherein waving the
private interests aforesaid, the matter will be plain; for it is agreed on all
sides, That Justice ought not to be delayed, no more then denied, or sold; the
Subject demanding this, had no more but Justice, when it was granted in the so
called Magna Charta.

Now I suppose this delay must intend, not the customary time of lawing, but
the due time, and that peremptorily, except in cases of so called Essoyn, that
is, when such due case in Law appears, as all reason must agree there can be no
proceeding but with greater wrong to the other party, then the stay can be to
this, which is injustice; but the truth is, to have so many reiterated summons,
formal and costly, for small causes, is, yea though it were Law, that is
formerly so either established or practiced, unfit to be so continued.

And in many cases, formal processes are vain, dilatory and ruinous; and the
Subjects privilege is (that is just men's) to have all such excrescences cut
off, and meet Medicine applied to the wound; the want of which, after so many
Vows, Covenants, Promises, Engagements, etc. gives spirit to the enemy, and
sets an edge upon their reproaches, and deadens the hearts of all true friends
to Justice and Righteousness.

Some Nations would never suffer the Sun to rise upon a crime unpunished,
committed after the Sun went down; and so not go down before punished, if acted
after Sunrise; you must suppose complained of, and possible to be effected.

But the meaning is, their punishment was immediate; others gave three days,
others fourteen days: Now the best men always give the least time, yet
enough; delays, whether in criminal or Civil Cases, always are the
nourishers of corrupt ends, if not perjuries; our Judicatories are for Civil
Cases in some places weekly; but the business in formality depends a quarter,
half, and sometimes a whole year; let there be justice done under a penalty:
Now the trick is, delay till the Witness be gone, or has forgotten it, or can
be wrought off, or the Jury fitted to the turn.

The Heathens abhorred what Christians practice, for the Criminal part; the
Sessions are or ought to be four times in the year; but the now Lawyers are so
afraid of their own Law; for it is so doubtful, that few but the Superior
Judges (who by reason of their places must) do or will understand it.

And hence men for ordinary acts lie sometimes twelve months, two years in
prison by Adjournments, and no penalty upon the Judge; for he is seldom
evidently faulty, but the Clerks; no Commission to try him, or a defective one,
whereby the prisoner is without all Remedy.

Next the Processes for the Trial before the Judges, are not every man's
purchase, and the appeal being only to London, the charge which rich men and
free men count nothing of, is to poor men destructive and unsufferable.

And we had need call for settled Courts and Laws, and the Judges to determine
by a day, under a Fine or Penalty; for in Arbitrary ones, and so remote as
London from many parts, and the Clyent must go himself, or his case is lost and
undone, where orders are gotten to day, and then the party out of Town, revoked
to morrow, and Order upon Order, Term after Term, and Judges sittings
uncertain, only when they can be persuaded together.

What is it but the Abyss of confusion, and that which threats most direful
plagues and judgments to the Nation? let the honor of the Nation be never so
much pretended, yea though these acts were done to enemies both of God and men
solely and only; For pure and holy Justice is prostituted, if not ravished,
nay is then made the Bawd to each exorbitant passion and affection.

Wise and Just Lawgivers must therefore settle Courts in due and fit places,
times frequent and ordinary, yea if it were every day, and enforce prosecution
under due penalties; And in case of appeals (while appeals) which in respect of
difficulties, and that of moment, may be betwixt persons mean and of small
ability, that they be settled in due places, and ordered in such manner that
Right may be done to the meanest, not as in the formal way of so called Forma
Pauperis, and all the Processes thence issuing, where the cause is
determinable, all Dilatory Pleas excluded, and errors of course amended, and no
error pleaded after issue joined.

These are principal privileges of free Subjects; but indeed the highest and
greatest are least understood, or regarded by the many.

Now whether these Laws be administered in the Towns, Hundreds, etc. is in the
Supreme Magistrate; surely in the County and in a due place there, both for
convenience of Travail, and Reception of Suitors, not in Confinio Comitatus.

The reasons for and against this, will not be worth the while, they holding
forth nothing of moment, more then what is before declared; only this, That by
this means every County will have a various Law, and carried according to
particular interests of places and persons; but this is not be esteemed; for we
allow the Supreme power the enacting the head Law.

So that the Law will be the same, though the dispensation may be diverse then
as it is now, and ever will be; for bind what you can, a wise Judge will have
or make to himself a latitude; but if truly wise, who will grudge? while
Justice indeed is his only aim and end.

But to avoid such and the like Objections; If the Supreme power settle County
Courts, both for Law and equity; and admit once yearly itinerate Judges, to
receive the complaints of Suitors against all other Judges; and for determining
difficult matters in Law, after the manner of the now Assizes, it will take
away all the grounds of interested objections against the necessary
administrations of Provincial or County Jurisdictions, which some frame from
the reasons of County, as Congregational, Independency, or their seares of
introducing the Churches giving an Analogicall Rule, at least, of exterior
Government, to the Commonwealth.

Now having taken this short view of the Laws Administration, let us in the
next place consider the Qualifications of the Lawgiver, and Law-dispenser,
whereby Justice may be executed justly, and how to be chosen.

Qualifications necessary in Judges; who are to be their Electors; Judges
Duties; and Defaults how to be punished, and in them concerning all Officers of
Trust.
Judges in all their degrees are in the heights of Civil Trusts, they are the
Pillars indeed of the Commonwealth; their general Duties are three.

First, to enact good Laws and just.

Secondly, to see them duly executed.

Thirdly, to alter them according to necessity.

All these belongs properly and more immediately to the supreme Magistrate; but
secondarily, and within limits, and according to power all ought to act; like
the wheels in a Watch, the one ought to move the other; but the first mover
has the special trust; for all move right or wrong as they do.

Now though the Judges be of several sorts: yet all of them in some
qualifications hold a Rule of proportion.

As first they ought really to be fit for the work to which they are entrusted.

But this intimates plainly, that the higher the trust, the more exactness is
required; and the greater strictness, upon legal enquiry, ought to be used in
their both choice and approbation. To settle humane things in a humane way
perfectly, it is an error to conceive or attempt;

But to aim at the greatest height of perfection possible, is a duty;
therefore in the first place, all in places of eminent trust, ought to be of
full and fit age; first of full age, which is commonly reputed not under one
and twenty years; for though a ripe wit may in the inventive part, in quickness
of apprehension, and vivacity of spirit outgo another, yet in the disquisition
of parts and settling the most convenient upon a sure judgment, to which
experience is requisite, more years suit best, and are most approvable.

Now as too few years are light, neglective, and subject to rashness, so also
too many years are froward, heavy and subject to wilfulness; Therefore the best
rule is for a wise Commonwealth to fix an age, before which, and after which,
no one shall be capable (no not with a non obstante) of such trusts.

Our Law, however practiced, and especially in the supreme trusts, holds forth
such a Rule; he that is not thought meet to rule himself, cannot be allowed to
govern another; and if he cannot rule according to Law, how unfit is he to be a
promulgator of Law? And the best way is to make such choyces absolutely void.

For the excess of Age, sixty is accounted a time to cease Arms, and betake to
prayers. I prescribe not, but cannot find a fitter. Nature may often shorten;
She seldom lengthens that date with that Activity which is requisite in all
such places.

Having done with the age, the next Qualification is ability, not of the body
so much as of the mind; The ignorance of the Judge may be the ruin of the
innocent; therefore it is not sufficient that a man has been Trained up in the
profession, nor has been a Reader, no not if he spent one thousand pound in
the Kitchen; but he ought to be wise among wise men, who is to rule fools, then
so much more if he be to rule wise men also, who may offend; and prudence may
reclaim when power is contemned.

The next Qualification is, he must be free from all possible obligations to
injustice in any kind; therefore it was unjust in the King to seek such a
dependence upon his mere will from the Judges, that they might thereby be drawn
from the straight path of Justice.

And it is the same in all other supreams; It is truth there is an upright man
whom no temptation can mislead; but we are to provide against errors; virtue
needs no curb, the just man is a Law to himself.

Now it is known, Dependence is various in its workings, according to the
nature of the man depending; for a timorous nature may servilely do the Princes
Will, without any regard either to honor, or reward; but few ingenuous spirits
are of that muddy temper; the great Misleaders, are Pride or Ambition, Revenge
or Anger, Coveteousness or desire of Gain.

Now there are to be Qualifications requisite in every Judge against these; for
these misleadings vices, or any of them, will otherwise turn the public Ax
against the private Enemy; there is therefore great care to be taken at all
times, in all choice of men to places of Trust, but especially in times of the
shakings of Nations, for then the wise man must save the City, how unthought
of, how poor soever.

Now to prevent these, the wisdom of former Ages and Nations have all appointed
a set and bountiful allowance for all Judges, which stirs up able and active
spirits to eminency of virtue, (which can be never extraordinary, in a mere
letter Law, where each Case particularly must have its examplar) All Nations
heretofore agreed punishments for Judges, and all in the most excellent trusts,
not only useful but of necessity; some went so far, through the fear of
Tyranny and Oppression by men of eminent parts, that extraordinary abilities
were obscured; for the complaint admitted no Trial, Banishment must ensue;
aftertimes tempered this Laconicism; finding it was the laying open the State
to many Tyrants and Tyrannies to prevent one, that the thing it self was the
greatest Tyranny of all. This last Age went about by all means to explode any
question of Judges; nay, the Officers of Courts were so friended, that there
was no seeking Justice against them; but of this more after.

In all Judicial places this is fit, That the Judge have his Salary set, his
public Fee from the Prince or State; now in this one word to this purpose (
viz.)

The Judge receiving this Fee from the State, this is a public Fee, wherein
each Subject has his portion; and the duty of the Judge in it is, equally to
care for the interest of both Prince and People or Subject; for the end and
respect of Justice is not personal but universal; for the qualification of not
Covetous, it is of necessity in a Judge; therefore as before he is to have a
due Salary; so he is not to take ought above his Salary, at least as a Fee:
There is much scandal at this day in Christian Commonwealths concerning Bribery.

In Turkey it were no wonder, though till corruption through prosperity ushered
in the way, it was a wonder, and a strange one among them; but that with them
assures their fall near; for this is like a deadly sore, which if in the
Judges, infects the heart, at least the prime vital parts of the Commonwealth,
and then sure death must follow.

Thefore it is requisite to have this wound searched to the bottom; Some for
this case have been so strict, that they would not admir a Judge to hold
familiarity with a father, or a brother.

Some not to take a meal, nor any gift, though never so small; others have
particularly set down what they may take; and that may do well if they
peremptorily conclude that all not expressed is included in the negative.

From this I shall take liberty to exemplify; It is not fit any Judge receive
a Newyears Gift, Gown, Cloth, Venison, Mutton, or the like, from any practizer
at the Law, as well as from a Suitor at Law; for though I would not, nor can I
asperse any in place of Authority, yet these things having been found evil and
inconvenient, it is evident then that evil may be.

And as good men must shun the appearances of evil, so wise Magistrates must
take away all things giving just occasion of suspicion; therefore it is
necessary, not only to have these things settled by the public Supreme
Magistrate, but also published, that so each man may know his duty; and for
this case it is thought inconvenient any one that takes a particular Fee of any
man to be entrusted judicially; for many aspersions have lain upon Justices of
Peace, Counselors, whether deservedly, or not, I cannot affirm; but it is
justly suspected, when they have been more fully informed of the Case, and
pleaded more earnestly then the retained Lawyer for his visible Fee; but this
is the present Opinion and thought of many, who also conceive it just, that a
Judge attempted by Bribery, should complain to a Judge duly appointed, and the
bribe-offerer convicted to be punished as well as the bribe-taker; for neither
in the Politikes of Christianity will be allowed.

The next Qualification of a Judge is fearing God in the Law; in the Gospel it
is the same, but has many parts; for sure his qualification ought at lest to
be as high as a (supposed lay) Elder; then he must be in Church Communion, and
not only not given to filthy lucre, but sober or grave in his behavior,
ruling well his own Family, (which now admitted, it is a hard matter to fill
the ordinary seats in Westminster; for such is the looseness of all Government,
that Government is esteemed harshness, cruelty, oppression, tyranny, and worse,
if worse may be;) but this is enough to a wise man; only this, he must not be
subject to Anger, that is overcome of it.

And it is the duty of the Chusers of these men, not to satisfy themselves
slightly in these qualifications, nor of the people too readily to asperse;
for unless defects be evident and notorious, Wisdom will cover on the one hand,
and fear of punishment, if that be readily allowed, bridle on the other; for
there will be such an awe upon spirits, that whom love of duty and virtue
cannot prevail over, fear of vengeance will.

I come now to consider by whom the Judges are to be appointed; to which it is
easy to resolve, That it properly belongs to the body Representative, none
fitter in ordinary course, unless otherwise ordered by the Supreme Power,
according to the establishment of a Nation; for assuredly the chief Judges are
the Arteries of the Commonwealth, and therefore a due and just dependence upon
the Supreme Power is requisite, but never would the Supreme look to all
administrations.

And if Judges be in Provinces or Counties as is due, not only the sedentary
at the elbow of the Supremacy, but the chief in the Counties, ought to be at
least allowed and authorized (though the nomination may be in the County) by
the Supremacy; but that all be done in this kind, by an open plain known
public Law, is most requisite.

Now before we come to the duties of Judges, we must show the necessity of
excellent Qualifications in Judges in point of due temper both of passions and
affections; for it is before asserted, that the Judge must be bound by a head
Law, which takes away the pure Arbitrium, and also to punishments which he may
not exceed, and that both corporal (and that as well to restraint of Liberty,
as Correction so called) as criminal or purs-paiment.

And this Prudence allows an extraordinary care in the due choice, or speedy
care in removeal of unfit Judges, which is that principally can free from
diversity of Laws, according to the diverse natures of men, in regard of which
diversity of spirits as fierce and untractable, and quiet and meek, the
Magistrate, as before, ought to have power above what is at all times and to
all persons fitting to be used.

We have seen that the want of this, and putting men for riches, or Family
sake, or other outward relations (as of breeding and the like, but no way
improveing them) in place and honored with judicial trusts, yea though but a
Justice of the Peace, has made Justice it self either from weakness or
wickedness disesteemed; whereas let nothing draw from the natural rational
Rule, and you shall see Justice carry that due Splendour and Majesty, which
properly belongs to those who bear the Image of Gods name in a more especial
manner.

Among Judges, I also must intend not only Justices of the Peace, but
Constables, yea and Jurors, who now are made of men of no esteem, and so justly
disesteemed.

For Jurors, if they were but bare Judges of fact, yet in that they are Judges,
and ought to have their qualifications accordingly; for estate in them it is
necessary, because their disburthen is by damage.

But as to other qualifications, respectively as others; for the choice of
Judges, as the the Supreme ought to choose the next immediate; so it seems to
some, that the Judges gradually ought to choose; but that savors more of form
then substance; for the necessity lies not in the Judgeship, but Supremacy,
which if wholly in the order of Supremacy, devolves into Tyranny naturally, as
on the other hand into confusion if wholly in the populacy.

To place it in the Judges, is solely to establish interest, which yet being
most inconvenient, is to be waved with greatest severity and care.

And it seems best to place the choice of inferior Judges in some certain men
of the people, duly qualified with due regulations of necessity to be observed.

One word to their duty, which will on the contrary evidence defaults.

The duty of Judges therefore is twofold; first, to hold forth practically as
well as literally the true and proper sense of the Law, and not to admit
Formality, Practice, or Custom against the letter, while the letter holds
forth ought of Justice, in the settled State at least; for that liberty brings
all Laws into the mere will of the Judge.

Secondly, where they perceive error in Law, which gives just cause of
exception, its their duty to declare the same publicly to the Supreme
Magistrate, with a fit expedient, whose duty it is to enact a due remedy, and
establish the same accordinly, if upon inquisition the same be found just,
otherwise not; and if they do not, they perform not the trust reposed in them;
for the Supreme Magistrate, though in the Democratike State (where most eyes
and ears are at work, and jealousies be highest) cannot discern each dangerous
obliquity in legal administrations; therefore they who are entrusted, should in
their places consult for preventing evils as well as for remedying; and this is
to have Judges as at first.

Their punishments cannot be prescribed but according to the nature of other
offenses, life with life, damage with damage, etc. But always provided that
the error was intentional, and except the guilt were notorious, to discharge
upon Oath, but withal to lose his place.

And to avoid all scruples concerning Magistrates Elections, as also for making
and enacting due and fit Laws, and knowing the errors of Magistrates in all
places, that there be respectively fixed places and sure appointed into which
it should be lawful for any man after promulgation of a Law, or nomination of a
Judge, to set down his Opinions and Reasons, for, or against the altering, or
annulling, or rejecting the Law or Judge, before the Law be established, or the
Judge confirmed, with a mark, no name to appear to make good if required upon
the mark, otherwise the note to be rejected; and these kept by some sworn men
under strict penalties.

I shall not treat how far ignorance of any sort excuses; there is enough to
hint the general reason before; I now proceed and Quaere

Whether the execution of Laws ought to be all after one manner, and all Courts
to have the same Jurisdiction, Officers, Proceedings and Fees?
AS to the Execution of Laws, provided the head Rule be observed, that is, life
to answer life, etc. Assuredly the Magistrate has the absolute power to
mitigate or enforce as he sees ocasion, (take execution for the way of
punishing offenders in any kind;) but if you take it for the Uniformity or
Identity of Law in all Counties, surely there the Law ought to be the same, if
Reason be the same.

I dare not assert it of certainty to be of necessity that all Christians live
by the like particular Laws; but I believe that as Nature holds forth but one
light to men, and God but one Law to Christians; so that it is most clear, and
the fittest way to avoid the ordinary jangles, as aforesaid, to settle that
head-Law as our Rule, and to draw by all just means to the like consonancy of
Reason in the distributive, as in the constitutive part of Law.

And this does not (as I in all humility conceive) at all clash with these
tling of Provincial Courts, while as before the whole Law flows from the same
fountain of Supremacy in the head-pipe of sedentary order of Judges, or a fit
number to over-see the whole Nation by way of yearly Circuits, admitting, and
determining Complaints, against even ordinary Judges, and that without or Fine
or Fee, and determining matters difficult in Law, or referring it to
consulation, after; but determining without further expense, and in a certain
time; for as before, the Judge, and so all Officers public, ought to be paid
out of the public purse; But these Judges also must be bounded what presents
they may take, and from whom.

This will silence all jangles, and the Englishman shall know his Law wherever
he comes in his own Nation.

Now as to the ordinary Courts, or Hundreds, it is requisite to have all
Officers, proceedings, and fees alike; not that it is intended the Hundred
Court should have the same with the County, or etc. or the Messenger that goes
ten miles, no more then he that goes but two; nor he that ingrosses or writes
ten sheets, as he that does but five.

But at a due known allowed rate for all, established by visible and plain Law,
Public, and in Print; and that in such manner, that the long hanging of a
Cause in Court, or multitude of Writs, or warnings of Juries should not
advantage Officers, or as bad as amerce Suitors.

But that the Judge be fineable; let the prosecutor be enforced to proceed, or
his Case dismissed with Fine for unjust clamor and litigation.

Next, all Writs or Processes are to be had in the County, and all returnable
at one time, be it one, two, three or four days or weeks.

How Appeals are to be admitted, and false Judgments remedied and punished.
THis seems to receive satisfaction in some foregoing Considerations; but in
regard that all cannot be said at once, I shall shortly enlarge; Appealing (in
this Question) is no more then the waving of the Court, and going to a higher,
for so of necessity it must be.

This I must agree is necessary; but though I allow Appeals, I admit not the
many gradations.

The reason why this grew so common, was, the meanness of Judges in County
Courts, which was ordinarily put off with an Attorneyes man; but wise men will
suppose that the qualifications must be intended in righteous Judicatories,
according to the trust; therefore we will suppose the County supplied with able
Judges, etc.

I thefore Quaere, what may cause an Appeal; may fear of injustice?

No, it ought not to be supposed.

But may greatness of damage?

No; for the difficulty must be either matter of Fact or Law; for Fact, there
ought not to be any removeal; rather let such extraordinary Cases (if what need
not be supposed, must be) be delayed, till the Itinerant Judges come down as
now.

For the difficulties will be only or specially in Criminals; for other great
doubts are generally Titles; and surely they are customarily made more
difficult then they are; however particular right of particular persons ought
not to admist such public hurries, though gain has gilded fair the rotten
posts of interested Reason.

But there may yet be Reasons of Appeal, as in Case the suit arises between
one in the utmost bound North, with one in the utmost bound South, or in diverse
Counties.

Now this must have a Rule to settle in which County, as where the wrong was
done, debt to be paid, or etc.

Or else in a certain middle County; in case of not observing which Rule, an
Appeal ought to be admitted to the Sedentary Judges out of their Circuits
otherways in, and to be determined at their return, (or by the Judges of both
Counties, if adjoining in the bounds of the County where the wronged person
dwells.)

But these Appeals are to be allowed under the hands of the Judges of the
County, when admitted, and so by them transferred to the Superior; and if the
Appeal be not justly grounded, and speedily ordered, the Judge to be punished,
for that he is the Author of delay; but if upon consultation the Case be
difficult, there must be a Certificate to the Superior Judges of the truth of
the Case attested by the Complainer, who must make it good within a set time,
or the Appeal to be quashed, and he fined, but the Judges excused.

Now as to the remedying of false Judgments, most certainly Writs of Error
were justly made use of and allowed, and the notion of false judgment for so
thought good reason waved, and so complaints ought to be as aforesaid; but this
must not attend the propounded Assizes without satisfying the Judgment
presently, yea though it be false.

Next no error but to be allowed before the Writ issues forth; for to purchase
the Writ of Course, and Assign one Error or more of course this Term, then more
the next, and then a peremptory day, and then Errors Cassed, is but legal
extortion.

So that it is plain, to take errors totally away, is as bad as to have all
allowed; but to prevent the mischief, let a certain day in Court be to
determine errors before issue, and not after.

Now the punishments in these defaults, are and must be pecuniary, and that
both in the Judges of Fact as Jurors as well as Law; but where the default is
evident, there ought to be a dispriviledging for future as to all public
trusts (at least for a time) but out of the Judicial place presently, yea
though the oath be that he was only mistaken in Law, and did not do it at all
maliciously, or with a mind of injustice.

Now to oaths, it is fit any Justice of the Peace should give it at discretion;
this requires able Judges, and so should Judges be; but of this more in due
place.

Concerning what things the Magistrate may and ought to make Laws.
YOu heard before, that there must rest in some persons thereto designed,
either by God, as those who claym to rule by absolute power, or by men, as
those who rule by Compact or Convention, as who either had no power, but were
merely elected, and agreed with, having no Right primarily; or had some power,
but not enough, and so condiscended to some rule, that they might rule
assuredly.

Now this being in one person, or more, yet the power ought to extend to all
things justly necessary to the well being of a Commonwealth; and therefore they
have respectively the general powers of war and peace, life and death.

But because we have before hinted, that there was a necessity of the
Magistrates regulating of those things which many men call dispriviledge to
Christians as well as men, we will according to the rule before laid, that is
of the head Law, according to Gods own Law, the God of Christians as of the
Jew, see the Government of reason laid there down both for Divine and Civil
worship.

Wherein first it seems directly given to the Magistrate, to have the ordering
of divine worship to God under the Law.

Now let us see how this works; for Vzziah is a Leper for acting in the Priests
Office.

Yet the aberrations both of Priest and People are laid to the Kings charge;
and the good Kings commanding just things, and not only so, but seeing of them
performed, are blessed; and on the contrary, the evil Kings punished, and their
Adherents: And those disobedient to the King, as (to Ahab) the seven thousand
that never bowed knee to Baal, were those who were to take root downward, and
bring forth fruit upward.

Now the great difficulty is, to settle the Magistrates power so that he may
not bring sin upon himself and the Nation, by commanding or tolerating things
evil and unjust, or unjustly enforcing things just and good.

Now as to this, it is to be considered, that we all profess Grace is from
Heaven, the mere gift of God, and that the Spirit breaths where it pleases,
as the wind blows where it lists; if so, the Magistrate,

Yea grant there were a clear Church Magistrate, that were by divine Word
empowered with the Sword of Paul as the Keys of Peter; could he go further then
the outward man? it is plain he could not.

Next then, grant no such Magistrate, sure the Civil (or in case of doubt of
Spiritual Power) the Civil Magistrate only can act clearly; Now for the
Spiritual Power to be helped out with the Civil Sword, surely it is one of the
grossest vanities that Popery ever broached. God stands not in need of man's
wisdom or power.

But God having not cleared that the implicit construction by Analogical or
singular reason from the legal severity is proportionate to the gentle and
quiet brotherlike Rule of the Gospel, nor agreeable to the Commission which our
Savior gives to his Apostles, which was either to the Jew, Matthew the 10.
Mark the 3. and Luke the 9. or to the universality of men, Matthew the 28. Mark
the 16. Luke the 24. and clear enough in that of the 21. of John and 15. where
nothing is spoken of but preaching, and teaching, and feeding;

If then the Pastor have not the Sword but of the Spirit, let us see the
material and Magisterial Sword which is not born in vain; what may this do?

If we look to the Jewish Model which many men seem so much to contend for;
There we see that the Magistrate had power over blasphemers, Idolaters, and
tempters to Idolatry, witches, etc. and this extended to death, and that it
should do so with us, is by them desired.

Now many suppose this difficulty, though very great, may be at least in great
part assoyled, if we consider that the persons to whom this Law was given, was
a people chosen by wonderful miracles and wonders from all Nations, to be the
people of God, and bear out to the world the Ensigns of his special love to man
in all Ages and Generations; which tokens of love in obedience to his Law, were
suited with answerable judgments in the neglect of the same.

And surely those things which relate immediately to God in the point of
gracious service, hold forth nothing to us but assurance of eternal punishments
to the unrepentant sinner. Saint Paul confesses himself a blasphemer, 1
Timothy the 1. 13. and declaring in the last times what fearful and horrible
sins should appear among men, 2 Timothy 3. 2. he takes notice of blasphemy and
bids only from such turn away.

Now if you would have a Magistrate to work without a divine precept, we must
look at the height of improved reason; There we find that zeal for the Gods
among all Heathens made blasphemy death; and surely reverence is due by the
light of Nature, to what ever is called God; Of blasphemy under the Law, the
Council was Judge.

Now the Sanhedrin was not of Priests; they might ask Council of the Priest,
but determined themselves; and these by Gods Law put the blasphemer to death;
many conjecture upon this, the Devil Aped Gods Law, others his delight in blood
hinted the Law, as in Heathen Sacrifices; but sure such reason makes against
these objects intended to take away the pure light of reason; for who that will
acknowledge a Deity, will allow the Deity to be blasphemed?

But now the doubt is, whether these are not under the Gospel to be reserved to
the last Judgment.

Some believing, that if Paul of a blasphemer (and who ever was a greater?)
became a Saint, a Preacher of the Messiah, who did and thought to do many
things against the Name of Jesus (that is, against them called on his name) why
may not any other be converted? where is Gods dispencing with the Law? where
the special reservation of Paul? he did it not against the humanity of Christ
but his Divinity; it was for calling on his Name.

Some excuse Paul because zealous; but others answer, so may any other be
esteemed; who shall venture the judgment of the Magistrate for blasphemy?
surely there is no word to warrant death for blasphemy, no not of one who has
professed Christianity, but the old so called Law.

But most assuredly, the Magistrate has a great latitude, and may to some
evidently and notorious inordinate liver inflict death.

Whereas he who only from consulting over-curiously the Godhead by reason,
and not comprehending the Essence of the infinite verity and wisdom by his
works, shall doubt, and so deny God his Power, etc. ought not nor can justly be
punished with death by the Magistrate: but for such the Congregations ought to
pray and endeavor; and if yet he cannot be convinced, living civilly and
humbly, the Magistrate ought to wait with patience, using all due means, if so
be it may be, that at last the Lord will reveal this thing unto him.

The same in a manner is to be the rule of Idolatry; for as the most horrid
blasphemer will allow, if there were a God (for he is an Atheist) he would not
blaspheme; so the Idolater, if this were Idolatry, he would not Idolize, and so
not tempt to Idolatry. For Witches there is much less doubt; for most of them
are drawn by malice to renounce God (whom then they must own) and damage men,
either of which must end in death for death.

For Murderers, Buggerers, Burglars, and the like, are without question as
capable to us of repentance as any of these, and then no one with Christians
should dye for any offense.

And it is plain, as before, that in the Apostolical Writings there is held
forth nothing of the legal punishments; Paul and all of the Apostles writing
and bending their speeches to the Churches, who were faithful, elected to be
Saints; and for the Sinners they were to reprehend and convince, exhort, and
persuade, and for greatness of crime or obstinacy to cast out; And Paul for all
other things leaves them to the Magisterial Power.

By which I presume it is plain, that offending against the verity and purity
of Christianity, the Church ought to eject; and offending against the purity of
Righteousness under Evangelical englightenments, the Magistrate ought to
punish, according to the Nature of the offense; that the Magistrate was to
follow the Churches censure as incapable to judge of such crimes, is not to be
moved; or that the Church could not meddle until the legal Trial were ratified,
is as contrary to sound Truth: Now if the Magistrate may judge, he may enact
Laws as it is plain; from whence I conclude, That the Civil Magistrate has the
power of Right to establish Laws against irreligion, viz. blasphemy, Idolatry,
and tempting to Idolatry, and that in some cases with death.

In Witchcraft without doubt, unless you shall distinguish in Witchcraft, as in
the other between the witch that has covenanted with the Devil, nourishes
Imps, etc. and does no harm to man in body or goods, and they that do, as in
case of Heresy or blasphemous opinions, private and published, Idolators and
inticers to Idolatry, leaving the mental and opinionative part to God, and the
Active sensible part to man.

But surely this reason should as to Blasphemy, Idolatry, and Witchcraft, have
been as well considered under the Law; for the Reason seems to be the same.

But to proceed, under the name of witches I comprehend Enchanters, Poysoners,
keepers of familiar spirits, and all that have entered any actual Covenant with
the Devil, be it by word or writing.

Now that which evidences to me most strongly the power of the Civil
Magistrate, in and concerning these matters, is, that they are called works of
the flesh; which to the judicious Inquisitive, will plainly denote the light of
Nature might evince them of the contrary; for they are deviations from the pure
light of reason, to blaspheme a God, to worship or allure to the worship of a
stock, or stone, or Image for a God, or to make a league with the Devil.

But if you ask whether I intend this Doctrine universally as laid down; I
cannot agree it.

For first to Heathens I allow it not, as abhorring the inference of
propagating Religion by the Sword.

Next I allow it not to sober civil doubting men; for absolutely profane and
perverse scoffers I yet believe, and cannot see to the contrary but that their
blood is upon their own heads; As in case of Murder, breaking open of houses,
etc. and what else the Law does punish mortally; this gives much more liberty
to men then heretofore: But what if as Paul preached Diana etc. to be no gods
but the work of men's hands; That a Turk should preach publicly the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ to be a mere fancy, and blasphemy; In this case as a Turk let him
be forbidden; if not obeying, let him be banished.

How can a Christian Magistrate to witness his zeal to his God, and his
endeavor to establish the peace of his Country, do less?

But if he be a Christian that thus Apostatizes, the rule is limited before.

But the best way is, where there is just doubt, the Christian Magistrate is
not to go to the height and rigor of life, but to seek out with all wisdom, a
due remedy answerable to the light of our Gospel-profession, and not cease till
a rule were set.

All the other power of the Magistrate for the well living of men, might easily
be included in Laws concerning Magistrates superior and inferior, and people,
and those either living in Cities or Towns, or private families, whether of
parents and children, Tutor and Pupils, husbands and wives, masters and
servants, for all contracts, houses and lands, bargaining and selling, etc.
words and deeds, man and beast, night and day, as in warding and watching,
peace and wars, as the ordering, charging, trayning and paying of Soldiers,
as also punishing of them, health and sickness, providing for the poor.

But some Judicials which are alterable, may I suppose now seem necessary,
which former Ages disallowed: As for example:

The Battelling of houses, lest any should fall from the roof, so the double
portion of the elder Brother.

And some just and rational Law instead of the so called Clergy, for a safety
for such offenders as it shall be thought meet to allow it to.

But a City is dangerous, lest a multitude of evil persons might prove
obnoxious, except the strict Rule of its Government in the settled inhabitants,
may bridle the exorbitancie of such evil Guests; the Law concerning a woman
with child, whereby her fruit departs from her, and those who procure Abortion,
by open force or private violence.

Now although it is plain, that all Errors of Christians ought to be reproved
with much care, and with all Christian information; yet these sins which are so
plain, are to be plainly enforced by the Civil Magistrate; but those others
which are tending to the service (not dishonor and blasphemy) of the Almighty,
ought to be with much Christian persuasion reformed, not by power enforced; for
though I must agree, the Magistrate may enforce an Atheist, and so a
Nonconformist for fear of punishment to the Congregation; and he may be there
converted, for some undoubtedly have been;

Yet we cannot thence infer, that the work is of duty; he uses indeed a means
which reason is capable of, but to enforce by pecuniary punishments, much more
corporal, is most assuredly so far doubted, that it is not suddenly to be
acted; for what is for you to day, is against you to morrow, as the Supreme
Magistrate varies in opinion, which Law is then without its certain Rule; and
that for which the Magistrate can give no certain Rule, is not to be made by
him a Rule or Law at any time.

For the Magistrates making Laws in these things which tend circumstantially to
the service of the Lord with Christians; I intend the matters so called of
indifferency, surely therein is the Liberty of Christianity, and the glory of
it, is, not to be tied to the Apish formalities of Superstition; conformity and
uniformity have been made the great wheels of Satan's Chariot, to hurry us from
the simplicity of unity, Christian Charity and Faith, and is to be exploded the
Congregation of the Faithful.

Now to clear the Magistrates power as to his Trust in, and concerning both
Tables, the matter is plain; the Offices of Magistrate and Minister are
distinct; as a Magistrate, he cannot intermeddle with the Ministerial proper
Duties, but with the Minister he may, if he neglect his duty; and that is no
more then that the Minister by his Office is not freed from Civil Judicature;
And so, though with Vzziah he cannot Ministerially dispense the Ordinances; yet
he may and ought to see the Minister do his duty; this is according to the Law
of God, and of this he may be judge;

That is, he may consult, and punish, and so enforce* (and both these Offices
may be in one person.) I shall not enlarge concerning this any further, but now
proceed in the orderly settling of the Commonwealth by due and necessary
Administration of Laws for Civil peace.

But before I come to particulars, I must a little generally enlarge my self
concerning the power of the Magistrate, and his duty, that is, that the
Magistrate has all power, and is to execute all power in all things of what
nature soever, conducing to the safety of the Commonwealth; and therefore that
in some cases conscience cannot be pleaded, but notwithstanding all such pleas,
due punishment ought to be inflicted.

To give Examples of Murder, and Adultery, Incest, and the like, will be plain.

But for Concubinage, and the true Polygamy, or many wives at once will be
difficult with many men.

Yet these sure, if made general, being but the restraining of the natural
appetite, and most consonant to the hinted Doctrine of our Savior in those
words, It was for hardness of heart only that Moses allowed it, it was not so
from the beginning, God created them male and female: The Magistrate may justly
and lawfully improve his just Authority; but to extend it to death, as has
been used, was assuredly not so obviously warrantable.

But to embroyl a Nation in War and blood, or lay a foundation to it for not
agreeing in the manner of exercising the Ordinances of the Gospel, that cannot
be allowed.

Such as marrying with a Ring; at the Table with a Communion, to receive it
sitting or kneeling, to administer it in the morning or at night, with a
Surplice or white garment, with all the like, that it must be done only in the
public Place of public Worship, so called Church; and this to prevent
Heresies, etc.

Surely it is natural to each man to believe his own opinion right, and that he
is educated in, the natural man without further controversy allows; however he
practices clean contrary.

Now it is certain, being all born in sin, and under wrath, there must be a
work of God upon the Spirit before we understand the things of God; this God
does ordinarily by Preaching, Reading, Praying, Conferring, Meditating;
sometimes by afflictions with these; sometimes by an extraordinary accident, as
delivery from an unexpected danger, or seeing some great judgment, or sudden
plague in and upon other men; a thousand ways there are whereby God preaches
to a man.

Now accordingly as the Spirit is affected, so usually is the man zealous or
remiss; and assuredly in such changes God is seen and glorified most, as are
from very bad to very good, as Paul from a Persecutor to become u Preacher; and
here the world takes most offense.

It is true, the Angel of the Church is not to suffer the woman Jezabel, nor
the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans to take root in the Church of God, but to
labor with the Sword of the Spirit (not with fire and faggot) to reprove,
exhort, admonish, persuade, convince; and the Magistrates ought to exhort the
Congregations to their duty, that men so qualified be ordained Elders in all
the Churches, and that they do diligently and faithfully improve the gifts
given them, to the edification and peace of the the Church, and the gifts
ceasing, to see others appointed in their places.

And the Pastors are to see the disobedient, and perversely refractory to be
ejected their Societies.

And the Magistrate may approve the Rule of the Congregation, that no other
Congregation receive them ejected, without satisfaction to them who ejected,
first given.

So that if you take the exhortative, enforcing the just duty of Christians,
from Christians in the Christian Magistrate to be the keeper of the first
Table, he may be so called.

But if you take it for the person properly chosen by God, to maintain, assert,
and defend the truth of his Service; the Magistrate has a share in it as a
Christian, if he be such, and the Pastors the like; a special share, in regard
of their more immediate trusts; but this keeping of the first Table, is a Right
belonging in my opinion to the whole body of Christians, and every member may
claim his due.

The Magistrates, even while pretending to it, have been the greatest oppugners
of it; witness the persecuting Christian so called, Kings and Princes in the
Church, the so called Clergy drawing in the same cord; witness the cruel
Massacres and Persecutions the Pope and Bishops have raised for the same
pretenses; and all we believe against the Truth; so that it is manifest these
did not keep it; who then kept it?

But they who had no Magistrate among them, and seldom a Minister so called to
instruct them; yet were the rite of Gods Service kept by them as by the seven
thousand in Israel, when King, Bishop, Priest, and all worshipped Baal. I now
hasten to the Settlement intended; wherein I shall begin with Education of
children.

How Children are to be Educated by Magistrates Authority.
THe Lord God took care for the meat or nutriment of special children, even in
the Womb;

But ordered every Mother to give her own child suck, presupposing that riches
and honor were but subservient to Natures ends; but this strictness now
accounted, though the Magistrate might exact it where it could be, or punish
its neglect,

Yet assuredly to enforce it in this our Age, were to debilitate and enervate
the Nation; for our rich people are generally so luxurious, that if the
weakness of the decayed stifled generative virtue choked with excess, were not
opened again to operate more acutely through another kind of nutriment in the
poor Nurse, they would all prove Changlings to old English Valor, though in
such a soul the splendors of Christianity may be as excellent, as in the
strongest, fairest and healthiest constitution.

This I hint only to intimate, at least to Professors, what a duty is upon
them to repress these excesses, which are so ruinous to Nature, and ought to be
punished; Natural men have out-gone most Modern Christians in these virtues.

My aim is at the manner, not so much of educating babes, or so called
children, as youth; that is, from seven years to eighteeen at least, if not one
and twenty, or better five and twenty.

Now to this end, I suppose, that it is the duty of the Magistrate to Erect and
Authorize, at least, in the head-Town of every County Schools of Virtue, that
is, fitted with Masters to teach and instruct the youth, according to their
Ages and Capacities, in Arts and Arms; I mean by Arts, Trades of all sorts and
learning of all sorts, atcording to Rule; This provided, that it is not
intended, that all children should contiue merely learners till five and
twenty; and it is supposed that the present values, rents, and profits, of, and
belonging to Inns of Court and Chancery, Universities, and Schools, will serve
for this work; however so far that the defect may easily be supplied.

But that they should not be accounted men till that age, nor to manage their
own affairs, much less of the Commonwealth, but be under Guardianship.

And by Arms, I mean all the exercises of the body, whereby strength and
agility shall be increased, courage raised, and yet being under a Tutor
obedience nourished, and Prudence established; for these Academies or Schools,
it is requisite to have their Rules grave and strict, but not ridiculous, not
such as flat Caps after so long disused, nor Cappings of so called Fellows as
was in Colleges though the rain pour down, but to order such due respect as
breeds an aw with love, wherein there must be necessary severity, not rigid
peevish Tyranny; the aw must express it self in a due silence, as well as
active diligence; for the expense of spirits is great in clamorous, nay
talkative youth; and sure, would quick and ripe wits not vent so fast, their
store would last longer; this makes many pregnant young men to be old dotards.

Let these have discreet Visitors, or Superintendents, who once every month
shall come and view the progresses of the several years, and a penalty set, and
that seriously; this due training of youth will enable them to rule in season;
the want of knowing due obedience in Education renders most men unfit to
govern; by this means the natural abilities of all men will be tried, and the
virtuous eyed as fit for high employments, the care of Parents will be quieted,
while their children are so nigh, as once in a week they may easily hear of
their health and sickness; and the nighness to the Parents will aw the child
from such extravagancies as youth is subject to at all times, but most when
they are far from them, whom Nature teaches to fear by degrees.

The habits of these Students I enforce not that they be all alike, but that
none be trimmed with Velvet, Lace, Points, Ribonds, or such fooleries; none to
wear long Hair, Rings, Scarfes, Fringes, Roses, Weapon or Boots; and that due
and civil respects be observed among themselves, according to their degrees;
but no fancies of Custom to be allowed, as Salting, Mustarding, or any such
lightnesses, nor any trials of Wit or Strength, but in the presence of a Master.

Thus shall both poor and rich be fitted to the service of the Commonwealth,
idleness will be banished, and ignorance despised; for all that were capable
should to these Schools for a time, till dismissed to Trades, for necessary
living by the Visitors or Superintendents; for prayers among them early and
late, it is necessary; but let the hours be apportioned for Study and Exercise,
and let each day be Catachistical to the knowledge of Christian Doctrine, as
Moral or Civil conversation.

But you must admit no Colledge-School, or Academy, to have any Privileges of
separate Jurisdiction, as now or formerly, they are but the inciters to
Debauchery and Riot, with great emulation and disturbance of the Peace; The
Magistrate must command; Let no door be free from the knock of the Consuls Ax,
it will make some heady one or other at some time or other to lay the
foundations of choosing Tribunes of the people.

Let only their obedience to the Law be their privilege and security; only
let the Tutors be free from personal service in War, or other service in Peace;
but for payments, let them be charged upon him according to his Rate.

Let the books of Learning be publicly appointed by the Magistrate, not at the
Tutors will; let not all be enforced to Latin, but each to Read and Write in
some measure; Let times of rising be set down, and also going to bed, and some
certain times wherein the children may recreate, but by parcels not all at
once, which now is case of great confusion rudeness and disturbance.

Let the Masters interchangeably have times of respit for extraordinary
occasions; This will speedily give a large increase for knowledge, which will
make that your Magistrates in all places may be men of knowledge, which will
embellish the Commonwealth; whereas now most Cities, Towns, yea I may say
Counties are despised in Government for default of prudent knowing men: A long
Robe-man or two guide all, and in this Age of interest, and these men's
interests so visible as aforesaid, all is let run to confusion.

And by this will also the several Congregations be fitted with able knowing
Pastors, and Teachers; yea honest virtuous emulation in ingenuous spirits, will
render almost every Member a Doctor.

This is seemingly a matter of great charge; therefore before I proceed, I will
see how charges are to be born, raised, etc. And the relief of Commonwealths in
excessive burdens of people.

How all the Charges of the Commonwealth, Fees, and Fines, etc. are to be
Assessed and raised, and by what Rule.
And the ways to ease Nations when grown over-numerous.
I Know that many will say this is good in Speculation, but the Practice is
difficult, yea some will say impossible; for you cannot get all men of one mind
to it; others that it is against Privilege to enforce children from the
Parents Tuition, who being Guardians by Nature, the Law will not, may not,
admit any Rule to bar his Right?

Others, This is a matter requiring great and vast expense, and how shall it be
raised.

To the first I answer; If the Magistrate has power to make the Law, then duty
ought to subject all minds to unity in obedience.

To the second I answer, That this is so far from dispriviledging, that it is
the highest, yea the top stone of Liberty; I dare not say it is not possible to
abuse or misuse this power; but if rightly used, it is the extent of
Privilege; for may a Magistrate make a Law to keep mad men's children, to
educate Idiots, Lunaticks, and the like, and dispose their goods, to the
necessary use of their Family, which all Laws of Nature and Nations allow?

Who art thou then Quaeriest? if thou do it thy self, thou will grant that
must be by allowed means and lawful ways.

I say not That there cannot be just causes of Negation, but I say Submit to
just things in their Seasons, it is your duty; and deny unjust ones when time
of trial comes, that is your duty also. This takes not away your Guardianship
of Nature, but makes your load lighter, especially when and where it is
greatest; for the most poor and ignorant are most like to brable and wrangle
such intendments; for the charge, I confess its great; but the great Let will
be, if you settle this aright, the rich must pay for the education of the poor,
and the barren of them that have children.

For I can allow nothing of a Rate but by an equal pound Rate, and that on all
the estates of all persons, and that not only for Wars but for the poor; for
maintenance of Ministers, yea for Bridges, Causywayes, Highwayes, all public
Meeting-places, and that both for Divine and Civil affairs; if you settle it no
higher then Counties at first, it may do something; but in a young or begun
State, it is requisite to cast all into a lump; were Righteousness obvious in
the disposers, it would easily be assented to.

But now the fear is, and Objections are, if you do thus, the Parliament men
will look to distribution of parts most unequally; and they that are best
friended shall have the best proportion, though they have least need.

As now in general Leavies, The Towns and Counties are most free or burdened,
as they have active Parliament men, Committee men and Justices of the Peace to
stand by them.

Therefore first it is requisite that each man show forth integrity in his
actions, cast away selfishness; own in deeds what you profess; be not deceived,
God cannot be mocked; The Heathens at the preaching of Jesus, yea the Wise men,
they that used curious Arts, brought their Books of great price and burnt them;
come and do likewise with your advantageous interests of all sorts; you are all
a Nation without scruple, though no National Church. But you object further:

This Nation has lost its Politic Rule, it is overspread with multitudes of
men, nay multitudes of poor; so that to take care for the educating of all
these, is, you say, wholly unfeazable.

To this I say, That no Nation, if not plagued with War or Diseases, but
naturally it will grow over-numerous.

Now the Magistrate Supreme ought truly to know the contents of his Territory,
and be as able to lay out the possible subsistence of his Subjects, as the wise
Grasier, to know how many beasts will be depastured in such a ground, or how
much seed will sow one Acre.

These are the Mysteries of wise Regiments, which few Princes or Magistrates
now adays, if at any time will study, but it is their duty; for from not well
considering these things, Nations which might in ordinary course live quiet,
being grown over populous, whereby the due care of inferior Magistrates is
obstructed, they grow loose and lazy, then swarve into crimes;

Then complain of neglects of duty of Magistrates which is evident; then
interest gains head, these make parties, and then the Sat is either embroiled
or altered.

Therefore if the Princes will in the use of the wisdom God has given them to
Rule by, Rule well and safely, they must once every seven years number their
people; if the Accidents, I must so call them, of Plague, War, Famine, etc.
has not done it; and either by opening a fit way publicly known of easing
their Counties burden, by settling them in an other County; or if all Counties
be full, by transporting them into an other Country avoid this danger.

This Act of Numeration well used, will take off the jealousy to what end such
matters tend, and the well and carefully providing for the Colonies will
encourage Adventurers; This will enlarge a Nation infinitely; and if well
carried on, will by just means so settle Christian interest, that great, if not
universal, will be the propagation of the Gospel.

Now we send away Rogues; then you may send away Preachers, Teachers, Scholars,
Masters of Prudence, in respect of Christian and Civil knowledge.

This fitted, you see visibly your charge cannot be so insupportable; you look
at the Commonwealths corruptions, as now wholly sick, wholly defiled, this
frights you; but let your speculations mount higher; it is not Vtopianisme, it
is Christian wise order; all you that look for Christ's Reign upon earth, labor
after it.

I bid you not sit down by this, this is rational, yours is divine, this may
be, it has been, yours may and is to be prayed and attended for patiently; and
if it heightens you in the active part of more exemplary conversation, who will
oppose it, let him first live above you, and then teach you, not upbraid your
opinion.

But surely all the Taxes, Charges, Levies, Payments ought all to be set,
assessed, and paid according to one set Rate; so that each poor honest Country
man may immediately resolve his payment, and in case of Refusal, the Officer
may know how to leavy it, namely by distress; and all to have one time, and
till that time be past, the Magistrate ought not to issue out his Warrant, and
then upon a Warrant the Magistrate superior to be sued, not the Officer for
levying it; for no reason he should be questioned or molested (much less undone
as now) for executing the commands of his Superior; for it is agreed the
inferior Officer in legal Administration ought, and so may act, not question;
otherwise each Officer might delay; and therefore it is justly constituted, if
he denies and takes upon himself the knowledge of the Law; if he mistakes he is
highly finable; and his Fine, and all other Fines, and the Fees, and Salaries
belonging to all public Officers, ought to be so Assessed and leavied, etc.
And where no distress is apparent, that is, no goods in the house, be they
whose they will, or denial, and they either delay or by denial, imprisonment
till payment, if able to pay.

I must in this case also remember, That it is fit that no person as no place
be infranchised from payments; for if one may be, all may be, except only as
necessity enforces, and then to endure no longer then the time: Kings and
Officers have made great advantage of these unjustices, to the insupportable
damage of the Nation, and ought speedily to be rectified; and all Grants,
Charters, Usages, and Customs to that end to be void.

So have some Lords of Manors, holding originally of the Crown, as it is
called, as of the Duchy of Lancaster, got such privileges as they are called,
which ought not to be, nor may by just Law; for that such privileges are
dispriviledges to the whole Community, opening a door to injustice and
irregularity, and consequently to bondage; for all may be freed from charges,
taxes, services, and the like, as well as one; And to say it is to be presumed
the Supreme Magistrate will not do it, is vain; they have abused themselves,
and many subjects much, who have paid largely forsuch grants; and after the
Princes have been forced to plead they were mistaken in their Grants, and the
poor men have been left remediless, for their purchase money.

In the last place it is fit that all visible personal estates be rated as they
appear; and people visibly rich in Apparel, House, Household Stuff, Diet, etc.
be esteemed as they esteem themselves.

Now the end of all Fines ought to be the defraying of the public Charges of
the Nation, City, or County, and the Offices there respectively; and to make
these certain by composition, must be as experience has manifested the inlet
to greater corruption and abuses; and though other Ages having seen the evils
of the old way of composition-evil, deserted that, and therefore gave Fees at
large, presuming they would take their salary, and fees besides; yet it is
manifest it was the evil of bad men; for the other is the best Law; and punish
strictly, and fear not, you shall have Justice exact.

The Magistrates Power and Duty as to ordering of Families.
THis Power has diverse objects, as between the Husband and Wife, Parent and
Child, Master and Servant, and so contrarily, and also the Master of the
Family and Strangers.

It is very requisite to be very wary in the head Law; the Lord God only gave
the power to the husband generally; Now the exercise of that power in the
Jewish state was Tyrannical and absolute, and ended generally in divorce; and
what needed any inferior Law where the head Law was so Magisterial?

But this being either obsolete in it self, or made so, or both (and really the
Lord Christ's words intimate no separation, except only for Adultery; and that
exposition is the foundation to many as they suppose justly not to make
Adultery death; for if so, what needed divorce, but this is omitted here) and
we proceed.

Let us see what is the Law of the Gospel; truly it teaches a duty and
obedience beyond what the rudiments of the world enable unto: Our Common Law
seems to me in something too divine as I may say; As for example, it will not
admit what we evidently see ( viz.) that a man cannot rule his wife; there are
women which will offend the Law against the will of the Husband; and indeed it
is visibly not in his power to help; they will not only sell and give his
goods, but break, spoil, mis-spend, etc. They will some beat the Husband, some
cruelly mis-use the children, etc. and no way to punish them, but the good man
is answerable for all.

I know the wretchedness of many men, but there is a little weak Law against
them; Let us also have some Law public for the women with that tenderness is
fitting to conjugal Societies; but there must be an aw in some one or more
Magistrates, even to bridle such exorbitances and neglects on either side, and
make due a provision in all cases, and that wisely and speedily; or Divorces
(indeed as usual) will be multiplied, and from thence Fornications and
Adulteries clandestine and private, make what Laws you can, though a legal
divorce may be waved.

Next as to children, there is no due aw and respect of or in some, nay many
Parents; the duty of the sense of education is wholly lost; there is nothing
but rude and exorbitant looseness; not only Parents curse Children, or provide
not duly for them; but Children the Parents; and for want of a head Rule, no
question is made more of this then violences in any other relations.

Now in case of such Rule, it is fit to proceed by a more particular Law; for
if upright knowing zealous Judges be not, there is no right; therefore it is
fit to make these Laws Oeconomical more particular then others.

Again, as to Parents neglecting the due provision for their family, the
Magistrate is wholly beaten out of it; The rule ought to be, that the
Magistrate might take cognizance, what a man can earn if employed; next that he
and his be set on work; and thirdly, that he does not, nor shall mispend it,
but that the house-rent and all be carefully discharged; and then where labor
fayles, to be supplied by the public Purse.

Next for servants, not each one that will to entertain servants, unless
visibly able to maintain and employ them; for otherwise there will be many
sluts and more Thieves, with multitudes of Receivers, which the Law can take no
notice of.

This Law must extend to all sorts of servants which have not estates to
maintain themselves visibly; otherwise there will be from the neglect in one, a
visible carelessness toward all.

Let no servant under a penalty be hired, but with a public inrolment in the
Town or Precinct Parishional, or otherwise; however neither dismissed, or to
go into another Precinct without License of an Officer in Writing; this is the
Law of England at present; only carelessness of Magistrates admitted pride to
grow too fast in servants, and then all was omitted, and this is a main inlet
to Confusion.

It is also fit strictly, by a sworn Officer, to keep the Records of the Birth
of Children; for the Age is now grossly mistaken, and no ascertained way of
probation, with a small fee, as a groat to the State to pay the Officer for
enrolment, so much for search, so much a Certificate.

For that of Strangers, it is to settle a little better the power, not only of
the Master of the Family in general, but particularly of those who either by
profession, are Inholders, or others like them, upon other accidental
occasions, who now are by some persons made servants to their Lusts, and have
no power to bridle exorbitancy that they can know; for to speak once for all,
it is not enough some wise learned book-man knows all these Laws, or if all the
so called Lawyers did; the Christian Law must plainly and perspicuously hold
forth to every man his certain known and assured duty and power in their
respective places; or the guilt, be it blood or otherwise, I fear lies
especially, if not wholly, at the Supreme Magistrates door.

Whether the Magistrate may appoint the Ages of Marriage?
And to whom the work of the Marriage belongs properly?
THe Government of the Family being settled, let us see how they part out of the
Family; and that is commonly by Marriage; It is agreed, the parents did at
their own Liberties dispose their children; by natural reason (corrupted I
conceive) they against Nature exposed their children, not only to the next
hand of man that took it up by a settled place for that purpose, where they that
had not the blessing of children of their own bodies, might take them off
others hand that had many, which has reason in it, and undeniable; but their
exposings were to mere fortune, as they called it, that is, let the will of the
Gods be done, let the Beasts devour it, hunger or cold or both starve it, or
the merciful hand sustain it and nourish it; but these are wholly rejected with
us; the way is to sustain them till fit for labor or Marriage.

Now that of labor is generally hinted before, none may be brought up idle.

Now for Marriage, there is much to be said; The general plea is, the
Magistrate has no power to set an age for Marriage; The reason is generally,
that there are diverse times wherein Nature works with men and women; and to
prescribe one certain rule for all, is unfit.

Next, it is the Parents duty to take care of that.

Lastly, the gift of Continency is of God, and not of man; and the Magistrate
has no power; the first and last I shall couple together, and answer them thus.

It is truth, diverse men and women are of diverse tempers and Constitutions, and
therefore one time will not agree to all; but surely the matter is not whether
all men or women shall marry at one age, but that there is a duty upon the
Magistrate to preserve the vigor of the Nation by seasonable Marriages; does
it not much more concern us to breed a generation of men fit to manage beasts,
then to breed beasts fit for management?

This natural similar reason is of some force; surely there is too much
looseness in this our Law, to allow Copulation at twelve in the woman, and
fourteen in the man.

Now the disquisition of the other part concerning the gift of Continency will
resolve the whole; for I pray you how is the Law of Liberty and Continency to
be pleaded? may the Child marry without the good liking of the Parent? Can the
Child plead to him that he has not the gift of Continency? or do we rather
know it is the loosnesse of Government, the evil of idle unclean education both
in young men and Maids, that inflames affections? The young ones are ignorant
of what is sin, and the eldest often, and they fall into contagious offenses
each with other, before they understand the rules of wise Reason, being led
away of natural appetite; and not withstanding all incentives, the father is
allowed to dissent from the Marriage of his son or daughter; and in case of
disobedience, to chastise with strokes or disinherison, or both, the son; and
it is done to the daughter; But should the son that had stolen the daughter
bring an Action, or the married son, could he justify, or not, by the Law?

I profess the case is difficult; for if lawful, why beaten? if not lawful, why
may not the Magistrate set the rule of restraint to Natural appetite as well
as the Parent? the public as the private Magistrate? for by paternal power and
Jurisdiction he enforces.

Now the Christian Magistrate therefore upon the whole may and ought to bridle
this beast in man by a discreet Moderate Law, to restrain the Lusts of proud,
rich, lazy, idle, and so lustful young ones;

And take of the itch of mean ones, by work, and labor of the body and mind,
or both, with slender diet, and holy exercises, Divine and Spiritual breathings
after God, in the sense of our own weakness, will as well restrain exorbitant
affections in Christians, as the love of Philosophy, or the fear of the gods,
so called, could Heathens; Let us not therefore eat to lust and live in
idleness, and then we must marry, O we burn.

It is as lawful from that reason to have many wives, many husbands, or
diversity of men, or women, in the accidents of sickness, long journeys, and
the like of yoakfellows.

The Modern Age is wholly loose, through pretense of Christian Liberty; that is
the undoing destructive principle; and it seems by many who out of zeal against
humane wanderings, go about to eclipse the glimpses of divine inlightenments, to
be fit totally to be rejected; but both must stand: a just Liberty with a due
restraint, that Justice with Righteousness be in all.

Now as it is rational, that the public Magistrate may temper the liberty of
the child, not to marry till a season; so after that season to mitigate the
Rigidity of the parent is as necessary, many parents being extreme and cruel,
forcing them to marry whom and how they please, or not admitting Marriage at
all.

I know the difficulty of these businesses has discouraged, but Christian
piety ought to advance endeavors in this kind, yea in some cases to portion
moderately children dutiful and obedient in all other things, and permit them
their own choyces, if nothing can be objected on the parents part but mere will.

It is also fit to resolve the degrees of Marriage; for late Liberty has made
Quaeries concerning a just and Regular Law.

And to see all this done, the Magistrate is the only fit man.

The Act is merely civil; it is old Popery acknowledging Marriage a Sacrament,
that only continues it in the Clergy so called; Therefore let no Marriage be
solemnized, but before one or more public Magistrates thereto appointed,
enrolled or recorded in a book of purpose, with their hands, and of the Parent,
if living, or Certificate under hand and Seal of the Magistrate where the
parties live; otherwise of the Guardian, unless they be of such an Age as is
fixed by the Magistrate, or they be married by Magisterial Authority, that is,
though the Parent before refuse, having no just cause; always resolved, that
if a Magistrate offends, or Rasures be and alterations, that the punishments be
exceeding high.

Who ought to be Guardians, Tutors, etc.
SUrely in this the so called Law of England, Common Law I mean, as
before-said, provides excellently above the Civil General of Nations, so called
Christian, by placing the next in blood to whom the inheritance cannot descend
to be Guardian; and the duty of his Account is well regulated by the other part
of the so called Law of England, namely the Statutes.

But the Heir in Capite, or by Knight Service, being in Ward till 21. the Heir
in Soccage but till 14. the Heir in Burg. English but till he can measure
cloth, tell Money, etc.

These Ages and Tenures breed confusion, and difficulty can a plain honest
illiterate man know his duty; therefore let one time be for all Ages, viz. not
under 21. And till then let them not dispose by will or otherwise, nor ought be
paid out by the Guardian but necessary expenses, according to the proportion of
the Estate at a fixed rate, not above.

Let the Guardian be appointed by a sworn and also answerable Magistrate for
the value; And the discharge of that Guardian, or any Guardian by Nature or
Nurture, as to any estate accruing to the Infant under age, so they be visibly
responsal at the time, ought to be as good as any man's of full estate; and as
to them that are visibly unable, or evidently debaucht, indebted, etc. then the
person or persons that are to pay, ought to pay it to the public Treasure of
the City or County, which ought to that purpose be settled, to be paid at full
age to the infant; and in the mean time 5. l. per cent. and no more, or four,
as the chief Magistrate shall see reason to enact.

And for successions in inheritances to real Estate, let it be in case of the
death of any brother, etc. as the Magistrate shall agree, whether all to the
next of the whole blood, or the son of the second wife to succeed before the
daughters of the whole blood.

Or in case of division, a double portion to the Eldest, and the rest equally
divided; the division to be made by three persons, one chosen by the Eldest; a
second by the rest; they two to choose a third man; and for personal estates all
to be equally divided, and the division as to value to be settled, who ever be
entrusted to the ordering of the matter before ought done, besides burial of
the dead only decently, and paying of debts.

Whether it be requisite to have Cities, Town Corporate, etc. And they to have
Privileges and Laws; And whether all ought to have like Privileges, and the
best way of trial of Laws, or probation of Laws, and Bylaws?
AFter the youth be grown to Age, they are to become sharers in Trusts, and
Duties, and Offices of the Commonwealth, some in the Countries, some in the
Cities; for the evils of Depredations, Thefts, Roberies, etc. did at first
necessarily cause men to gather into Societies and Companies; and the same end
of safety in time of War, to have strong places to retire to, is still; and the
same necessity did enforce Laws diverse from the other places of the Country;
here were Taxes for repairing of Walls, Bridges, Defenses, Watchings, Wardings,
Pavings, cleansing of Streets, Common-Sewers, and the like, which were certain;
hence the taking people infected with the Plague, etc. from their own
dwellings, and removing them into places specially appointed according to their
quality; hence men are liable to Laws of conveniencie, temporary, or ought to
be, and that for peace sake, which saves life absolutely, healths sake, and
trades sake, which are but comforts of, and for well-living; but most assuredly
Cities being necessary and Towns,

It is necessary, and of necessity to maintain and allow a necessary distinct
Law within the Precincts, not as Franchises against Law, but of diverse Laws
according to the necessity of the place and the trades there driven.

Now the Laws of Cities, etc. though they must, in the regards aforesaid be
diverse, yet in respect of their proper nature, as bodies corporate, they ought
all prefixedly and positively to have those Laws set and known, and a due
enforcing power in a speedy way; for the standing out of a man in a tedious
suit, cools all obedience, as Experience manifests clearly.

Therefore draw and settle the Government of these places by a head Law; the
Charter-Grant is but the foundation of Bribery and Extortion, Nurcery of
Prerogative and Arbitrary Liberty, and fit to be avoided; Experience has so
evidenced the Truth, that I cease to contend, and only assert.

This head Law must distinguish Inn-land, and Sea-Towns and Cities; for the
other Laws respectively, they are communicable generally one to another; only
the particular Regulation of Trades, which must have special power well settled
to regulate the exorbitances of the Artificers particularlys.

And to that end they must, both Cities, Towns, and Companies, have power to
make Bylaws which are to be approved; Now to that one word, to the probation
of Laws and Bylaws, which being respectively for the Nation, Cities, Towns and
Companies of public concernment, and what are of particular use, may have a
general influence;

Therefore it is requisite, after a defect Seen, to propound the defect and
remedy, which the then chief in Trusts respectively, for City, Town, or
Company, think fit to the City, Town, or Company; That being done, the same to
be promulged for a Law, if allowed; but not so to be received for a short set
time, during which any Citizen, Towns-man, or Artificer, is to bring his
Reasons in Writing against that Law, and propounding a better, or offering
expedients to remedy visible evils, and only leave their Reasons; Then is the
Supreme Officer to cause them to be searched, read, and debated, and if great
difficulty arise, to take the opinion of the Judges in Circuit appointed, who
are to determine the difficulty, or the Law, as appointed by the Magistrate to
stand; if they find difficulty, then to state the Case, and present it to the
Representative of the Nation, who are to discuss and allow the same; always es
provided, that for Regulation sake, from one month after need seen of a Law,
and promulged by hanging up openly in several the eminent parts or places of
the City, Town, that Law to stand though not so good, till another Law be
established by them or the Supreme Magistrate; for better an evil Law then none
at all.

No Law after once established to be questioned by particular men, which
enervates not only the particular Law or Privilege, but tends to confusion;
and as no City nor Town, so no company ought to be without due Regulation, nor
any person, but in and of some Company, Decree, or Order settled and known.

Whether, and how Customs are to be admitted as Law?
CUstom has necessarily been accounted part of our Law, and that rightly as to
the Rule; namely, That no Custom is good unless the same be reasonable; yet
this admitting of Custom among Christians is of the profane Apostate Church,
and Commonwealth; for by this Rule the whole Family, Township, City, County,
Nation, may, as we have done, live all days of our life under evil, wicked and
pernicious Customs.

Therefore the Magistrate ought to admit nothing to be pleaded as a Custom,
until allowed by certain Judges, who allowing, or disallowing the Custom as
reasonable, that is justly to be used, by not only men but Christians; the
same is equal to, and is indeed the Law, temporary, or settled; for a certain
limit, or more generally, or universal, as the nature of the thing is; this
will avoid the ingendring of all sorts of corrupt, envious, and self-seeking
Customs, and cool our greedy, devilish upholding of them by manifest and open
perjuries, and the like.

Then that all particular Customs of particular places be inrowled under a
sworn Officer, and published in Print, and a Book kept in every Town or
Precinct.

What is the Magistrates duty in all Orders of Government and necessaries
thereto; And first, whether the Christian Magistrate may admit War?
THe Magistrate ought to provide for the well-being of the Nation, or any part
thereof repectively according to his trust; so let us consider the evils which
may disturb this well-being, and that arising

First from open war; secondly, from private force; thirdly, from deceit or
fraud; and lastly, from difficulty: Let us a little discourse therefore of war;
and whether Christians may war?

Surely, the Church, that is the Congregation of Saints are militant on earth;
but that opposition being against spiritual enemies, Satan, lust, pomps,
vanities, etc. are not the subject of our discourse; against these there is no
Quaere; they must war; and these are enemies both outward and inward; and
though the children of God will not, cannot war among themselves, yet there are
false brethren, such as go out, because they were never in; Heretics so called,
Deceivers, Liars, and all such as are cast out of the Church.

Now for these I still humbly conceive, that we must look at the nature of the
offense; for if it be merely mental, opinative, and internal from the souls
mistakings, but not degenerating in actual scandal; the weapons that are to be
used against these, are merely spiritual, which are mighty to the beating down
of all the strong holds of sin, and overthrowing every thing that is not of
God; and against such, I suppose no outward force, yea though you suppose or
believe them firmly to be Heretics, may or ought to be used, so as they
disturb not the Civil Peace.

But a case will enlighten somewhat; Suppose one does believe, as many are said
to do, the abolishing of the Sabbath, may the Magistrate enforce obedience?

To this I say, that he that holds the abolishing of the Sabbath, held a
Sabbath was and then must acknowledge the power whereby that Sabbath was, and
so the end to which it was directed, which was the ease of the creature from
corporal labor, and for his edification in the service of God in the Spirit;
This gives no loose to any Jocundrie that day, no Sporting, no nor idle
Tatling, Walkings, but the Spirits Recreations in the Contemplations of
Divinity ought to be the repasts of the Soul.

Then assuredly the Magistrate may hinder this, and cause keeping within doors,
and punish offenders; Therefore let not the Gates of a City be opened that day,
but to such as pass too and fro, and are known, and that to partake in divine
and spiritual services, and that not above a Sabbath days journey; and agree
that, but dilate not twelve months what is a Sabbath days journey; but within
the private Family there is no enforcing of the Magistrate; that is, he seems
not to be bound to it, nor is his power evident.

No, the better way to know the care and diligence of the Master of the Family,
is, to appoint some men, not as Church Officers, but Civil Inquisitors of
Knowledge, who may see the progress in Knowledge of such as are out of the
Schools and Colleges, and punish, or cause them to be punished at first; and
afterward the Parents and Masters; and not to admit to places of Magistracy,
such as are ignorant themselves; so neither those that do not carefully educate
and instruct their Family, whereby they may in their season become serviceable
in the Congregation of the faithful.

Now this war of Heretics and profane persons being over; let us see what is
to be done to those without the Church.

I say to these, That these also as the Religion wherein they were educated,
are to be permitted their Conscience without force; suppose them Papists, and
suppose them Idolators, suppose them Turks, and suppose them Heathens; for
unless by the pure light of Nature they must or may see it, that is, it be
evident and perspicuous; I take it, Reason, Divine or Humane, corrects not,
notwithstanding that Parable of the Servant that knew not his Masters Will and
was to be beaten.

Now this is evident; for among all the clashings amongst opinions until now,
where was it not, that every one strove only to free themselves from the power
of others to be enforced, yet would enforce others? but now I take it to be the
infinite Mercy of the Lord to reveal this thing unto us that see it, how many
do not; that is they can see nothing but confusion accompany it.

Now as to the other part of Papistry, though claimed as part of Religion, viz.
That the Pope is Head, etc. and may dispose Kingdoms, dissolve Leagues, Oaths,
and remit obedience to powers, and that because he has said it, there is no
faith to be kept with Heretics: All or any of these being contrary to the
peace and safety of a State, may be enforcedly renounced, and the parties
denying justly banished; I say not their goods confiscate; for we know many do
conscienciously hold these things, and with great strength of Natural Reason,
as much as maintains the greatest pretending opinion in this Age, and now in
contest with us; And in case of Resistance War is lawful.

So that in brief I take it, War is lawful against the Enemies of the Church,
Spiritually with Spiritual weapons, against the carnal enemies with corporal
weapons of Banishment in case of destructive errors to peace and civil quiet;
and warlike force, where the State and Nation cannot otherwise in Prudence
secure it self for the entering the others Country or Limits.

First, To make that the Seat of the war, where other things are clear, the
Law of Nations which admit it, will well setle it.

What Arms or Armies he ought to use, whether his own People or Strangers?
ASsuredly, the necessity of Arms being preservation; it were indiscretion to
put that strength into a Strangers keeping; Experience has proved it unsafe;
and Religion will count it unlawful to employ an other about that which we
count simply evil.

Next, only to keep the people from delight in blood, it must be Civil or
Divine Knowledge must do that; indeed there is a shadow of exception in the
Law, which prohibites Butchers to be of a Jury of Life and Death; but that was,
I suppose, because most of them were of mean and servile condition, and so
ignorant; for assuredly the killing of beasts makes not a man careless of the
life of a man in a judicial way; it was the office of Gods High Priests; though
it may in the way of a particular quarrel; next Soldiers for never so many
battles are not debarred the being of Juries.

How the Militia ought to be settled.
ALL Humane Laws have their settlements, and of themselves naturally devolve
into Error; so that if we eye all the wise settlements of Nations in this or
ought else, it is naught worth now: The Jewish, Roman, Grecian, Egyptian, or
other old or Modern; the foundation yet of most of these, being originally
Regal and absolute, held one course to engage, as our William so called the
Conqueror did the great men to an absolute dependence upon him, and by them to
vassalize the residue.

I know many godly honest people see no such thing; I believe it, God gives
gifts variously; but most certain it is such dependancies are the Nurses of
Feuds and Jealousies; If therefore you will setle the Militia aright, you must
suppose your Nation or Jurisdiction at terms of Unity among themselves, under
no great and eminent civil broyl; for then none on the adverse party to them in
power, or justly suspected, that is openly opposing (by purse or person) can be
for a time entrusted; but otherwise the power muff be in the dependence in the
Supreme Magistrate, and their active power by his general Law.

That is, That all within their Limit, from twenty six, or twenty eight, etc.
to sixty, seventy, or etc. be chargeable to the War; that is to say, They that
have not estate to such a value, to be in inferior services, as Pyoners, etc.
And of this let the inferior Magistrate take the ordering care.

Next, All that are of such an estate, to be charged Foot-Arms: All of such an
estate Horse-Arms, that is, Dragoons, and Light Horse, as the estate is.

Now as to this, and to all Rates, it must be known that there will be
multitudes of Quaeries arising; some have great estates fit in proportion to
find ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred Horse; some in respect of
great and vast real, others vast personal estates; some have their lands lie
altogether; some dispersed; some live in their own, some in Cities; some have
great charges of children, poor friends, and decayed, some in debt, and some
have granted out Annuities, Rents, etc. and have outwardly a fair visible
estate, bur indeed and really small.

Now in all these there ought to be a Rule of proportion with safety to the
whole; for first, it must be agreed, that the Commonwealth consists of real and
personal estate; the real estate House and Lands, the personal estate Goods and
Money.

Now this is certain, that all Land must have stock, all Trades must have
stock, it is visible; therefore the rule of Charges of all sorts must be the
Land and the Stock, and that whether in City or Country.

Now for discharge of this, it must of necessity be either theirs whose visibly
it appears to be, or others.

For Lands, in which there is so much more then Turkish Knavery, if it were
inrowled wisely and justly, it would prevent much; but due punishment would
take it all away, while impunity breeds offenses, that controversy, that gain
to the Officer; and therefore is mercy, etc. cried up so.

This Land, and this Stock is the subsistence of the Nation; I know Corruption
fears discovery of estate; for either they are rich, and would conceal it, or
poor, and fear undoing: Now to nourish either of these corrupt interests, is
destructive; the last is most to be eyed, but least to be regarded; for though
some good come of it, yet it is the most dangerous; for from hence comes all
the stock of Bankquerupts, and the sudden undoings of many esteemed rich men;
and indeed it is most unchristian and utterly unlawful for a man knowing
himself poor to borrow or buy at a day for what he visibly and certainly sees
not he can pay, though such may have thriven.

Thefore allow no discharge, either for rates of Assessment of Moneys or Arms,
contrary to the visible estate, but with certain knowledge of the owner; only
this is fit, that for Assessments for the visible personal estate abatement be
per rate as for land by the hirer (all the Objections are answered before as to
personal estate;) and for real, let it be charged as it lies in the Counties.

I say not in the Towns; it is best leave that at the discretion of the
Commissioners, or Judges for Arms, unless a general settlement by a standing
National Law be; only let such rents, etc. as are going out bear a
proportionate charge of horse or foot respectively, as the said Judges shall
under Hand and Seal appoint and Record in their Muster-Book.

For to say it once for all; all these Jurisdictions ought to be settled, and to
be the Records of the County.

Now I presume you will not find a better way for the present settlement, then
the owner to be at the charge of the Horse and Arms, the Tenant to find the
keeping of it, laboring him reasonably, so as always to be ready for service;
and if he dies not by negligence, but sickness, or in Military service, the
owner to find another, otherwise the Tenant, and the Training service by the
Tenant also; for all service more then for mere Trayning service, ought to be
the expense and public charge of the County at least, if not National, which
is more just; then one County shall not bear all the burden of war and charge
also, as is too frequent; and for price of horse, lest the owner and Tenant
differ, let a set price be so much for a Dragoon, so much a horse of service,
and this price to be set yearly at such a day.

But finding in diverse places where the lands lie, will ease some part of the
just doubt of the great men's over-powring the County by purse and power, but
nothing will avoid it wholly, except it be enacted, that no one man find above
6, 8, 10, etc. horses or Arms; and that for every one that he is in proportion
of estate chargeable above that number, let him pay so much yearly as shall be
settled to the public purse, or for the ease of some particular service; but
better all to come to the public purse either of the County, or of the Nation.

Next, all Arms are to be owned the Nations or Publicks, yet to be in the hands
of the particular persons charged, unless dispriviledged. Next, these Arms must
be employed in War by fit men, and even to Christians it may be so requisite
(if it be not simply unlawful) to administer a Military Oath of obedience to
the Officer, according to the Tenor of the Commission of the Officer, or
General, of faithfulness in his trust; for though just men and virtuous are
true for honesty sake, yet the evil will not, but the fear and conscience of an
oath will reach far with the worst of men; And so to the Soldier respectively.

Let this, and the reason of the disuse be well Quaeried.

Some presume the best way of settlement is to charge so many Arms only upon
the Township, whether horse or foot, or laborers in the ways or carriages,
and all to bear their equal proportion; now this generally may be good, but the
particular rule will vary every moment; either or any of the ways may do, so
the Commissioners as they are Judges, do justly; for all Laws as Governments
are not so much good or bad by Institution, as by Execution; to this end it is
fit as most think, to give a general Oath of faithfulness in their trusts,
although they agree it true, that the generalty of men are just for
Righteousness sake, oath or no oath, they are the same; And so on the contrary;
but in a Commonweal, in the State that England is now in, it is fit to make
Laws of this nature, probationers for a time in each County, and by due returns
of what is done (which is so required, but neglected, for that in all things
its noted only from all Acts and Ordinances, and Instructions earnestly
required for a day or two, and then rejected, which is a great oversight in
them supreamly concerned; for it is visible, all men are by this beaten out of
the road of settled obedience, and spin out time to attend the issue; and that
falling out as of old, they will never be forward to service after; so for
service in Arms, the forward appear, the other slack; so in Assesments upon the
true value, the forward pay to the utmost penny, the other half, no punishment
but talking, no, deal gently; thus is all sense of obedience to Powers and
Authorities destroyed by the Powers themselves, and their self-ended Agents,
seeking to make parties; for one such time and person-server shall in this
corrupt Age have more followers then 20. honest men.) But I return to my task,
If the supreme Power have due returns, let them see and judge out of the
several experiments made, what is fittest to be the general head Rule, and way
of the charge of Arms; Its visible in our condition at present, the generality
of the Nation are unfit to be entrusted; but for accidental evils there can no
particular remedy be well prescribed: the general Rule wisely executed must be
the top stone under God of the safety. Magazines in the several Hundreds for
the public Arms of the Hundred, or the chief Town adjoining, or such head
Town, or Town of defense in a County, to be the Magazine of the County: these
have all their objections, yea in a settled state, all or any may be useful, and
in a distracted one may prove destructive: now the difficulty is but to find
out the best as we must say for the present temper of the Nation: for its
certainly true, to settle unity, love and peace, and root out the jealousies
and acerbities which are risen in a Nation; its fit to have all the same
general Law; the Supreme Magistrate ought so to administer Law, that it be the
same to all his Subjects. To follow the crochets of Machivilian Politicians by
transplanting soldiers, is to nourish absolute dependences, such as free
Commonwealths explode, and only raise to an eminency of power to do good or
evil at lust, which is tyrannical; no; a necessary dependence is all here
hinted, which though some may extend farther then others, yet while its rule is
not absolute, nor its constant practice, there is no just ground for exception;
by this its plain, the Laws must be equal, that is, respecting time, place,
person, estate etc. and so universal; now for the leading and conducting of
these, whether to place the whole under a general Command, absolute and settled,
of a known Military Officer, or of a Civil Officer, as now the Sheriff; and the
other to be settled by the Supreme power, as need is, is worthy enquiry, yet
easy to be determined; for if it be looked into, both will be seen necessary;
for the settled Law of England always allowed the power of the County to
suppress Riots, etc. and against obstinate offenders and oppugners of the
Public peace; therefore the chief Judges in the County must have an Officer
duly constituted, who shall see to the execution of the Laws; next to give the
ancient Colonel or the Col. of Horse in each County the chief trust in order,
reserving special power of making an extraordinary Officer in chief, is (while
Commissioners for the Militia are a Court resident) the most (evidently) safe
way. Now we are come to consider a necessary engagement, and that is the pay of
Officers and Soldiers of the Trained Soldiers of the Nation. To this its
easily answered, if in actual service pay is necessary, the doubt is only in
time of peace; now not to distinguish of peace as settled peace, and disturbed
peace, intervalls of peace and war, or outbreakings or fears; I say in the most
settled times, its fit the Officer have some settled pay, be it more or less, as
the Supreme power thinks fit. I shall not enlarge concerning that; what the age
of Soldiers is, is not so needful; ours is the best way that requires an able
man of body, and of this the Commissioners are absolute Judges. Its not much
requisite with us what rank a Horsman be of, especially if the State be mixed
Monarchy, so called, or Republical; for honors engage not to a dependence,
that is, should not but as the Law requires.

For offenses done in the field, and as Soldiers, let them be tried by the
Commissioners for the Militia, without any form of complaint legal or in
writing, that is so necessitated, and let the Marshal see the Judgment
executed.

For all things which now the Heralds exercise in Office, and which the Lord
Marshal did take cognizance of, they ought properly to come to the
Commissioners thereto appointed in the County; and that for the Militia is the
fittest; for Honors arose from Arms, and with them let the Records of Honors
remain.

The Lists of them enrolled Soldiers;

Those authorirized to make and fell Arms, Powder and Ammunition of all sorts;

Let them also have the sole power of watching and warding, but by a like
head-rule of a proportionate charge, and let them have a set way by a joint
consent at Sessions, or as is by the Supreme Magistrate appointed to raise
moneys to pay, in case of necessity, such as are employed by them for the
necessary peace of the County.

Let them appoint Superadvisors of Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, etc. and let them
have their Licenses from them, if allowed by the Justices at Sessions, and you
may make a Reservation of a Rent to the State to defray charges; but to admit
that entrance to increasing gain, is a visible in let to all villainy, in
enervating the good Law under color of public benefit, which is most
carefully to be avoided, as the shelter to private knaveries. Lastly, the rule
of punishments, that is the general Law of punishing mutinous refractory and
disobedient Soldiers, and that both in actual service, and also in ordinary
musters and trayning (or better to express it, appearing in Arms) is to be
considered, and some other way thought of, especially for trained Soldiers who
are not in constant pay, then cashiering or taking away of Arms; for the
despising of Arms is yet in mind, and the honor of the trust of Arms is
unknown; it must be corporal punishment, as whipping, with cashiering some
incorrigible, rude, unworthy person, or running the Gantlop, and this by the
judgment upon vote of the Officers of Troop, Company, or Regiment, if the
Regiment be there. Seek not many, but fit soldiers; but look none keep Arms
but those charged or allowed by the Militia or Justices, as now one is fit, if
not of necessity.

I have now but one word to the Commissioners and Officers, and in them to all
Officers of Trust, Judges, and others, be strict in your duties to your
Supreams, and require nothing but just things, and obedience will flow of it
self; it is the Military power that in all alterations of State gives forth the
Rule of Government; from their order is the Nation settled: Reduce therefore
your Discipline to a just and settled Rule, and then each one labor to beget
this opinion in your Soldiery, which is truly a Christian as well as prudent
humane Maxim, That the riches and safety of the Master is in the emulation of
servants; but as that, so this must have a just emulation; and by that the
Army, and so the Commonwealth will be established and preserved; but this
emulation is fit to be a little better known; It consists principally in the
glory of doing good, but that doing good is materially in avoiding or hindering
of evil: I mean they that will faithfully serve the Commonwealth, must not only
keep the Laws themselves out of conscience of their own duty, but also see to,
and as much as in them lies, that is, as lawfully they may in their places
enforce the performance of them by others; the want of which has so disordered
Civil Government, that he that requires or advises but the obedience to the
Law, or a just and conscientious regard thereto, is thought, nay called a
busy-headed fellow, a Roundhead, a pragmatick, self-conceited, shallowbrain'd
fellow; Turks and Heathens will rise up against us. Gent. you it is that must
redeem Authority buried in the ashes of politic mercy, which has destroyed
Kings, and will ruin this Commonwealth ere it has the honor of a settlement,
unless the prudence of power set it on his legs again, with the blessing of the
Spirit of the eternal wisdom, without which all man's labor is in vain. But I
proceed with my intended settlement.

Whether Indictments or Appeals are to be pursued in cause of crime, or both.
HAving done with the due regulation of Arms (which under God are the great
stays and support of men, to assure their peace, quiet, repose and enjoyment
of what God by their friends or labors has vouchsafed them) for I must agree
that the foundation of humane happiness subsists in the providence of the
Almighty, however he uses us as instruments, that is, gives success to our
endeavors thereto. We come now to look at the civil settlement in the
remainder; and first because the criminal part of law is of most and greatest
concernment, as looking at the life of man, I shall therefore look first at
that; now in this the difficulties causing difference are these; in an appeal,
there must and ought to be witness besides him that appeals; for he is the
accuser, and that either in his own right, or as next of kin, but all for
private benefit. Secondly, there the damages are to the party, and it is a
personal thing proper to the complainer, and he may desist when he will, and
compound as he will. The Indictment is at the suit of the supreme Magistrate,
solely for the benefit of the Commonwealth, and the State has all the goods,
and all damages; and the prosecutor, or complainer, is here a witness for the
State, but at his own charge, which is as now used, unjust. The Interest
therefore of the Magistrate and the Subject ought here to be compromised
rationally, for assuredly, if life goes for life, damages are cut off as
unfit, or of unequal value to be rendered for the life of a man; therefore the
heir, or wife, or friend who should bring an appeal, as I conceive, ought to
have no forfeiture; some recompense may be, where the life is lost, as in all
cases of Murders and voluntary considerate killings, and in all appointed
duels, not in heat of blood, especially if for ought the Law gives a remedy
(for great abuses dispunishable by Law, it seems not reasonable) but of this
more after.

Now for to clear this, indeed it is requisite that there be, as is justly
supposed in Law, an Attorney for the State, whether called Clerk of the Crown,
Clerk of the Peace, or what other name you will give him, settled in every
County, who upon a set day each week, by virtue of his place, should receive
all complaints, and that upon oath, himself being duly sworn, and then by and
with the consent and advice of one or more Justices, should frame an appeal
generally, thus: I do challenge you A. for the peace of the Commonwealth, to
answer to B. for the death, wounding, etc. of C. whereof you are accused; and
let B. and another witness make two witnesses; and upon the finding of him
guilty, let him be fined moderately, that is, so that at least a fourth part of
his estate be left him; The like Law also in case of Maym, wounding, etc.
whereof two parts to the party wounded, etc. a third part to the State to bear
all charges (for it is not fit to add charge and loss of time to him that is
before oppressed) in case of life, let life answer life, unless by
misadventure, yet then he must be fined, but not to the party, but to the
State, and that but to a third part of his estate real or personal, to bear
charges; and where the life is lost, the charges must also be apportioned in
like manner. For the leavying this, the way is before set: but for discovery of
estate, there is the difficulty; but in Lands admit no trusts for deceit, nor
uses to cheat, and the estate in the Land will be visible: and take the goods
in possession at the time of death, and all is satisfied that can be expected.

Only let a set time be for Creditors to come and be satisfied; also that the
Commonwealth be satisfied, and the members not ruined, undone, and
impoverished: Thus shall both interests be satisfied, and the multitudes of
legal quarrels by indictments, etc. will be quitted, which have freed many rich
Murderers, Poysoners, etc. and of other offenders multitudes, when there have
been poor prosecutors. That this must be done in the County where the fact is
committed, is owned; Let the transferring him from one County to another, when
taken out of that County, be settled in an easy and speedy way; and that a
Judge be there ready to determine such cases, weekly, if not daily: however to
examine witnesses immediately upon Oath, (which all Justices must have power to
give as they see cause; therefore make wise and honest Justices better then yet
are) and let this be taken as evidence, as far as is credible, and let not
witnesses stay a month, a quarter, a year for Trial, and at unreasonable
charge: and as soon as gone, a Trial; if stay, a flaw in the Indictment, though
the Evidence be plain.

This was Englands old Law; and the reasons are the same; the alteration was
the sweet benefit, not Justice or Righteousness: Why cannot the Justices in
Ordinary in the County, try Felons, Murders and Treasons, as well by a settled
Commission as a Special one: And in all faults, the condition of the fault, and
the quality of the person ought to be observed. In an Amerciament, or Fine, I
would have but one word for all purse-pains; for that is just, and is our
Liberty of old, and now ought to be.

For Murderers of themselves, and Murders and Manslaughters by unknown persons,
let such rule be as is proportionate for Fines, to deterr, not ruin Wife and
Children; and enquiry in all by one specially appointed, as with us per
Coroner; but let his power and Fee be certain, that he encroach not on the
Office of the Justice, who is but Inquisitor; yet it might be better to give
every Justice that power. For Deodands, let the Law be settled by some Rule of
proportion, which our Law books hold not forth but solely for the advantage of
the Crown so called; yet under the Right of God as the Priests portion, this
seems wholly superstitious.

For words threatening life, let good Sureties be for the peace; and let due
public and evidently hearty confession of his unchristian walking be before
remission. This will quiet all double Controversies. For of suing first an
Appeal and then an an Indictment, first Indictment, and then action, brings
that there is no end of labor.

Now let us see how Felons are to be apprehended.

How Felons ought to be accused and apprehended.
FOR this, for the security of the Privilege of the people we must distinguish
between palpable and public, justly known or probably suspected Malefactors,
and private, and concealed, yet with some light and possible causes of
suspicion.

Now in all known cases, and justly suspected, every one may apprehend without
a Warrant, yea if but justly, that is, upon strong presumptions suspected
because of flying; but in case of but probable lighter and lesser suspicions,
no man ought to be apprehended but by Warrant, that is, the causes of Suspicion
allowed by the Justice, the Warrant is to be granted; if he denies, the party
may go to another; and where ever just suspicions be, or a warrant, the party
complaining, except the informations be feigned, or causes of apprehension
merely suggestions, no suit ought to be; and in case the person be obstinate
and dangerous, or the number many, the Civil Officers may undoubtedly crave the
assistance of the Military power of the Nation, if any be ready, or otherwise
raise them, and it is no dispriviledge at all. Now shortly let us see how they
are to be dealt withal when apprehended.

How and where imprisoned? How maintained? And of the Treasurers therefore.
ASsuredly, things are best tried immediately as acted, and would save much
needless if not unjust and imprudent trouble and vexation in the world, and
then imprisonment would not be a question of such controversy.

But in case it shall be delayed a short time; for it is unjust to delay so
long as restraint and charge there (happily of an innocent) shall bring a
greater evil by beggering wife and family, then the original damage.

Yea, grant it were for Murder; but put it so; Let the Prisons for criminal
offenders be only within walled Towns, or at least Corporations, in respect of
the multitude of Inhabitants necessitated to incorporate, and come under
particular Government, not contrary to the general Law of the Nation.

Next, Let them there be maintained at the charge of the County at a set Rate,
if they have not whereof to live, and this according to their condition; and if
clearly not guilty of offense against the Commonwealth, let them be acquitted
free from Fees or Fines. To this end, as before, Let the Gaolor and all
Officers have Fees from the State out of the Fines; Let there be special
Trasurers, to whom the Atrorney for the Commonwealth shall pay the Fines, as
the Record is; for in this there shall need no abateing of Fines: for all men
shall still have something to live upon.

For their employment in prison, let it be according to their Trade, if not
highly criminal, that is for life, in which Cases the more speed ought to be,
that so he may again return to the service of the Commonwealth, and
sustentation of his particular Family, unless a person notoriously factious and
dangerous, and that in time of danger; in which Case better restrain Liberty
private then endanger the public safety.

Who is Baylable.
THe answering body for body is now out of use, or it had better be, and one
only word of bailing used, wherein the party is to appear at a day, or the
Recognizance, that is the sum wherein he was bound, to be forfreted.

Now set the Rule certain; in high Treasons where the party is eminent; and
times dangerous, surely to admit Bail were vain; therefore resolve the
contrary, for it is no privilege; yet as such, it would be claimed and breed
Tumults, or lay the foundation of Sedition.

But for misprision of Treason and words, let them be bayled; but in all
Treasons, as in all Cases of death, speedy trial is of necessity; if the
ordinary Judges be not sufficient, send down either at the Circuit, if such may
be agreed, or adjoyn others of the same or adjacent Counties in a settled way,
that the Subject may truly know his time for trial, otherwise to be bayled of
course, and set the Judge his power in certain, that he may know his duty, and
perform it without, or be duly questioned, and his reason known why he denies.

But for Bayls in Manslaughter, and the like, set down the value; as for
Example, for Manslaughter, two hundred; Maim, one hundred; wounding, fifty;
beating, forty; assault, twenty; or leave it to discretion of Justices, only
put not in men unfit; our present shame.

And thus let all Vagrants, all idle persons though seemingly, able to live of
themselves, if suspected, or not able to give a good account to the Justice, go
under bayl for their good behavior, or be sent to the place of their birth; or
if found refractory or dangerous, set to work in Bridewells, well ordered, and
sufficiently provided with good, wise, and faithful Visitors, Justices of the
Peace, there to be till enquiry be, or certificate of their condition, that
order may be taken accordingly.

Now for the Trial of all persons, let it be, as speedy, so public, and with
one Counsel (no more) if they please, who may freely and openly speak the Law
and no more, not manage evidence as is now used; and if the Judge denies the
Law, let an Appeal lie to the next Circuit under the Councels Hand, and with
his Reason; but if the Judgment be affirmed, let the Council be highly fined.
All these matters are subject to devolve into mere Form, except Justice in the
Supreme Magistrate aws all; for according to their example do all others frame
themselves, therefore it is still fit they be under due and visible regulations.

How Debts are to be Recovered.
HAving briefly passed these Heads, I come now, before I come to treat of the
way and manner of Trials particularly by twelve men, to treat of the Civil
Policy as diverse from Criminal, and look at that as it looks at Liberty,
Goods, and good Name.

And in this I shall pass over the Introductions to Debts, which are Trading,
Bargaining, Selling, Giving, Granting, Bequeathing, and the like, and the
consequences thereof; now as to this all Revenge is but bestial, Satisfaction
is Rational.

Now the satisfaction must be either from Lands or Goods; Lands for the benefit
of Posterity ought to be preserved as much as may be; therefore till there
appear no Goods, there ought to be no Process against Lands; but as the evil
present is always heaviest, so the liberty of the Parent is to be esteemed
above the future advantage of the issue, and then the lands are to be sold.

Our Law holds forth things just enough; I cannot in my conscience but say the
fault is principally in the Practiser and the Judge; the one to move unjust
things, the other to determine them; although I believe many of the Errors were
brought in upon Prudential grounds, rather then Legal, or to avoid the rigidity
of the Letter originally.

For thus it stands, the Law being thus anciently, that first Goods, then
Lands, then Liberty was to be seized for debts, etc. upon a just and
proportionate Rule, necessity found ways to evade: Quaere the Goods, and they
were others; Quaere the Lands, and they were aliened; and to run through the
difficulties of all these Trials, the burden was found too great, and
therefore the Law of imprisonment at first by Atrest was brought in; That it is
against Privilege, that is as used, I believe it highly; but that it is
against Privilege duly used, is not to be deemed.

We ought in all things to remember we are Christians; our professing well, and
practicing ill, makes bad Christians, nay mere civil ones Atheists, and keeps
good Heathens from Conversion; Surely now, we by our Laws make such multitudes
of poor, that we see no way to relieve them, and therefore we exact not the Law
of common distributive Justice; I dare not be too bitter; The Lord write upon
the hearts of Magistrates such (let me say Christian) affections, that the poor
may be rightly maintained; but that is not my task here, therefore I proceed.

If any Debtor be, let the Creditor come to a legal Officer appointed, and
there Avow in the word of a Christian, that such a one is truly indebted to him
in so much, and show particularly how; if the public Officer knows the man
responsal, let the Debtor be immediately summoned to answer to the Creditor for
so much, be it by Bill, Bond, Book, Promise, etc. If the Officer knows not the
Creditor, then let the party be summoned, and if he denies the debt, then let
one legal Witness (for all men are not to be admitted Witnesses) Avow; by that
I mean a Protestation in the name of a Christian as before a Magistrate, that
he knows the thing; then if the party satisfies not the debt by a day, let a
Plea be entered.

No more but thus; A. of such a place, impleads B. of C. for ten pounds which
he ows him upon a Bond or Bill, or as the matter is.

Then let the Debtor answer thus; B. to the complaint of A. for the debt of ten
pounds, denies the debt, promise, Bond, etc. or pleads so much paid, and
tenders the residue, with submission to the Order of the Court.

If he appears not, let an other summons go by way of exacting the party or
parties to appear under the penalty of the value of the debt; if he appear not,
nor any Attorney for him being warned, let the goods be immediately seized and
inventoried by one sworn man or more, and apprized by sworn men, as they are
truly worth, then to be bought at the first hand, to the utmost of their
knowledge; and let one Justice of the Peace administer the Oath, to appear
equally and indifferently between Creditors and Debtors; then let a Jury of
twelve or six men, such as shall be lawfully called of the next neighbors,
capable of the great trust of such Judgment, sufficiently qualified with
estate to recompense, knowledge to discern, and faithfulness to act according
to knowledge, for such ought all Juries to be, and then the Trial by Juries is
excellent, where the matter needs, or will bear the delay, except you shall so
enforce obedience, that Trials may be speeded as called; then the debt proved,
let not payment be till all Creditors be called in, and then let their debts
also be proved, not allowing above forty days for all, and then let the goods
be divided into three parts, if there be no other estate; otherwise three parts
of the whole be distributed proportionately as the respective debts amount, a
third part saved to the Creditor, etc. And the same Trial that settles the
goods, let it pass the lands, and let the Seizure of the Land and Sale be by
the public Magistrate, but all enrowled in a Book for that purpose.

How Lands are to be Recovered.
SUrely the old way of State and Seisin so called in the simplicity of that Age
was good; but to speak it once for all, it is the Magna Charta, the great
privilege of Free men, that they may make Laws according to necessity.

I write not this to destroy, but enlarge the Subjects Privilege, who now by
the practike part of Law are deprived of the just end of Magna Charta, and all
else. I know there is a conceited humerous generation, that are content with
nothing but the Letter of Magna Charta, and others as much against it; I shall
equally walk equally between them; It was then a good boundary to the
Prerogatives of Princes, and power of Judges; and it were better to follow that
truly now, then to be again ingulphed in as vast an Ocean as no Law, in the
variety, multiplicity, and difficulty of Laws; for how many things, literally
observed, would plainly much prejudice the Commonwealth; but I proceed.

Lands then in case of doubt must receive a Trial, as for other matters of
value, before a public Judge, the course by a short complaint, at a day set
for both parties, with their Witnesses present, who can prove the matter in
question, or upon Oath made that they are sick, or such Case as is allowed upon
Oath taken before a Justice of Peace; the Affidavit of such persons may be
read, attested under the Justices Hand and Seal.

Always provided the Affidavit without another special Witness does nothing;
and in Case that the land be adjudged to the complainant, to be immediately
awarded, and delivered within three days, under the penalty of a Fine Treble
value (for the time it is holden above three days) to the rent for half a
year: For obedience in Civils must be rendered to mistaken judgments, final or
primary; if final, for ever; if primary, till death of the party, unless he
lives ten or twenty years; for it is fit to set a time after such judgments,
that so it may be fit for a Purchaser, who may otherwise pay his money, and
lose his land; if the Demandant or Complainer be not able to make good his
Title, let him pay the Fine for the charges of the Defendent, as is adjudged in
open Court, and then let him be dismissed; which Fine must be according to the
nature of the offense, and the estate of the party, both being considered.

How Equity is to be pursued.
BUt it may happen that part of the money in a personal action, or complaint is
paid, and that the land is forfeited in case of a Mortgage upon a Cause
equitable in Law, as enemies hindered, great Waters, robbed going to tender the
money, and bound, or the like, (not voluntary neglects as now, whereby the
controversing in Courts is more expensive to the Subject then the Army) which
appearing in the legal Court before the Judge there; let him transmit the Case
upon his word of a sworn Judge (that is intended upon his Oath) that there is
just matter of equity, and let him see the Case, and examine what Witnesses he
pleases, and fend for what other he judges fit; always provided, he decrees the
Case within a set time, as ten days at the furthest, and then let possession
be continued, or adjudged, as the Case requires.

This also must be pursued, that no rule at Common Law, or Order so called in
Court of Equity, but be Engrossed, Read, and Signed by the Judge before going
out of Court.

Now to some, there will some difficulties arise at first; what needs this
double work, may not one Court determine Equity also? Next the Lawyers will
never agree an Order with the Judge in Court, advantages are so sought and
preferred, as daily experience manifests.

Whether Law Courts and of Equity also, are to be?
FOr this it is most certain, that while men, we must in all lawful ways give
satisfaction to the experienced evils arising amongst men, and that as the evil
is capable of reformation; heretofore many delays and draynings of the truth in
a set legal course was thought a good way, (or at least so pretended) to make
justice pure; form was set up to an eminent height, and seeing the Idol men
bowed down to it, and it was thought better to part with some real Justice then
lose a shadow, which gave refreshment to so many, etc.

Now, this though it may have shadow, which as the world grows past amusing,
will fall of it self, so it has substance; for the work is proper to another
judgment, and of it self likely to be sufficient for one Court, especially if
those men be empowered to hear and determine all small matters of equity, as it
is fit.

The other Judges in Civil Courts should do all matters of trifle, and also all
suits both legal and equitable of poor men.

What, and why pleaders are to be, and their Duties.
SUrely, the knowledge of the Laws municipal, and just, and righteous, settled
Customs of Nations, which are Laws, are highly to be honored, esteemed, and
provided for; they are the left eye of the Nation, as the instructers of the
Nation in the knowledge of divine wisdom are the right eye.

Now to draw men to such labors, there must be some allurements; we had so
many, that of late years it drew all the prime wits and parts of the Nation
that way, and all the Courts being at Westminster, the whole Nation during the
so called Terms, was void of requisite Government; for these wits to maintain
and increase their honor and riches, had made the Law so difficult, that good
honest Knights and Squires in the Counties, yea though they had studied the
Law, durst not venture upon a matter extraordinary; how then should Citizens?
and these, and the Attorneys, by the adjudges tricks and niceties, had buried
Justice past finding out by Juries; each man had his legal quillet to deceive
the honest man, prejudice the State, and yet satisfy his so called conscience.

Now if pleaders be rightly used, then they are no more but men skilled in the
Law, who are for the party who chooses them for their Council, that is, such
upon whose judgment and skill in Law they will depend, to make good the Law
for them to the Judge, to manage evidence, which some have been famously
infamous for; to do what they can for the Clyent, that is by lawful or unlawful
ways to get the day, is most unchristian.

Thus yet old Lawyers through tricks, use to deceive young Lawyers, and
unpractised Judges, or old, or sleepy, or such ignorant ones as have been
admitted and continued, till they with credit of conscience left their place;
therefore it is unfit any Lawyer speak but to the Law, and that only to the
Judge, and that to enform him, and require his advice, and that he ask these
questions. Let all these Lawyers after admitted to plead, set in the Court,
below the Judges, covered but when they speak; and any one as a friend to
justice though not retained, may speak to the Judge his opinion; And let all
but the present pleaders be as assistants, as to so much as information of the
Law according to their skill and knowledge; let but one be retained for one
man, and let not his Fee be above two shillings six pence; and that a supply
be, let each one have a pension or an office from the State, and then in case
it amounts to a competent salary, it is better to allow no Fee at all; The
objections of laziness and the like which will ensue upon this, are no way
answerable to the necessity of giving stop to the immoderate laboring after
riches now in this generation, and that only to be Fathers to a lazy idle
ignorant gallant Son, etc.

What Attorneys are to be, and their Duties.
MAny will think Attorneys as needless as Courts of Equity, and so they are;
yea truly not of so much necessity; yet much good there is in Attorneys. But so
many is to nourish knavety and show an unchristian Commonwealth; for many of
them cannot live, no more then many Lawyers, without much contention; Which
shows strongly that our Commonwealth is but baptized Christian, with water, not
the Spirit of love, meekness, gentleness, peace, long sufferance, forgiving as
we would be forgiven; Oh the sad case of Christendom so called! I must grieve
to think of it, though others laugh at me.

But while all men are not capable of the plainest forms of Law, it may be
conceived requisite to admit men who shall appear by their warrant to answer
for them; but men to be necessitated to it of custom, as now, seems not just;
Two belonging to every Court of Judicature is enough; let his duty be only to
receive instructions from the party in the matter of Fact, and to set down the
witnesses names in a paper for the Judge, and to what they can speak, but not
to speak in the Court, but to the Judge, and let them have a Fee as the
Magistrate shall think fit.

Let both Lawyers and Attorneys be sineable by the Judge, and all that plead as
such in Case of misdemeanor, and that without a Jury.

Whether Debtors be to be imprisoned.
Surely where there is neither goods nor Lands to satisfy, the rational man,
the Law of Christ, of Love, will not still engage to satisfy angry revengeful
persons, in exorbitant and irrational appetites; therefore if he will take oath
that he is not worth a third part of the Debt, that not exceeding sixty pounds,
or what sum the supreme Magistrate thinks fit, let him be freed; let the oath
be general or particular, I care not; for he that will swear upon a trust, will
swear upon no trust; but let the thing concealed be forfeit: if you will not do
this, keep not debtors in prison, rather make them servants; the same for
Felons, Trespassors, and the like.

Whether servitude be lawful among Christians? etc. And whether fitting, or not?
SUrely the Almighty wisdom appointed nothing in it self but just, and that
justly, yea above other Lawgivers, who from want of prudence, often multiplied
servants to such numbers as they often oretopped their Masters and the Laws; but
the Lord by allowing servitude among his people, yet limiting it for a time,
gave satisfaction to justice every way; the proprietor was satisfied by labor,
where estate failed, and the servant had his day of freedom, and the danger of
multitudes was never obnoxious to them; for we see the Lords and great men
offended in forcing service, but not the contrary; service therefore well
limited, is held by many and those prudent men, and godly Christians, no way
dissonant to the Liberty, nay equality of the Gospel, wherein by Christ we are
brethren, and fit to be practiced as well as bound Apprentices, but with well
tempered Laws.

As first the power not to extend to life or mayme, next not work above so many
hours in a day, then to be clothed against cold, and fed for Natures
sustenance, that is, he shall be better then in a prison; the greatest
difficulty will be to make servants of wife and children; for it seems to some
unreasonable, that they should be made servants: Our Heralds in many heads have
made such shatters, that they cannot think fit a highborn man or woman, or the
like (which are accidents of inferior providence, as I may call it) should be
subject to the universal Law of Mankind; but certain it is, if all Debtors,
etc. pay or serve, these men ought not to be excluded; but that the women must
follow the condition of man, is not of necessity, no more then to be
imprisoned, etc. she must be miserable, but needs not be in servitude, nor the
Children.

Now the Lawmakers ought to settle something against them, upon two grounds;
First, of satisfaction; secondly, of aw or fear; upon this score to make the
children and wife suffer, would do much as some think; but I conceive
otherwise; for self is generally nearest: Next for children, it would or might
ruin education, whereby the public loses more then the private gains.

Lastly, for the wife, if all parties be pleased, let them come and serve
together; otherwise not; But under the Law of mercy to show mercy and love, let
the evident poor man be discharged, as before, with something to begin the
world; but once more repress idle houses of all sorts, vanity in Apparel, etc.

And settle estates, and rate them truly, and keep strict and just Government,
and you will not complain of poor, nor fear cheating, nor need servitude, but
with content of all parties; but above all, take off high Covetize, and preach
by example, as precept; Magistrates, Ministers, etc. men of all sorts having
food and raiment, be therewith content. But because Usury is supposed a
manifest cause of beggary, and is so much questioned in the world, and so
beaten by the Pope and his Councels, and Usurers so accursed, and our Law
present only wincks, tolerates not, let us a little consider that, and Quaere,

Whether Usury be lawful? And how compared with Letting of Lands.
I Take Usury to be a Covenanting for to receive the principal with interest;
Now the reason of the coming to a settled way of use by particular persons, that
is, twenty, fifteen, ten, eight, six, or four in the hundred, was upon consent
of parties to avoid tedious and deceitful accounts and reckonings, and the
like, (the Laws settles it to avoid excessive gripings) just as in Lands the
Tenant hires now at a certain price, and puts the gain in his pocket; truth is,
we are a light, loose, proud, lazy, prodigal Generation; for we have had much
liberty, educated under no restraint, aw, nor fear, no reverence of youth to
Age, of people to Magistrates, of poor to rich, no order, all men now Masters,
all brave, all for back and belly; this spends fast, and gains are decreased,
and often all lost, and then the fault is use-money: I pray what difference
between being undone by a cruel racking Landlord, or a biting hard-hearted
Usurer? you will say all one; He that gains little by Land or Money, cries, I
had rather take money, and hire Land to give account; I am undone; some by
being unfit to manage Land, or Money; others by ill managing of it; he that
thrives, will never agree to this; no, that were to be always a servant:
Again, some will over-purchase themselves, and receive four in the hundred in
Lands, and pay eight; and this ruins them; others have good Trades, in debt,
purchase, pay use, and thrive; Nay it is certain, Money is a more possible way
of great increase, then Lands; and the Complaints even in all Nations much what
alike; therefore I conclude as to that it is fit to regulate letting out of
Moneys; but it is also fit to order some proportion for Lands, or give a Rule
for Landlords, that squeaze a poor ignorant laboring creature, as we do a
Honeycomb; let neither be permitted unjustly; and for rich Tenants, let them
not defraud the Commonwealth.

This premised, Usury in it self may be lawful, if not forbidden; now if it be
forbidden, let me see where it is; if it were Typical, it is abolished; if
judicial generally, it is rational, that is, all those Laws hold forth the
reason of commanding, or prohibiting plainly, and then let us see the reason.

Now if you take it judicial specially, as proper to the Jew, then it must by
like reason run thus, Take no use of thy Brother a Christian; the English
Translation has it poor Brother, which to me plainly hints the Law, and its
reason, and that justly; and this not observed, is unchristian; so to imprison
for mere use, the principal received, much more all lost; and that not by
neglect, folly, or exorbitancy; for all these differ the Case in the Court of
Christian Conscience; but for rich men to detain use is unjust, or if able to
pay, for to plead it while clothed as Princes might be, is a shame to the
Governors; God has not bound us Christians to Laws of meats, particular
Judicials, wherein the command was only to try obedience, therefore regulated;
it is without question as lawful as letting of Lands, much more lawful then
buying for three pence in the season of the year, and for half a years benefit
of laying out of the money, to get twelve-pence, fourteen-pence, which is ten
fold, nay one hundredfold worse usury then twenty per cent. yet this is usual
and never stumbled at; but to double is counted lawful necessary gain; how ever
if the Law allows not, let it not wink; I now come upon the rule of like reason
to Quaere,

Whether tortures be lawful among Christians, and whether against Privilege?
WE have before agreed what Privilege is, and wherein it consists, and that
public good is to be preferred above private.

Now we come to particular questions concerning it; and that is, whether it be
against Privilege; but being that the resolving of the other part of the
question will in the greatest part, if not wholly assoyl that:

I first examine, whether Christianity allows it; I might first have
determined, whether Nature allows it; for if Nature seeks Self-preservation, it
allows it not; then surely it is unnatural to force to overthrow Self; it is
agreed, many detestable Murders, Rapes, Adulteries, Treasons, etc. to the
preservation of States, and glory of God, in just punishing of offenders, have
hence arisen; but this may be Gods mercy to bring good out of evil.

Our Rule is, Let Us not do evil that good may come of it; Now this has also
been manifested, that much evil have come of it; not only many Innocents have
suffered in it, but by cruelty have been falsely accused by such parties, easy
natures being drawn, and in the torment have spoken any thing; so that it is no
certain Rule, and if no certain Rule, and a severe punishment, and that of one
not convicted, it is not only unchristian, but irrational; the vain Christian
I know, is ready enough to seek assurance against fears by such extremities;
but it is better to trust Providence, best so to live as not to fear to die; I
shall not enlarge in this, which is so plain, but haste and consider

Whether all public Offices and Charges be to be born by the public Purse,
and what is the public revenue.
IT was never denied in any State or Nation; For the labourer is worthy of his
hire: The Laws of this Nation allow it; yet only to a competency for the
necessary charges of the place; not the charge which Pride, Vanity, and Custom
has introduced, or may.

Now assuredly this ought to be settled in certain, or rather to be so settled,
as may be reduced to a certainty from the Judge Supreme, to the Constable and
Scavenger, whose place is now disused to the great disrepute of the Nation, and
offense of Natives, as well as Strangers, and the Laws take no notice of them,
only Customs of Cities, etc. which Customs, how good so ever, are made so
difficult in pleading from Form, and so chargeable, if granted by Charters,
that the Government is wholly lost and disused; they ought to have power to
employ men to cleanse all places of filth, carry away dunghils, etc. and punish
offenders, and they to be paid out of the public Revenue.

Now the public Purse and Revenue is all men's lands and goods equally rated;
deny this, and all men will make places of Trust serviceable to their ends:
Nature is above Reason, above formal educative professing Religion, and
misleads Saints oft-times. I cease further enlarging this, having in other part
settled the Reason of it before.

How mad men, Idiots, etc. are to be provided for.
IT ought not to be in the power of every man to make or adjudge Idiots
Lunaticks, etc.

Therefore it is fit in every County some Court be appointed, as to appoint
Guardians and Tutors to children, so to determine who are mad, and who fools,
and to order the management of their estates, and places to be specially
provided for them with a settled Physician; and if the party be able, his
estate must as the Magistrate appoints bear the charge; otherwise the public
and this Court to order all Bridewells and Prisons, and Commissioners to that
end authorized, specially with settled power to determine the same, and all
matters thereupon arising, and to Record it; all yet to have superintendent
Judges Visitors, as aforesaid.

Whether the Tenures of the Nation can stand with the freedom of the Nation?
Public and Universal consent took away not only the Tenure in Capite, which
was originally the great man's dependence upon the King, and after great and
small being become every ones purchase while annexed to Lands, which was
incongruous, but also Knights Service, because of the dependence of mean
persons upon Lords by Sword-Service; and the rather for the incidents now
become so insufferable, of Wardship, Marriage and Relief, and the prime reason
effecting it next to the power which struck the first stroke, or nothing had
been done, was the original ground of the Institution of the Tenure ceased.

I need say no more for Coppyholds; a wise uninterested man will speedily
conclude the reason of the institution of the Tenure is gone.

Truly you Lords of Manors, you it concerns, I pray consider upon what grounds
you hold Courts, swear men, Fine at pleasure, seize goods, or destrain; a
cunning Lawyer might find you all in the forfeiture of all your Manors: How
many Manors have sprung up since Prohibition? but this is but by the By; the
State may look to such Chequer Rents and forfeits in time; but to the thing it
self.

These dependences are visibly destructive to the peace, quiet, and purity of
Government in the Nation; next the forfeitures are unjust, being constantly for
no cause reasonable; again the prosecution or finding it is also unjust, being
by the so called Homage the Lords men; this abuse is evident; Some Lords
setting themselves in Court, and threatening the Homage if but questioning the
reasons of the matter in question, and make them find what they please, yet
sworn.

Lastly, uncertain Fines are wholly unjust; and above all the dependences of
Free men; for now Coppyholds is also become each man's purchase, yea Free men's;
this is clear against the original Constitution; and the reason ceasing, the
Law ought to cease; but if the interests of Lords prevail for the present, that
there be no total abolition of the name, and remembrance of that Tenure, no
more then of Capite and Knights Service, which is equally just; yet let the
Commonwealth have its due freedom, let the Fines be made certain, one years
clear value, which cannot be above two parts in three.

Next, No forfeitures; next to pass by free deed; lastly, all as Freehold at
Common Law, except only the Rent; for it is better enlarge the Rent and have
no Fine.

Lastly, let no Rent be distrainable for upon the land after eighteen months
due; and for the apportionment of Rent, let it be recorded between Buyer and
Seller; and if parties concerned cannot, let two Justices of the Peace upon
hearing both parties determine it, and let it be recorded in the Parish or
Town-book, to cease all Controversies after.

To clear this, Let a Commission issue to some persons to return a Survey of
all Manors, when granted, what Customs, what Tenants, what Rents, Free or
Copy; the quantity and nature of lands, particularly the value yearly, that so
a foundation of settlement may be laid; but because of the great advantage has
been said to accrue to the Commonwealth by Coppyhold-lands, above free and
Charter-hold, in respect they were not subject to cheats, frauds, etc, as
Freehold lands, let us a little consider how lands are to be passed.

Whether Inrollments ought to be in each County, and how, and the way to avoid
deceit in Conveyances, etc. and of Frauds, and the best way of punishing them.
HEretofore Deceits were not so frequent; men, yea even the highest preferred
honor above inheritance; Now as the love of riches, the god of the world
prevailed, so private interest grew, and from thence looseness of Law; and the
jealousy between our Kings and people, made Laws come forth difficulty, and
when ever they came, the interest of one side was visible, or the Law so
choked with ambiguities, or incertainties, or so short in the main, that it
did but add to Contention, besides the difficulty of obtaining them, without an
active leading Parliament man were the Author or eager promoter, which in those
days few would or did undertake out of pure zeal; so that men set down
willingly by the evil, and looked to prevent it as well as they could, and take
their chance, as they called it, amongst others, rather then stir for new Laws
of any sort.

This made of late years, the legal robberies of cheating and truly fraudulent
conveyances increase (as well as Letters) yet not within the adjudged remedy of
Statute, frequent; for it is as easy to avoid the Statute as to quench
ordinary fire with scalding hot water; one good Law against all frauds, is
better then a hundred of the best against fraudulent conveyances; the reason is
so gross and visible that it neds no president, there are yet too many.

But while all possible means of the exact purity of Justice are to be
indeavored by all Magistrates, especially Christian: It is just and requisite,
that they take the hint of the good has flown from the manner of passing of
Coppyhold Estates, which truly proves, that an Office of Inrollment, at least
in the Head-Town of every County, is of necessity, with such due regulations as
is fit; and in the same Office, a passing of the wives consent, by sealing the
Deed of Sale, or releasing it; provided, the Act be done before two Justices of
the Peace, be as good as a Fine; the Dedimus upon the Fine, is to meaner
persons, less fit to be trusted then some Justices may be; however not under
the conscience of an Oath, which all they be; the charge of a Fine is not so
much (though to some it is more then they are worth, and ought to hold some
rule of proportion) as the trouble, care, delay, etc.

Let there be therefore always some authorized to take these.

There is another legal, I dare not call it deceit; the Custom has established
it, as a Fine to bar the issue, intayle, or a recovery, or both, with single
and double voucher; but what is this but Custom against the Statute Law, by the
assent of the Statute? I know the Evasion is but a mere Evasion; it is better
to mould the Law anew; for the Law is both ways unjust; for the Statute
Dedonis, is in it self a perpetuity, and would settle lands impassible in a
short time, and then all men must fly to the Supreme Power for remedy; let
them therefore settle how lands shall be De jure; as for example,

The eldest son to have all, two parts of three, or three of four, or a double
portion, or at the will of the father; provided he gives it no otherwise but to
him and his heirs: and indeed all other estates are but to be a little
over-wise; but in this I shall not undertake to prescribe ought.

I shall only add, let the Law be; All frauds to be punished by Presentment,
which found legally, damages to be to the party according to the value proved,
and then a fine to the State, according to the Law and the nature of the
offense. Now this, according to Law, brings us to discussion of Juries,

Whether it be best to have Trials by Juries? and in that of the Course of all
Trials Civil.
ALL agree, that right is to be done; but many, nay most differ about the way;
and certainly there are diverse ways, and all good; but there are better ways,
and the best; but the diversity of Opinions is great in these; for some call
that best which others call but good: so various is Judgment, much more
Opinion; for many which have found the good of one just, wise, discerning
Magistrate, will think him better then a Jury of Twelve; and they that have
found corruption in one Magistrate, and Justice from Twelve men, abhor what
they call Prerogative Sentence; it must be assented to that while in the flesh,
the best men are subject to fails and mistakes, and therefore to drain Justice
has been thought the best; this with popular jealousy in the just fears of
dependencies of Judges rivited England to the maintenance of Juries, who will
not easily forgo it; and though there is at present so much miscarriage, that I
think there is far more evil then good by them to the Nation, I would not their
temporary ejection, but their due, strict, and settled Regulation.

But first, every Case is not worth such trouble; but Justice must be done in
every Case; and unless you will pay Juries for their pains, they cannot travel;
therefore to avoid this, you must make Judges in every Town; and though the
letter of the Magna Charta is general, yet do but the Justice of Magna Charta,
and the Subject will not complain. Justice never wrought dispriviledge, and is
above Magna Charta. But before we proceed with Jurors, let us see how Cases
ought to come to the decision of Juries, then what Juries, etc.

Now it is just, that before any suit be, the party wronged should first
privately seek peace, then call the party before a Magistrate to know what the
difference is, and see if it yet may be composed; if this will not do, let a
Magistrate allow a legal controversy.

Then let his Case be set down specially as it is, after the nature of an
Action upon the Case, and let Oath be of the truth of it, and that he is able
to make it good by Law; let the Case barely be stated, no Conceits, no
Opinions, but the naked truth, which the Complainant is to make good.

Let this always be within twelve months after cause of Action. Then let a
Summons go to the Defendant by a sworn Officer from the Court, or the party, or
some other making Oath of the Summons; if he appears not, let a Note be fixed
to his door, (under a severe penalty to any one to take off) requiring
appearance, or to show Cause; if neither be done, let the Trial immediately be
awarded; if he appear, let the day of hearing be ordered and entered in the
Court-book, (and that truly by the Clerk under a severe Fine, immediately to be
deducted by abatement in his Salary;) after which time, let a Jury of twelve or
six men (for it is not the number that does the work, I think six best; but
that contest is not worth the while: the alteration of an old received way is
the greatest objection) be warned, not under the penalty of twenty, or one
hundred pounds, and nothing ever paid, but of ten or five shillings, to be
assuredly levied to the States use immediately of Course, unless sick in bed, or
otherwise employed in the Service of the Commonwealth in the County above
twenty miles, or hindered by Providence; which Causes sworn and allowed, may
excuse or essoyn him; for not summoned, the Officer is sworn, and must admit no
present contest.

Now the men must be knowing, understanding men, and of estate to answer
damages, (if that be continued) if they give a false Verdict, which is just,
being they are properly Judges of the damage: now if they and the Judge differ
upon the Law, let them do it at their peril; for the Case, let it be stated,
the Judges and their hands with the Counsel present set to it, and let the
yearly Judges decide it; and if the Judge be faulty, let him, otherwise the
Jury be fined to the State; and if they give a false Verdict, that is, go not
truly according to what is truly alleged and proved, unless they or some of
them of their own knowledge know the thing of which they are bound to give the
Court public Cognizance; for Juries as other Judges are under a Rule of Reason
and Common Justice.

then Jurors must be of the next inhabitants to the place where the fact was
Committed, of the vicinage, near dwellers, so that they know the parties, their
lives and conversations, and thereby judge; But there ought to be no relations
of Consanguinity or Affinity within three degrees; for although spiritual or
public relations ought to be preferred above natural, yet this is now little
known, less regarded.

Lastly, he must not be who is a Jury-man, a common Swearer, Drinker,
Company-keeper, nor ejected any congregation as an evil person, an offender
against the peace and quiet of the Nation, or one that has declared his
opinion before sworn: It is agreed, it is best object against the Juror before
sworn, but what the court is mistaken in, ought not to be proceeded in;
therefore till they be as we say gone from the bar just objections may be
offered; but the Judge must not allow objections as to favor or surmises after
sworn; if it be, let it be proved (for let no Juror after sworn be dismissed,
but the reason recorded) and this proof is easy, and then let him be fined.

When Judgment ought to be, and Execution. And when void.
Judgment ought immediately to follow Execution, unless some just cause, and
that only in Law be offered; and for execution (notwithstanding the cause which
may be for delay alleged) let the goods be secured, or the money deposited, or
no cause allowed; And if the party be present, let him enter caution
immediately to perform the judgment; or otherwise to imprison his person, is
not dispriviledge if he be able, till he performs it, let the caution be
setting his hand to the judgment, which ought to amount in Law to above all
Statutes or Customary Judgments; always provided if the execution be not
within twelve months, upon any Judgment whatever, the Judgment to be void;
for the long hanging of judgments and other securities is also legal
injustice; I say no more.

Offenders in impannelling Juries, Imbracers, and the like.
FOr offenders in putting in knowingly unfit Jurors in any kind, let them be
fined, and the Fines high, and deducted out of their salary, if any in hand;
otherwise by distress, besides loss of that place, and disabled of any other,
for at least some years, for it must be perjury, for he is a sworn Officer.

For drawers of Jurors, or informers of them aforehand, to draw them to one
party, let all be upon presentment, and tried and fined.

What Distresses are lawful.
THe Law is just that no man be destrained in that whereby he principally earns
his living, if ought else be.

But to distrain one man for a Fine due from a Hundred, Town, etc. this is
hard, without speedy remedy, is unjust; let this be generally committed to a
Court, and right done as the fact appears, that is, let an equal rate be, and
the Constable and Overseers gather it, and pay it immediately with respect to
his damage adjudged and set; and if they will not, let the Court enforce the
rate, and all charges upon it; and so in all other Cases.

What to be done in cases of waste, etc.
IN case of waste, let the forfeiture be certain; for Tenants for year by
Lease, let it be their Term, except an incom be, and for that let a Jury
mitigate.

For Guardians of Infants, Tenants for life, and the like, let it be treble
damages, those to be assessed by a Jury.

What to do in Commons.
THis is a matter of large extent, and is one of the great sores of England,
which wants healing.

Our Commons are either appendant, appurtenant, or by reason of vicinage, and
were originally the relief of the beasts of the Plow, and for the breed of
young Cattle for the Freeholders, and do primarily belong to them; and as their
Farm was, so might they put upon the Common greater or lesser quantity of
Cattle, according to proportion.

But long since the rule of Commoning was lost, and Commons are become the
ruin of the generalty of the poor, to whom Commonage belongs not.

For first they get a Cow in Summer, and live idly of that, and not providing
against winter, they buy dear in the Spring, and sell cheap at winter; and the
rich, so long as the purse pays not, few regard how things go; by this at last
miserable and remediless beggary ensues, besides the general neglect of
Commons, as of all matte^ of public interest, whereby many poor are undone by
loss of their beasts, the ground spoiled, and not half improved.

And lastly, no due extant visible rule set, which ought to be in all Counties
anew, and Rules for dreyning and improvement, beyond what the Commission of
Sewers can reach.

To avoid this, it is necessary, as in other matters, to empower some Gent. to
consider the Commons (give them only their charges necessary at a set rate) let
them have power (if you can pitch upon trusty persons) to settle Commons if you
will continue them; otherwise to part them proportionably, and improve them by
severalties, leaving a set part to the poor only, to be improved for them,
according to order of the Commissioners, by the overseers for the poor, and the
order recorded in the County-Book for that purpose; and also in the Town, or
Towns, if there be entercommuning; this is the best way of the two, as by
experience meeting with more evils, and remedying them, then the other way is
capable of, in a present settlement, and is assuredly far more durable.

Let free Warrens, and Fold-courses be considered, but not at the height, and
settled where they please in severalty; this, if wisely and prudently ordered,
will afford not only a great and most considerable improvement, but will afford
a mean of settling the Nation; and may now be done without danger of
Insurrections or Tumults; And let but the settling of Tenures be carried on
rationally, plainly, and prudently with it, and the Generalty of the Nation
will assuredly see the clear benefit of change of Government.

Provided they may have Justice that they may abide by, that is, know assuredly
when to end, as to begin, and at what expense.

Who ought to have the oversight of Bridges, Rivers, etc.
NOw as all matters of right and wrong are under the cognizance of the Supreme
Magistrate, who as he cannot by himself dispatch all businesses belonging to
the Land, but by many hands, so much less all both at water and land, and all
the evils accruing and arising in, from, and by both;

Therefore it is fit to have a Magistrate specially deputed for cognizance of
all such matters which now lay in the cognizance either of the Admiralty, or
Commission of Sewers, or Justices of the Peace respectively, or for which any
Commission is issuable upon any Statute, with such rules as are necessary, both
for amending, judging, and determining matters yearly emerging, and also such
as are merely accidental, and that in the respective Counties, yet in such a
way as the errors in the adjacent parts of Counties may be tried without
infringement of Liberties, which is best by a mediety of Jurors impanelled
yearly, one year by the appointment of the Judges of one County, the other year
by those of the other County, and so by course constant in those places, we
seeing the excessive charge and trouble of purchasing Commissions; for let a
Statute appoint five shillings only as in case of the Commission of Sewers, you
can have none under five pounds, and ten, or twenty pounds attendance to
procure it.

Who are to be admitted witnesses in Judicial Trials?
IF Jurors be to have knowledge and estate, and that in such manner as may
answer the Trust, then surely in some measure witnesses, upon whose evidence
the Jury is sworn, to lay the foundation of their judgment so called Verdict,
ought to be men fit to be believed; The Law principally looks first at infamy,
especially perjury; but this being legal perjury, the punishment was so penal,
and the Law so difficult, that few were complained of, fewer attainted.

Now this is sure, moderate punishments, severely executed, curb more then
severe punishments remisly or not at all. The Law in the next place looked at
Excommunication, for relations they are not valued in Law as to witnesses.

Assuredly he ought who is a legal witness to be of sufficient understanding,
next not convicted of notorious crime; for justly what is the cause of rendering
a man incapable of the benefit of the Law, or rejection of Church-Society,
ought to be admitted if proved, a good plea against the witness; yet let such a
man speak, but not upon oath; for he that obeyes not man for Gods sake, nor God
for his own, is not be allowed to call God to witness; for in his acts he
denies him, though with his mouth he owns him. If it be asked, Why heard?

Then I answer, he may speak truth, but is unworthy that sacred Testimony.

Therefore the Magistrate must from his words and probabilities and
circumstances, and so the Jury gather the truth of the matter; but where the
man is capable of oath, let him be sworn, whether 'twixt the State and Subject,
or Subject and Subject; for right is the same.

There is also necessity to hear the wickedest man's Testimony, though not swear
him, because we cannot always choose witnesses; therefore estate is not
requisite, nor can be stood upon in witnesses, as in Jurymen, who are to be
chosen.

For point of favor; I find in this Age it is of great importance; for such
relations in Nature are generally preferred to, (though unworthily) relations
either of Country or City, earth or heaven; few men leave all for Christ,
Truth or Justice sake; Therefore I would admit the notice of alliance, but not
the objection, and hardly carry it upon such a single Testimony.

When Laws have their beginning, and how to be promulged.
ASsuredly there ought to be a day certain, before which in the several Cities,
Towns, Hundreds, etc. respectively, there ought to be an Assembly of the
people, those at least who are, or may be, or immediately are concerned in that
Law; and there, by some one or more of the Justices of the limit, or some other
thereto appointed, the whole nature of the Law, and the reason of it, ought to
be opened; and the people exhorted to obedience themselves, and also to see
that their Neighbors do the like, which is of necessity.

But the inability of Justices, and difficulty of Laws, have rendered the people
wholly doubtful and stupid, or petulant and stubborn.

And before such promulgation, no punishment but of the Justice for not
promulgating, or Certificate of the default of the representative for not
transmitting the Law, the same to be settled and published accordingly.

The lew knew all Moses Law, the Christians Lords know not their Law, they are
all enshrined in the breast of the Judge; but enough of that.

The Magistrates duty to repress excess in Apparel.
THe mind of man is apt to take impressions of sundry Natures, and education
may assuredly rectify Nature; much of this rests in Apparel; for vain light
Apparel makes the spirit lofty, not solid, and changes of habit adapt to
mutability of fancy, a light flashing wit in stead of a composed judgment;
Proud, humerous, self-conceited and stubborn, in stead of a reserved, prudent
debating or submission. If the interest of setting many poor on work, and
supposition of enabling to pay Taxes can overbalance the interest of the just
and necessary well being of a Commonwealth,

Let the Magistrate neglect a due care in this; But I presume it is fatal;
however, let not the clothes and colors, which are the Ensigns of Majesty,
Honor, and special Virtue, be made not only common to mean men, but their
ordinary Liveries and for servants of all sorts; let their Rules be set, and
let others do as they will, so it be ordered, that they bear all public
charges at their rate of private expense.

Whether Titular Honors be consistent with a Free Commonwealth?
IF it be supposed, that the Quaere be whether the Commonwealth may admit them,
or that they be ruining of such a settlement in themselves;

It is not intended to bring it into controversy; the Magistrate may do it,
and the State may yet stand; but the Quaere is only of Prudence.

For the honors being hereditary and native from Monarchy, their tendency is
thitherward; and while the root remains and has but any sap, there will be
sprouting each day, which will labor a re-establishment; so that prudence in a
resolved Commonwealth, would not so much as in any case but that of necessity,
grant such Titles to be at least claimed of right; but let only virtue proper
exalt the man, and then a Commonweal of all settlements is the most happy
establishment, which God grant may be first held forth, then practiced, and
that will assure a lasting Government; for the shattering of States is Pride
and Emulation of Competitors for principal management, which in an interval of
peace is as natural to natural men in such a case as Sweating.

What to be done in Cases for which no Law is set, or the Law clearly abused,
annulled and antiquated.
SUurely there is no offense, no transgression, but it falls under some Head of
general Law; yet Circumstance may aggravate it so, that to quash the thought of
it in the corrupt heart of man, there is exemplary punishment requisite upon
this account.

The lying with a maid-child under ten years of Age (consent or not) was justly
made death.

But put Case as trial was, A man abuses a boy at the mouth, whereby the child
breaks out with pustules, etc. in the letter it is not Sodomy, Buggery, etc.
for which the Law provides, but a filthiness of a worse nature; so some of the
old Earl of Castle-Havens abominations; so the business so called of Mopping in
Star Chamber tried in an extraordinary Court, and brought in upon a challenge
between two (at least one) great spirit.

This for criminal matter; so for all defects and deceits which be remedied by
Statutes Supplemental so called of the Common Law, that is, since it was
presumed, that there was no Law for which there was not an adjudged Case in the
Year-books, leaving the Rule of the string to go by the bow, or in some things
which ought to be remedied, but now cannot; as for example.

A. sojourns in the house of B. his Nephew. A. has diverse Nephews and Neices
upon whom he would settle his estate; being old, crazie, and not able to stir
abroad, B. finding his Uncles and Kindred to endeavor a just and equal
settlement according to A. his intention, they come to A. for that purpose. A.
gives it under hand and declares the pressures of B. to settle all upon him,
and that he knows B. will make him alter all; to this weakness has Age brought
him. B. after this shuts the doors against Father, Brothers, Uncles, Friends
and all, and will suffer no one to see A. or speak to him; the Magistrate is
complained to, he has no power. A. is thus imprisoned, it is fit to be
provided that the Magistrate should take a sworn Clerk, and make A. his Will
not to be altered but by the Magistrate sent for by A. but it cannot be done,
that is lawfully, and A. is now kept a prisoner till death, his estate, as
informed, all seized and converted by a debauched man, a rebellious disobedient
son, and ungratious Nephew. Thousand such things are, which while the
Magistrate is tied from the Rule by particular Laws, lay as heavy judgments
upon the land, especially upon the Supreme Magistrate, who as a wise and good
Physician ought to have a salve for every sore.

The Rule of Law is, Quae sunt minoris culpae, sunt majoris infamiae; these
things which are unjust, while profitable and unpunishable, are the Tetters of
the Commonwealth, they do spread daily.

Therefore it must either be resolved, the Magistrate in Ordinary shall punish
them as the Cause is, that is under the Rule of the head Law, if plain, or not
criminal, or criminal respectively; otherwise, to attend a meeting of diverse
Judges, or the extraordinary Judge for Criminals, and in the mean time to
secure by bayl or imprisonment as the Case requires.

And this must be observed, no Judge to be punished for want of Form, if the
Act tends to the speedier settlement of the Commonwealth, and does the Act in
person.

Whether Duels be lawful or not? and other Trials by fire, and water, etc. As
in the trial of Witches, suspicion of Adultery, etc. and all doubts.
I Shall first treat of Duels, which is without question unlawful in all Cases,
yea of the greatest doubt.

But first to speak to plain Cases, most of which are disgraces, affronts, etc,
for which the Law gives none, or not considerable satisfaction or reparations:
Now it is clear in Law and Reason, that when words and signs become dangerous
and prejudicial, the Magistrate ought to provide accordingly to repress; King
James made very rational orders in the very cause of Duels, but saw them not
executed; which disgusted the most discreet spirits; but it was evident, the
catch was but to halter the great men in the Spring of the Star Chamber Law;
such policies never throve yet; Piety when the end is Gods Glory, with the
peoples good (not particular persons interest) is the best policy.

Let therefore the Magistrate no longer count words light, while they bear the
weight and price of blood, but repair every breach, give a just recompense for
every loss, and then punish transgressors severely in such Cases; for many
think they may justly become their own avengers where thc Law affords no remedy.

The example is evident in stealing Dogs, so called for pleasure, which has
cost Lives and Ears.

The Lord Marshall did take notice of some of these matters, but not all, and
that with such delay and difficulty, that the parties were better try it
shortly; therefore for all words, give speedy remedy; let the complaint come
presently to the Judge, and receive a trial accordingly as the Supreme
Magistrate shall order.

For the second part, which are difficulties, suspicions, etc. we have no
infallible word to warrant it; the practice arose rather from Heathenish
Superstition, then Christian Faith; therefore we are to leave them to Gods
judgment, and settle the matter rather some other way, as of lot in Case of
doubts in civil claims, which assuredly is lawful.

But as to the other suspicions, there the causes of suspicion are to be
examined, and if approved, they are either evident or doubtful; if evident they
convict; if doubtful, they render suspected.

Now in all Cases of such Tendencies to suspicion, if the parties suspected
walk still suspectedly, they are to be punished, but not to the height of
punishment; and punishment must increase as crime does; but to entertain
jealousy too far is dangerous. Therefore let all Magistrates see some grounds
before they admit Question, more before they punish.

For the Ordeals, were they an infallible certain Rule, they might be used; but
for want of that, they are unwarantably made Laws where ever used; and
therefore where used, to be rejected.

What Religion the Magistrate is to settle; or his Duty and Power therein.
Whether, and how there be, or may be two Supreams.
I Have Implicitly scattered some opinions tending to the resolution of a great
part of this Question, which I shall not again meddle with; my intention here
being only admitting the Magistrate Christian, to Quaere his duty in the
variety of opinions, and so reflect a little upon our present doubts, and
dicuss them so far as may tend to settle, not divide; for for some high
opinions of the Churches Power over the Magistrate, and for the esteemed
obstruse and difficult opinion of the Magistrates acting as a Church Officer;
both intending, notwithstanding their expressions, a just latitude to the
Supreme Power, but specially exalting Christ and his Kingdom above all, yea
though alleging the very words of the Pope, That no Christian Magistrate but
must be a Churchmember, and so inferior to the Church it self, whereof he is a
member; for the Officers, as he is a member, must give him the Rule, or the
Congregation, yea though he were a Pastor or Elder himself.

I conceive this short Tract, wherein so many particulars are briefly hinted,
only to draw them into discussion, is not fit to open that controversy, which
must be with much Wisdom, Prudence, Judgment, and ability of divine Learning
discussed, or it will but cloud more, and tend to heighten the differences of
interest twixt Church and State: I shall therefore (for the present at least)
forbear to open that Controversy, and look only at the Magistrates duty
generally; for his power, I make it the Handmaide only to his duty.

Religion therefore being the proper object of the spirit of the inward man, is
not the proper subject for the Magistrate as a man, nor of his power, no not
though a Christian.

Yet while there are Hypocrites in the world, and the Notion of Religion may
veil Treasons and Obliquities to the State, being and well-being of the
neighbor; it is the Magistrates duty to see to these, as before; but as to the
particular contentions of Christians, in, and concerning, or Doctrine, or
Discipline, it is not clear that the Magistrate has ought to do in it, while
the outward peace be not disturbed thereby; I will exemplify generally.

Suppose the Doctrinal Quaere be, How many Sacraments? Or whether Baptism came
in lieu of Circumcision, or descent from the particular seventh day as a
Sabbboth, and the like.

We see plainly, that while the Magistrate used his power according to his
opinion, as the Magistrate inclined, so matters went generally; and the
opposites in opinion often crucified each other, seldom converted.

Therefore assuredly, in these difficulties of Faith among Christians, let the
Admonitions, Exhortations, Persuasions, Convincements of the Church be urged,
let not outward force be used.

It is well known, the great cause of our Embroilments now, is the difference
pretended, betwixt those of the Congregational way, and those of the
Parishional Disciplined way; I have purposely omitted this matter to this
conclusion of the Work, to sum up all; for it is plain, the Controversy
stands thus, as is hinted in the first Part,

Whether the Churches are to be gathered anew?

Now to understand this fully, it is to be noted, That the Church of England is
counted Schismatical by Rome, renting from her, as supposing she had so far
parted from the Doctrine of Christ, as that there was no possible just
Christian Communion with her, which the Puritan must still hold, that is, the
true Presbyter.

They all agree a Reformation necessary.

But they of the Congregational way suppose it cannot be a Reformation, but
such as is a new Congregating; that is, they own indeed what the Puritan
supposed; That truly such was the Apostasy of Rome, that there is nothing to be
done with her; they own her not the Spouse of Christ, but a Harlot Israel, and
England her sister in the old way.

And it is most sure, compare the Doctrine of Christians, as to all sorts of
men and women, and all the actions of their lives; And assuredly, the beginning
of Heathen Governments from the light of Nature, gave forth greater and more
glorious examples of Piety, Justice, Mercy, Fortitude, Truth, Charity, Love,
and that to Enemies; Gratitude, Obedience to their Country, and to them set
over them in any kind, and zeal for their gods; which I commend only as far as
it walked even pace with their profession, then there is to be found among
Christians, and among Princes where they devoted themselves to their Country
and people, as among the both Greeks and Romans, etc.

We have justly banished Superstition, and wickedly given free scope to
profaneness; the lives of the best are so farsed with the rudiments of the
flesh, in eating, drinking, clothing, and exercising inordinately, and in
immoderate care to maintain these, that the Gospel is become a scandal and a
stumbling block to many that are entrred the School of Christ, and have been
mortified by many acerbities.

Yea, these have I seen to give way in their old Age to the vanities of youth,
and that as might be feared through pride that God had given them a sight of
what they persuaded themselves to be the truth.

But that which is the spreading incurable disease of Christendom so called,
is, the looking to others mostly, and neglecting self, gadding and tatling, and
the like, etc.

Now of all these assuredly there is evident power in the Magistrate to repress
them, whether in the excessive vanity, in eating, drinking, clothing or
gameing; but those more inward and heart vanities are to be repressed by a
general prudent Government. The example of those in Authority, and power, and
their due exercise of that power where needful, is the great incentive to
excellent virtue.

Now the contest of the Presbyter for a punishing power, and his looseness in
admitting Members to his Church, makes the Eagle sighted Magistrate jealous
that what ever is acted by holy and religious men at first faithfully, yet if
holding forth a liberty of Contention for Supremacy, some will attempt in time
to claim of duty, while there are Wolves which will for lucre and interest sake
put themselves in Sheeps clothing, as heretofore has been evidenced. But this
the Magistrate in the present Age must eye wisely and justly; that is,
resolving that the Lord Christ has a Supremacy, which he must be always ready
to acknowledge, and also to give unto him.

Now in ths contest for the constituting of Churches otherwise then as it gives
just cause of disturbance to the peace of the Commonwealth, I see not that the
Magistrate hach ought to do; It is yet a matter of scruple to many good
Christians, what Church there is in England, for that the Church is constituted
National.

I believe most pretenders to Morality are ashamed of it, plainly seeing, that
it is not the Baptism of Water that makes a Christian, but that of the Spirit;
and the same delusion works upon men to rest upon Signs and Forms under the
Gospel as under the Law.

Yet the outward Church Fellowship, that is the first so called sign of a true
Church being with them, that is the Sacraments, and that profitable Sacrament
of a Priest to administer them, makes all within the Church, though there be no
Officers, or them but mere Laymen, so called Church Wardens, and Overseers;
and of these inconsistences, and incongruities are our Parishes framed.

Let me therefore to clear things to the world a little open the Quaere of the
Congregational way of all sorts, and their Opponents.

1. First, Whether in so great an Apostasy as the very Form of a Church seems
to be lost, there ought not to be an agreement of Doctrine and Discipline
according to the Primitive Rule, and merely according to that to lay the
foundation of Church Fellowship.

2. Secondly, Whether in the admission to such fellowship in such an Apostasy,
and when yet the profession brings along with it no danger to life or goods,
there ought not to be a strict examination, and from that some apparent signs
of real holiness, and true faith, with some measure of knowledge.

3. Thirdly, Whether the Members ought not by an express agreement made between
them and the Church, to which they Associate, assent to that Doctrine and
Discipline, and promise obedience to the same.

4. Fourthly, Whether these Members are to be admitted as they shall
voluntarily and of their own will associate, or as they inhabit, which is
called Parishes.

5. Fifthly, In whom the power of Admission and exclusion of Members rests (or
to speak it in the Prelatick phrase) Whether the Superintendent Pastor, Bishop,
Officers, that is, the Classis respectively, or the Brethren, that is the whole
Company of Believers, not excluding Pastor and Officers, have the power of the
Keys, that is, may exercise all Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction save only in the
Sacraments.

6. Sixthly, Whether the limited Congregations, and that either in respect of
multitude or bounds be warranted by the word of God.

7. Seventhly, Whether they are to meet in one certain place.

8. Eighthly, What is the proper work of the ministry, viz. (whither
conversion of unconverted ones) (which must suppose with us some baptized not
converted) or only the confirmation and edification of Church members.

9. Ninthly, Whether the Pastors, etc. of particular Churches may not only
teach to confirming and edifying of sister-Churches, but also perform all other
Acts of Pastoral, etc. Office.

10. Tenthly, Whether prophecy ceases, or be a perpetual institution, so that
they who bear no Church Office, may exercise their gifts as brethren, (which
they often do to the shame of the present so called Ministry, excelling them not
only in life, but Doctrine, and also in the gifts of admonition, instruction,
confutation, reprehension, persuasion and consolation of the hearers) and that
the body of the Church present.

Now to clear this, It is controverted, but not yet by the Congregation
publicly.

1. First, Whether there be an infallible Ministry, not as teaching by an
infallible word and giving fallible expositions, but such as in their at least
public administrations have an infallible Spirit to guide them.

The reason of this Quaere is of principal concernment; for if such there be,
then assuredly their work is extraordinary, and then a settled maintenance for
extraordinary men will to most judicious men seem incongruous, and if out of a
settled place, more dissonant from the universal engagement which by the
mission apostolical is upon those endowed with such a Spirit.

If there be no such men, and that that spirit visibly is not existent in such
men among us; Then the Quaere is by what Rule or upon what ground, Apostolical
Succession is claimed without Apostolical Spirits.

And then upon what ground they become Teachers of the people. If it be said
from humane Learning, then the work is by some thought properly the subject, if
not soly, of the Magistrates power, and cognizance.

If it be said Divine purely, then it is answered before, and must be proved
either by the express word, or working of the Spirit, or both; if mixed, that is
grounded upon a Divine and infallible word, but subject to a fallible
construction: Then we are in the round, for none will acknowledge their own
opinion faulty.

By this it will appear that the particular Christian is the keeper of the
first Table, for none of these are in the whole infallible, Popes, Councels,
Bishops, Elders, Classes, Congregations, all erring, wandering, pleading
infallibility and demonstrating themselves fallible.

For the age and Qualifications of Pastors and Teachers, I altogether omit it,
presuming if the greater be settled, the lesser will also.

The Question concerning the Admission of Infants to baptism I omit, with the
ancient Rites of Baptism where the persons baptized stood up and received the
Sacrament: And only say that if no Rule were originally given for baptizing in
Fonts instead of fountains, no nor practiced in the most flourishing times of
the Church in all places Christian, yet after commanded, then assuredly if the
Church has that latitude in the form, take it only so of a Sacrament, There is
not so much amiss in Romes Mass as is supposed; and if the Church has not that
power, there is more amiss even in the purest reformed Congregations then is
yet discovered: And if so, then surely the Power of the Church must rest in
dispensing duly the plain word for edification, exhortation, confutation,
reproof, or exercising the discipline in rejecting the obstinate and
disobedient.

And in doubtfuls and indifferents Christian Liberty must consist; provided
that Liberty be not destructive to the civil peace in word or deed, or
evidently tending thereto.

This now will allow both Magistrates and Congregation a respective bound,
whereby both Antichrist Lay and Clerick may not domineer, to the disturbing of
Conscience; for if in in Paul's time one eat flesh, another Herbs, one meat
sacrificed to idols, others not, some kept days, others not:

Why this Ado, especially with Christians in a Church way? for in the
Magistratick order surely he may (however he will) enforce, not profaning the
day he appoints as aforesaid; and though they only of his opinion keep it
regularly, yet none of any opinion shall despise it and him irregularly, and if
they do and go unpunished, be assured the Magistrate is in the greatest fault,
he is or loose, or lazy, or both.

So for maintenance in this way, the Magistrate may clearly setle it and ought,
(and that only from a public maintenance) for otherwise his people will grow
pure beasts in the form and shape of men; and to these he ought to setle a
maintenance competent; for humane industry is capable of humane satisfaction;
this as Teachers; but as Pastors, let the additionall maintenance be as
Christian duty requires.

Now to setle it as Tithes, were the What, and how, and where, and when, and to
whom well settled, it cannot be unlawful, that is to give a tenth; but to admit
it as of duty to the Minister as to the Priest, to plead customs of and for
Tything, as well as to deny customs of not Tything, are all equally absurd, if
thoroughly scanned; A maintenance, and that only, is agreed due by all to them
that Labor in the word and Doctrine; but the whole Ministry has with us been
so Generally corrupted, that not only men have made or pretended conscience to
pay any Tithes to such wolves in sheep Clothing, but from the vanity,
wickedness and perverseness of these men of corrupt minds, have questioned
whither a ministry be.

Here is a hard task for the Magistrate; for he has been necessitated to take
that power into his hands, which at first himself questioned whither it were
lawful for him or not, but attempting and finding no danger present, the fear
is now least he should not let go his hold.

I presume this is clear, he may and will declare if he have any Religion,
which he approves; this is most natural; that he will establish what he
consents not to, who can persuade himself of it? all that I can say is, if he
be a Christian, let him with all meekness and in the evidence of truth by all
Christian means labor to win all, but to enforce none but the wicked and
disobedient to just and righteous Laws; The want of which is the great disgust
of all good men: but I shall not enlarge here of that.

The Churches power then consisting principally, if not wholly, in things plain
and evident, it is most certain that the Magistrates Power in ordinary ought
not to stretch so high, much less exceed; that is to help where that with
humane thoughts seems to come short, as the Church has hitherto held;

Now in this I shall speak one word to the great and weighty consideration of
the Supremacy of power, and whither, and how, there be, or may be Two Supreams,
which will a little clear up the way for amity amongst so called Christians of
all opinions.

First we must consider the rise of the controversy is from the word of God in
all the new Testament, wherein all words of saving knowledge are directed soly,
wholly and only to the Elect, Saints at least by calling and profession (which
in their season some think, nay believe shall govern the world) and at these as
called out of the way of the world, to a more holy and spiritual serving of
him.

Now some suppose this was to be done only in a Church way, which both Papist,
Greek Church and Protestants of all sides agree, that is, that the Magistrate
Ruling among Christians in ordinary ought to be a Christian.

Now says the Church of Rome, and all, as a Christian he must be a member of
some visible Church; if so, he must be subordinate to the Pope, and a general
Council says the Pope; to a general Council and Fathers of the Church, lay
the Biblers of old: To a general Council and the Kirk, say both the Lutheran
and Calvinistical Divines; All which, place the Power of the Church
Authoritatively in the Officers or Officer Supreme.

Now those of the Congregational way of all sorts distinguish as the rest do.

First in that the Supreme Magistrates are men, and so members of Churches,
they are Subject to the Discipline of the respective Congregations and
Churches, but as Magistrates they are distinct Officers in the world for the
good of all men, and the peaceable and quiet Governing of those committed by
God to their charge.

Now as a member, he is inferior to the whole; And as a man he is Subject to
Ordinances; But as a Prince, he is not Subject to the Church; for as the Prince
cannot as Prince perform the Offices of a Pastor:

So neither can the Pastor, Officers of one or more Churches, intermeddle with
the ruling power of the Prince as a Pastor or Church Officers, in any of their
opinions.

Now for Supremacy, they who are Christian Princes and Pastors, will not strive
for the Supremacy of Power, but keep their fixed places. All Saints are now the
Kings, Priests, and Prophets of the most High God; But more especially the
chief Magistrate in Ruling represents the Kingly Office of the Lord Christ, and
the Pastors and teachers the Priestly and Prophetical.

The Prince Governs the Commonwealth according to the Judicial Law of the
Almighty God, the Law of pure righteousness laid forth in both the Testaments;
And the Pastors and Teachers and Elders Govern the Church in dispencing the
Ordinances and Rules of the Gospel: the Pastor principally if not only in
Preaching of the Doctrinall part of Christianity; the brethren appointed to
teach, in opening the practical part of Christianity.

I know that some hold, that all ought to come under the pure notion of Church
Government, and all Magistrates to Rule as Church Officers; I allow it fit to
be Queried; but I presume it is the wickedness of our present age blinds our
eyes, that we see not all that all of them who pretend to sincerity desire;
And I see not, notwithstanding our variety of opinions, but that all that have
not the mark of the beast, shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

By this it is plain there is in the Church of Christ, the Lord Christ's
Substitutes in Governing the Nations by the material sword according to a Law
of righteousness, and Justice, which man may comprehend.

And there is the Lord Christ's Substitutes in holding forth to the several
Churches the Gospel of Love; the one has the sword of Justice, the other that
of the Spirit.

In the order of Government, the Pastors and all the Saints must submit to the
Supreme Magistrate as to Christ the King.

As a Christian, the Magistrate must submit to the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of Christ, as a member of that body whereof Christ is the head, as a
member, a Christian, subject to the Ordinances of the Gospel: As a Prince
ruling justly those committed to his charge.

It will be thought that this admitting of the Prince subject as a member, will
make his power subservient to the end of that particular Congregation to which
he is associated; And this will breed Emulation, and at last division; Now let
this thoroughly be considered in the cause original; and the head of this
fountain of bitterness being stopped, the streams it is hoped will be dried up.

From whence does all this proceed but from the opinion of the benefit of
uniformity, and from thence the necessity? and thus we War, that we might have
peace, and instead of convincing by Love, and waiting the appointed time, when
the vision will assuredly make haste and come, and will not tarry, we enforce;
laboring as we think by humane wisdom, politiquely to prevent the evils we
imagine may grow to a disturbance of the Peace of the Church; And surely this
pride of heart and humane Wisdom, this thinking so well of our selves, and
looking at the opinions of Christians more then the lives and conversations,
which is next to the eye of every man, and whereby God, and Christ, and the
Gospel is visibly dishonored, is the source or spring of the quarrels of
Christians: our duty in practical Christianity is so plain, and our
conversation so contrary, that it is the Wonderment of a Moralist, and all our
divisions for Church Government.

Power, oh had we Power.

And what brethren, could you do with your Power? could you raze one opinion
out of the heart of any conscientious man, now after so many thousand years
(man leave this vanity) Christian, now after sixteen hundred years, learn to
know the motions of the heart are only in the hand of the Lord; teach in
season, and out of season, to draw to the Faith; but let the Spirit of man be
convinced of the duty of Faith; What sense and reason, is capable of in the
plain Law, enforce so far as to secure the peace, and expiate justly the
offense.

For the Quaere of the power of Churches one over the other, I suppose it is
beaten sufficiently, and in whom the Power of settling of Pastors, and Power of
excommunication rests.

I shall now proceed, and as a necessary Quaere treat a little

First of Impropriations, and then of Prescriptions?

Impropriations to speak plainly, are of two sorts; the first called
appropriations being the granting presentative benefices to Religious houses;
The other was the freeing of such Lands as were given to Religious houses, from
the payment of Tithes; the ground of this was the supposed virtue that was in
the prayers of these Religious persons; but indeed there was a knot of carnal
Policy also, which was to keep the people ignorant by admitting little
preaching, which was counted the mother and nurse of Sedition.

Now this Arrow came not only out of the Popes quiver, but secular so called
Princes, after he began, followed, till at length the Abbyes, Monastaries,
Fryeries, etc. had, abounding in riches, and thereby abounding in ease, growing
Luxurious and sinful beyond belief, fulfilled the measure of their iniquities;
and Henry the 8. was the instrument as aforesaid to plague them, who yet
looking rather at Lucre and Power temporal, then Religious duty, did not
return the Benefices and Tithes into the Ancient course, but conveyed them
still along to the owners of the Lands of those Monasteries, etc. to which they
were annexed as they are still continued.

Now as many had such things by particular grant, so others held them, and some
other only by prescription; but the not doing of three or four things, makes
Reformation difficult.

First the not ordering all Christians in a Congregational way, either limited
or parochial, or absolute, which is best, without which a choice of a just,
safe and equal representative (Christian) will never be.

Next the not ordering all Annexations and Impropriations into the Common
stock, for the maintenance of teachers Humane and Divine.

Thirdly the discharging of all prescriptions, customs, Grants, etc. of
particular privilege of old, either of places, times or persons.

Lastly, the settling one Law weight, measure and tenure precisely throughout
the Nation. Now to speak one word of prescription, I take it to be but only the
continued Right of a particular person, or family, or now of a Corporation,
Township, etc. So that upon due and full search, it seems to me no more then a
custom in many places and cases.

Now for this, the time of prescription ought to be set certain; next the same
ought after once pleaded, to be settled and published just as a custom, so that
no public Right may not be publicly known, and the Justice of it owned; for
many prescriptions are as unjust as many customs, and equally to be
disallowed, as arising upon false grounds, evil in themselves, or tending to
the damage of the public. I now come to Quaere

What Law the Christian Magistrate ought to settle.
THis I suppose many will account a needless quaere, both in respect that the
law judicial generally is formerly asserted requisite to be the head law, and
also a form or kind of settled proceeding in law, agreed to be principally
according to the reason of the common law so called of the Nation, herein laid
down as grounded on the word of God.

But my intent is a little to discuss the rights of the so called common law,
and civil Law, and whither it be fit to allow such diverse courts of so called
diverse laws, and to search shortly whether they were originally one and the
same, or not, which I really suppose they were; for it is evident that although
the first writers of our laws use not the form of words of the civil law,
dividing the law into the tomes of the Digest, the Code, the Authentic, and
the Feuds;

Yet the rule of Justinians Institutes which are an epitome of the Digest, is
by them wholly observed.

Now the Digest or Pandect, that is the new called Institutes (for they are
various in names) I agree to be but the drawing of the multitude of particular
opinions and judgments of many venerable sages of the Law into one settled body
of Law, containing variety of learning, upon particular Titles of law or head
laws, which laws being grown exceeding voluminous and intricate, the English
neglected them; and few being learned, they were under the sword dispensed
with, and politiquely brought into the Closet of the Conquerors breast; and as
the condition of the Nation required, were enlarged or straightened at pleasure:
And upon interest only, the municipal law or customary Law of the people was by
some settled in opposition to the so called civil Law.

Now this interest was partly of Princes, who found the Civilian still to draw
strongly toward the advancement of Papal interest; partly of the practizer,
who hereby siding with the Prince, at last drew the Civilian into a narrow
room, and got the name of common lawyer, as studious of that law which was used
and received among the people by tradition generally, and in time they got
preheminences and liberties as we have seen established.

We have known the great strifes that have been in these courts not out of
conscience of the interest of justice to be either more faithfuly, or more
speedily, and at a due rate executed, but to bring grist to the Mill, as the
ministers glory was to have a multitude of Auditors, no matter how few
Christians, they would but scan his Doctrine, question his life, and unless he
were more worthy, scruple adding more to his former abundance.

So these men's honor, was, to have their courts packed with suitors, that the
several practiser from the Judge to the dore-keeper might have his Fee; from
these shifts grew the so called prohibitions, consultations, etc. And the poor
Suitor was undone, while the Courts admitted First with ease the Quaere, and
then eagerly prosecuted their own dues and rights before his could be
determined, which was ever slow paced enough.

This evidences the necessity of settled Fees in all places, and that from the
supreme Magistrate; This also clears the case that the supreme Magistrate must
admit but one Law in practice and proceeding, nor one sort of Lawyers; he may
for the advance of learning order the study of it in Latin and all the
exercises.

But the practice all ought assuredly to be in the vulgar tongue of the Nation,
and in that tongue to be constantly printed, and also all precepts and
processes of the Courts whatsoever; for the pure executing of justice is more
to be eyed then humane learning; For as in the Ecclesiastic State, when the
ordinances of men and unction of men are preferred above, and justle out the
ordinances and unction of the Lord, the Church is Apostate:

So when interests overtop justice, and justice and righteousness are become
Nominal, Topical heads, Hypocritical Colors to wilder the people, the State is
also Apostate; and as long as either of these work in Church or State, the
Apostasy, the fatal ruining Antichristian Apostasy reigns.

Therefore all the Courts of a well constituted Nation, a Nation that seeks the
welfare and freedom of her people indeed, must have a body of Law proper to
the Nation, and this must as before, be so settled, that every Subject may in
due just and evident way partake the benefit of it; therefore it must all be
common, and keep that name, that weak ones may not be offended, what law soever
be settled; for it is most properly belonging to the Community.

Lastly, admit as little form as may be, yet I would settle the habits of
Judges and practizers in all Courts, but by way of honor; for I intend but this
one word, the glory of form is lost where form is made Common, Scarlet, the
ornament of Judges is the guard of a Groom in these days.

Whither offices may be put to sale.
IN a word this is the plain inlet to all corruption; admit this and your
setlement must totter; to distinguish betwixt judicial places and other, is but
to hook in a liberty to unlawful things by degrees; for all are officers
tending to the execution of Justice, and it is unjust to pay too much, and to
stay too long for justice, as well as to be denied justice, or have false
justice; Admit such practices, and all evasions of Law will be not only studied
but practiced; one evil admitted, a thousand follow.

That just and honest and wisemen have done it, and do it, is not worth the
while; the short answer is, there is no man but errs, And soonest in matters of
interest, much more where custom signs the lawfulnes of it; but a word to
what makes it seem lawful.

Suppose the place be eighteen hundred pounds per annum accounted, as the
Chancelours was in the late Kings time; and Sir John Finch pay so much
annually, viz. Two thousand pound to Duke Hamilton, Two thousand to Lord Au.
and at last has four or five thousand pound a year only to himself.

So the Prothonotary of the Common Pleas to pay eleven thousand pounds for his
place, and have eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen hundred or two
thousand pounds a year, had he not better have had it freely, and only five
hundred, then if he had died within a year, left his only daughter a beggar,
and his Friends engaged only to purchase a more then necessary allowance? I
could set down who had this money, how it was shared, unless wise and honest
men then misinformed me.

By this it is clear, that there may be a sufficiency to settle the interests
of the supreme Magistrate, if they have wise and honest men to carry on the
work, upon foundations of certain Justice, and pay every officer, and the
Supreme Magistrate to be a gainer, however no looser, but the people to be
surely advantaged in the just procedure and Issue of their litigations.

Now for the choice of Officers it is settled before; both in the qualification
honest and skilled; and in due manner approved; and in places of many Officers,
where aptness is by the course of succession, if no objection be, is most
plausible, but not to be tied to it.

Now the way to have good Officers, is to settle eminently just Judges; and to
gain them, is not to have too many; and in young States or beginnings this is of
absolute neeessity; for without it ruin is unavoidable.

The necessity of educating Seamen, and the way of breeding them, and from
that of the Politic Law to restrain eating of Flesh.
THis quere is of great concernment to This Nation and Island; God is our
support; but the means which the Lord affords us, are not to be neglected.

Therefore in the first place we shall look at the way of increasing, and
breeding Mariners.

I suppose it is clear to most intelligent men, that by the fishery, there by
long being abroad in stormy seasons, and high Seas, whither great gain invites
them, they become not only inured to the Sea, but grow hardened and dreadless,
their experience being much more then either a Merchant or man of War can
atchieve; So that where they breed one able Mariner, a poor North Seaman
breeds Ten. And indeed from these are your great Ships manned.

I must therefore be the care of the Supreme Magistrate especially to provide
for even these.

The first care is that they may fish safely, therefore the convoy ought to be
sufficient.

Next when they come home, there must be vent for the fish; The obstacle is the
old superstition of the Lent, or the Forty days fast: the just and prudent
Magistrate can easily remedy this, by making it Twenty eight or Thirty days.

There is an objection or two against the season.

First religious or so supposed, just before Easter, and carries the time of
superstition: setle it to begin upon a certain day of the Month yearly and that
scruple is gone.

The next is Physical: then is the return of the year, and our bodies which
should then receive best nourishment, are filled by fish with cold and
flatulent nourishment; this may seem much to some, but it is not worth the
while: for suppose there were nor flesh nor fish, there is variety of meats to
live on for a month in England.

But I suppose two days in a week truly observed to have no flesh spent were
better; for see how Lent was kept: lay in so much flesh before as served the
household; And so it would be, ye will say, for two days in a week; I agree
it; therefore I say truly observed: therefore as in the historical part I
propound that the reason of every law be divulged, and conscience from
conviction of the benefit of it engaged to obedience, and no way like that, as
the examples of Catholic abstinence now manifest.

But if the Magistrate would use force, I shall offer the best and most
reasonable way, which is to send to every household in every town so many fish
at an equal and set rate by him, according to the number of his family, so many
fish for every head by the year, accompting two days in the week wholly for
fish.

Now the benefit of the preservation of young Cattle, is great and warily to be
provided for: therefore let the Magistrate enact, that all Lamb killed before
such a day shall be forfeited, and the killer and eater to forfeit a price.

So no Chicken, Turkey, Duck or Goose till such an age, no Rabbit till
Midsommer; And that in Two great respects.

First, till that time they bear little grouth, and do not much harm if well
looked too.

Secondly the wool and skin is then serviceable.

Now for Calves, the laws for rearing of young Cattle must be made in them more
certain; for Bull Calves needs not in many places to be preserved equally as
others; some also are plainly unfit for to be reared, at least by opinion;
Therefore there must be a loose to them more then others.

But to setle all, to provide that every second, third, fourth or fifth Calfe
be reared up, or so much paid to the hayward of the Town; And every Town to
have one, seems easy and feazible.

Whither losses at Sea by Piracy ought to be satisfied, by whom and how.
ASSuredly the taking of customs, etc. engages the Supreme Magistrate to the
guard of the Sea; now this done, many think the work is done, and customs are
due clearly; but the Subject must bear his private loss.

Others Christianlike say that there are providence which none can eschew, and
for these each one must bear his own burden. Next there are remote places
wherein Traffic is thought settled; Yet clearly in dominions of other Princes
and States, and that for any Supreme Magistrate to assure their Subjects in all
places, is impossible. Therefore the Engagement of the Magistrate must be
settled.

First that the Piracy be within such a precinct or bound.

Secondly that it be a vessel of the Nation.

Thirdly of goods lawful, but not that if any goods unlawful were in the Ship,
no recompense be, but that recompense be only for lawful, that is not goods
prohibited, whether for importation or exportation.

Fourthly to a Subject of the Nation, in other cases let the customs of
Nations prevail.

But in these cases it is just that Recompense be to the loosers by the Supreme
Magistrate out of prizes taken by his men of War, which ought therefore to be
valewed, and returns made Annually to the losers as their losses are proved in
time; allwaies provided a high punishment, be to him or them abuse the State.

Now there is great difficulty made of the proof of these things. But we
perceive it is easy to the State if the Governors have a mind; for the lading
will appear in the Bill or Cocket if they have it; if not, and

That that be miscarried, they can have what they can claim out of the office
from whence they sailed; And the Principal Merchants can quickly make out the
work; especially if all Merchants be brought under rules of Trade as they ought
to be, what ever is yet alleged to the Contrary.

How all Accounts for the Common Wealth are to be settled etc.
THis ought also to be done in the several Counties; there, are the men best
known and their dealing.

Admit complaints to men empowered, and that with speedy and due Justice, and
small charge, and men in conscience will complain often, where little or no cause
is; but that is quickly ended.

But make it difficult, and Envy and Malice are the only accusers; men do
accuse then not of but out of conscience only.

Let the times be set positively wherein to have all accounts cleared, and yet
let none be called to account upon error after a set time; for I would have all
formal accounts cleared and burnt once in seven years, they are not worth the
keeping; let the Auditors be carefully assigned, who are to prove the accounts,
and let the punishment be in case of Error or Arrears securing estate, till
cleared, and the person, except good Sureties be; for it is clear, it is the
due prosecution of justice is the great privilege; and if nothing but securing
persons will keep them in due order, let the work be done.

For the Judges, they must have power to call to account as often as they see
cause, but all to be ended with the year as aforesaid.

And let all Treasurers and Officers have their fees from the State, as before.

Next let them have their offices only during well abearing, and so much in
the pound truly for all discoveries of deceits, and the work will manage it
self, especially if once the erroneous principle of conceiving it unchristian
and unbrotherlike for a brother to enform of a brother be beaten out of the
world.

In whom is the Right and Power of Calling Councels.
THis is a great Question, much ado is made concerning it in the world, and yet
all to little purpose; for that most spend their time only in treating what
was done; but few upon what right it was founded.

It is not, nor cannot be intended here, who should Congregate the people in
Civil Matters.

No, it is intended in Questions doubtful, troubling the peace of the Churches
of God.

Now it is plain, by what has been said before, that the latitude of the
Magistrates power in these cases, is only the preservation of the public
Peace; otherwise he has but the relation of a private Christian.

Therefore as Emperor, King, or State, to settle, or convene a Colloque,
Assembly, Diet, or Council, Provincial or General, he has no Power in a
Church Way.

It must be only prudentiall, to assure or continue the public peace in the
best way they may, wherein all things that are not unlawful and be expedient,
become lawful.

But to assure the jealousy of the Supreme power, it is not requisite to have
such public Conventions without the Magistrates permission; but to turn this
sufferance into a Right, was an Error.

Again, for the Churches to desire the Magistrates permission, and after to
enforce a Grant, or summon without, was a greater fault; for their profession
admits less deviation; just Magistrates will not deny the Churches lawful
meetings, while the Churches seek but lawful things lawfully.

Now as the Churches have the first insight, as by Office, into Church Errors,
it is their duty to consult a remedy; and if a meeting of some few Churches,
yea be it provincial, shall be required, till error arise, it may not be
unlawful; they have the Right.

But if the Magistrate upon error settle a Law to prevent that error, (further
the Magistrate ought not to go, and so far he may) then the Churches ought to
observe that Law; But in case of Error, or such Conventions as are possibly
dangerous to the Civil Peace, the Supreme Magistrate ought to be advised, and
ought to be obeyed, if dissenting, yea though his dissent be not in some eyes
well grounded; for this evil is the least, however experience has manifested
in a superstitious Age the Churchman prevails, in a swording the Magistrate.

What I have written, may to many seem doubtful, to whom the power of Right
belongs.

But the plain meaning is this; This being a Church-Affair, an Assembly for the
settlement of conscience, it is the proper work of the Churches.

And if the Churches have power over one the other, as in the Popish,
Episcopal, and Presbyterian way; the Summons ought De jure to move from the
Church, but the Magistrate may prohibit, and ought to be obeyed; but diverse
Churches dissenting this in fact, caused first an address to the Imperial
Power, and so it would do again; also the very Congregating such Members into
one place, ought, both for the safety of them that meet, and the place where
they meet, and of the whole State, to be not only with the knowledge, but the
approbation of the Supreme Magistrate; and the rather, for that though those
elected ought to go, yet no Christian may be debarred; this in that way, and in
the Congregational way more clearly will assure, that though the business be a
Church business, and concerning matters of mere conscience: yet the great
matter, is, as they are men, to consult of difficulties and this is the
Church-work; and therefore the Magistrate ought not to prescribe the Christians
met what to propound.

For I presume, That ought to be long before manifested; first, in the private
Congregation, then in the adjoining Churches, yea, in public Conventions.

There is another part of the Quaere, that is, Whether the Magistrate may
summon without the Churches prayer?

Now as to the right, assuredly as a Father of the Country principally
entrusted for the good, welfare, and peace of his people, and as a Christian
taking notice of unchristian Controversies, he may invite assembling the
Churches, and may require it, but ought not enforce until the civil Peace be
actually disturbed; he leaves the sin at their door. This root of bitterness
arose from thoughts of the necessity of remedying what was amiss, and venturing
all for that, which is true and false: A false color of truth with a real
mistake; the Magistrate cannot enforce here; the Church must have its due
liberty here; otherwise we must admit by the Rule of Contraries, the like power
to the Church against the Magistrate offending.

No, let each keep their place, and if the Magistrate will amend the Church,
let it be by Preaching, not fighting; let them come that will upon his call,
let him persuade the other, not enforce actually (politickly he may) no not
though all that come agree with him.

But I am confident, Take away the interest of Power and Revenue, and the
Spring of all these controversies will be dried up; for the matter is clear in
it self, and by most so agreed.

I could enlarge much in this, and all the heads that I have treated on.

I could have multiplied Quaeries to delight the Ear, and make the Book more
Merchantable in this Age; I could have scattered witty varieties, Recorded old
Histories, and interwoven new Stories, to have delighted a foeminine fancy; I
could have so polished my phrase, and trimmed my discourse, that it should have
stolen away the heart of a light youngling, and like a Romance fettered him in a
clew of delights, till he had come to the end of the Book and been never the
wiser.

But as the first thing moved me to this Work, was the serious apprehension of
the bitter Cup the Lord had put into the hand of the Inhabitants of this Nation
to drink, and what God had done in Germany; when my soul considered the deadly
defiances among men so called Christians; not only Nation against Nation, but
they of the same Nation one against the other:

When I eyed the Threats and Promises of the Word of the Eternal God, Revolved
his Acts of old, and at present done amongst us; comparing the Professions and
Practices of Christians; and that though we had light above others, yet our
sins were more grievous then others; but most of all was my spirit affected
with the many engagements which lay upon the Nation; For this light drew from
us on all sides, Royal, and Parliamentary, and that under what notion, or name,
or opinion soever you will rank them, Promises and Vows of settling Truth and
Righteousness; King, Parliament, and People, all seeing the Errors in Church
and State; a bare name, no face, if a footstep of pure Christianity. This in
the first place put me upon a more serious way of Writing; and in the second
place, the multitude of my occasions would not permit the idle time to clip,
and pare, and file, when I was forced to steal time, to cast and mould the
matter of this Discourse by a quarter of the hour to day, and as much the next,
seldom an hour together, and then happily not of a week, two, or three,
sometimes not of a month after; This will render me to a wise man over
zealous, and over-confident, to rush so unadvisedly into such a great
undertaking as it does attempt the holding forth, though but in Essay, the
frame of a Civil Christian Government; and they that know me will say,

Have so many Ages passed? Are so many wise men at present? And none to
undertake it, but one so young, a man not able for time to have digested in any
part the voluminous Tracts, which he that but offers at such an Essay ought to
have gone through; and to do all this raptim, and that by snatches, which
required the most serious thoughts.

Lastly, A man that practiced the Law of England so short a while, that he
could not comprehend the Ambages of it; and for eminency of parts, a man of no
Renown, the world has not taken notice of him.

I know this, as to others, will be the whispers and speakings concerning Me,
and this Work; It is not presumption of my Abilities, nor to gain applause that
I adventure upon this Work; my heart was fired within me, when after so many
reiterated undertakings for Righteousness, Justice, etc. I saw the Work so far
off from perfection, that it was worse then before.

I waited, attended, hoped, prayed, and all, yea incited men able, and skilled
in the Laws of the Land, by long study, and approved parts: They agreed Error
in the whole, a necessity of Reformation, and that even by a Transubstantiation
not Consubstantiation; for they agreed the whole Law was, as it is, devolved
into Form and Practice; the pure streams of Justice, were as they fell from the
fountain of Divine and Moral Reason, drawn by Art into private Cisterns of
Profit and Honor.

But they durst not undertake the Work.

I desired then, considering my many occasions, That they would but impart
something to me, to help me in my so great attempt; I talked with some
Attorneys to the same purpose; and from two men I received two Papers, showing
the abuse of damage clear and suing out the Cap. utlagats, the most ordinary
matters.

I then addressed my self to some men eminent in Honor, and places of Trust;
discovered my mind; we argued; I saw they were convinced of the truth of the
thing, and were resolved, were the Law altered, they should submit, yea even to
what I then and here propounded.

But they would have no hand in it; they had no time, they had spent their
Studies in the present Law, and to change was a new work; Some advised me to
leave off these thoughts, and fall to Practice, they would warrant me I should
get as much as any of them; After long delays, consulting my own strength, and
seeing Judges, Sergeants, Counselors, Attorneys, Solicitors, and All,
confessed Alteration necessary, delays evident, Justice uncertain, Equity more
ruining then undoing Common Law.

I did partly out of the sense of the unjustness and wickedness of the Law, but
principally that I might be out of the lash of a credit Ruining frown, leave
all Practice whatsoever, as I had formerly left the most, and did consult which
way to take to open in the most Christian way, the Evils of the Apostate State,
and Commonwealth; and how to offer an expedient suitable to the condition of the
people wedded to Laws and Customs called their own.

This is that which the Lord put me upon; I have avoided to my utmost all
bitterness, and just occasion of offense to any, either Powers, or persons: And
to any man shall require a further account of the hope that is in me concerning
matter of Conscience, or of the matter of Law, and the Reasons herein offered,
so it be with Christian meekness and zeal for the Truth, according to my
knowledge, I shall freely discover my self, and yield I hope, a satisfactory
answer.

For I assert, there is nothing here laid down in any kind, as to the civil
Regiment, not warranted by the present (so called) Law Books of England; I
restrain not my self to the so called Year-Books.

For the scantness of my time, I could have wished more, and more abilities,
and that both natural and experimental; but you must take it as it is; only an
Essay for a Settlement of a Christian Commonwealth, I leave the Work to such as
Providence shall cull out of the many present Worthies of Englands Laborers.

Me thinks, England labors like a woman in sore pangs of Travel, crying out to
be delivered; I pray God none of the Midwives Juno like set cross-legg'd in the
Temple of honor, profit, power, or the like. O that every one could banish all
interests, and all Relatious for Christ's sake.

I know abundance that will allow this project of Resolving this Nation into
County Jurisdictions, their spirits will be immediately fancying places to
themselves, friends, kindred, etc. for the moddle holds forth a due
satisfaction, even to carnal Interests.

The opposition will arise from the great interest of the City of London, and
the Supreme Judicatures; but it is clear, their interest may thus be continued
to a just proportion.

Now they ruin Government within themselves, and destroy the whole Nation
besides; let them live, but let not England perish; for the Lords sake, you
that are our Physicians, remember your promises when you undertook the Cure.

Then you stroaked the wound gently, you asked nothing till the cure were
perfected; but our wound is open still, more ways to discourage the poor
impoverished subject then ever.

Take but the many fruitless Acts for poor prisoners into consideration, and
the forceing an Affidavit of the Engagement, notwithstanding a Certificate of
the Commissioners; can we not easily determine the Reason? it cannot be zeal
for Justice, but the Clerks Fee upon the Oath; our hearts are hot in pursuit
after the world, while our lips breath forth expressions of the new birth.

Assuredly Englands Allarms to War will not cease till the sins cease.

You that are in Authority, like valiant Chieftains, must not only speak
courageously, but Act rigorously; you and your just Acts and Ordinances are
slighted, and contemned; First, by your selves, our Trustees, they are not duly
transmitted to the Counties; then by our selves, your Trustees, they, or some
of them deal with them as they list, each one interprets as his interest leads.

Let these things be represented to you, and what is done? nothing.

Nay, come up to London, wait and attend till you be weary; the justness of
your Cause gives not the quicker dispatch; yea, I have heard, that some spoken
to, to hasten matters agreed on, have been told their haste should cause their
tarriance, or words to that effect.

These are sad Symptoms, to such Melancholy spirits as mine, of renewed
Judgments; I shall say no more, But leaving the whole Work to the Lord,
address my self to seek his face, and pray unto THe Lord our God, the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of all the faithful, the Almighty Jehovah, the
Father of our Lord Jesus, and in him both of Jew and Gentile.

That he will please to open the eyes of all called Christians, and give them
hearts to understand his ways, that they may see and perceive the evil of
their doings; that the precisest professors may see, that from their evil
walkings the Enemy takes advantage, and causes many Professors to fall off,
vainly thinking all are wholly hypocritical, because of some men's failings;
Let those, O Lord, who have some beginnings of resenting their duty to seek thy
face, not give any occasion to thy Enemies (the profane-hearted yet among thy
people) to transgress with more boldness because of their Liberties.

Yea give the loose Professors to consider, that their evident unchristian
walkings cause the open Enemies of our blessed Savior to blaspheme, even Jew
and Gentile; for what people walk so contrary to their profession, as the so
called Christian?

Father, I pray discover to them that claim to be called thy Clergy, as at
least (indeed) set apart for more excellent and eminent services, in Word and
Doctrine, that their lives must be the best Interpreter of their words, their
conversations of their Exhortations and Persuasions. To Preach Love, and live
in Enmity; to Preach Obedience and be Refractory, if not Rebellious, is not
Christ's way.

O let them all see, even from the highest to the lowest; that its Error
evident has caused Truth to be distrusted, and their words contemned;
Righteousness and Truth carry a Majesty which Satan fears: Convince them
therefore, that as they have lost the glory of Pastors, by preaching Christ,
and pretending for Christ, and following the world, and seeking Self, so they
must redeem their ancient honor by signal services.

Let love be even to Enemies, and let the reducing of those that go astray, be
with that real sincere affection, as they Preach Saint John did his
backsliding outlaw, given in trust to a Pastor or Bishop.

Let them be Fathers of the Church and brethren in Christ; let them be eyes to
the blind, and teachers to them that are slow of heart; let them be diligent
and faithful in their places, preaching in season, and out of season, looking
at their duty more then the reward; for by the vertual Succession, or public
Designation they own, the charge of the Lord is upon them, and they pluck a woe
upon themselves if they preach not the Gospel.

Lord, dispel from their minds the rudiments of the world; the superstitious
reasonings of the flesh, and all carnal Ordinances, and give them the Evidence
of thy Spirit, that by thy Power they may be instrumental in this our day of
high expectation to draw much people to the Lord.

Holy Father, give us Magistrates as of old, men full of wisdom, and of the
fear of the Lord, men of courage, and despising riches: let them make Thee
their strength, not trusting to their knowledge, knowing that in case of a
Kingdom appointed to ruin by God, wise Councels and fair occasions avail not,
but are by a secret overruling Providence wholly inverted: nor to their
courage riches or power for the same reasons.

Let them not undertake War for Ambition, nor as all Christian Princes and
States of late have done, engage in Oaths in policy and for stratagems; let
their leagues be kept inviolably: the privilege of Nations is above that of
private persons: let their Laws be not only in the letter, but the practice
also the Indexes of pure Justice: let their Government be such a sweet mixture
of Justice and Mercy, that may declare they seek Reformation, not destruction;
the Glory of God, not the benefiting of Self: let them hear before they
determine, determine before they execute, and yet execute so, that
Righteousness may be preserved free from the scandal not only of false Justice
but also of too late Justice.

Banish from the hearts of all such as thou shall call to places of Judicature,
every affection that is dissonant to the purity of Christian Profession: Let
not form destroy the essence of Justice. O Lord, look upon all those that have
power, wisdom and riches, whereby being eminent in their Generations, they are
rendered useful for thy glory, that they may all of them improve the Talents
that they have received, to the end for which they were principally given.

And Father, let thy many promises of building up Sion, sending down the New
Jerusalem, settling the people in peace, making them all of one heart and mind,
be fulfilled to us in this our day: Many believe it is the great work of thy
Glory, reserved for thy Call of thine own people: Lord hasten that time,
shorten the evil days for thine Elects sake, and stir up all hearts in their
respective places, so to act, as the vigor of all Christian virtues may be so
apparent, that all eyes may see the brightness of thy glory, the perfect image
of the Father shining forth in the conversations of the children.

Let all our emulations be holy, tending only to incite and stir up desires of
more affectionate duties and services to the eternal Majesty, not seeking after
(principally) loose and accustomed liberty, but laying such a due restraint
upon all inordinate walkings, that even propension to transgression may be
chastised, nay strangled in the heart, before it grows to action. Let the gifts
of the mind in our Commonwealth have the first place, then the excellencies of
the body, and let those of the world have the last, as the lowest in the Sphere
of Christian Politics.

Let thy Kingdom, even of thy Son the one eternal, immortal, invisible infinite
Prince, the Prince of Peace, come; let his Spirit so rule and reign in the
hearts of the sons of men, that his will may be so done of us here as it is in
heaven, that thou and thy Name may be glorified by all flesh; even so be it, O
Lord.

Amen, Amen.
So prays

CHARLES GEORGE COCK, Student of Christian Law, Of the Society of the
Inner Temple, now resident in Norwich.

FINIS.
Postscript.
As I find this Work accepted, I shall enlarge.

Isaiah 62. verse. 1. For Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, and for
Ierusalems sake I will not rest until the Righteousness thereof break forth as
the light, and the salvation thereof be as a burning Lamp.

Verse. 6. and 7. Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep not silence, and
give him no rest, until he repair and set up Jerusalem the praise of the Earth.


