A LETTER SENT BY COL. COBBET FROM THE General Council of OFFICERS TO GENESIS
MONK. WITH HIS ANSWER To the said LETTER, Dated at Edinburgh October. 27. 1659.

Together with A LETTER intended to have been sent from the Militia of London,
to General MONK, and the Officers under his Command in Scotland.

London, Printed in the Year, 1659.

A LETTER from some Officers at Whitehal, to the Commander in Chief of the
Forces in Scotland, to be communicated to the Officers of the Army there.
GENTLEMEN,
WE hold it a duty incumbent upon us, in order to the preserving the Peace of
this Commonwealth, as well as to give you satisfaction in an extraordinary
passage of Providence that lately has befallen us, which nothing but necessity
and sense of duty could have prevailed with us to have undertaken.

Of late, the old spirit of Malignancy in all parts of the Nation appeared as
well in the old professed Adversaries, as Neuters and pretended friends, who,
having sworn a confederacy and secrecy, and fitted and prepared themselves to
have swallowed up the Interest of the good people of this Commonwealth, through
the blessing of God were prevented in very many places; only in Cheshire they
got an head, as we presume you have long since heard. Against which force, the
Lord Lambert was sent with a Brigade, who (with the hazard of all that was dear
to them) with cheerfulness undertook that service: And God having, according to
his wonted kindness, given an issue to that undertaking (even when the enemy
concluded of success) The Officers there, weighing their duty in improving that
signal mercy, and considering how craftily those that bore to the Adversary
good will in former times, had by fair speeches, pretenses and suggestions,
cheated us of our hopes and expectations; and finding the disease more general
than was to be supposed to be understood by the Patliament, did agree upon an
humble Petition and Proposals to them: with a very sober and Christian Letter,
sending the said Petition and Proposals in the said Letter to the Lord
Fleetwood, with a desire, that if he thought it fit, it might be communicated
to a General Council of Officers for their approbation. His Lordship forthwith
communicated the said Letter and Paper to Sir Arthur Hesilrig, with a desire,
that himself, Sir Henry Vane, and Major Salwey, would give his Lordship a
meeting, to consider what was fit to be done therein, who promised to answer
his Lordships desire: But notwithstanding in stead thereof, the next day the
said Sir Arthur acquainted the House, (for what reason we know not) of the said
Paper, and that there was a dangerous design among those faithful Servants of
the Commonwealth. Upon which rumors were spread abroad of introducing a
Government by a single Person (which was directly contrary to the scope and
desire of the said Paper) Whereupon the House ordered an Admonition to be given
to the Officers of the Army; and reproachful speeches were frequently cast up
and down of sending the Lord Lambert to the Tower, and that some of the chief
Officers in the said Brigade deserved to be hanged, drawn and quartered. By all
which, we clearly perceived, the design was either to divide between the
Parliament and the Army, or between the Army and the good People of the Nation,
or the Army within its self. Upon which the Officers here met, and agreed upon
an humble Representation and Petition, which they delivered to the House, and
had their Thanks, with a promise that their Proposals in the said Petitien
should be taken into consideration: At which General Council (to the end that
nothing might be done by us, but what you might have full knowledge of)
directions were given for sending the same, together with the reasons and
grounds thereof sent unto you. One of which Letters being sent to Col. Okeys
Regiment, was brought into the House by a member thereof. The House thereupon
declared the Lord Fleetwood's Commission void, together with the Commissions of
the Lord Lambert, Major Genral Disbrow, and seven more Field Officers. And all
this was done without so much as hearing them speak one ward for themselves, or
examining whether the names, subscribed to the said Letter, were the
handwriting of the said Officers, and all arising upon the same matter, for
which, before they had given Thanks to the Army (an ill requital for their
unwearied pains for the service of this Commonwealth) And some who seemed more
eager to inflict punishment upon those Officers that subdued the common Enemy,
then upon the common Enemy by them subdued, had so contrived it, that the
Regiment commanded by Colonel Morley (who, with six others, were appointed to
command the Army) was brought on for the Guard of the House, six or seven
Barrels of Powder laid in, together with provisions, in order to the effectual
prosecution of the said Design.

So soon as the Officers had the knowledge of these proceedings, and finding all
once more laid at stake, resolved to trust the Lord with the Issue, and took
Arms for the preservation of the good People, and Peace of these Nations, and
have put a stop to the sitting of the Parliament for the present, concluding it
a betraying of that Cause and Interest, more precious then our lives, and for
which we have often jeoparded us all, to suffer this Army, that God has made
the Bulwark of the Peace of the Nation, to be divided and broken, to answer the
ends and designs of evilminded men. And therefore upon the whole, Our humble
request to you is, That you would not hastily judge this Action; It being our
desire and design to approve our hearts to God, that our end is the Glory of
God, the Peace of these Nations, and the settlement thereof in the way of a
Commonwealth, without a single Person, or House of Peers. And therefore
whatever reports or suggestions the Enemy may raise to the contrary; We desire
you would give no place or credit thereunto. But in your several places strive
to preserve the Peace, and to suppress any turbulent or discontented Spirit, or
contrivance of the Enemy, under what name or appearance soever it shall show it
self: In order to which the Officers here, at a General Council, have with an
unanimous consent acknowledged and owned the Lord Fleetwood, Commander in Chief
of the Army, and declared their resolution to obey no other Orders, but what
shall be given or communicated by his Lordship; and to look on those that are
contrary minded, as disturbers of the Peace of the Army; and further have under
consideration what may be necessary and fit, in Order to the speedy and
effectual settlement of the Armies and this Commonwealth. And for your more
full and clear Information in these things, We have sent you Copies of our said
Representation, and Petition, and Letters, upon which the House passed the said
Votes. We shall add no more, but commend you to the Lord, and desire your
Prayers that God would now appear in giving wisdom and understanding, that we
may know what to do, and find his presence with us in our undertakings, that
the end of this may be his Glory, the comfort of those that fear the Lord, and
the Peace and good settlement of this Commonwealth. For a more particular
account of affairs here at present; We refer you to the bearer hereof, Col.
Cobbet, to whom we desire you will give credit: We remain,

Your affectionate Friends and Servants. John Disbrow. Ja. Berry. Jo. Mason Ed.
Salmon. Charles Fleetwood. Tho. Kelsey. Jo. Duckenfield. Jer. Camfeild.

These for the Right Honorable General Monck, to be by him Communicated to the
rest of the Officers of the Army in Scotland.



An ANSWER of the Commander in Chief and Officers of the Forces in Scotland; To
a LETTER from some Officers at White Hall.
GENTLEMEN,
With how great reluctance we put Pen to Paper against you, our sad hearts,
which are still firmly united to you in the same bond of love as ever, can bear
us witness; yet, that we may not be wanting in our duty to God, our Country and
Posterities in a day of so great trial as is come upon us; we are constrained
to bear our Testimony against your late violent proceedings upon the Parliament
of England; for which proceedings we confess our selves altogether ignorant of
a warrantable ground (notwithstanding the account you have given us) either
from Scripture, Reason, or Necessity: For, suppose the account you have given
us of that Action to be impartial (which yet we think we have some ground to
suspect.) We would gladly know what ground there could be of sending about your
late Petition and Representation, to create Greatness and Power in Men (a thing
of dangerous consequence) after you had received the Parliaments Answer
thereunto?

If you avow the Thanks of the House? We answer, Those had no relation to the
matter of the Petition; for that they gave their sense of that before, viz.
That it was Dangerous, Chargeable, and Useless to make more General Officers
than they had made: Their Thanks were only for your good expressions in the
Petition, whereof they could not but have these especially in their
consideration, viz. your acknowledging them the Supreme Authority of these
Nations, and your selves their faithful and obedient Servants: Now by
appointing a Committee to Recommend that Petition to all Regiments for
Subscriptions, after so great a progress made in it by a few, and the
Parliaments Negative sense declared of it, What could there be in design, but a
stirring up the Army against the Parliament? This we cannot but take notice of,
as a considerable circumstance in the management of that affair. To the matter
it self of the Petition, we mean only, that of appointing General Officers, we
think we have just cause to declare our dislike: And we cannot but wonder, how
such as have so lately escaped out of the Tyranny of an absolute Monarch,
whereunto by their own too credulous inclinations they unhappily fell, should
again carry so many materials for the building up of that they have so lately
destroyed: The best of men, we know, are subject to many failings; and how this
Army and these poor Nations have already been cheated with specious pretenses,
the sad Revolutions these five years last past do sufficiently evidence. No
doubt many pious men were made to believe, after the former Interruption of
this Parliament, That the Yoke should be taken off the neck of the Oppressed,
none but Faithful and Godly men kept in Authority, and sundry other promises
of like import; and no sooner was that work done, but all the Godly in the Land
were animated in their differences, many faithful ones in the A^my and Navy,
and in Civil Judicatories shamefully removed, many precious ones sent to
loathsome Gaols, very few, save Court-compliers, countenanced; till our Yoke
was become heavier then what our Fathers Necks had been accustomed to; and an
Officer of the Army as contemptible and odious in the eyes of the Honest Party
in England, as a Janizary at Constantinople, and scarcely known o^ distinguish:
by any other title: There are living Testimonies among your selves, which, to
their sad experience, can put their Seal to these truths; Watness Lord Lambert,
Col. Overton, Col. Rich, Col. Okey, Col. Saunders, Col. Alared, Col. Packer and
his Officers, Sir Henry Vane, Maj. Genesis Harrison, Mr. Carew, Quartermaster
General Courtney, with many others which would be too long to insert. And is
Servitade and Oppression already become so desirable a thing, that it must be
courted and petitioned for? What can so readily create Servitude, as the
contracting the Power of the Nation in so narrow a space as a Single Person, or
a few of any one Faction? Will not this be to Rule the rest of the Nation with
a Rod of Iron? For, can any thing but Force support such a Government? yea,
such a Force as must beggar our selves and posterities, in a very few years,
even to their skins? We beseech you lay these things sincerely upon your
hearts, and let not the ancient Foundation of our Liberties (we mean the
Authority of Parliaments) be destroyed, or made contemptible: You cannot but
acknowledge, that the blessing of God was on us in all our public enterprises,
whilst we stood by them, and as great a withdrawing of His presence from us,
when we fell from them. We were told by yours of late, that the Malignant Party
were grown so high, that such as were instrumental in bringing the King to
Justice, and establishing the Government in a Commonwealth, were marked out for
destruction, and like to be exposed to the Rage of their Enemies: We beseech
you look narrowly into your own hearts, and then tell us by whom they are so
exposed at this time, and what other Consequent of it can be, but the
heightning of the spirits of the Malignant Party; for the encouragement of
which Interest, we think the wit of man could not have devised a more effectual
mean, then the Interruption of the Parliament, wherein (by your own confession)
you have resisted the Supreme Authority of the Nation, and consequently the
Ordinance of God, not to be justified by the highest necessity. We therefore
entreat you with all earnestness of spirit, That as you love the Interest of
Gods People, the Peace and Liberty of these Nations, and the quiet of your
Consciences, when you shall be drawing near to the close of your days, That
you would speedily invite the Members of Parliament to return to the discharge
of their Duties, in that Freedom and Liberty in which the S^pream Authority of
these Nations ought to sit: And we do assure you, that touching the Officers of
the Army, upon whom their late Votes of Dismission were past, none shall
interpose with greater vigor and zeal for the continuance of them in their
Commands, and for an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, then our selves: And in
all other things that may conduce to the Union of the Army, and of the good
People of the Land, and to the establishing the Kingdom of Christ in
righteousness and peace amongst us, we will go hand in hand with you. Mean
while, our Prayers to God shall be for the guidance of his Spirit both to you
and us: To which good Spirit we recommend you, and remain,

Your affectionate Friends and Servants,
Edinburgh, October. 27. 1659. For the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood, To be
communicated to the Officers of the Army at Whitehall.



The Substance of a Letter intended to have been sent from the Militia of
London, to General Monk and the Officers under his Command in Scotland.
GENTLEMEN,
WE understand, That you are preparing to march with an Army into England,
having displaced and imprisoned several Officers of the Army of known Integrity
to the Commonwealth, and appointed others in their Commands; And that you are
making great and warlike Preparations hereunto; Which as things now stand, we
cannot but judge very threatening to the Peace of this Nation. We observe also
the general expectations of the old common Enemy growing big hereupon.
Notwithstanding, we shall not take upon us to censure the Integrity of your
Intentions; but having received Authority from Parliament to Suppress all
Insurrections and Invasions, and to preserve the Peace of our Country, and
being sensible of the sad effects of such Proceedings; We think fit to present
unto you our earnest desires, as you tender the Glory of God, the Peace of your
Native Country, the just Interest and Liberty of the People, the guilt of (...)
Blood like to be spilt, and the sad Consequences of another W^^. That you would
please to set free the said Officers from their Imprisonments, restoring them
to their Commands, and desis^ your further Acting^ in that kind. However, we
hold our selves bound in Duty and Conscience in our Places and Capacities, to
endeavor to the utmost the preservation of the Peace of our Country, as well as
of this City, against all persons, that under what specious pretenses soever
shall disturb or Invade the same.

FINIS.

