AN INVITATION OF LOVE TO THE Hungry and Thirsty, WHO Truly hunger after the
food of Life; and a Call (to such) to come (from off the Barren Mountains, and
from feeding upon vanity) into the Everlasting Kingdom and House of my Father,
where the least of his Servants have Bread Enough; with some information of the
way which leads thereunto.

Given forth according to the movings of the Spirit of the Lord, in his Servant
Josiah Coal.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

An Invitation of LOVE to the Hungry and Thirsty.
EVery one that hungers, and every one that thirsts, and every one that breaths
after Righteousness, Come, the Fountain of Life is opened, and the Everlasting
God of Jacob is arisen in this day of his Power, to gather unto himself the
dispersed of Israel, into his Everlasting fold of Rest, and into his
Everlasting Covenant of Light, Life, and Peace, with him to dwell; And for this
very end has he caused the Eternal Light of his Son to shine forth, and has
set up his Standard, and displayed his Ensign (to the Nations) to which the
gathering is; and the Call is gone forth, and the Spirit bids, Come, and every
one that hears, let him Come, and drink of the water of Life freely; For the
Fountain is now opened; and the true Shepherd now Calls; and his voice is
heard; and all who are wandering upon the barren Mountains, and in desolate
places, and are weary and heavy laden with sin, may Come, and follow (him who
leads to the Everlasting Fold of Rest, which is) Jesus Christ the true
Shepherd, and the Light of the World, and Way to the Father; who is now arisen
in this his day for his Seeds sake; to gather his Sheep from off the Barren
Mountains, where they have been scattered and driven away, in the dark and in
the cloudy day; And to make manifest the way of Life freely, to all who hearken
to his Counsel, and obey his voice, who declares unto man what is his thoughts;
And by his Light makes manifest the Secrets of the heart, and reproves the
deeds of darkness; By which all who are guided By it, Comes to receive power
over sin, which made a separation between God and you: And this is he (which
the Holy Prophets of God prophesied of, in the days of old) who is given a
Light to Lighten the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth: And
whom Moses said the People should hear, and said, that he that would not hear
this Prophet, which the Lord should raise up (to wit) Christ Jesus the Light of
the World; Even he should be Cut off from amongst the People; and therefore
every one, you being enlightened with a measure of the Light which comes from
this Prophet, Christ Jesus, by whom the world was made, and whom the people is
to hearken to; it is a thing of concernment to you all, to wait to hear his
voice, who calls your minds out of the vanities of the world, and the love
thereof, that you may hear and live, and no longer to spend your labor for that
which does not satisfy the soul; But to hearken diligently to the Voice of God
(who is Light) that you may come to eat of that which is good, and let your
Souls delight in fatness; and so every one who prizeth the Everlasting Peace
and welfare of your Souls, beyond the pleasures and delights of the World;
Return unto him who calls in your minds out of the visible and perishing things
of this world, and the Love thereof; and wait to know the Sword of the Lord
Jesus Christ (who is the Prince of Peace) to Cut down the transgressor in every
particular of you; and to know the Righteous Law of God revealed in you, to
take hold on the unrighteous Nature which has led you into Rebellion against
God, and against his pure witness in you, which has long called for purity,
and for a holy life, and a Godly Conversation; that so into purity and holiness
you might all come, without which none can see the Lord; And so they who comes
to the Light of Christ in them, such comes to that which is pure, and holy,
with which they may come to see God.

And Friends, This is the Word of the Lord God to you all, and his everlasting
Counsel to you all, who have desires in Truth and Righteousness to walk in the
way of life; that you hearken diligently to the voice of God, the light in
every one of your Consciences, and to it be obedient at all times, In
whatsoever it makes manifest to be the mind and will of God the Father; that so
his will may be done by you in Earth, as it is in Heaven; and that your sins
and iniquities may be blotted out (by him) for his own Names sake; Who is now
arisen for his Glories sake, which has been long trampled upon, and for his
Seeds sake which has long cried unto him, from under the burden of oppression,
which has ruled above the pure in every one of you; And the cries and
groanings of the oppressed, has entered into the ears of the Lord God of Rest,
and he is arisen and is zealous for his Glory; And in the valley of Judgment
will he plead with Egypts King, and will all the Host of the Egyptians, and by
his out-streatched Arm will he bring deliverance unto his own Elect Seed, and
the Host of the Egyptians will he destroy in the Red Sea of his wrath, and then
shall the Seed rejoice over its oppressors.

And so friends as you hearken to, and obey the voice of the Lord, the Angel of
his presence you will see leading you in the way in which he will have you to
walk; and beware of him, and obey his voice, for he will not at all pardon your
transgressions any more, Exodus 23. 20, 21. But will give a just reward to every
one according to their deeds, whether they be good, or whether they be evil;
And so that you may come and receive the reward of Everlasting Life; which is
enjoyed in my Fathers Kingdom; Every one be good and faithful servants, and
improve your Talents which is committed to you, that so when the Lord shall
come, you may be found doing his will, and not your own; So shall an entrance
be Administered unto you into the Kingdom which is without end, where you may
feed on the Heavenly Manna, and drink of the water of Life, out of the Wells of
Salvation, even abundantly, and be filled and your Souls satisfied therewith.

And so friends and people, arise and come out of Death, you that have desires
after the way of Life and and Salvation which is now Preached freely, and be
all odedient to tbe measure of the Grace of God (which brings Salvation)
which has appeared unto you, and believe in the Light which you are enlightened
withal, for says Christ, I am the Light of the World, he that believes in me
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of Life; and this is the
sure word of Prophecy, unto which you do well if you take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn and the Day Star arise in
your hearts, which Star being followed, will lead unto the knowledge of the
Savior, as it did the wise men who found him lying in a manger, for there was
no room for him in the Inn, because it was full of other guests (him that reads
let him understand) and so when you have found him according to the Angels
Inteligence though it be but in a low place, in you, yet wait to know him to
grow in stature, and you in him to increase of Wisdom, and in Favor with God,
for truly People, no Union nor Fellowship with God can be known by you, until
you come to be Obedient to the Son of God, and to hear him in whom the Father
is well pleased, and in whom alone we are accepted of God, and by whom we have
free access to his Throne of Grace, where he sits at the Right hand of the
Majesty on High, Judging and Condemning all who walk contrary to his Light, and
that disobey the Gospel which is now Preached; and Justifies and gives life
unto all that obey and follow him, and stand in his Counsel; which is the
desire of my Soul that you all may do, who have desires in the least measure
after this Life of Holiness; And for your sakes have I Written these Lines
according as the Lord gave it me by his Spirit.

Who am a true lover of all your Souls, and a Labourer, and Traveller for the
Seeds sake which is Scattered throughout the Earth; That those who are
wandering upon the Barren Mountains and in desolate places, may be gathered
into the Everlasting rest, and fold of Jesus Christ, with me to lie down in
peace and safety where none can make us afraid. J. C.

THE END.

