A LETTER FROM John Cockburn, D.D. To his Friend in LONDON; Giving an Account,
Why the other Narratives about Bourignianism Are not yet Published, And
Answering some Reflections Passed upon the First.

LONDON, Printed for William Keblewhite, at the White Swan in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and Hannah Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball in Cornhill, MDCXCVIII.

A LETTER FROM John Cockburn, D. D. To his Friend in LONDON.
Reverend and Dear SIR,
THough there was not Divine Authority for doing this or that, without a
profound Respect to the Lord's Will: for both Great and Small, whether they
will or not, are altogether in the Power of God; who very often, by his secret
and unforeseen Providence, disposes them, as both short of, and beyond, so
besides those Expectations and Desires with which they amuse themselves, and
please others: Res Deus nostras celeri citatas Turbine versat. Seneca Thyestes.



But though both Scripture and Experience teach us this important Truth; yet
such is the Vanity of Man, that he resolves, promises, and undertakes, as if he
were Master of himself, and wholly at his own disposal.

Narrative of Bourignianism. Indeed, I was never so profane, as to forget my
Dependence upon God, or to think that I could undertake or execute any thing,
without His Permission and Assistance: But supposing that He would grant Life
and Health, and that Assistance which may be expected, upon his own Promise, to
all sincere Endeavors to serve Himself, and the Interest of Truth and
Religion; I say, supposing this, I did not apprehend any occasion of delaying
the other Narratives, which I intended and promised; I did not expect, neither
had I any fears of an Obligation to lay down my Pen, and take up my Staff; to
leave England, and walk as a Pilgrim again, into a Foreign Country, which has
frustrated several other Designs, as it has interrupted the prosecution of
this about Bourignianism.

Enthusiasts are all Masters of Celestial Politics, and take upon them to
assert the secret Reasons of all Public and Private Dispensations, as
positively as if they were Secretaries of Heaven, or sat in the Council there,
or kept an intimate Correspondence with the Supreme Court: Wherefore some of
the Admirers and Followers of Antonia Bourignon will perhaps say, That God has
forced me to wander thus, to punish my assaulting the Credit of so Excellent a
Person, and the endeavoring to raise Prejudices against her Doctrine and
Principles, which not only may contribute much to reform the World, but also
which are the only means by which a General Reformation can be effected. I do
grant indeed, that that which has befallen me, is a new Affliction, attended
with several Inconveniences to my self; which I take from God, both as a
Punishment and Trial, and I do pray most heartily unto Him who overrules all
things, that this and other Misfortunes which have befallen me, may add to my
Faith, and produce Repentance, Wisdom, Experience, Patience, Hope, and all
other Fruits of Righteousness. But though I have many things to repent of, yet
I see no reason to repent of my undertaking the Detection of the Errors and
Delusions of Mademoiselle Bourignon, and her Followers: Nay, I may rather
think, that the Wise Providence of God, that uses to contrive all things so
wonderfully, that each most fitly answers diverse excellent Purposes, has
cast me upon this Shore, though against my Will, as for other Ends, so to
render me more capable to prosecute this useful Design; for now I have
opportunity to speak with those who knew Antonia Bourignon. I can have a better
Account of her Self, and I am better furnished with her Books, and other Books
relating to her, than could have been had in England. Thus while I am removed
from dear Relations, and most worthy Friends, and the Satisfaction and
Convenience which I enjoyed amongst them, I am brought nearer to this purpose;
which, I hope, will prove both acceptable and profitable to the Public.

It was impossible to go on with the Narratives, flourish best, and are most
fruitful, which do not over-hastily put forth before their proper Season. I
would not have published the Account of Bourignianism by Parcels, nor the First
Narrative so soon, if it had not been to satisfy the Curiosity of some, who
earnestly desired any Taste of that Matter, to which they were altogether
Strangers.

First Narrative, and I crave leave to offer them to your Consideration.

tanti; that there is more noise made about the matter than is needful: Why,
say they, all this Zeal against Antonia Bourignon? What though her Principles
prevail, some of them are harmless, others tend to Piety; and what may produce
so good an Effect, ought not to be obstructed. If Persons be Good, it is no
matter upon what Motives and Inducements. Suppose she was not absolutely
Perfect, yet she was Pious, and her design was to reform the World; she shows
wherein its Corruption lies, and lays down very good Moral Rules and Directions
how to overcome it. What then is there here which should offend?

To all this, I answer, First, That the Offense is Poiret says, That Bearded
Animals take it ill, that God should have manifested himself so far to a Woman.
But by his leave, he is mistaken; we do not quarrel at the Divine Economy, nor
envy his Grace in any. I am far from advising Men to enter into a War with the
other Sex; they will gain nothing by it, inasmuch as it would be very
unnatural. They employ their Wit very ill, who write Satyrs against Women; for
at least as severe ones might be made against Men: and commonly they have but
small share of Sense, Discretion and Virtue, who deny them to Women. But
whatever Respect be due to the Sex in general, or to any particular Person we
must guard against Dotage: we ought to be Just to all, but not unreasonably
Fond of any. The Behavior of Lysis the fantastical Shepherd, was not Respect,
but Madness: and they are not much wiser than he, who, like him, admire the
very Deformities of their Mistress, who fancy her without all Imperfection,
altogether Divine, the Masterpiece of the Creation, and who follow her, as he
did, through all places, gathering the Rags and Scraps, and licking up the very
Dirt and Dust that falls from her. The Application is plain.

Again, As I do not oppose Antonia Bourignon, from which, it may be thought, we
would have reserved to our selves, as our own particular province: for whatever
be the Privileges of our Charter, we have no reason to fear or quarrel with
Interlopers, if they do not impose upon and cheat People with false and
counterfeit Wares. Would God all were Prophets! I heartily wish that the True
Spirit might rest upon all; this would be no Prejudice to the Clergy, but a
great Ease to them; this would not abate the true Respect which is due to their
Persons or Functions, but rather increase it. The Ministry is so much slighted,
and the Sacred Offices thereof so little regarded, only because there is little
Communication with the Spirit of God, little Knowledge of Him or his Ways, and
because generally Men favor more the things of the World, than those that are
of God.

Antonia Bourignon, because I am an Enemy to true Piety: I would promote this,
as much as She, or any of her Followers. But what, shall we Lie for God? or
spread Errors, to advance Piety? Every one ought to be zealous for Holiness and
Piety: But this Pretext will not justify a Cheat, nor make it lawful to impose
that which is not True; nor is the Piety solid or sure, which is so gained.
There are important and certain Truths, sufficient to convince and persuade
Reasonable and Thinking Persons; and it is but doing disservice to Religion and
Piety, to call in the Assistance of Dreams, Whimsies, and fantastical
Delusions: The mixture of these raises a Suspicion, and renders the Wary even
jealous of what cannot be denied. The Judgment of those who pretend to Sense,
and more Knowledge, will sway the ignorant Mobb, who are never at the pains to
Think. The prevalency of Atheistical Opinions, at present, proceeds from the
favorable reception which they are believed to have amongst some Knowing
Persons, who yet never examined them thoroughly. And as the Atheism of these
Parts has been derived from France and Italy, so it had its Original there, by
Preaching up so much the Fables of Purgatory, the ridiculous Stories of the Bon
Dieu, the Legends of the Virgin, Saint Teresa, Mary Magdalen of Puloczi, Saint
Francis, Loyala, Xavier, and other Ancient and Modern Saints, instead of those
Certain and most Instructive Instances which are set down in Holy Scripture.
These Delusions can be current only for some time, or with the very Credulous;
and when they are detected, they do all the mischief, which the Devil, who
first suggested them, did intend: that is, they shake Men's Faith, and fill
their Minds with Doubts about Religion; seeing those who teach it, while they
pretend to be Infallible, take occasion to teach and advance such things as
could come only into the Heads of Knaves or Fools.

The Devil certainly is a great Enemy to Piety: but Respect which is due to
God's Word and Commands. If the Devil showed himself always barefaced, or held
up his Cloven-Feet, People would be afraid of him, few would be so hardy as to
entertain him: but therefore he transforms himself into an Angel of Light, that
his Cunning and Cheat may be the less suspected. So his Agents and Ministers
put on Sheeps Clothing, when they are sent out to devour; and he and they both
have their aim, if their Arts prevail but so far, as to hinder a hearty assent
to, and compliance with any particular positively required. If any join issue
here, he allows him to show as much Zeal as he pleases in other Matters; and
the more Zeal, the better for his purpose; because nothing can be a better
Blind to keep either the Person himself, or others, from discerning his crime,
and dangerous state; how that from henceforth both the Character and Privilege
of a faithful Disciple is forfeited, according to those certain and
unchangeable Maxims, Joh. xv.14.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: And, Whosoever shall
keep the whole law, Jam. ii.10.
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.

neither can nor will help one to* but to further his Designs, he counterfeits
it, and does it sometimes so neatly, that it is only perceptable by the
Circumspect and skilful. That which has the color, and some common
resemblances, passes well enough with the generality, and therefore they have
daily gross Cheats put upon them. Under the mask of Piety, horrid Villainies
have been perpetrated often; and under its shadow, damnable Doctrin^s have
sprung up and spread. Some have had a beautiful form of Godliness, who both
denied the Powers of it, and taught others to do so: Men of corrupt minds, such
as are reprobate concerning the faith, who give heed to seducing Spirits, and
the Doctrine of Devils; they who draw others from that Truth which is able to
save them, have oftentimes a specious Exterior show of Sanctity, and freedom
from gross Blemishes; so that they are like painted and well-garnished Tombs,
made proper to allure and turn aside the curious Passenger. Egregious
Wickedness is not always joined to monstrous Opinions: The Authors and
Maintainers of damnable Heresies, are not always guilty of gross Immoralities.
If Vaninus had concealed his Atheism, his Enemies could not have accused him.
Tertullian was deceived by Montanus's prosess'd Austerity, as well as by the
pretended Revelations of Maximilla and Priscilla, the two Women he carried
about with him. The Messaliani, or Euchitae, were otherwise very innocent.
Epiphanius tells us of one Hieracas a Physician of Leontopolis, in Egypt, who
was both a learned Man, and very mortified to the World, he neither ate Flesh,
nor drank Wine, and seemed in all things very Exemplary; and yet this very
Person did pervert the Christian Doctrine very much, and did propagate very
dangerous Sentiments, which corrupted the minds of the Monks, Hermits, and
other Religious that were then in Egypt.

Modern Divines, to stretch out the Right Hand of Fellowship to all Parties and
Persuasions; for they think Errors and Mistakes of the Judgment very innocent:
The Condition of their Communion is Comprehension and Morality; and to show
their Moderation, they can plead the Defense of a Bury, when he strips the
Gospel naked of its Essentials, out of a pretext to take off the foreign
Clothes and disagreeable Dress which others have put upon it; and that they may
not scare Deists and Socinians from the Church, while they throw out all
distingishing Creeds; so while in the Pulpit they look upon the Scriptures at a
distance only, and talk authoritatively from Epictetus, Seneca, Hierocles, and
other Natural Men. They should be drawn in the Center of a Circle, which
contains Jews, Pagans, Mahumetans, and all without the Church, and all the
several Sects which pretend to belong to it, only the Papist should be but half
in; for it is not popular to make no difference betwixt him and others. I wish
these Church-Levellers would consider, that as there is a Dwarfish Littleness,
so there is a monstrous Latitude-Moderation, as all other Virtues have their
Limits and Extremes on both sides, within which they should be kept, and
without which they lose their Name. The Church of Ephesus is praised for not
bearing them which are evil, Rev. 2.2.6.
for trying them who say, they are Apostles and are not, for discovering them
to be Liars, and for hating the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans: v. 14, 15.
and because the Church of Pergamus did not so, therefore she is upbraided and
reproved.

The growth of Sects and Heresies has been very much furthered by an indiscreet
Moderation toward them, upon the Account that those who followed them, either
were generally esteemed Innocent, or held something that was good. If it had
not been for this, neither Socinians nor Quakers would have spread so much, nor
their damnable Doctrines taken such root. Moderation and Charity are good, but
God never required them to encourage Error and Wickedness; nor yet to indulge
Men's perverting the Faith, and contradicting the Infallible Declarations of his
Holy Word.

By this it may be perceived whence my Zeal against Bourignianism arises. I
have no personal Prejudice against the Author of this Sect, nor any of her
Followers. I have all the good Will and good Wishes for them all, which
Christian Charity can suggest, and besides a particular Kindness for some: but
as there are some good Things in the Writings of Antonia Bourignon, so there be
other Things very bad; she advances some Things of pernicious consequence, and
the whole Scheme of her Principles have in my Judgment a tendency contrary to
the Christian Constitution, which I think my self obliged to discover. It Is
true, I do not pretend to be infallible, but I will leave it to any indifferent
Reader to judge, whether I be mistaken here, and whether I do this Woman and
her Party any Injustice.

De Cort's Letter to the Vicar General of Mechlin, falsely and unfairly, to the
perverting the Sense of it; Narrat. I. p. 9.
The Passage is, No body makes Prayers to her; as if I would have insinuated
that they worship her as the Papists do the Virgin, and other Saints; but I
intended no such thing. I understood this Passage according to their own
meaning, and published it only to show that the Author placed her in the
highest rank of Prophets, paid her the respect that was wont to be given to
Samuel, Isaiah, Huldah, and others, who had Power with God; and was very much
displeased that none asked her Intercession with the Almighty, for preventing
those Public Judgments which were threatened and deserved. I did not apprehend
that any would have interpreted me otherways, nor is there need to set my
Invention on work to fix Absurdities upon them that do. I could have produced
an Hundred more Instances, if I had not shunned being tedious. It Is true, the
Translation is a little close and literal, because I studied to deliver their
Sentiments in their own words, as much as possible: And if there was any
Mistake here, it is a small one, and the taking notice of this so narrowly, is
a proof of my Truth and Candor in other particulars; for omnis Exceptio firmat
in non Exceptis.

Again, It is laid to my Charge that I am like to Antonia Bourignon, and her
Disciples, I pass by what is good in her or them, and only pick up here and
there such things as may serve to this purpose.

May it not be a proper Answer to this, to say that he or she who has a very
Ugly Face should not tempt a Painter to draw it: and if it must be done, it
ought to be done Like, otherwise there is a Cheat put upon all who see it. The
Italians are in Love with fine Pictures, and are not Curious what resemblance
they bear to the Original: But here it concerns us to have a true Picture, an
Exact and Natural Representation of the Person; and if such show any Deformity,
who can help it? The Painter is not to blame.

I have not given any Instances, but such as are true, nor shall any
Provocation tempt me to do it: and if telling the Truth diminish the Character
of Antonia Bourignon, those who have doted upon her, as a most perfect Beauty,
and who have in all Companies magnified her as incomparable and above any thing
in Nature; those, I say, may readily fall under some Censures, but I am
innocent. When vain Women come to have their Pictures drawn, they desire the
Painter to draw it very like, and only to do them Justice; which he knows is a
plain Insinuation that he should add some strokes of his Art and Skill, and so
to order it, that their Natural Blemishes may be shadowed. They would have me
to do so with Mademoiselle Bourignon; but I crave their Pardon: This does not
answer my Design, which is to show her, not according to their Fancy, but as
she is; and their Complaints are only as those against a Painter, for coming
too near to the Original, and for representing Nature a little too much. It is
strange to see how much some love to be Cheated, and how much the Truth offends
them.

As according to the Poets, there was once a Contest betwixt Three Goddesses
about their Beauty; so now there is a Debate whether Antonia Bourignon is to be
preferred to all the Learned World; to Fathers, Prophets and Apostles; and we
would have this Debate decided, not by some partial Paris that is Bribed, but
by a serious Consideration of the Truth, of which every one may be Judge.
Wherefore the giving Instances which are incompatible with such Pretenses as
are Pleaded, is not Malicious, but Just and Necessary.

the Light of the World, desires to be taken notice of particularly; and I know
it is that which has chiefly engaged him and others to her: But these things
are not singular, nor reasons for so high an Esteem of her and her Writings.
That which is singular and peculiar to Antonia Bourignon, is neither good nor
true; and I have found nothing good but what is common, what is handled and
recommended in every Practical Treatise, better or worse, according to the
Talents and Gifts of the Author; yea, what is the Subject, of almost daily
Sermons, so much undervalued by her and her Disciples. Defensio Relat. de Ant.
Bour. Actis Lyps p. 13.
Deum Testor (says Seckendorf.) me qua potui diligentia, imo credas velim, non
sine praeviis precibus, aliquot Antoniae libros egisse, sed reperire in illis
nihil potuisse; quod melius esset orthodoxa and usitata doctrina; certe nihil
tale, cujus lectio librorum tot periculosissimis erroribus refertorum, and
vanissimo fastu tumentium simplicioribus commendari possit. Will any say, That
Self-denial, Resignation, Charity, and Divine Love, are new Names now, seeing
many Hundreds of Years before she was Born, there have been constant Complaints
that these Christian Virtues were not generally observed and practiced? who can
be Ignorant either of the Nature of them, or our Obligations to them, that ever
looked seriously upon the Scripture? will the Authority of Antonia Bourignon
have any more Weight and Efficacy than Moses and the Prophets, Jesus Christ and
the Apostles? If she has other Doctrines than what comes from them, must we
not inquire into the Certainty of her Mission? and why should the Truths, which
they have long since delivered, be now Preached in her Name? is her word better
or more to be relied on? At first God laid only Twelve Foundations, as
sufficient for the Wall of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.14.
viz. The Twelve Apostles of the Lamb. How comes a new one to be added in our
Days? Are the other decayed? or did not God foresee what is Necessary? will Men
offer to mend the Work of God? Oh what Insolency and Blasphemy is it to Attempt
it. The setting up new Names and Authorities, and the pressing zealously the
particular Opinions of Men, whether true or false, and the proposing plain
Scripture Truths, as Private Doctrines, is a great Service to the Devil and his
Interest. For by this Method he does pervert Men's Faith insensibly, and he
takes off their Minds from a Devout Application unto Jesus Christ; who is the
Supreme Lord, and only Lawgiver. Les Erreurs Populairs. p. 197.
This Consideration made Luther (as it is reported by Monsieur d'Espagne) hate
his own Books, and wish that they might be Buried, lest Readers should wast
that time upon them, which ought to be employed in reading the Scripture. They
who fall into this Error, are more conversant with the particular Authors they
are besotted with, than with Jesus Christ; and their Minds are more intent upon
their Writings, than upon the Sacred Scripture. Whereas we should consider the
Truth as it is in Jesus only, and not contend for Paul, Apollo, Cephas, or any
other, so as to dishonor Christ, and forget his Authority. His Glory is given
to others, when their Names and Sentiments are made the Standard and Measure of
Religion and Truth.

If we would run the Race that is set before us aright, we must Look unto
Jesus, who only is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; so far as others may
help us to this, we may consider them too: but to fix our Eyes wholly upon any
other, to make them altogether or equally the Subject of our Contemplations, is
both Evil in it self, and of dangerous Consequence; for by this, we run a
hazard, either of halting or slipping out of the way. And this is the Origo
Mali; the great Source whence all the Floods of Sects and Heresies have come
upon the Church: This has destroyed the simplicity of the Christian Religion in
the Church of Rome, and has revived all the old damnable Doctrines, and other
Extravagancies since the Reformation. Philosophers have often turned their
Heads by a too earnest pursuit of new Opinions; but the Affecting new Systems
of Religion, and the having an Appetite to every thing that appears plausible,
was the old Disease of Mankind, and always Fatal. Some who now favor
Bourignianism, I am sure are very capable to discern the Mischief of this, and
other Errors; and I heartily wish that they would set themselves to cure the
Inconstancy of our Natures, rather than to increase it.

But to go on with the different Censures of People, while I seem to Combat
Bourignianism, I advance it in the Judgment of some. Some of the Favorers of
this New Sect, hope that my Narratives will rather recommend Antonia Bourignon,
than ruin her Principles; if the rest be as the first.

If it be so, I am very unhappy, and have missed my aim very much. It is true
that weak Defenses or Refutations, are always Prejudicial; and an Ignorant Zeal
commonly has Effects contrary to that which is intended.

Nec semper feriet quodc^nque minabitur arcus. Horat. de art Poet.

I am far from the Vanity of thinking, that these Errors and Delusions could
not be better detected by another: but also I do not think, that how short
soever my Performance may come, I am so unlucky as to have rendered
Bourignianism very lovely and desirable. I do easily believe that I have by
that Narrative, excited the Curious to know more of the Life and Principles of
Antonia Bourignon: But I do not see what there is in that Account which may
dispose Persons to love her. I purposely showed her with all the Advantages, by
which her fond Disciples do set her off; I would not deal so unfairly as to
conceal any part of that high Character which they give unto her: But at the
same time, I judge that I have given very good Reasons why that Character is
not to be received, nor their Evidence admitted; because their Proofs are
Unsufficient, their Expressions are Extravagant, their Narrations are
Inconsistent, and in their transports of Zeal and Affection for this their
Mistress, which are very frequent, they neither observe Truth nor Modesty.

Ibid.
Atque ita mentitur, sic veris falsa remiscet,
* * *
Ut dum vitat humum, nubes and inania captet.
There is as little air of Truth in the Accounts of Monsieur de Cort and
Monsieur Poiret, as there is in the Poems of Prince and King Arthur, in
composing which, the Author consulted his Fancy only; and though some have
censured his Vanity in proposing these Poems which he conceived and brought
forth in Coffee-Houses, and passing the Streets, as a Pattern for other Poets
to write by; yet he could never be so vain as to think that either his
Contrivance or Characters would be received for strict Truths, otherwise he
must have forgot what the greatest Masters of that Art have observed
themselves, and prescribed to others.

But neither Historians nor Biographers were ever allowed the liberty of Poets.
That which is without Rythme, should have Reason and Truth. Matters of Fact
should be nakedly delivered, without the biased Sentiments of the Relater. As
there is either a Real or a fancied Defect of Natural Beauty, where Paint and
Patching is used; so pure Truth is wanting where Fancy is studied, where big
swelling words are affected, where every Circumstance is exaggerated, and no
Consequence left to the Reader's Judgment, but all positively dictated, and
magisterially imposed, not to persuade and convince, but to ensnare the unwary,
and to obtrude upon them what might be rejected, if fairly offered. However
Clamor, Impudence, and a multitude of words, do catch only lazy and
inadvertent Persons; for the Judicious are rendered thereby more diffident and
suspicious knowing that these Arts are seldom used, but when Reason and Truth
are unserviceable.

Wherefore whatever honor is due to Mademoiselle Bourignon, whether she ought
to be received as a new Light, as the Organ of the Holy Ghost, as the Great
Restorer of the Church, as the last and highest Gift of God to Mankind, sent to
perfect the Redemption begun by Jesus Christ, of whom he was a Type and Figure,
whether she be greater or equal, or how far a just Comparison may be made
betwixt him and her, whatever be in this, certainly Messieurs de Cort and
Poiret, her two great Evangelists, from whom the Rest copy, are not to be
compared to his, nor near so worthy of Credit: and yet it is not to be
imagined, why the last and greatest Manifestation of Wisdom, Goodness and
Mercy, should not be as credibly Attested as the former, and as free of
Suspicion. Abstracting from their miraculous Gifts, the Candor and Simplicity
of the Sacred Penmen are so convincingly visible, that none but very perverse
Persons will question their Veracity. It Is true, they were as much in the
Interest of Jesus as could be, nor was it possible to be more zealous to have
others into it; yet, like faithful and impartial Witnesses, they deliver
Matters of Fact nakedly, and set down that which may seem to disgust, as well
as what is pleasing; that Jesus Christ may be received, not upon their
Authority, nor by virtue of enticing Words, and subtle Reasoning, but by the
natural and undeniable Consequence of those things which they relate as Eye and
Ear-witnesses. Whereas the Spirit and Practice of De Cort and Poiret are quite
contrary, and therefore their Credit is too weak to sustain so important a
Character as is raised by them to Mademoiselle Bourignon; and they must be very
credulous, who, upon their simple Authority, believe her to be so
extraordinarily Inspired and Dignified.

This was all I aimed at, in that First Narrative: I purposed only in it to
prove, That their Judgments are not Infallible, and far from being a competent
Evidence of, so weighty Matters; and without great vanity, I may be allowed to
say, That at least a second reading will convince those who are not prejudiced.
That I have done what I intended: that is, I have Cast and Disproved their
Evidence.

sway in the World; the most are under the dominion of Prejudices, which allow
no Freedom to our Reasonable Faculties, or which keep them under a very great
Restraint. Where Prejudices have entered and taken possession, it is hard for
Reason to force its way: and yet we must not give over the attempts. If Physic
do not perfect the Cure at first, it must be renewed; and there is ground for
Hopes, if once the malignant Humors be loosened from their seat, and set in
motion: which may be, and often is done by other Remedies than those they call
proper Specificks; for commonly these are not applied, until the Body be first
prepared. So I intended the First Narrative, only as a Preparation to the main
Cure; and whether that be well or ill done, it may be serviceable, if it has
but this effect, to shake a little the lazy and unreasonable Credulity of the
Bourignianists, and if it does but put them upon the Enquiry into the truth of
such important Matters as they have over-hastily believed. I expect this at
least, otherwise the Persons are truly irrecoverable; no cure can be wrought,
unless they will think, and consider: and if once they do it, I doubt not the
success. For as the Devil flees, when he is resisted; so Error, which comes
from him, loses ground, when it is enquired into; neither of them can endure a
Trial: this is the peculiar property of Truth. I may compare Bourignianism, and
some other Delusions, to Glass-Drops, which should be viewed at a distance, and
very slightly handled, because upon the first Experiment they dissipate into
Vapors.

These Reflections and Censures were written to Postscript to The State of the
Philadelphian Society. He is offended with a Passage of my Preface, which
insinuates, That the Refutation of Bourignianism, will overturn the Principles
and Practices of our Quakers and Philadelphians, as well as the Quietists and
Pietists abroad, because they are of the same kidney, and do all stand upon the
same foundation. And I still think that I had good reason to say so, because
some Sentiments and Practices are common to all the Enthusiastic Tribe; and
whatever particular Differences there are amongst them, they nevertheless flow
all from the same Cause and Source: viz. 1. An intolerable Pride, That they
have the Spirit, more than others; That all their Fancies and Conceits are of
God. And 2. Either a total Contempt and Disregard of the Scripture, or a
levelling it with their own private and particular Sentiments; so that it must
either speak as they do, or have no Force and Authority. Now that which is a
good Antidote against these two Evils, may be esteemed a Catholicon for all the
Distempers of Enthusiasm, whatever Names and Distinctions they go under.

They say, Omne simile claudicat; and indeed, I do not see how his is in
anywise pat to the purpose: Sure I am (says he) That our Church of England-men
and Presbyterians, as well as the Unitarians and Zwinglians abroad, are not so
very easily to be wounded all by one Blow, though they pretend to stand all
upon the same Foundation, and do resolve the Principles of their Faith
according to the same Rule. For as sure as he is, I am very much persuaded, and
I believe so are you, that he is mistaken; for they do not stand upon the same
Foundation, nor have they the same Rule for resolving their Faith. The Church
of England, and those of the Episcopal Persuasion, you know, defend Episcopacy
by, 1. Its being more proper to preserve the Order and Unity of the Church,
even in the Judgment of St. Ierom, the great Patron of Presbyterians, as they
imagine. 2. The Universal Practice of the Church, which was never introduced by
any Council, or Humane Authority. 3. The Practice of the Apostles, which is
above all Humane Authority. 4. The Conformity to the Jewish Economy, which was
established by God himself, and which, by the Example of Christ, and the
frequent Reasoning of St. Paul, was to be the Rule and measure even under the
Gospel, as to all things suitable to the Nature and Ends of the same. Now how
can this Foundation be shaken by the proper Arguments against Presbytery? As,
1. The Confusion of Parity. 2. The Novelty of its Constitution: 3. Which was
introduced and occasioned by the Necessity of Calvin's Circumstances. And, 4.
The Unsufficiency of his Authority, when laid in the balance with that of the
Catholic Church, and the undeniable Instances of the Apostles. Those of the
Episcopal Communion cannot fall with the Presbyterian, unless the Quaker can
effectually prove that there is no settled Ministry; and the Libertine, that
there ought to be no Government; and the Erastian, that Religion and the Church
are and ought to be entirely subjected to the Prince and Civil State; that
their Will and Humor are as much to be regarded as the Practice of the
Apostles, the Example of Christ, Reason, or Divine Institution. If Dr.
Tillotson's famous Sermon, and Dr. Wake's late Book, can be showed as undoubted
Demonstrations, both the Church of England and Presbyterians may put up their
Papers, and lay their Hands upon their Mouths; and so may both Protestants and
Papists.

In like manner, those who hold a Trinity, build their Faith upon the
Authority, Certainty and Perspicuity of the Revelation of the Scripture;
constant Tradition, which gives this, with other Articles, as the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, by Christ and the Apostles; the weakness of Humane
Reason, to comprehend all Mysteries, and particularly the Infinite Nature of
God; and the unreasonableness of refusing an assent to a plain Revelation, only
because the Subject is above our reach, when there are many things in Nature
which we are forced to acknowledge, though their Consistency is an hidden and
unintelligible Mystery. But these are things which Unitarians will not yield;
they refuse this Foundation, and build upon a particular one, which may be
overturned, while the other stands sure. Indeed, both Trinitarians and
Unitarians would be thrown to the ground, if the Doubts of Deists could be
turned into indubitable Proofs, that there never was any Revelation at all; or
the Atheists Quibbles and Witticisms could be changed into solid, irrefragrable
Demonstrations, that there is no God. And at this rate there may be, with as
great likelihood, one Comprehensive Blow given to all the several Disputes
amongst Mankind, by advancing Skeptical Arguments, that there is no Certainty
at all; that it is doubtful whether Men, as well as Brutes, may not be mere
Automata, without Sense, Reason or Perception; that it cannot be known when
they are asleep, or when awake, whether they do not always dream, when they
think they see clearly. If there be no other Life, no State after this, we and
the Philadelphians both trouble our selves to no purpose: And yet he must be
very ignorant of our Principles, who would say, that we resolve our Faith
alike: or that the proving them guilty of gross Delusions, does also prove,
that we have no sure, fixed, or sufficient Rule to walk by.

I cannot choose but laugh, when I see him endeavor to abate Men's Reasonable
abhorrency of a private deluding Spirit, by calling it the Principle of
Internal Light; as if soft and new Names could change the nature of old, ugly
Diseases. Nor is it less ridiculous, how he shuffles off the Imputation of
Enthusiastical Impostures and Delusions from his Party, and others of the same
kidney, by saying, That none have written better, or with more perspicuity and
solidity against these, than they who have possessed this Principle: as if it
was impossible or unheard of, for one to be deluded, and yet not to be sensible
of it; or to exclaim against a thing, of which he himself is as guilty as any:
And I do not mean the Exclamations of gross, designing Hypocrites; as when a
Rogue holds up his Hands, and cries out, Villainy! Villainy! or like that
notorious Whore, Sir Roger L'Estrange some where speaks of, who had always in
her mouth, O the Impudence of Women now adays!

It seems that this Author did never walk about Bethlehem, where he might have
seen some who very properly belonged to the House, laughing and bemoaning the
Madness of others that were shut up there. Burton wrote a large Folio upon
Melancholy, and yet, they say, he was Hypocondriack as much and as frequently
as any. Monsieur Iurien cautions against False Prophets, and yet none can deny
now, but that he ought to be listed amongst them, having with a witness come
short of his peremptory Prognostications. So the profound Iuan de la Cruz
(which this Author admires) may have written well against Enthusiasm, and yet,
for ought I know, as much an Enthusiast as any; for I own that I have not
perused him, having long since turned off the Conversation of the Mysticks. For
though they, now and then, do deliver pious and useful Thoughts; yet generally
their Imagination is so much heated with the contemplation of uncommon things,
that they, for the most part, rave and talk extravagantly: and, in my judgment,
it is equally useful and well-spent time, to dive into their Meaning, as to
trace the Notions of a Bedlamite. Mystical Divinity contributes as little to
True Religion, as Profound Metaphysics do to the solid Use of Reason: the
Chimera's and subtle Notions of the one and other, make giddy Heads fit only to
be kept within the Walls of a Cloister; for if they walk abroad, they are
laughed at, and their singular Notions and Whimsies obstruct both their Esteem
and the Good which otherwise they might do.

But to return to this Philadelphian, who, it seems, has a tender Respect for
Mademoiselle Bourignon: He says, That he hopes to see her true Character
undertaken by one that is neither a Friend nor an Adversary. Who, I pray, can
this be? or from what part of the World must he come? Certainly he is an
Utopian; and this Author is a new Hennepin, he knows Intelligent Creatures,
different from the Good and Bad both of this World and the other, who can see
Good and Evil, without Love or Hatred, Favor or Aversion. And from whence will
this wonderful Undertaker have his Instructions? All that have yet written of
this Woman, are either Friends or Adversaries; and if he be a mere Transcriber,
he is as little to be trusted as his Authors. The Character of Antonia
Bourignon is not, according to my judgment, to be undertaken as the History of
Troy, or the Battle of Pharsalia, with a perfect Indifferency whether the
Conquerors or Conquered were in the Right, or which of them showed most Valor.
He that enquires into the Character and Principles of Mademoiselle Bourignon,
and has a just value for important Truths, cannot choose but be of one side or
other: if he find her truly and divinely Inspired, he will and ought to be a
Friend; otherwise he ought to contemn her as an Impostor, or deluded Person,
and then I think he may be reckon' an Adversary: and if we can suppose him very
little concerned whether she be one or other, his Account is not much to be
regarded; for then we may very well suppose that he did not take pains to know
the Truth.

But I believe by this Periphrasis, the Author meant an Impartial Person, which
he thought a Friend or Adversary could not be; it is true, the Characters both
of Friends and Enemies are sometimes liable to Suspicion; for the first
generally over-do, and the other seldom come a just length: Love and Hatred
blind the Judgment, and are like Impetuous Torrents, which commonly overflow
the Banks of Reason and Discretion. But yet it is possible, and I hope
frequent, whatever this Author thinks, that both Friends and Adversaries will
be just, and give a Testimony to be relied on; nor can the Testimony of either
be reasonably doubted, when it is evident that they respect Truth, and not the
Persons of Men, and are moved by the Merits of the Cause, and not by Interest,
or unreasonable Prejudices. If the Ingenuity of such cannot be trusted, we
shall never be able to discuss Bourignianism, or any other Matter; and he is at
needless trouble, when he writes and prints the Accounts, of the Philadelphian
Society.

I am of the opinion, that no body suspects the learned Dr. Prideaux of
Mahometanism, or is so uncharitable as to think him no sincere Friend to Jesus
Christ: Is therefore his Life and Character of Mahomet to be questioned, which
he has written with so much Ingenuity and Accuracy? I cannot satisfy this Man
that I am his just Medium between a Friend and an Adversary; for truly, I am as
yet no Friend to Mademoiselle Bourignon, but such an Adversary as would become
a Friend if Truth could oblige me. As one was willing to be a Papist, if he
could get over Transubstantiation, but said he, it is past my belief. Once for
all, I promise to be as faithful in relating Matters of Fact, according to my
Knowledge, as if I was a Witness upon Oath; and I shall also endeavor to judge
impartially according to Truth.

But, Dear Sir, I ask you Pardon for detaining you so long with my Scribble:
Nor can I give Monsieur Paschal's excuse when he wrote a long Letter, that he
had no time to make it shorter; but it is the Custom of this Country to use
little Ceremony, they are seldom at the Pains to put on fine Clothes, but walk
Abroad, give and receive Visits in their loose Chamber-dress: Now I treat you
thus familiarly, I send you a careless Letter, which wants the Accuracy of
those Books you are Perusing; and yet I know that you have so much Kindness and
good Nature, as not to be offended, or to think your self slighted: for it is
your Maxim to welcome your Friends heartily, whatever way they come.

I hear that some worthy Friends and Acquaintance look impatiently for the
following Narratives, and complain that they are not sent; therefore let me beg
the favor of you, to acquaint them with what I have written for my Excuse; and
to show them that besides the hindrance from the Necessity of my Circumstances,
I have been a gathering new Materials up and down all proper places; and so
soon as I have put them in order, with the things I had prepared before I left
England, they shall be transmitted. But being at this distance from the Press,
I cannot send my Papers to it, as before, till all be finished, lest it should
be stopped too long by contrary Winds; nor can I send any without first taking
Copies, lest they should Miscarry, and I be put to a second Trouble of thinking
and consulting Books: And also, I must now write all my self, having no
Amanuensis here, so that it is no wonder if my Work be tedious.

If you, and my other worthy Friends, shall think it worth the while to
satisfy Strangers in this Matter, by making this more Public, I will not be
against it; provided you give your self the friendly trouble of correcting the
grosser Faults, which may disgust nicer Palates.

I will be careful not to abuse your Friendship, but I intend to presume a
little upon it, and to give you the trouble of receiving all I send from hence,
which I do submit entirely to your just Correction, both as to Matter and
Expression; if before they go to the Press, you will be at the Pains to read
them, with a Pen in your Hand to sit them to your own Mind, I shall have less
cause to fear the Censures of others.

That I may at last deliver you from my tedious Company, I wish you all
Happiness, and I will be always,

Roterdam Apr. 12/21. 98. Dear Sir, Your very Humble, very Sincere, and
Affectionate Servant, J. COCKBURN.


