AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Nature, Necessity, and Evidence OF Christian Faith, In
Several ESSAYS.

PART I. Of Faith in General, and of the Belief of a Deity.

By I. C. D. D.

Vigilo Credo and Clamo Loquor.
LONDON, Printed for William Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDC XCVI.

The CONTENTS of this First Part.
INtroduction, showing the Occasion and Design of the following Essays, p. 1.
Essay I.
Faith is and has been the perpetual Standard of Righteousness from the
Beginning of the World, p. 6. 1. Faith proper to Scripture and required under
the Dispensation of both Testaments, ibid. 2. What to live by Faith, p. 7. 3.
All the righteous upwards to Adam lived by Faith, p. 8. 4. It is great
Insolence to find Fault with the Terms and Phrases by which the Principles of
Scripture are set forth, p. 9.
Essay II.
Of Faith as opposed to Doubting, p. 11. 1. The Meaning of Faith ought to be
enquired after, ibid. 2. Common Definitions and Distinctions of Faith not
considered nor any new Definition offered, ibid. 3. Faith first opposed to
Doubting, implies a firm Persuasion of Good and Evil, which is essential to a
just Man, p. 13. 4. Of the Influence which this Faith has upon Actions, as to
the rendering them Good or Evil, p. 14. 5. This Faith no light Persuasion, but
the Effect of serious Enquiry and Deliberation, ib. 6. It is the first
Principle of a good Life, p. 16.
Essay III.
Of Faith as opposed to Atheism, and how a Belief of the Existence of God is
necessary to determine the certain Rule of Moral Actions, p. 17. 1. Faith is a
Belief of God and his Attributes, ibid. 2. The Necessity of this Belief for
knowing the first and great Rule of Moral Actions, ibid. 3. Righteousness
according to Scripture, is to act with a continual regard to God, p. 18. 4.
These Divines are very censurable, who recommend Morality upon other Principles
more and oftener than this, p. 19.
Essay IV.
The Existence of God is most evident, p. 21. 1. It does not require Learning
or great Travel to know that there is a God, p. 22. 2. Some Truths more obvious
than Mathematical Demonstrations, and it may be said, That the Existence of a
Deity is more evident than the Propositions of Euclid, p. 23. 3. Whether there
be real Atheists. The Causes of Atheism considered, p. 24. First Cause of
Atheism, Vitiousness, p. 25. A Second Cause of Atheism, the being rebuted by
Difficulties, ibid. A Third Cause of Atheism, want of Consideration, p. 26.
Essay V.
Evidences of a Deity in Man, p. 27. 1. The Outward Figure of Man's Body
considered, ibid. 2. The Inward Frame, p. 28. 3. Life and Sense, with the
Organs of them, ibid. 4. The Internal, and Intellectual Faculties, p. 32. 5.
The Method of nourishing the Body. p. 33. 6. The Manner of its Generation, p.
34. 7. Of the useful Dependence of some outward Members upon our Will, and how
readily they answer our thoughts, p. 38.
Essay VI.
Evidences of a Deity in other Parts of the World, p. 37. 1. All other things,
as well as Man, prove that there is a God. It is evident, That Man and all
other things had one Author or Cause, ibid. 2. Contrivance and Design in in
every thing, in the Celestial Orbs, p. 38. 3. In Vegetables and Animals, p. 39.
4. Locusts and Caterpillars considered, p. 40. 5. The Disorders and
Irregularities occasioned by Man no Reproach to the Wisdom of God, p. 41. 6. It
is unreasonable to ask more Evidence for the Existence of God, than what we
have, p. 43. 7. God's Eternity obvious. His Omnipotency appears in the
Immensity of the World, p. 44. 8. His Wisdom and Power in the very Disposal of
mere Matter, or the several kinds of Earth. p. 45. 9. In the Variety and Virtue
of Plants, p. 46. 10. In the Diversity of Animals, p. 50. 11. It is impossible
to convince them who resist these Evidences, p. 52.
Essay VII.
Of the Absurdity of Atheism, p. 53. 1. Two sorts of Demonstration. A Deity
demonstrable by both of them, ibid. 2. The Existence of God proved by the
First, ibid. 3. The Objections of Atheists do strengthen the Belief of a God.
The First Objection stated, p. 54. 4. The Answer to it, p. 55. 5. A Second
Objection, p. 59. 6. The Answer, p. 60. 7 A Third Objection, p. 62. 8. The
Answer, p. 63. 9. A Fourth Objection, with the Answer, p. 64. 10. A Deity
proved by the other kind of Demonstration, ex absurdo, p. 65. The Conclusion,
p. 68.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Nature, Necessity, and Evidence OF Christian Faith.
INTRODUCTION.
Showing the Occasion and Design of the following Essays.
AS certainly the Christian Religion has the fairest appearance of any, and
comes to us with all the marks of Truth, being stamped with Characters truly
Divine, and carrying along with it Authentic Testimonies, both from Heaven and
Earth; so they who had the keeping of it, have, for near these 1700 Years,
taught that Faith was a very considerable part of it, and absolutely Necessary
to the obtaining all those Advantages which are promised by it.

But now there are a Set of Men who pretend new Discoveries: They decry Faith
as much as it was formerly magnified, and turn the things proposed to be
believed into ridicule. Some of them run down Faith, by exposing the Clergy,
who require it, as ignorant and Foolish, a sort of Men who are easily imposed
upon, or who, to keep up their Trade, study to impose on others, amusing them
with mysterious Nonsense. Others essay to prove, That Faith is impossible where
Reason rules and is used; and therefore that Believing proceeds from a Defect
of Reason, and consequently unworthy of those who own themselves to be Men,
that is, reasonable Creatures. A Third sort examine the several Points of
Faith, as they are set forth in Systems and Confessions, and do either dwindle
them away into nothing, or render them very absurd, that is, impossible or no
ways worthy to be believed. This Controversy is of the highest Importance: all
ought to be inquisitive into it, and earnest to know on what Side Truth lies,
not to satisfy an idle Curiosity, but to discover the certain and solid
foundation, if there be any such thing, on which they may build their Peace and
Comfort, with respect to the present life, and joyful hopes in reference to
that which may be hereafter.

Upon this account I resolved on this Enquiry, and to proceed in it with all
the care that becomes a Lover of Truth, in matters of so very great moment, who
ought not to suffer himself to be biased by his former Sentiments, nor to be
carried off by the Censures of the World, nor to be possessed with a fondness
for Opinions, merely because they are New or Old, Singular or Common.

My first aim was to satisfy my self; and now I propose the giving true
information to others, and for that end shall lay all things heartily before
them, imposing as little on them, as on my self, who am not willing to be
deceived. And I am confident that he, who is attentive and willing to be
informed, shall receive plain and full Conviction.

To try this Matter, I do not find it proper to appeal to the Universal
Doctrine, either of the Present, or Primitive Church. The Fathers may be thought
as partial and incompetent Judges as the Modern Divines. Authorities have no
weight with the Patrons of Incredulity, they laugh at this Method, and judge it
as unreasonable, as if one would consult old Bigoted Aristotelians about the
New Philosophy. I know their regard to the Scriptures, is much the same as what
they have to other Books: They read and examine it with the same boldness and
freedom, and very often with less Modesty than human Writings: because its
Assertions are plain, and otherwise unanswerable; therefore, to shelter
themselves, and to defend their Opinions, they disown its Authority, and cry it
down as a Book which is not implicitly to be believed more than others. Hence
it is that some attack the Authentickness and Purity of the Text; others, the
Integrity and Inspiration of the Penmen: and all of them endeavor, one way or
other, to remove the only sure Light we have to direct our Course. So they
would reason us into a fearful and troublesome uncertainty: and they make our
condition as deplorable as Persons at Sea in a dark tempestuous Night, without
Waggoner, Compass, or Pilot.

I intend not to prove the Divine Authority of the Scripture, which has been
admirably well done by several, both in this, and former Ages: I take this for
granted. But if this be too great a Postulatum, it will be sufficient for my
business to suppose it in the first rank of Books, which it may claim, both by
reason of its Antiquity, and the things contained in it. The Authors of this
Holy Book merit Reverence and Esteem, at least as much as Plato, Aristotle,
Seneca, Epictetus, Confutius of China, and other Ancients, whose Sentiments the
World is curious to know, and which Learned Men have been employed to Collect,
as useful to Mankind. Nay, I am willing at present even to pass this too. I ask
only (which cannot be Justly denied) a due Attention to what is said in
Scripture, and an impartial and unbiased consideration of the excellency and
reasonableness of what it proposes; for then, I am sure, that the Doctrine of
Christianity will appear divine, and true, and worthy of all acceptance: for
it shines with Evidence, as the Light which proves and manifests it self to
every one that is not blind. If our Gospel (says St. Paul) be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost, etc. The finest Picture does not look well, if it be not
set in a proper Light. Nor does the Gospel appear reasonable, when it is not
duly represented. All the Cavils and Objections, that are made against it,
proceed from a wrong view of it; represent it fairly, and there is nothing more
agreeable: Its Imperfections are Beauties and admirable Contrivances: its
Foolishness is the highest Wisdom: its seeming Absurdities and Contradictions,
upon Examination, are most rational and perfectly consistent: its Faith is
Conviction and Demonstration. In a word, it is every way faithful and true, and
worthy to be received by the wisest and most perfect Men, as I hope to make
appear by these Essays, and what are to follow hereafter, which I desire may be
read with Attention and Candor, and according to the Method in which it is
written: for Divine Truths are in this like the Propositions of Euclid. There
is a dependency amongst them, the first must be received before the rest can be
admitted; but though what is Prior in order of Nature ought to be first
considered, yet it is certain, that the same is not so fully comprehended, as
when what follows is known and understood. Thus the Existence of a Deity is to
be proved before a Providence, and yet the Proofs of a Providence, and such a
view of it, as we may have by Reason and Revelation, does not only mightily
confirm us in the Belief of a God, but also very much enlarge our Idea of him:
What may be known by Nature and Reason, should be proposed before the
Discoveries of Revelation; and yet the Light of Revelation does give clearer
Convictions of the former, and does render intelligible, what before could not
indeed be denied; but yet was not well understood. Nature and Reason may be
compared to the dawnings of the Morning, which is not to be despised; but the
Discoveries of the Scripture, resemble the Light of the Sun when it is mounted
the Horizon, which is full and sufficient for all that is necessary to our
present State.

We should have begun at that Faith which is peculiar to the Gospel, and so
spared our labor in proving a Deity and Providence, if the present growth of
Atheism had not made it necessary to establish these first. It is true, these
Subjects have of late been excellently well-handled, to which we might have
referred; but that would have been to build upon another Man's foundation. All
must acknowledge, that these Subjects are of great importance, and therefore
what we offer about them, ought to be kindly received both by those who doubt,
and those who believe; that the one may be confirmed, and the other satisfied,
in Matters that so nearly concern them. I would not be thought to despise some
Proofs and Arguments which I have not used: Our Essays would have run out into
vast Volumes, if we had amassed all that might have been said, and therefore we
have only made choice of such things as either have been least considered by
others, or which may be of most common use. We do not write for the Instruction
of those who have been bred in Universities, and therefore have purposely waved
what could not be understood without Metaphysical Notions, and the abstruse
part of Learning.

We have digested our Enquiries about Faith into three Parts, of which the
present Essays make the First: And we have been advised to Publish them
separately, to encourage the Reading of them: For, though those who have most
need of Information, have also generally most leisure to Read; yet it is well
known that they are also least willing to undertake the Reading of what
requires many Hours and much Attention. Bulky Books fright them, and they throw
them by, as too great Interruptions to their Diversions, for the most of their
Occupations are nothing else. But if such will not be at the pains to read a
few Sheets, they betray their Aversion to these Truths, and do in vain pretend
to excuse their Infidelity, by want of true Conviction.

The Second Part is wholly taken up about Providence, which is too copious a
Subject to be exhausted by any; but without the hazard of being vain or
immodest, I may say, that there is at least some things suggested, which may
both persuade the belief of a Providence, and also satisfy men's Minds in some
measure about the Strange and Wonderful Dispensations of it, which, not being
commonly handled, we have the more largely insisted on. In the Third and last
Part, shall be considered that Faith which is founded upon Revelation; which
also we shall endeavor to set in its true Light. Both these Parts shall follow
very soon, if it please God to assist us; and I heartily wish, that all of them
may prove Useful to the design proposed, by helping to clear those Truths which
are of the greatest Importance.

ESSAY I.
Faith is, and has been, the Perpetual Standard of Righteousness from the
beginning of the World.
1. AS all Authors (whether Historians or Philosophers) have their peculiar
Phrases and way of Speaking, so Faith is a word and term proper to Sacred
Scripture. It never occurs to us in the reading of any of the Heathen
Moralists, in that sense in which we meet with it almost in every leaf of the
Holy Bible. St. Paul as agreeable to the other Apostles, he discourses often,
and very much of Faith; so, in three several Epistles, he asserts, that the
Just shall live by Faith: and in one of them, he Prefaces it with an as it is
written, testifying by this, that it was no New Doctrine of the Gospel, but
what was taught by the Law and the Prophets. And accordingly we find the same
very words in the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap. 2. 4. whence we may conclude, that
this is a Scripture Maxim, of certain and perpetual Verity, under every
Dispensation, as well the former as the present.

2. By the Just, is to be understood the Good, Holy, and Righteous; in
opposition to the Wicked and Ungodly. And to live, comprehends and must be
extended to, the whole tract and course of their Life and Conversation; for to
restrain it to any single, or individual act, which has not an Universal
Influence upon the whole Man and all its Motions, is to make the Scripture and
Inspirer of it, speak very improperly. He is not said to Live in a place, who
Lodges there a Night or two; but who has his constant Residence and Abode in
it. Nor can he be said properly to live by any Art or Science, who now and then
perhaps diverteth himself with it; but only he who makes it his profession,
aim, and study, who constantly exercises it, and subsisteth by it. So when it
is said that the Just live by Faith, the meaning is, and must be, that they
always walk by Faith; they order and frame their whole Life and Conversation
according to it. It is the Principle by which they are actuated, and which
produces all that they do. As the Soul and Spirit give Life to the Body,
excite, direct, and determine the Actions of the whole Man, so Faith is the
Soul, Life and Spirit of a Just or Righteous Man, the first and great
Principles of his Motions, the chief Rule and Director of his Actions, that
which quickens his Hopes, awakens his Fears, excites and curbs his Passion, and
which pusheth him forward to all that is suitable to his Rank, Quality, and
other Circumstances in which he stands. In a word, to live by Faith, must be to
think, speak, and act by it, for Life comprehends all this. And he who does
thus live by Faith, is truly Just, Good, Holy, and Righteous. For if it be true
that the Just do live by Faith, it is also true that they who live by Faith are
Just. As Knowledge and Wisdom render a Man learned and wise, so Faith makes one
Just and Righteous: and this Righteousness increases according to the
proportion of our Faith; for there are degrees of Faith as of Life; there are
weaker and stronger, imperfect and perfect in both.

3. Now that it is not peculiar to the state of the Gospel for the Just to live
by Faith, but that they did so, under the Law, and before it, does further
appear from what the Apostle writes in the Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, where, by a long enumeration of particular instances, he proves
that all the Righteous, even up to Abel, that is, ever since the Fall, did walk
by Faith; and that Faith was the source and spring of both their Common, and
Extraordinary Actions. And he might have ascended higher, and showed, that even
in the state of Innocence, Faith was appointed the Life and Soul of
Righteousness: for that Command which was given to our first Parents, about the
Tree of Knowledge, in the midst of the Garden, was to exercise their Faith, as
their Transgression was a failure of Faith as well as of Obedience. St. Paul,
in the Epistle to the Galatians, and in the first Part of that to the Romans,
pursues the same Truth against the Bigoted Jews and Judaizing Christians. For
to convince them of their Error, in expecting to be Justified by the Law of
Moses, He shows clearly, that, before the Law was in being, Men were accounted
Just and Righteous before God, by reason of their Faith, and therefore that
Faith was the permanent and perpetual Standard or Rule both for measuring Men's
Righteousness, and for obtaining their Justification. Because Abraham was an
eminent Example of Faith, therefore he was not only reputed Righteous, but had
the peculiar honor to be called the Friend of God, and the Father of the
Faithful, in all succeeding Generations. And all who believe, and live by
Faith, are styled the Children of Abraham, and Heirs of his Honor and
Privileges. Upon which account they are also named the Children of God, the
holy Seed, the righteous Generation, in opposition to the Sons of Belial, the
Wicked and Reprobate, who are branded with the Character of Unbelievers,
Children of Unbelief, Persons without Faith, as the Original bears, which is
(...).

Much more might be said on this Head, but it sufficiently appears from what
has been said, that according to the peculiar Dialect, both of the Old and New
Testament, Faith and Holiness, Believing and to be Just, or to live
righteously, are used indifferently, as reciprocal Phrases, which import or
infer one another. And the reason of this Dialect is, because, according to
the Philosophy of the Scripture, that which goes under the Name of Faith, is
the first Principle which actuates a a good or just Man, and that the Goodness
or Righteousness, which is acceptable to God, is only the Effects or
Expressions of that Faith, which naturally and inseparably follow it, as the
Light does the Sun.

Now, before I proceed further, it is fit to make a little Pause; and it may be
convenient to represent here the Obligation which lies upon all, who own the
Authority of Scripture, to entertain those Phrases and Expressions, with
respect and reverence.

4. They ought to esteem them not only Sacred, but Exact and Just, and the
fittest to convey true Notions into our Minds. A Wise Man can express his own
Thoughts best. And sure none can be supposed more qualified to know the most
apposite words for expressing Truth, than the Spirit of Truth, or they who are
inspired by it. They, who recede from the Phrases of any Author, do also
generally differ from his Sentiments, and give others occasion to mistake them:
For the peculiar and repeated Phrases, which one has used constantly, do give
the greatest Light to the Discovery of his Thoughts: For, if he had not
perceived or fansied some Propriety in those Phrases, for representing what he
would be at, he would not have been so fond of them, nor would he so constantly
have used them, even as an exact and skilful Painter, observes carefully, both
the Strokes and Mixtures, which are fittest to shadow out the Colors and
Figures he would represent. But even abstracting from the Divine Authority of
Scripture, and the peculiar Inspiration of the Penmen, it is very great
Immodesty to offer to correct and amend their Expressions; as if any now adays
could express their Thoughts, Notions and Sentiments better, than they
themselves were capable to do, especially on Subjects with which they were well
acquainted, and which they knew better than other Men, by reason of their
Profound Meditation, the Purity of their Minds, and the Integrity of their
Lives: These very things (if divine and immediate Inspiration will not be
allowed them) could qualify them to teach the Nature and Acts of a Holy Life,
or true Righteousness far better than others. All the Heathen Philosophers came
short of their Perfection, and therefore are not so good Masters of Morality:
for Moral Truths are not like Mathematical ones, to be learned by Reading and
Study: The Knowledge of those comes best, nay, can only be had by serious and
continued Practice. A good Man Unlearned, has a deeper sense of Christian
Morality, and can discourse more lively and reasonably of it, than the greatest
Scholar, who has only the Theory. And there be some Expressions which seem mean
and silly to the last, which the other feels to be just and Emphatick; as what
that Man esteems lofty and Sublime, this Man Undervalues; for the one knows and
thoroughly understands the Subject he speaks of, which the other does not. To
return, all the Disciples of any Sect, reverence the Authors and Founders of
them, and love to speak in their Language, and according to their Dialect. An
Aristotelian will huff, and grow very angry, if the Cant of his Schools be
mocked; and the well-bred Cartesian will not be much more calm and easy, when
the Terms and Principles of his Philosophy are played upon. Now ought not
Christians to be much more tender of the Divine Phrases which the Prophets and
Apostles have used to set forth the Secret and Sublime Principles of that Life,
which renders us acceptable to God, and makes us to be reputed Righteous in his
sight? Which Phrases were neither blindly hit upon, nor affected to amuse, but
wisely chosen as most proper; because both clear and comprehensive. Therefore
to mock Faith, and to turn Believing into Ridicule, to explode the Phrase, and
pretend to give better, is insufferable Insolence, and a high Affront to the
Apostles, and Prophets, and that Spirit which did inspire them. Christians
ought to resent this: to bear with it is not Meekness; but want of Zeal and
Courage; it is a lazy treachery, as when one beholds the Rights of his Country
or Society invaded and betrayed, and yet holds his Peace. It does not become
the Children of the Family to assume the Liberty, or rather licentiousness of
Enemies and Aliens, and if the Wantonness of their Humor prompt them to it, it
is their Duty who have the Charge of the Family, to Chastise them into better
Manners.

ESSAY II.
Of Faith as Opposed to Doubting.
1. WHatever regard be due to Words and Phrases, there is a greater due to the
sense and meaning of them. Men are no better than Parrots, if they utter words
and do not understand them. The next thing therefore to be considered is, what
is this Faith which the Just should live by, which is so much magnified and
spoken of in Scripture, which is now, and which is said always to have been the
Principle of a holy and spiritual Life.

2. In order to this, I resolve not either to consider the Definitions of
others, or to give a New one of my own, the common Definitions of Faith would
hamper me too much: If I were tied to them, I could not have the freedom of my
design, which is, to make a clear, full, and ample Description of Faith. This
is not to cast a slight upon any of the received Definitions; which, as they
are placed in the common Catechisms, do serve well enough to point out some of
the special and chief Acts of Faith, but which yet are not sufficient to give a
full or clear Idea of it. Nor will I attempt to amend them, or to establish a
better one; for it is not easy to make a good Definition of such a very
comprehensive thing as Faith is: nor is such a thing well understood by any
Definition, as by taking a particular and separate view of those things which
it comprehends. It is but a very confused Notion of Grammar, Logic, or any
other Science which Youth have by the Definitions which are first taught them;
they then only rightly understand the Nature and Use of these Sciences, when
they have gone through them.

And as I am not to trouble my self with the common Definitions, so neither
will I entangle my self, or the Reader, with the ordinary Distinctions of
Faith; such as Temporary Faith, an Historical Faith, a Faith of Miracles, etc.
For though there be something in Scripture which gives occasion to these Names
and Distinctions, yet the consideration of them would give little light to our
Enquiry, for they suppose the Knowledge of Faith which we enquire after, and
are designed to mark out some certain degrees of Faith, rather than to instruct
the Nature of it, which we mainly aim at. For my purpose is, by the light and
guidance of Scripture alone, to search out this Faith, which is necessary to
entitle one to be Just and Righteous before God, and upon which account it must
be that St. Paul says, without Faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. ii.
6. And to prevent all dangerous Error, that we may not mistake one sort of
Faith for another, a Faith which cannot, or does not render Just, for one that
does, we shall have still in our Eye this necessary Relation betwixt Faith and
Righteousness.

3. To proceed then, In the first place, I find Faith taken in opposition to
Doubting: So it is taken, Romans 14. and in several other places. And in this
sense Faith is much the same with Conscience, and is an inward Conviction or
Persuasion of Mind concerning what is true or false, good and evil, lawful and
unlawful. Which Persuasion or inward Conviction, is the first Rule or Standard
by which one's Integrity and Uprightness is to be measured; and therefore it is
as necessary for the Just to live by this Faith, as for a Square to have four
equal sides: both Texts of Scripture, and the Nature of the thing require it.
The true and primitive Character of a Just Man is to be Conscientious, to
follow the Dictates of his Mind, and to order his Life and Actions according to
what he knows and believes to be right. A Just Man must be Upright, and there
is no Uprightness if the outward and inward-man do not keep touches, if there
be no Correspondence betwixt them, if the Mouth contradict the Heart, and the
Life and Actions be disagreeable to the inward Light and Sentiments.

This Faith is as the Eye by which we see and know how to order our Steps; it
is as the Light to show the Way in which we should walk, and not to follow it,
or to go contrary to it, is great Perverseness, and the Character of a Wicked
Man. As the Spirit is the Principle of Life, and Life of Motion; so this Faith
is the first Principle of a good Life, and Men are to be reckoned good or bad
as they walk according to it: He is a bad Man who contradicts it, and he is no
good Man whose Actions do not flow from it. The Motions of a Puppet or Engine
may be both Regular and Useful, but they cannot be reckoned Natural; because
they proceed not from a Principle of Life, but from Artificial Springs. So though
one's Actions be never so plausible, fair or useful to others, yet they are not
good; nor is he, who does them Just, if they proceed from any other principle
than this Faith, that is, an inward Persuasion of their being just and good,
lawful and reasonable, for whatsoever is not of Faith (says the Apostle) is
sin, Romans 14. 23. Hence it is that we see some in Scripture branded with the
Character of ill Men, and others denied the Approbation of being good, whose
Actions were outwardly good and commendable, because they did what they did,
for other Reasons, and upon another account, than the intrinsic goodness of
those things, or their own Persuasion of it.

4. All the Actions of every one are to be Approved or Condemned, with a regard
to this Faith, and by virtue of it, things, in themselves good and lawful,
become evil, and what is evil loses a part of its malignity. Thus the Eating
of Flesh, which in it self is a lawful and innocent Action, is a damnable Sin
to him who has the least doubt whether it be lawful; and what is clean turns
unclean to him who thinks it so, as is excellently discoursed in that
forecited Chapter. So on the other hand, we find God himself excusing
Abimelech for taking Sarah into his House, because he did it in the integrity
of his heart; that is, he was ignorant of her being another Man's Wife. And St.
Paul's Perfection of the Saints was the more pardonable, because he verily
thought he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus: I was before
(says he) a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief; that is, without Faith, or the
persuasion of the evil of it, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

But then it is to be remembered, That this Faith which has such Influence upon
our Actions, and which is so Essential to a Just Man, is not Fancy or
Imagination, nor a light or hasty Persuasion. Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind, says the Apostle, ver. 5. and therefore our Faith and
Persuasion ought to be well-grounded, the effect of serious Enquiry and
Deliberation, that it may give true and certain Direction, otherwise it may be
still said that we are regardless of Right and Wrong, Truth or Falsehood, Good
and Evil, which is inconsistent with the Character of a perfectly Just Man. A
wise Architect does not work at random, but by Plumb and Rule; but then he is
first careful that his Plumb and Rule be right and exact; for without this, he
cannot sincerely intend to have his work perfect. So a Just man carefully
studieth both a Conformity betwixt his Actions and his inward Sentiments, and
betwixt these and truth, and the stable Rule of Right and wrong, Good and Evil.
To act contrary to inward Conviction is to offend wilfully, and the height of
Wickedness; but it is the next degree to it to be careless whether we offend or
not, whether we do Good or Evil, which we are guilty of, when we are not at any
pains to adjust our Persuasion to Truth, to know the right, or to inform our
selves of what is good, lawful, and fit to be done. The same reason which makes
it Just, and our Duty to act according to our Knowledge, and inward Persuasion,
or to do the Good we know, obliges us to search out the real Good that is,
that there may be no Error in our Persuasion, nor Crookedness in our Practice;
and then only our Thoughts can justify our Actions, when, by Diligence and due
Care, we have endeavored to make our Thoughts just and true, conform to the
Nature of things; for without this, we cannot be fully persuaded in our Minds,
as the Apostle enjoineth; the assurance of Faith is wanting, which is necessary
to dispel all doubts, and to establish our goings. Happy is he (says St. Paul)
that condemns not himself in that thing which he allows, Romans 14. 22. by
which he gives us to understand, that our Heart must approve our Actions; our
Minds must Judge, that the ways we take are right, otherwise we stand
Self-condemned. Now the Judgment is not Just which is not certain, which is
rashly or hastily pronounced, before a strict Examination, or a due Attention
to all the Proofs and Evidences which can be brought for clearing the Cause.
There is still place for Doubting, when necessary Caution and the proper Means
have not been used for right and sufficient Information. And as Doubting
defiles the Man, and polluteth all his Actions, so it is uneasy to the Mind:
As Darkness, in which when one walks, it makes him Apprehensive, full of
Fears and Jealousies, going forwards and backwards, to the right and left,
without any steady course; because he has no certainty of his way. What is
translated a Double-minded Man, ought to be a Doubtful Man, one that has not
the assurance of Faith; and such an one (says St. James) is unstable in all
his ways, he wavereth like a wave of the Sea, which is driven with the wind and
tossed, Jam. 1. 6, 8. Fleeting and Inconstancy, change of Opinions and
Practices, regarding Events and outward Advantages, is at least a sure sign and
evidence that the Person has not attained to a true Faith, or full Persuasion
of his Duty, of what is good, lawful, or necessary; for Faith gives a cheerful
confidence, it makes one constant, and to be always the same; because Truth and
the Nature of things change not.

To conclude this Matter; By Faith here we are to understand a true Knowledge
of the Nature of things, a clear Conviction of Truth, and a hearty full
Persuasion of Good and Evil, Lawful and Unlawful, which every one should
endeavor after as much as possible: And also every one ought to live
answerably to the measure which he has attained of it. Who does thus, so far
he is to be reckoned Good and Just; for he has no Perverseness in his temper,
no crooked Bias in his Constitution, but shows an Integrity of Mind without
guile or hypocrisy, and a regular Will, which offers no Prejudice, but which
renders to every person and thing what is due.

6. Righteousness begins here: A tendency toward this Faith is the first
Symptom and Appearance, as well as Motion, of a Just and Good Life, which like
the Natural, upon its first Production, may be weak and languid; but which,
like it too, grows if it be not stifled: and as it grows, so it acquireth
strength and vigor, until it arrive at Perfection. The first moments of the
Morning are hardly distinguished from black Night; but it creeps on
insensibly, until the whole Hemisphere be enlightened. So the Paths of the just
(says Solomon) are as the shining light, which shines more and more until the
perfect day, Prove. 4. 18.

ESSAY III.
Of Faith as opposed to Atheism, and how a belief of the Existence of God, is
necessary to Determine the certain Rule of Moral Actions.
1. TO go on with Faith, which in the Second place is opposed to Atheism, and
so it is a firm Belief of the existence of a Deity, a certain, full, and clear
Persuasion that God is, and a sense of those Attributes which are necessarily
included in the true Idea of God. He (says the Apostle) who comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them who diligently seek
him, Heb. 4. 6.

2. The Faith, spoken of in the former Essay, obliges to enquire after this;
and this we are now upon, enforces the reasonableness and necessity of that;
such is the relation betwixt them, and so mutually do they support one another.
Not to Criticize Grammatically upon the words [ Lawful, and Vnlawful] which
suppose a Superior, even Good and Evil depend much, if not altogether, upon
the Knowledge of God, and are to be measured by a Relation to him: the Nature
of these will be found to vary very much, according as the Existence or
Nonexistence of a Deity is established. If Man have no Superior, none to
reward or punish his Actions, then I suppose the Government of himself is
Arbitrary, as the choosing Employments is now thought to be; his chief business
is to please himself; and consequently, Good and Evil are only to be considered
with relation to one's self and his present Interest; which shall make as many
different notions of Good and Evil, as there are different Humors,
Inclinations, and Interests among Men. Good and Evil shall in that case have no
certain Standard by which to be measured, but shall be of as mutable a Nature,
as Honesty and Dishonesty in a divided Commonwealth, where the same thing is
both Honesty and Knavery, in the Judgment of the different Parties, and where
the same Person shall be both reputed a Hero and a Villain. Then no act can
leave a guilt, and better or worse, well or ill done is to be measured by the
Event and Success. And though Moral Laws can be showed to have a Foundation in
Nature, yet the transgression of them, for a particular Pleasure or
Convenience, will be thought no more culpable than to level a Mountain, to cut
the course of a River; to force Water to ascend, and such like, which seem to
be equal Violences to Nature; so that he who has a Liberty to do the one, may
also do the other.

But the case is quite altered, if there be a God, for then we are no more at
our own disposal than Servants: He who made us, has an absolute dominion over
us; and all our care ought to be to please him: His Will is a Law, and the
perpetual Standard of Good and Evil.

3. However it is certain, that, (according to Scripture) none are reckoned
Just or Righteous, but such as act with a continued regard to God, which
sometimes is expressed by the fear of God, sometimes by walking with him, or
before him, and having the heart perfect or upright with God. When Hezekiah
pleaded his Integrity, it was in these words, Remember, Lord, how I have walked
before thee with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. Upon this account, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Joseph, Joshua, Job, and
all the other Worthies in Scripture are put into the Catalogue of the Just. And
granting that there is a God, it will necessarily follow that he only is a Just
Man, who sets God before him, who makes him the end and measure of his Actions,
and the very design of whose Life is to please God: Nor can there be a more
proper Character of an Unjust Man, than that by which the Wicked and Ungodly
are described in Scripture, Viz. They have not the fear of God before their
Eyes, God is not in all their thoughts, they are without God; that is, they
have no consideration of him, nor regard unto him. He is not Just who does not
render to every Man what is due. If one keep squares with others never so well,
if he deal never so fairly with them, yet if he, at the same time, be
untowardly, or undutiful to his Parents, he cannot properly be called Just. So
let one possess all that is called Virtue toward Men, yet if God have not due
Acknowledgment from him, that Man is neither Just nor Righteous. Nay, as he is
not a good and faithful Servant, who does not sincerely intend his Master's
Honor and Interest in all he does; so, (according to the Scripture) none can
claim the titles of Just or Righteous, or have them bestowed upon them, who do
not all for God's sake, whose chief Motive to do Good and forbear Evil is,
because the one is acceptable to God, and the other offensive to him.

4. Wherefore those Divines are much to be censured, who recommend Morality,
and a good Life chiefly by other Topics than these: for they are either
ignorant of the Principles and Philosophy of the Scripture, or they discard the
same to establish a better, and more plausible Scheme of things. They who
profess to believe the Divine Authority of the Scripture, ought also to think
that they are incapable to correct its Principles, or to establish what is more
Just, or Wise; and that they cannot better show their Learning and Judgment,
than by making it appear that they fully understand the Scope and Doctrine of
the Scripture. But whatever Opinion they have of the Scripture, seeing their
Profession obliges them to teach it, they ought to do it heartily; that is,
without mixing their own Fancies and Opinions. If one was appointed to read a
Lecture of either Aristotelian, or Cartesian Philosophy, he could not be said
to execute his office with ingenuity, who did not represent them purely
according to their Authors, but who did blend them with other Principles. A
righteousness built on the Principles of Self-love, Honor, Convenience,
Pleasure, and such other Motives, is a Righteousness built on a Heathen
Foundation, which cannot please God, no more than we do think our selves
obliged by Acts and Deeds, which had no regard to us. I would not be thought by
this to exclude all respect to our Private and Personal Interest; nor yet to
disprove a humble and modest Enquiry into the reasonableness or excellency of
the Divine Laws: But as the surest Proof, the clearest and shortest
Demonstration of this, is drawn from the Existence, Nature, Will, and Authority
of God; Just as we best understand the Wisdom and Reasons of a Government, by
considering what the King is, and what he proposes to himself. So the only
design of this Enquiry should be to encourage our Obedience, to render it more
ready and cheerful by convincing us, that he, who has the Authority over us,
employs it most for our Advantage, that so the Servitude, which we owe by
Nature, may become voluntary, that we may be incapable of revolting: and though
we could be free, yet we may choose rather to be Servants for ever, like that
Servant under the Law, who gave his Ear to be bored through, preferring (out of
love to his Master) perpetual Bondage to his Freedom.

I know not whether it should move Indignation or Pity most, to see how
pleasantly Men delude themselves with Suppositions of Mankind; their starting
up free without all obligation, except to consult their own Pleasure and
Convenience. Some, who make these Suppositions, deny a Deity, and proceed
without any Consideration of God. Others own a Deity, but they found our
Obligation to him only on his possessing Wisdom, Reason and Knowledge in
greater measure. But this state of Nature is a Dream and mere Romance, and all
their Suppositions are wild, extravagant, against Reason and Nature, if Mankind
had another beginning, if we all owe our being to another; for then we are not
free, our Creation subjects us to him. We ought in the first place to regard
his Will, which is a Law of indispensible Obligation, not by virtue only of the
reasonableness of it, or the convenience it brings with it, but by virtue of
the Authority enjoining it. He is an open Rebel who has no regard to this
Authority at all, and he, who preferrs any thing to it, or has any other thing
in greater consideration, has broke the first and greatest chain of Justice; he
is not truly Loyal, but waits an opportunity to revolt. Though Rewards and
Punishments be proposed, yet they are not intended for weakening the Authority
of the Supreme Lord; but to preserve it from contempt, and to heighten our
regard for it. Which Rewards we ought to consider, and have always before us,
both that we may know the Nature and Importance of those things to which they
are annexed; and also, that by them we may be the more capable to serve and
glorify God, to whom we owe infinite Service, if it were in our Power.

ESSAY IV.
The Existence of God is most Evident.
FRom what has been said it necessarily follows, that the first Principle of
true Righteousness, the Foundation of all Morality and Religion, is this Faith
by which we firmly believe that God is, and that we derive our Life and Being
from him; that he Rules and Governs the World; and that he is a Rewarder of
them who diligently seek him. This comprehends all; and all other things are
but Deductions from this. Shake this, and all falls to the Ground; the whole
Fabric of Religion and Morality shivers into pieces. But then this cannot be
shaken: It stands like a Rock, immovable, notwithstanding of all the furious
blasts of insolent Men in the several Ages of the World; and perhaps, never any
of the former made so many, or so violent attacks as this present. This
Foundation is surer than that of the World it self; for when the Foundation of
the World shall be overturned, this shall stand sure to all Eternity, as it was
before the Foundation of the World it self was laid.

1. And as it is sure and certain, so it is clear and evident. This is not a
Truth which lies hid, or mysteriously wrapped up, which requires depth of
Judgment, vast Learning, assiduous Study, and great Pains to the digging it up:
We may come at this, without undertaking long and dangerous Voyages, without
the wearisome Study of Languages, without turning over many Volumes, without
the trouble of consulting all the Wise and Learned, and collecting their
Sentiments. This lies open to every Man of common Sense and Judgment, because
it is what every Man should know, believe, and understand. The Necessaries of
Life are common every where, and may be had in every Country by a reasonable
Industry, which is no ways uneasy. What must be fetched from afar, with much
expense and labor, does rather please Fancy, than serve Nature: So they are
only Indian Trifles, for amusing and sustaining a vain Curiosity, which for the
most part are returned to us by the Laborious Travels of Learned Men. And though
they produce also things Substantial, to give solid Delight and Satisfaction;
yet even of these it must be said, that they are not absolutely necessary to
give us Wisdom and Knowledge, to establish this Faith, which is the Groundwork
and Foundation of all. What is necessary and sufficient for this, is obvious
and at hand, that all may be without excuse; for which cause I may apply these
words of Moses, This is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not
in Heaven, that thou should say, who shall go for us to Heaven, and bring it
unto us, that we may hear it and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we
may hear it and do it; but this word of Faith is very nigh unto thee, in thy
Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it, Deuteronomy. 30. 12. That is, the
Evidence of this Faith depends not on the knowledge of what is transacted in
these upper Regions, nor on what passes in the remote Parts of the World; but
the Evidence of it lies in every Man's own Bosom: His own Mind (if he hearken
to it) can make him conscious of this Truth: That thing within him (whatever it
be) which makes him sensible of other things, can convince him of this.

2. Because I intend to speak intelligibly to all, what the meanest Capacity
may comprehend, I will not run into the Philosophical Debate about innate
Ideas; I will not enquire, whether all be born with an Idea of God, nor of what
force that is, to demonstrate his Existence; but whether the Mind of Man come
to the World void of all Notions, or prepossessed with Principles, by which it
is to examine all things afterward: it is certain, that it is capable of
discerning things when duly set before it; as the Eye is capable of
distinguishing objects and colors in a clear light, and at a due distance. If
the Mind cannot refuse an assent to some things, if upon every representation
of them it owns a Conviction, and cannot without violence work it self into a
denial; it is all a matter, whether this be from innate Principles, or the
natural Evidence of these things themselves. And that there are some things
clearer and more evident than Demonstration it self, appears from this, that
even Mathematical Demonstration proceeds upon the supposition of this, and
requires them as Postulata. Now the Mathematicians have only considered such
Axioms as relate to Lines, Figures, and Bodies: There are other Principles as
self-evident as these; whence comes that the Voice of Nature is Uniform, and
that there is a common consent of Mankind: Wherefore it is no Paradox to say,
that the Existence of God, and the Principles of Morality, is not only as
certain, but more evident than the Propositions of Euclid, because the
generality of Mankind have always easily (by the very bent of their Nature)
given an assent unto them, and that the greatest Barbarity and Corruption could
never entirely deface them. Some Men's Genius is not capable of Mathematics,
but all are capable or Morality; and the reason of it is so plain, that every
unbiased Mind assents to it.

That there are Debates about some Moral Principles, and particularly this of a
Deity, is no more an Objection against the Evidence thereof, than the Arguments
of Zeno against the Possibility of Motion, or the Sophistry of the Scepticks
against the certainty of these things which fall under our senses. There are
some things which a Child can distinguish as well as any of riper Years, and
which a Country Clown may Judge of as well as a Philosopher; and consequently
common Sense and Reason may be known from the one as well as the other, nay,
very often better: for the one speaks what his Mind naturally dictates,
whereas the other being amused with the Notions he has read, which his Head
always runs upon; He discourses according to these, and so perverteth his
Natural Reason. The most simple Person can at first sight distinguish Natural
Things from Artificial, and without hesitation, without waiting a deduction of
Logical Inserences is presently convinced, that both the one and the other has
a cause, and did not spring from themselves. None was ever so senseless as to
think a House was built without Hands; and any of common sense sees, that
Natural Things far excels these of Art, being more curiously wrought, more
admirably contrived, being more beautiful, serving to more uses; and in a word,
every way more perfect. Therefore leave Men to the freedom of their own reason,
they would as readily believe a God, as that a House had a Builder, or a Watch
an Artificer.

3. Some will not yield that there are, or can be real Atheists; because it
implies such absurdity. But we see daily instances of Men's swallowing very
gross Absurdities: Nay, there is hardly any absurdity which some or other has
not received; which should teach the wisest to walk with fear, and to preserve
their reason carefully. If there be no Atheists, some take a great deal of
Pains to no purpose; for they are at much ado to persuade us that they
themselves are, and to bring others to be Atheists.

But as I see no reason to doubt that there are such, though very much reason
that there should be none. So Men's Atheism proceeds either, 1 st. From their
Vitiousness, which first breeds in them a dislike of God, and then carries them
to dispute his Providence, and at last his Existence. Just as they who are
embarked in some Design, which makes them dread the King, first Quarrel with
his Government, and then deny his right and title. Or, 2 dly. It arises from
the Difficulties which they meet with in the Contemplation of his Nature and
Attributes; because they cannot clear or comprehend these, therefore they deny
his Being, thinking it better to deny what is plain and evident, than to own
their Ignorance, or the shortness of their Reason, than which nothing can be
more unreasonable, as we may have occasion to show afterward. Is it reasonable
to deny plain and common things, because there are some things without our
reach? Shall I put out my Eyes because they fail me in some particulars?
because they do not reach beyond the Clouds, nor penetrate into the Secrets of
Nature? Difficulties which are insuperable may put a stop to further Enquiries,
and make it reasonable not to determine any thing positively in these Matters
where we find them: but they can never make it reasonable to deny what was
clearly perceived before these occurred.

Though the Divine Essence he incomprehensible, because infinite, and because it
does not fall under our sense, though the ways and Workings of God be
unsearchable and past finding out, yet plainer and more certain Evidences
cannot be desired of united Wisdom and Power, than what we have continually
before us; nay, carry about with us in our own selves. As soon as one casts his
Eye seriously upon them, he shall be convinced: He that considers them, shall
acknowledge them; and therefore a Third Cause of Atheism is want of
Consideration and Reflection. Some are Atheists, because they do not think;
their Souls are always asleep, and they never open the Eyes of their Mind to
behold, by a wise regard, the many Prodigies of Omniscient Power, the beautiful
Scenes, the curious and admirable contrivances of Almighty Wisdom, with which
the World is filled. They are like these sensual, dull, and uninquisitive
Souls, which creep about the Palaces of Princes, on the account of the Meat and
Drink, which is to be had there in plenty. They mind nothing but the crambing
their Bellies, and are altogether insensible of the Stately Magnificence, the
Curious Architecture, the fine Sculpture and Painting, which draws Strangers
thither from all Parts of the World. He, who leads such a life, should be set
to graze with the Beasts, for his life is not much better than theirs, and his
Soul seems to be altogether sensitive.

It is the Property of Man to think: his Dignity above the other Creatures lies
in a power of discerning and understanding things, their Nature, Ends, and
Uses, their relation to each other, their cause and contrivance, and what else
may enlarge the Mind with Wisdom and Knowledge to which he bends (when free) as
naturally as a Stone to the Earth. He, who does not employ his Thoughts these
ways, abdicates the Dignity of his Nature; and he, who thus carefully maintains
it, will be full of God, if I may so speak, God will be in all his thoughts,
for he shall see him every where, before him, behind him, on every side, and in
every thing. As the foolish Jews asked a sign of Jesus Christ, when according
to their Hypotheses, and the Supposition of their Law and Prophets which they
themselves believed, every word he spoke, and every work he did was a Sign. So
some unreasonably demand a Proof or Demonstration of a Deity, whilst they walk
in the midst of Demonstrations, and do tread on them every step. If we cannot
see his invisible Essence, yet upon the first opening our Eyes, we discern
unquestionable Effects of his Essential Attributes: And if they do not affect
us, because they are common and ordinary, it bewrays our want of Judgment and
Consideration; for the excellency of a thing lies not in its being rare and
singular, but in the design, contrivance, and usefulness. Is the Art of a Watch
less to be regarded, or does the Memory of the first Inventor deserve less
honor, because now adays every body carries one in his Pocket; and that
perhaps some of no great capacity are taught to work them.

ESSAY V.
Evidences of a Deity in Man.
1. GEnerals do not much affect us, nor are things distinctly known by a
general view of them, we then see and understand them best, when we consider
each apart by it self. The World is too large a Prospect to be taken up at
once; we will therefore descend to particulars, and shall begin at home. Take a
view but of the outward make and figure of the Body of Man; Consider the
variety of Parts, the Symmetry, Situation and Proportion, either in respect to
the whole, or to each other; the firmness of the Feet, the strength of the
Legs, the well-compacted thickness of the Thighs, the stateliness of the Trunk,
the force of the Arms, the contrivance and innumerable uses of the Hand, the
comeliness and beauty of the Face, the majesty of the Countenance, and the
ornament of the Hair. The finest Painters and most curious Statuaries think
they cannot show their Skill better, than to imitate these, and though the best
imitation of them be very rude in Comparison with the Original, yet even these
rude Counterfeits have been much admired, and have procured much Honor and
Fame to those who made them. Now if the Copy be admired, what does the Original
deserve? If the Picture or Statue show Art and Skill, shall the Original be
ascribed to chance? Is it not more reasonable to think that it is the work of
some wise and excellent Hand?

2. Especially if we penetrate into the Inward frame and texture, which is
altogether unimitable: none was ever so mad as to attempt it. When the outward
covering of the Skin, which also is admirable, being a Net of Nerves curiously
interwoven, when this (I say) is laid aside, what a wonderful Contrivance
appears of Bones, Muscles, Arteries, Nerves, and other Vessels, which both
astonish the wisest, and also afford them matter of curious Enquiry. Since the
Beginning of the World all the wise and curious have been prying into the Body
of Man, Dissecting and Anatomizing the Parts of it. Some have spent their whole
life in considering but one particular Part; and yet after so many Thousand
Years, there is no perfect discovery, either of the whole, or almost of any
part. There is a terra incognita even in this little World. As there are at
this day better Anatomists than whom former Ages could boast off: So the most
Skilful do acknowledge ingenuously, that they discern neither all the Parts of
this admirable Machine, nor yet all the true Uses of those Parts which have
been discovered. All the Functions of the Brain and Spleen are not yet
understood; and it is but mere Conjecture what is said of several others. Is it
not then against common sense to ascribe to any thing but perfect Wisdom, what
is thus above the reach of the wisest Men, and what puzzles them to comprehend!

3. To give further Conviction of this truth, let Life, Motion, and Sense be
considered. What admirable and exquisite Wisdom does appear in the frame and
disposal of the Senses! As in a City invested with Enemies, and in danger to be
betrayed, it is necessary to advert to all the Motions of those within, and to
keep Watch at all the Ramparts, and other places proper for discovering the
Advances and dangerous Approaches of the Enemy. So it is necessary to the
preservation of the Body, that both its outward and inward state be perfectly
understood, that all the Motions within, and all Applications without be felt,
that it may be presently known what are hurtful, and what convenient, what
should be cherished, and what prevented; wherefore we see that the Organs of
this Sense of Feeling are posted every where throughout the Body; so that the
least disturbance within, and the slightest touch without, even in the
Extremities, is instantly perceived. Tasting being designed for distinguishing
Meats, and for discerning what is agreeable; therefore the Instrument of this
Sense is the forepart of the Tongue, which lies at the very Gates of the first
entry or passage to the Stomach, to secure against what is disagreeable: For if
the Faculty of Tasting had been placed more inwards, the disgorging unsavory
things should have been very incommodious. Because all the ends and purposes of
Smelling may be served by one Organ, therefore there is no more, but that is
curiously formed, and admirably sitted to receive the insensible Particles,
which evaporate from all Material Substances, whether animate or inanimate,
natural or composed. However the Organ of this Sense is grosser in Man, than in
some other Animals, because they require it far more exquisite. For Example, If
the Dog had not this Sense in a nicer measure than Man, he would not be worth
keeping; for then he could neither trace out his Master's footsteps, nor yet
find out where the Partridge feeds, or the Hare has her Seat, which certainly
never happened by Accident. If this be not Design, we may make Design and
Chance all one; for it is impossible to distinguish them.

The two other Senses being by far the most Delightful and Profitable,
therefore each has two Organs, most wisely situated, and most admirably
contrived to answer the purposes of these two Faculties. The Fabric and Motion
of the Eye is so curious, that never any yet did consider it without wonder and
astonishment. This is the foundation of the Optics, which is the most pleasant
and curious part of Mathematics. Upon which account, I must say, That if there
be Mathematicians who are Atheists, they are of all others most inexcusable:
For seeing Vision, and the Fabric and Motion of the Eye, by which it is
performed, is according to the strictest Rules of Mathematics, and that he
must be a Master of that Art, who can unfold the Method and Manner of Vision,
and explain the Reasons of it. Is it not the height of Impudence? Is it not a
Violence to common Sense? Is it not to contradict and baffle Demonstration it
self, either to think or say that Vision was contrived, or the Eye framed
without Wisdom, or that the Author thereof was not skilled in the Nature of
Light, the Rules of Motion, the Doctrine of Refraction and Reflection, without
which the Eye had been no Eye, nor Vision ever effectuated? To secure this
necessary Organ from danger, it is lodged in a well adapted bony Orbite; and
because only a Body of a Spherical Figure can move easily within another,
especially when the whole space is to be filled up, therefore the Eye is
Spherical, which is the only Figure capable of those many Motions which are
necessary for discerning the various Objects which surround us; and both to
facilitate these Motions, and for performing them rightly, it is tied by
various Muscles, interwoven with many Nerves; by the means of which, it moves
up and down and to either side easily. These Muscles are also so situate, that
one is a kind of curb to the motion of the other, lest the Eye should be in
hazard of being renversed: Moreover, they serve to keep the Eye fixed upon
Objects, as long as there is occasion to look at them. The Eyelids are not
only for a cover when we are asleep; but also they serve to clean and clear it
by their Motions, which could not be so safely done by the Hand. As the Eye
gives Life and Beauty to the Countenance, and discovers the inward Thoughts
and hidden Temper both of Body and Mind; so nothing could have been more
admirably contrived for Vision; being composed of various humors contained in
different Coats. The Cornea or White is unequal, and receives different degrees
of Convexity, according as the Objects are far or near: and to render it
capable of changing its Figure thus, the humor next to it is thin, liquid, and
pliable, which is therefore called Aqueous. The Pupilla or Sight does dilate
and contract it self as there is more or less Light. And because various
distances of Objects require different Positions of the Cristalline humor,
through which the Rays of Light pass to the Retina, where they form the Image
of the external Object: For Rays from a nearer Object unite at a greater
distance than those which come from an Object more remote; therefore the
Cristalline humor is pressed upon the Retina, by what Anatomists call
Ligamentum Ciliare, and yet it is kept by the Vitrious humor, at such a due
distance as is necessary for uniting the Rays exactly upon it. And that the
Image of the Object, which is formed upon the Retina, may not be disordered by
a Reflection of the Rays which pass through it, therefore the Choroides or coat
which surrounds it, is tinctured black, which color does not reflect any Rays;
for if it were of another color it would, and so hinder a distinct Vision of
external Objects. The Retina, upon which the Image of all external Objects is
formed, is not above an inch and a half; and yet without Calculation or
consulting Experience, or Arithmetical Tables of Proportion, we are made to
perceive all Objects distinctly in their just and real Proportions and at their
true Distances, which is a most wonderful Contrivance, altogether impossible
without infinite Power and Wisdom, as both this and some other particulars of
Vision are inexplicable by humane Reason.

Nor is the Ear less curious than the Eye: Some offer to prove it more
Artificial; but, Comparisons here (as in other things) are to no purpose.
Certainly, there are as many (if not more) distinct Parts in the Fabric of the
Ear than Eye. But it not being my design to give an Anatomical Discourse, I
will not offer to dissect it. Notice of all external Sound is given by a
delicate Membrane, which is guarded by a viscous Substance, lest rude and
violent Percussions should break it. There are wonderful Cavities for receiving
the impressions and beatings upon this Membrane, for reverberating them, for
modifying and distinguishing them, that they may be clearly understood. All
which can be ascribed to nothing less than infinite Wisdom, which contrived the
Eye, to give us the most delightful Prospect of the most pleasant Scenes of the
Divine Opera; and which formed the Ear to entertain us with the sweet Notes
which the most Melodious feathered Chorus Sing to the Praises of their Creator,
and especially that by these means our Souls, though strictly chained to, and
closely detained in the Body, may be capable of communicating their Thoughts to
one another.

4. Which leads me to the internal and intellectual Faculties; the vast
Capacity of the Mind, the quick and lively force of the Imagination, the
incomprehensible Storehouse of the Memory, where Myriads of things are laid up
without any Confusion, but ranged in that good order, as a very Thought can
produce them in a Moment. This is a large Subject, I dare not attempt it, lest
I be carried too far, or should utter things not so obvious, or which might
occasion debate. I only mark the excellency and usefulness of these Faculties,
which every one can understand. It is by the means of these that we think,
reason, discourse, arrive at Wisdom and Knowledge, by comparing things
together, considering their mutual Relations, by Judging the present from what
is past, by running the Effects up to their Cause, and by taking measures, both
of Natural and Moral Events and Productions, from the Nature and Conjunction of
Causes. By all which method and manner of reasoning, we constantly find that
every thing must have a Cause, for nothing can produce nothing; nor can any
thing give to another the perfection which it self wants. Motion must have a
Mover: Life must proceed from something that Lives, and Art and Contrivance
from one or other that understands the same; and consequently the whole System
of our Reason must be overturned, the first Principles of Knowledge rejected,
and the clearest Perception denied, if he who planted the Ear did not hear, if
he who formed the Eye did not see, if he who teaches man Knowledge does not
know. In a word, if the Author of our Being be not infinitely. Wise and
Powerful, to which all Mankind have given their consent; for as the Latin
Orator, and some others have observed, there was never yet found any Nation or
People who did not acknowledge a God.

I crave leave to add some few Thoughts more for evincing this.

5. One is taken from the wonderful Contrivance of nourishing the Body, and
supplying all its Parts. Many rare Inventions have been ruined, because they
could not be sustained or repaired: When the secret Springs broke, they
perished; and what a trouble is it to uphold the Machines of Humane
Contrivance, or to keep them a going? But as the Author of our Being did
foresee that our Bodies were liable to decay, and did waste themselves by
acting and moving; so he has most wisely provided against that Evil, and has
laid down a wonderful easy Method of sending Recruits to all the Parts, far
and near; nay, even to these which are wrapped up in the Heart of others,
without doing prejudice to the surrounding Vessels, which is by receiving a
little proper Food into the Mouth, from whence after chewing and mastigation,
it is conveyed into the Stomach, where it is digested into a liquid Substance,
whether by heat or acidity, or both, or by the motion of the Stomach it self,
we shall not debate. But however it be, there is a speedy Dissolution of what
comes there, and a better Se^retion or Separation of the different Substances
after Dissolution, than can be by the most expert Chemist. Which Preparation
being made, it is instantly discharged into Pipes and Canals, of different
sizes, and strangely intersected, which supply every Part with what is
necessary; so that the remote Parts are not neglected, nor the nearer ones
sooner supplied: all are equally provided and taken care of, and at the same
instant refreshed. When the Body is faint and feeble, seems to have lost all
its Spirits, and upon the point of expiring, how suddenly does a little Food
recover it? how soon is its color renewed? and how instantly does it begin to
exert strength and vigor? should this be passed over because common? should it
be slighted because ordinary? should we not regard this wonderful Device, by
which our Life is maintained from Day to Day? Methinks, those who are so well
pleased with Eating and Drinking, should thank the Contrivance. Upon this is
founded the Custom of asking a Blessing before Meat, and of giving Thanks
after; and to say the truth, it is not only laudable, but more reasonable and
necessary than is commonly believed.

6. And as the Nourishment of the Body does ascribe Wisdom to its Author, so
both his Wisdom and Power does appear in its Generation. What an unlikely
beginning has it? how unaccountable that an homogeneous fluid should be the
foundation of such an hetterogeneous solid? We are sure it is, but how it comes
to be cannot be comprehended. The manner of this Production is as much hid from
our Understanding, as the place from our Eyes. The wisest Philosophers are but
Children here; their Principles of Mechanism can give no light to this Affair;
all they say, is but a heap of fanciful and groundless Conjectures. Nor do I
believe the sole Power of what is called Nature sufficient; there must be the
guidance of an intelligent Spirit, to regulate Nature, and to see it perform
its Duty. As in a Watch, all the Wheels and Parts have a mutual dependence on
each other, and do regulate one another's Motions, and cannot move without the
Spring: nor this, unless it be wound up by some Hand: So there is a mutual
dependency among the Parts of the Body: They must be all formed at once, and
must all perform their Functions together, otherwise not any of them can act or
move. The Circulation of the Blood is the Cause of Animal Motion, or absolutely
necessary to it, and the means of Nourishment. The Blood cannot circulate
without the Motion of the Heart, nor the Heart move without Animal Spirits: Nor
are Animal Spirits formed but by the Circulation and Secretion of the Blood;
therefore there must be some supervenient Power to influence them all simul and
semel, to breathe Life into them, and to set them a going. And if it be said
that this is now performed by the Blood and Spirits of the Mother, which
circulate in the soetus, yet the Argument holds still against the formation of
the first Man, without supernatural Aid; which makes out my purpose, and which
is agreeable to the account we have of Man's Creation in Genesis, where it is
said, that God formed Man out of the Ground, and then breathed into his
Nostrils the breath of Life; that is, by his Almighty Power he wrought a
lumpish piece of Earth into that wonderful Machine of Man's Body: But the
Creation and Conjunction of those external and internal Parts, not being
sufficient to give it Life and Motion; he also afterward inspired this, by a
second Supernatural act of breathing into him. But to leave Philosophizing, and
to return to our Subject, how does the unsuitable and improbable matter from
which we proceed, argue the Almighty Power of him who contrived it? And was it
possible without infinite Wisdom, to provide so wonderfully for the Nourishment
and Safety of the Child during the Nine Months that it continues in the Womb?
from which Prison it is also delievered in a strange manner, which merits
Admiration. When all these things are considered, how much truth and force is
in that divine Hymn of David, where he Commemorates his Generation and
Production, and where he says, God has possessed my Reins, thou have covered
me in my Mothers Womb. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; Mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul knows right well. My
substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Thine eyes did see my substance yet
being imperfect, and in thy Book all my Members were written, which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, Psalm. 139. 13,
etc. Job also has spoken as Philosophically, and much more truly, than any
who has attempted to explain the formation of the foetus, and that in a very
few words; thus, Have not thou poured me out as Milk, and curdled me like
cheese? Thou have clothed me with Skin, and fenced me with Bones and Sinews.
Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
Spirit, Job 10. 10.

Once more let it be considered how admirably each Part is fitted for the use
to which it is destined: And as a great many perform their Motions without our
concurrence, so these external Members, which are at the command of our will,
do follow our thoughts quickly and readily, without previous Preparation, or so
much as a Minute of time intervening. Nothing is quicker than a Thought, and
yet as soon as we will it, the Tongue speaks, the Hand acts, and the Feet walk,
etc. and all of them again cease their Motion just as we think it; such a close
dependence there is of these Members upon our Minds or Faculty of Thinking. One
cannot Play well or distinctly upon any Instrument before he can distinguish
the Strings, and until he learn what touches are proper to make the different
Notes. But we are not taught the distinct and proper Muscles, Nerves, etc. by
which our Members move: Nor do we so much as understand how they move them, and
yet all is done, as if we had a distinct and perfect Knowledge, and that too
with the swiftness of our Thoughts; for our Thoughts and these Members keep
pace together, if there be no obstruction and hinderance; and if it were not
so, we should be under great Disadvantages. I could bring several other
instances to prove, that the Structure and Economy of the Humane Body is a
most wonderful and artificial Contrivance, which can be ascribed to nothing
less than infinite Power and Wisdom, and consequently that it is a
Demonstration of a Deity.

ESSAY VI.
Evidences of a Deity in other Parts of the World.
IT has been made appear that every one of us carries in us, and about us, a
Demonstration of the Deity. Whenever we look upon our selves, we see him; for
we read his Wisdom and Power in our Make and Frame, in our first Production and
daily Preservation, and by both our external and internal Senses.

1. But if one Evidence be not sufficient for so weighty a Point, let us
interrogate other Creatures, and they will all unanimously answer the same
thing. We are indeed a wonderful Work, but we are not the only Work of our
Maker, he has framed other Pieces besides; which no less manifest his great
Power and unsearchable Wisdom. It is evident that he who made us, made other
things, and had both of us in his view when he made either. What should be the
use of an Eye, if there was not Light? And to what purpose should there be
Light, if there was no Eye to see it, nor any Creature to discern the Beauties
which it discovers. He then, who formed the Eye, created the Light; and he who
ordained Light, resolved to have a Creature capable of Seeing. We cannot live
without Food; nor can the Earth afford us necessary Food without the warm and
kind influences of the Sun: that therefore there should be a Sun to render the
Earth fruitful, by its benign influences, could not be Chance, but Contrivance,
and this proves an intelligent Being.

2. If there was but one instance that looked like Art and Design, we should
not lay much stress on it; we might be tempted to think that was only a lucky
hit of blind Fortune. But we have many Thousand instances in the Heavens, in
the Earth, and in the Seas, in both the Vegetable and Animal World, where each
Individual is not only wonderfully contrived in reference to the Ends and Uses
of its particular being; but also in reference to one another: for they are
admirably fitted to one another, and are made to serve other most wisely: The
Universal Frame is as a huge Machine; the vast Orbs above, and this in which we
dwell, as so many Wheels and suitable Parts, which the Artist has most
skilfully joined, that not only each may have its proper Motion easily, but
that the particular Motion of one may be beneficial to another, and all of them
serviceable to the general Design; no part can jolt out of its place, nor
interfere with another. A Fleet of 500 Sail can hardly keep together without
falling foul on each other; and behold those innumerable and prodigious Orbs
move continually in their immense space, without rubbing, though they naturally
gravitate toward one another, which shows that they are steered by a most
dexterous Pilot. And was it possible to put so many vast Orbs in motion without
Omnipotency? We may as well imagine that an Ant or Worm may cause an
Earthquake. Certainly the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handiwork. Day unto Day utters speech, and Night unto Night
shows knowledge; nor is there any Language where their Voice is not heard;
that is, though the several Nations of the World speak with different Tongues,
which makes them that they cannot understand each other; yet the Heavenly
Bodies, by their regular and useful Motions, speak an Universal Language
intelligible to all of common Sense, for convincing them that they are the Work
and Contrivance of an Almighty and most Wise God.

3. Again, Let us consider the Vegetable and Animal World as a well-governed
Commonwealth, where the People are wisely employed according to their Stations
and Capacities, whose different Employments breed no Confusion, but do preserve
the Order and Peace of the State, and promote its Wealth, Power, Strength and
Glory. The Earth sends forth Trees, Herbs, and Plants of all Sorts for Food or
Medicine, to serve the Necessities or Advantages of humane Life; and all these
spring up in their proper Situation, as if planted by the Hand of some skillful
Gardner, which are sorted into different Climates, to whet and encourage
Industry, for engaging and securing a good Correspondence amongst Men. Animals
are destined to several Uses, and are assigned to such Regions as are proper to
their Nature and these Uses. Fowls have the Air to rove in; Fishes sport
themselves in the Waters; and Quadrupedes walk on firm Land; Camels are
allotted to Arabia, where there is no Water: Salvage Beasts are sent to
Deserts, where they may do less Harm; and they who are mild, tractable, and
useful, are kept amongst Men. Such Animals as are dangerous to others, or of
less Use, are generally barren and unfruitful, whereas other Kinds do multiply
in Abundance: For there would be no Living in the World if Lions, Tigres,
Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and the like, were as numerous as Sheep and Oxen. And the
Air should shortly be dispeopled of its feathered Inhabitants, if the Vulture,
Eagle, and Hawk, could draw out Armies like the Flocks of Crows and Pigeons.
Now who imposed these hard Laws upon those Beasts and Birds of Prey? What
Pharaoh forbad them to multiply to the Danger of the State? Is it possible that
the Terror of Man could have made them drown or destroy their Brood? Was it by
the Art of Man that Foxes, Wolves, etc. produce all Dogs, and almost but one
Bitch at every Litter, whereas other Animals bring forth Males and Females
equally. Can this proceed from any, but the wise and potent Author of all
things? But to go on; the climbing Goats feed upon the Rocks; the simple Sheep
and unweildy Oxen graze in the Valleys, and the frighted Deer are removed to
range in the Woods. The fierce and undaunted Horse is appointed for the Battle;
the Ox to Labor, the Sheep for Food and Clothing; the Hare and Partridge for
Diversion, and the Hound and the Hawk for catching them. Thus there is Use and
Design to be seen in every Creature, nay, even in Insects and creeping Things,
which we look upon with so much Contempt. The very common dull Worm has its
Use; and lest they should be over numerous, the blind Mole is given to check
them. But how useful is the Silkworm? What a Treasure does it yield? And how
splendid are Men by its Labor? What might be said of the Be? Its Conduct and
Industry are admirable; like an excellent Chemist, it extracts the mellous
Juice from the Herbs and Flowers, but does not spoil their Beauty and Figure,
as Chemists do by their Operations. It admirably composes Wax, which serves to
many Uses, and yet conceals from Mankind both the Matter and Art of that
Composition; for it is not yet discovered: For they are mistaken, who think
that with which their Thighs are loaded is the Substance of Wax; for this is of
different Colors, whereas the Combs at first are almost a pure white: And
besides, I my self have observed several Cells in the Combs, filled with that
Matter which is upon their Thighs, but for what Use I have not yet discovered,
except it be for hatching their Eggs.

4. If any Object, the Locust and Caterpillar; they may well as upbraid the
Prudence and Policy of a State for keeping Forces, which generally are made up
of very rude and insolent People; for these are a Party of the Army of the Lord
of Hosts, which he sends out at his Pleasure, to chastise the Pride,
Wantonness, Ingratitude, and Forgetfulness of Man, who is the only disorderly
Part of the Creation: He only breaks the Peace, and moves Sedition in this
excellent and large Commonwealth; and he does it to his own Prejudice, as
generally all rebellious and seditious People use to do: But his unruly and
disorderly Behavior is no Ground of impeaching the Wisdom of the Almighty Head
of this great Commonwealth of the World, far less than the rebellious and
seditious practicing of Subjects is chargeable upon the Government, who
oftentimes (as all Histories inform us) run into it without just Provocation,
through their own Wantonness or Ignorance, or foolish Fears, or the evil
Counsel of cunning Men, who make them misapprehend some things, and beguile
them with a Pretense of making other things better, which in the end turns
worse. All the Disorders in this Universal State, which is made up of all
Creatures, proceed from these very Causes, which give Disturbance to particular
humane States. If I may be allowed to borrow a little Light from Revelation,
when I reason against Atheism: The Devil or Lucifer being proud, and full of
himself, became disaffected, and turned Malcontent; and to make himself a
Party, he addressed to Man, preying upon his Weakness and Inadvertency, whom
having once deluded, he still keeps into that rebellious Interest, by
suggesting evil Thoughts, cherishing their Corruption and bad Inclinations.

5. Some may say, That this overturns all we have said about Design and
Contrivance, seeing it seems to prove a grand Mistake in the Masterpiece. If
the World, the several Parts in it, and the Conjunction of these Parts be the
work of infinite Wisdom, would one have been made to disturb all the rest, to
disorder the whole Contrivance? Or would the Power and Dominion over these have
been committed to one altogether unqualified and unworthy of it, as Man seems
to be? Or must it be said, That the contriving of vegetative and sensitive
things was with in the Skill of this wise Being, but that rational things, or
what is of a higher Nature, is above his Reach; and therefore he missed his
Aim, and came short of his Design? No, none of these things follow. The
Almighty God would show his Power and Wisdom by the creating an Infinite
Variety of Beings, endued with all Degrees of Perfections; and therefore one
who was to be free, to be entrusted with the Government of himself, and who was
to be under no other Force than that of Reason and Truth, nor to have any other
Ties than that of Gratitude and Interest, which he might know sufficiently by
the Exercise of his intellectual Faculties, and the Application of his Mind to
what is always before him. Other things could not be left to themselves; being
endued with no Sense or Reason of their own, they are still guided by the
Wisdom of their Maker; and hence it is that they never step aside, but always
move regularly: Infinite Wisdom appears in all their Motions, and from this it
is that some Creatures without Sense, and others which have no more than Sense,
do outdo all the works of Men: Without Understanding they know the Rules of
Architecture, the Nature and Uses of things, and the Means of compassing them
better than Man with all his Reason, and after all his Study and Application:
Nay, the Perfection of humane Art is but a faint Imitation of what other
Creatures do by that which is called Natural Instinct, which is truly the
Guidance of that Infinite Wisdom which contrived them. Men's best Knowledge is
but Experience and Observation from their inferior Creatures. And as it thus
appears, that those Creatures are under the Management of their Maker, whose
Wisdom manifests it self in their Motions and Actings: So it is no Defect in
this most perfect Wisdom, that Men do not act perfectly or exactly right,
because they are left to their own Freedom, and the Direction of an imperfect
and limited Reason, which yet was sufficient, if they had adverted to the Marks
and Instructions given them.

As by Revelation we are assured that Man was at first made upright, so there
are Reasons and Prints to convince us of it without Revelation. And as he is
endued with Perfections above others in this part of the World, with
intellectual Faculties which they want, so it seems evident, that all those
other things were invented to be subject Matter for those intellectual
Faculties to work upon. Pictures are not hanged up but to be seen, for they
cannot talk together; so neither can Plants or Beasts. This World therefore
would have been but as a wast House; though richly furnished, yet it would have
been altogether desolate of Inhabitants, if there had been wanting one of
Understanding and Judgment, and capable of making wise Reflections on what
there is in it. Man's Life would be very miserable if he had not the Service of
those other Creatures, and they would be useless if it were not with a Respect
unto him. Either they were designed to administer into him, or he was made to
receive the Advantage which redounds from them: They are excellently fitted to
one another, which could only proceed from an intelligent Being of infinite
Wisdom and Power.

Thus there are so many and so great Instances of Design and Contrivance, that
no thinking Man is able to resist this Faith in God. He who does not admit this
Faith, must be strangely stupid, and so much to be pitied, or unreasonably
obstinate, and therefore exceeding censurable.

6. I would ask such Persons what they would be at to satisfy them? Do they
require a Sight of God? They may as reasonably ask to see a Voice, to touch a
Tune, or to try the Objects of one Sense by another, as Colors by the Ear, and
Odours by the Eye. Will they deny the intellectual Faculties of Perception,
Judgment, Ratiocination, Memory, etc. to be in others, because they have no
immediate Intuition of them? Is it not sufficient Demonstration, that this, or
the other Man does possess these Faculties, when the one or the other shows
the proper Signs of them, and that the necessary Effects thereof may be
perceived in his Discourse and Actions? And what greater Demonstration would
any have of an Almighty, Intelligent Being, than prodigious and infinite
Instances of Wisdom and Power, such as the World every where presents us with!
God's Essence is invisible, at least to us. What Organs the Angels of Heaven
have for beholding him, we do not know; but he dwells in a Light which no Man
can approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see. But that which may be
known of God is manifest, for he has showed it; for the Invisible things of
him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are
without Excuse, viz. who doubt or deny a Deity, or who are not persuaded of his
Eternity, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, and who does not glorify him as such.

7. If God was not eternal, nothing could have been made, for there was then
nothing to have produced any thing; therefore his eternal Existence is
evidently proved by the Existence of other things, which do not exist
necessarily: And there is not any thing but himself which has necessary
Existence included in its Idea. And though the creating of any one thing was a
Demonstration of his Almighty Power and Wisdom, because nothing less could
produce any thing out of nothing; yet he has created innumerable things of
vastly different Natures and Properties, that by this infinite Diversity and
Variety of Beings, his infinite Power may be visible to those who are capable
to perceive it. The Immensity of his Power appears in the Immensity of the
World, to which our very Imagination can prefix no Limits. By the latest and
exactest Calculation of the Modern Mathematicians, there goes 69 Miles and a
Tenth Part to a Degree, so that the Periphery or Circumference of the Earth is
24876 English Miles. Its Diameter is 7915, and the whole Solidity may be
reckoned Two Hundred Fifty Nine Thousand Five Hundred Seventy and Eight
Million, Nine Hundred Thrity Three Thousand Four Hundred and Five Cubical
Miles. The Earth is greater than Mercury, or Mars; for the First bears only the
Proportion to it, which an 100 has to 347, and the other of an 100 to 334;
That is, the Earth is more than three times greater than any of these: But then
it is much less than the rest of the Planets; for in respect of Venus, the
Earth has only the Proportion of 43 to an 100, to Jupiter as 121 to 10000, to
Saturn as 296 to 10000, and to the Sun as 1 to 1367631.

The Magnitude of the fixed Stars cannot be conjectured; but there are
Demonstrations offered to prove them greater than any of the Planets; seeing
they shine so bright at amost stupendius Distance: For a Telescope which
multiplieth 200 times, does not show them bigger than they appear to the naked
Eye, but rather less. Whence it follows, That this planetary Orb is but as a
Point, in respect of the Distance of the fixed Stars; and consequently, That
the Universe which comprehends the Planets and all the Stars, visible and
invisible, each of which has a particular Orb, must be Immense beyond all
Imagination and Apprehension.


The Length and Greatness of the Earth, with the vast deep, does astonish us
when we have it in our View; but how little does this Greatness appear, when we
lift up our Eyes to the Heavens and behold the innumerable Multitude of those
shining Orbs, Two of which, viz. in the Panetary World, are only less than the
Earth; and some of them, not only many Thousands, but Millions of times
greater, as we are assured by the Authority and Observation of Mathematicians,
and which, without them, we may rudely conjecture by their Appearance at so
vast a Distance: By the help of Glasses we may discern many more Stars, than
what appear to the naked Eye. And there be very good Reason to believe, that
there are many more which Glasses cannot reach; so that Imagination it self
cannot grasp the Universe: And all our perceptive Faculties fail us when we
offer to view the Extension of it. Lo, all that we see are but Parts of his
Ways, for how little a Portion is heard of him, says Job, chap. 26. 14.

8. How these celestial Orbs are filled and furnished, we know not; but we have
very good Reason to believe, That they are not wast and desolate Places, or
mere Masses of Matter to fill up the immense Space of Vacuity. Without doubt
they are admirably replenished by his Almighty Wisdom, as well as this which is
inhabited by us, where are infinite Diversity of Instances, for forming and
enlarging in us an Idea of the Godhead, and to convince us that his Wisdom and
Power cannot be bounded. In one Place Matter lies heaped in loose Particles as
Sand, which can be easily separated, nay, blown asunder: In another Place it is
kneaded like Dough, we know not how, as in Clay and such like Ground: Again, it
is both closely united, and also hardened wonderfully, as Stone, of which there
are diverse sorts, some of a bright and dazzling Luster, as the Diamond and
Crystal; other altogether Black, or of an unspotted White, or admirably
variegated with different Colors, as the several sorts of Marble. Sometimes
this hardened Matter is combustible, as Coal; sometimes malleable, as Metal,
which may be beat so thin, that a very small Quantity of Gold could be made to
cover the whole Surface of the Earth, as can be demonstrated from Leaf-Gold,
and the drawing of Gilded-Wire; for a Grain Weight or two may be extended to
some Thousand Else of Length. Thus the Power of God does wonderfully appear in
the very Disposal of the Atoms and Particles of Brute and Lifeless Matter,
which also shows his Wisdom no less; for by this means, Matter is made to
serve to many different Uses and Purposes, which otherwise could only have
served one or a few. Convenient Houses, strong and magnificent Buildings, could
never have been erected of Sand and loose Dust, nor could Stone be beat out
into useful Plough-Shares and Pruning Hooks, Swords and Knives, and such other
Instruments as the Convenience of Life requires. Of what Advantage Iron is, we
may understand by the Imperfection of Arts in America, before the Europeans
carried it thither: Though it be commonly reckoned the coursest of Metals, yet
none is more useful, and without it other things could not be so well managed.
It should be tedious to run over the several Species of brute Matter, but it is
evident, That the wonderful Variety thereof renders the State and Condition of
Mankind more convenient and happy; and if but a few of them had been wanting,
they should have labored under great Inconveniences; As for Instance, how
inconvenient would it be for those who inhabit Inland Countries, remote from
the Sea, if there were not Rocks and Mines of Salt; and therefore the
Contrivance of such Variety, speaks out both the infinite Power and Wisdom of
God.

Which does yet more appear when we consider Vegetables, which is Matter raised
to the First Degree of Life, being made capable of Nourishment and Growth. Some
have written several large Volumes about the Number, Kinds, and Virtues of
Plants, and many more might be written without exhausting the Subject. There
are many different Genders or Kind of Plants, and every one of these in the
same Gender differ from other as to Size, Shape, Figure, Color, Odor, Virtue,
Duration, and the like; so that the Number of known Plants are computed to be
Eighteen or Twenty Thousand; and there may be yet many more undiscovered. Some
are almost insensibly small, other vastly great; some proceed from the Seed,
others by the Root; some bear Seed, others none at all; some send forth a
Flower, others are without it; in some the Flower puts out first, in most
others it is last; some have no Odor, others either refresh with their
Fragrancy, or they offend with their Stink; some are only commendable for their
Beauty and Ornament, as the Tulip, others for their Use and Virtue; and some
have Beauty and Virtue enjoined, as the Violet, the Rose, the Lily, and the
Gilly-Flower. Some wither almost as soon as they spring up others last a
Season; some are Annual, and others perpetual; and all these diverse Kinds have
one common Nourishment, viz. the Rain and Dew from Heaven. What Admiration may
it breed, to consider that such an insipid thing as Rainwater, is capable to
be distilled into Liquors of so many different Colors, Tastes, Smells, and
Virtues, as are the Juice of Plants! And it is no less Matter of Admiration,
that this same liquid Rain should be consolidated into so firm, hard, and
strong Parts, as are the Roots, Trunks, and Barks of Trees: For their Accretion
and Growth is only from Rain, the Earth, being only a fit Receptacle to
preserve it for them, as is evident from diverse Experiments. Is not all this
the wonderful Work of God, of which who can make any doubt? If the inward
Structure and admirable Mechanism of Plants or Vegetables be considered; for
they are composed of different Parts, wisely fitted for Nourishment, Growth,
and Preservation: The Root fixes it in the Earth, sucks in Nourishment, and is
as the Stomach in Animals, to digest and prepare it. Then there are various
Fibers as Veins to receive the Sap, and through which it circulates. There are
also some Vessels to take in Air for Respiration, to facilitate the Circulation
of the Sap. The outer and inner Bark of Trees preserve them from the Injury of
the external Air: The Leaves are not only for Beauty, but to defend the Fruit,
and to shade the Tree it self from excessive Heat, and to gather the Dew, which
returning with the inward Sap, helps to nourish the Fruit and Branches. Every
Vegetable has its peculiar Contrivance suited to its Nature and Use; which
abundantly demonstrates that they are all the Effects of infinite Power and
Wisdom: But there are some more remarkable Instances, which, like strange
Prodigies, seem to be planted with a Design to force our Admiration and
Acknowledgment. Take this short Account of them, which Mr. Ray has given in
his ingenious and pious Treatise of the Wisdom of God in the Creation.

First, The Coco or Coker-nut-Tree, that supplies the Indians with almost
whatever they stand in need of, as Bread, Water, Wine, Vinegar, Brandy, Milk,
Oil, Honey, Sugar, Needles, Thread, Linen, Cloths, Cups, Spoons, Besoms,
Baskets, Paper, Masts for Ships, Sails, Cordage, Nails, Coverings for their
Houses, etc. which may be seen at large in the many Printed Relations of
Voyages and Travels to the East Indies, but most faithfully in the Hortus
Malabaricus, Published by that immortal Patron of natural Learning, Henry Van
Rheed van Drankenstein, who has had great Commands, and employs in the Dutch
Colonies.

Secondly, The Aloe Muricata, or Aculeata, which yields the Americans every
thing their Necessities require, as Fences, Houses, Darts, Weapons, and other
Arms, Shoes, Linen and Cloths, Needles and Thread, Wine and Honey, besides
many Utensils, for all which Hernacles, Garcilasso de la Vega and Margrave may
be consulted.

Thirdly, The Bandura Cingalensium, called by some Priapus Vegetabilis, at the
end of whose Leaves hang long Sacks or Bags, containing pure limpid Water, of
great Use to the Natives, when they want Rain for Eight or Ten Months together.

Fourthly, The Cinnamon-Tree of Cylon, in whose Parts there is a wonderful
Diversity. Out of the Root they get a sort of Camphire, and its Oil; out of the
Bark of the Trunk the true Oil of Cinnamon; from the Leaves an Oil like that of
Cloves, out of the Fruit a Juniper Oil, with a Mixture of those of Cinnamon and
Cloves. Besides, they boil the Berries into a sort of Wax, out of which they
make Candles, Plasters, Unguents. Here we may take Notice of the Candle-Trees
of the West Indies, out of whose Fruit boiled to a thick fat Consistence, are
made very good Candles, many of which have been lately distributed by that most
ingenious Merchant, Mr. Charles Dubois.

Fifthly, The Fountain or Dropping-Trees in the Isles of Teno, St. Thomas, and
in Guinea, which serve the Inhabitants instead of Rain and fresh Springs.

Sixthly, and Lastly, we will only mention the Names of some other Vegetables,
which with Eighteen or Twenty Thousand more of that Kind, do manifest to
Mankind the Illustrious Bounty and Providence of the Almighty and Omniscient
Creator toward his undeserving Creatures, as the Cotton-Trees, the Manyoc or
Cassava, the Potatoe, the Jesuits Bark-Tree, the Poppy, the Rheubarb, the
Scammony, the Jalap, the Coloquintida, the China, Sarfa, the Serpentaria
Virginia, or Snakeweed, the Nisi or Genseg, the numerous Balsam and Gum-Trees,
many of which are of late much illustrated by the great Industry and Skill of
that most discerning Botanist, Doctor (...) Plukened. Of what great Use all
these, and innumerable other Plants are to Mankind, in the several Parts of
Life, few or none can be ignorant. Besides, the known Uses in curing Diseases,
in feeding and clothing the poor, in building and dying, in all Mechanics,
there may be as many more not yet discovered, and which may be reserved on
purpose to exercise the Faculties bestowed on Man, to find out what is
necessary.

10. But if we make one Step higher to view the Animal Life, we shall see
Wisdom and Power still more wonderfully displayed and diversified. What a
prodigious Bulk of Life and Animal Motion is the Whale! What a huge Animal
Machine is that Leviathan! By whose Neezings a Light does shine, and whose Eyes
are like the Eyelids of the Morning. Out of whose Nostrils goes Smoke as out
of a Seething-pot or Cauldron. He makes the Deep to boil like a Pot, the Sea
like a Pot of Ointment. He makes a Path to shine after him, so that one would
think the Deep to be hoary. And is not the Epitome of the Animal Life as
astonishing which we have in the Mite, and other almost imperceptible
Creatures! Which though they be but as Motes in the Sun, nay according to the
Observation of some, there are some Animals less than a Grain of Sand by
several Millions, yet they have Life and Motion, and consequently are inwardly
composed of Heart, Lungs, Veins, Arteries, and Fibers, which proves the
wonderful Divisibility of Matter, and the Art of Almighty Power, which can
produce the same Motions and Sense in an Atome which we see in the hugest
Animals. Again, we see here all imaginable Qualities distributed into various
Sizes, Shapes, and Figures; and also, all or most of them united together into
one. Some are designed to fly in the Air, and for that end are furnished with
Feathers, Wings, and very strong Muscles, by which means they are capable to
continue and support themselves a long time in the Air, without wearying: And
because their Feathers may be spoiled by Rain and Dew, and so rendered useless;
therefore each Fowl has Two Pots of Oil, that is, Two Glandules upon its Rump,
which always produce an Unctuous Substance, for anointing the Feathers that
they may not be wet, or receive any Prejudice from Rain or the Moisture of the
Air. Others are framed to swim in the Waters, and therefore have a peculiar
Structure of their Lungs and inward Parts, which makes them require less Air
than Terrestrial Animals. And though the Animals proper to one Element cannot
live in another, for Fishes brought to the open Air pant and die; Land-Fowl,
and the Generality of Terrestrial Creatures, when they fall into the Water,
cannot subsist long without Drowning. Yet to show that nothing is impossible to
Almighty Wisdom, there be some Fishes framed to fly above Water, and a great
many Fowl to swim and dive under it. So there are Terrestrial Quadrupedes,
which, without Feathers, fly in the Air, as Bats, and some Indian Squirrils;
and there be others, whose Food being Fish and Water-Insects, they range
continually in the Waters, as the Beaver, the Otter, the Phoca or Sea-Calf, the
Water-Rat, and Frog; all which have their Toes interwoven with a thin Membrane
to fit them for Swimming, and also are furnished with a Wind-Bladder to afford
them what Air is necessary to the Circulation of the Blood, so that they can
continue long in the Water without Suffocation. Now could all these different
proper Structures of Animals have been contrived without Wisdom? Could they
have been distinguished in some, and united and intermingled in others,
according to the Elements for which they were designed, without infinite
Understanding?

To proceed, the Power of Seeing far is given to the Eagle and others,
Swiftness to the Hare, Hound, and Roebuck; Strength to the Ox and Bear;
Fierceness to the Lion; Cunning to the Fox; Docility to the Dog; Courage and
Fleetness to the Horse; and the Elephant is made both formidable and tame,
cunning and docile, strong and fierce.

And lastly, there is Man to manage this and all the other Animals, who, though
he be neither so clear sighted as some, nor so strong, nor so fierce, nor so
swift as others, yet by his Reason and the Ordinance of God, he has Dominion
over the Fowls of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fish of the Sea,
and makes them all to do Homage unto him. O Lord, how manifold are thy Works!
In Wisdom thou have made them all, the Earth is full of thy Riches.

11. We need not ascend higher, nor go further to fetch Proofs of a Deity, nor
Instances of eternal and infinite Wisdom and Power. They who are so peevish as
to quarrel what they see here, would not lay aside this unreasonable Humor,
though they were carried to the Regions above. They who are not convinced by
these things which are continually before them, would not be satisfied with
other Arguments, and there are innumerable more. As they are hardened against
the ordinary Works of God, so they would resist obstinately such as are
extraordinary, for they mock all of this kind which have been. Wherefore it is
wisely observed, That God never wrought a Miracle to convince an Atheist; for
besides that it is not reasonable that God should indulge an unreasonably
willful, and obstinate Humor, no Miracle can be more effectual, or less liable
to Exception than the regular Motion of those prodigious Orbs in the Heavens
above, and the Multitude of Productions in the Earth below, all of which show
admirable Art and Contrivance. When common Food cease to nourish, Delicacies
and Dainties seldom do good. If the Body be clean and sound, common Food should
be both savoury and nourishing. And if Men would lay aside their Pride, Malice,
and Superfluity of Naughtiness; if they would be meek and docile, they should
soon perceive the reasonable Force of what we have touched, to persuade to a
Belief of the Existence of God. And if any would have the Satisfaction of a
fuller View of these Works of Wisdom and Power, I referr them to the
forementioned Treatise of Mr. Ray, because it may be easily had, and is made
plain and intelligible by the meanest Capacity.

ESSAY VII.
Of the Absurdity of Atheism.
1. THere are Two sorts of Demonstrations, one is a positive Proof drawn from
certain and known Principles; the other shows the absurd and unreasonable
Consequences which would necessarily follow, if what is required be not
granted, which is therefore called Demonstratio ex absurdo. Mathematicians make
use of both: And there be many Propositions in Euclid which are not
demonstrable but by the last Kind. Either of them makes a thing sure; and what
is capable of both is most evident, and consequently nothing can be more absurd
and unreasonable than to deny and resist what is clearly made out both these
Ways. And hence also it follows, That the Atheist is monstrously obstinate, and
to the utmost Degree absurd and unreasonable; seeing the Existence of a Deity
can be demonstrated either way.

2. First, It is evident by what has been delivered in the former Essays, that
there are clear Instances of Wisdom and Power in the World; and it also clearly
appears that this Wisdom and Power are united in one, because they never act
separately, but always work together. Power is always directed by Wisdom, and
what shows the one shows the other, which is a sufficient, full, and as
great a Demonstration as can reasonably be demanded, of the Existence of a wise
Power or powerful Wisdom, and consequently that there is a Being superior to
all that we see, which has as much Wisdom and Power as what we find expressed
in the Contrivance and Frame of the World, and in the Composition of the
several Beings that are in it, that is, there is and must be an all-wise and
Almighty God; for by him we understand a Being whose Power and Understanding is
infinite. Of whose Existence we are also further assured by all the Principles
of reason and Knowledge, and by all those Methods by which we find out the
Truth of any thing: For we are ascertained of the Truth of things, either by
the Consideration of their Nature and abstracted Idea's, or by Deductions from
Principles which all acknowledge to be self-evident, or by their effects and
Manifestations, or finally by Testimony and Tradition. And all these several
Ways, it is evident that there is such a supreme and perfect Being as is meant
by God.

3. Moreover, this Truth is so far from being shaken by the Arguments and
Objections of Atheists, that they do rather confirm it. Wherefore, that we may
entirely silence them, and remove all Difficulties which any may entertain in
this Matter, we will consider some of the chief of their Objections, without
concealing or diminishing the Force of them.

Firt, It is objected, That an Argument, drawn from final Causes, the Ends and
Uses of things, is not concluding, nor of Force enough to establish such an
important Truth, because it has more of Fancy than Solidity in it: The ends of
things are but little known, and are only devised by a strong Imagination.
Fancifull Men apprehend a Thousand things which have no Foundation in Nature,
as cunning and industrious Persons can adapt and appropriate things to several
Uses to which they were never destined. It is unreasonable to pretend, that the
several things in Nature have been particularly designed for the Ends and Uses
to which the Art or Necessities of Mankind have employed them. And the like may
be said of most other things, which we only fanste were formed with a Respect
to such or such an End, because we perceive some Agreeableness betwixt them and
it. This Argument Lucretius insists on, which I shall set down according to the
excellent Translation of Mr. Creech; But now avoid their gross Mistakes, that
teach
The Limbs were made for Work, a Use for each;
The Eyes designed to see, the Tongue to talk,
The Legs made strong, and knit to Feet, to walk;
The Arms framed long, and firm, the Servile Hands
To work, as Health requires, as Life commands:
And so of all the rest whatever they feign,
Whatever they teach it is Nonsense all, and vain.
For proper Uses were designed for none
But all the Members framed each made his own.
Again: These various things Convenience did produce,
We thought them fit, and made them for our Use.
Thus these, and thus our Limbs and Senses too
Were formed before that any Mind did know
What Office 'twas that they were fit to do.
Well then, it is fond to think that these began
For proper Uses made, bestowed on Man.


4. The Sum of this Argument is, That all things happened by Chance, That
nothing was contrived or made with Design, and that the pretended Ends and Uses
of things are arbitrarily imposed by Men. But this Argument falls to pieces,
and is of no Force at all, if it evidently appear that the Frame of the World,
and the Structure of particular Beings cannot be ascribed to Chance, but to
Contrivance and Design, which must necessarily infer an Intelligent Being: For
even the Proposers of this do acknowledge, That acting intentionally proves
Wisdom and Understanding, otherwise they would not be so anxious to remove all
Contrivance from Natural things.

Now, neither the Continuation of the present State of things, nor their first
Production can be afcribed to Chance without the grossest Impudence. Not the
first, because Chance is Chance still, and not only may, but does more often
miss than hit right; whereas the Motions of the Planets are certain and
regular; and the successive Production of Animals and Vegetables is constant
and unchangeable, never miscarrying, but when some visible impediment happens.
The several Species are not confounded or blended together, but every thing
produces its like of the same kind, with all its natural Perfections and
Proportions. If one should always throw the same Number with Two Dies, when the
Odds is more than a Million to One, though there be but Six different Numbers on
each, we would conclude that he did it not by Chance but by some Art or Trick
which secured it. How improbable then, nay, how impossible is it, that so many
Thousand admirable and regular Productions should happen merely by Chance, when
each is a greater Chance than one against many Thousands of Millions without
the Management of a wise Power. We conclude him a wise and expert Artist, who
always hits his Mark, and compasses his Design. And is there not as much
Reason, to conclude these many natural Productions the Effects of an
Intelligent Being.

If it be replied, that all things now are continued and perpetuated by the
Order and Method into which Matter has settled, and into which it fell by mere
Chance; I answer, That neither can the first Production of things, or that
Order and Law by which they are now produced be ascribed to Chance, which was
the other thing I asserted. For supposing Matter to be Eternal, we must also
suppose some other thing to put it into Motion, for Motion is not essential to
Matter: And though we should suppose, that both Matter and Motion were Eternal,
yet we cannot thence conclude, that blind Matter and undetermined Motion could
ever produce any regular thing, without a Director, or one to super-intend it.
At the most it can be supposed only to occasion a Separation of its Parts, and
a Secretion of the subtle from the grosser Particles, as we see done by some
Chemical Operations; but no Force put upon our Imagination can ever make us
fancy that it could be so admirably organized of it self, or by mere Chance
shaped into so many different independent Species of Beings, which have also
Power to perpetuate their Kind, not to speak now of the Faculties of thinking
and reasoning. We may with much more Ease conceive, that a fortuitous Jumble of
Letters may compose all the Books of the World, which the Atheists have been
often, and of old twitted with.

And as Reasoning a priori, we cannot admit Chance to be the Cause of things,
so a posteriori, we cannot deny Contrivance and Design to be visible in the
Frame of the World, the Order of Beings, and the particular Structure of each,
unless we do Violence to both Sense and Reason. Such as refuse to acknowledge
it, I would have them to declare greater Signs and Evidence of Art, Design, and
Contrivance, than what is to be seen in and amongst natural things. Are not all
things made in Number, Weight, and Measure? Where do they perceive any
Confusion or Disorder? Where do they see irregular and unsuitable Mixtures or
Compositions? Are their disproportionable Quantities of Matter, or disagreeable
Qualities conjoined in any Subject? Is not Order, Method, just Proportion and
Measure to be observed every where, and in every thing? Are not all things so
exactly adapted together, and so well fitted to each other, that whether we
consider Individuals, or the several Species, or the whole Frame together,
nothing can be better devised? What is it to act intentionally, or with Design,
but to propose some certain end, and to carry it on by suitable Means? And
therefore when we see things so conveniently adapted together as to produce
certain Effects, and so well adjusted as to prevent the Miscarriage of them,
have we not all Reason to conclude, that there is Design and Contrivance there?
The more excellent the Effects be, and the more Artificial the Means, it still
proves more Wisdom in the Author and Contriver, and consequently the Author of
Natural things is infinitely more wise than Men, because Natural Productions do
far exceed those of Humane Art, and the Means by which they are produced are
much more admirable.

It is great Perverseness and inexcusable Obstinacy, not to acknowledge a wise
Contrivance in the Ends and Uses of Natural things, or to allege that they are
all devised by Men: For though we should grant, that the Ends and Uses to which
the Wit, Art, and Industry of Man has improved many of them, were not foreseen
by their wise Author, nor those things which they have thus improved, intended
by him purposely for the greater Convenience and Advantage of Life; yet there
are real and visible Ends and Uses, and manifest admirable Contrivances in
Order to the same, which are altogether independent upon either the Art or
Imagination of Men. Is the Distinction of Animals into Male and Female, and the
Adaptation of the Female to conceive and nourish the Foetus, both while it is
in the Womb and after it is brought forth, merely grounded upon Fancy? Could
either Individuals have been multiplied, or the Kinds propagated without this?
And was not this an admirable Contrivance, and could it have been without
Wisdom and Understanding? What Reason is there to ascribe a Watch to Art and
Contrivance more than the Structure of Animals, which is composed of different
Parts and Vessels, curiously set together? Why should we think, that Windows
were designed to let in Light to the House, and not the Eye purposely framed to
see? Why should we think, Doors and Gates intended by the Architect for giving
Entry to what we would admit into the House, and shutting out other things, and
not also conclude the Valves of the Heart, Veins, and Arteries such another
Contrivance? Is there more Art in the various ways of joining the different
pieces of any Frame or Machine, than there is in the different joinings of the
Bones of the Body, which makes them move differently and very usefully? As for
Example; The upper part of the Bone of the Arm is unequal, and that Bone of the
Shoulder which receives it is concave, by which Means we can trun our Arm
round, whereas at the Elbow there is another Kind of Articulation, which only
suffers that part of the Arm to turn upwards toward the Shoulder. And because
neither of these joinings were proper for the diverse Motions of the Hand and
ForeArm, therefore its Bones are joined so as to make it capable of turning
round, and of moving backwards and forwards, up and down, and almost every way.
The Teeth are the only Bones of the Body, except those of the Ear, which are
not covered with a most sensible Membrane: And if they had been covered with
it, we had been liable to continual Pain. Now this Difference between the Teeth
and the rest of the Bones could not be Chance, but a wise Contrivance. I might
also make out this further, by considering the different Contrivance betwixt
the Teeth of Men and other Animals, and those of other Animals according to
their different Natures, and by many other Instances. But what has been said
is sufficient to prove, That the Ends and Uses of natural things are real and
not fansied by Men; that the Universal Frame and the Nature of particular
things do evidently and demonstrably prove a wise Contrivance; and consequently
that all things are the Effects of a wise and intelligent Agent. And who would
be further cleared and persuaded of this Matter, let them read the Treatise
which the Honored and Worthy Master Boil has written of Final Causes.

5. But 2dly, it is objected, That if it be reasonable to conclude the Existence
of a Deity, or some supreme and intelligent powerful Being from the seeming
Order and Contrivance of some things, it is as reasonable to conclude that
there is no such being from the manifest Irregularity and Vselessness of other
things, for if there was a God, or any Wise Almighty Being, as is pretended,
all his Works would bear Prints of his Wisdom. But we see many things which
have no manner of Contrivance in them, which are of no Use, but rather
prejudicial, and therefore we have Reason to believe, that the rest happened by
Chance and not by Design. Thus ( say they) the Spleen is the Occasion of much
Pain and Trouble, and is of it self of no Use, for several Animals have been
known to live without it. Mountains are irregular and ill contrived Heaps,
which spoil the Surface of the Earth, and render it less beautiful, and are
very inconvenient for Traveling and Commerce. If this Terraqueous Globe had
been the Work of a wise Agent, there would not have been more Water than dry
Land, which is the only proper Habitation for Man and Terrestrial Animals,
which are by much preferrable to Fishes: Nor would there have been so much
Ground laid wast which cannot be inhabited, as the Deserts of Arabia, the
Lybian Sands, and about the Two Poles, etc.

6. To all this I answer First, That though it should be granted that there are
many thing without Contrivance, and which show no Design, yet it would be
unreasonable to deny the necessary Consequences of what does manifestly show
both a Contrivance and Design; and therefore whether there be more or fewer
Instances which do so, it still follows that there is a Wise, Intelligent
Being, capable to produce them. 2 dly, We cannot without Rashness conclude,
That a things is without Contrivance, because we cannot find it out, nor is
intended for any use, because we cannot perceive it. Our Knowledge is very much
limited, and it is impossible for us to comprehend all that God does, and it is
great Presumption to condemn what we do not understand. No wise Man will slight
the Works of any famous Mechanic or Artist, though he does not presently
conceive what he intended by it; for his known Art and Skill in other things
makes it reasonable to believe, that what is not yet declared or understood was
nevertherless well designed and artificially contrived: Even so, seeing the
general Frame of the World does show so much Wisdom, and that there appears so
much Art and Contrivance in the Nature and Structure of particular Beings, we
ought from hence to conclude, that all things are wisely and well contrived for
excellent Ends and Purposes, though we be ignorant of many of them. 3 dly, In
passing a Censure and Judgment upon particular things, we ought not to consider
them separately only, but also with a Respect to other things, to which they
have a Relation, and with which they are conjoined.

Having premised these things in general, I answer next to these particular
Instances proposed. First, That though the Use of the Spleen is not yet well
known, nor can it be certainly determined, nevertheless we have no Reason to
think it useless, seeing the Structure of it is as curious as that of the
Liver, Lungs, and other Parts. The Use and Function of several other Vessels
were not known till of late, and after Ages may discover the Use of this too,
which certainly was never placed in the Body without some special End or Use;
nor must it be reckoned altogether useless, because some Animals have been
found to live without it: For so, both Men and other Animals do live without
some Parts, which are of a known Use and of a special Contrivance; besides,
though the Loss of the Spleen did not instantly put an end to Life, it might have
shortened it, or rendered it painful and uneasy, marring the Economy of the
Body. 2. As to the Mountains, they are very far from being useless; for they
serve to collect and condense the Vapors which feeds Springs and Fountains:
They determine the Winds in some measure: They nourish diverse Plants, which
will not grow upon the Valleys: They are proper for Metals and Minerals, and
are so far from spoiling the Beauty of the Earth, that they make it much more
pleasant, by casting it into diverse Shapes and Figures. 3. There is as much dry
Land as is necessarry either for Man or Terrestrial Animals, nay, as much as
could contain many Millions more than there are, so that there is no Reason to
complain of being straightened by want of Room. And it was necessary that there
should be more Sea than dry Land, partly for the Convenience of Navigation, and
partly for furnishing sufficient Rain to water the Earth. The Ground requires
all the Rain which falls, which, by Computation is reckoned in one Year to be
Five times the Quantity of Water in the Sea. If therefore there had been less
Water, either the Earth should have been without sufficient Rain, or when it
rained the Sea should have been too much emptied, which would have been very
inconvenient, both for those Creatures who live in it, and also for the Ships
that sail upon it. The Libyan Sands, and barren Deserts of Arabia, etc. cast no
Reflection upon the wise Contrivance of the Earth, for it is not reasonable to
think that all Parts should be alike good and excellent; Diversity is both
useful and pleasant: What is wanting in these barren Places is supplied by the
Richness of others, which are also rendered more delightful by the Contemplation
of such frightful Desolateness, even as Shadows contribute to the Beauty of a
Picture, and the Brightness of the other Colors. Besides other Uses which we
yet know not, they may be designed also to make us sensible how much we owe to
the Bounty of the wise Author of all things, who has made so much of the Earth
a convenient Habitation for the Children of Men. Lastly, The same may be said
in Reference to the Countries about the Two Poles, which are not very
considerable, if we compare them with the rest of the habitable World. And
besides, they show the wise Contrivance of the Spheroidical Figure of the
Earth, and of making the Axis so much shorter than the Diameter of the Equator;
for if it had been otherwise the frigid Zones should have been much more large,
and much less habitable. There is no way to Remedy that Inconvenience of the
Country about the Poles, at least in our Conception, except there were Two
Suns, or that this Sun was made to move without and beyond the Tropicks,
neither of which would be so convenient as the present Contrivance.

7. 3 dly, It is said, That the World and all things in it were eternal; which
if true (in their Opinion) will cut off all Pretext of Contrivance and Design:
For if nothing was ever made, then nothing also was ever contrived, there being
no Occasion for contriving what was already existent.

8. But this Opinion of the Eternity of the World is taken up without any
Shadow of Reason or Probability. It is a precarious Assertion, which being
denied can never be proved. 2. It contradicts the Universal Tradition of
Mankind, which has always attested that the World had a Beginning. 3. It is
against the current Testimony of all History, which traceth the Origin of
Nations and People, the Inventions of Arts and Sciences, and which shows that
all have happened within the Space of less than Six Thousand Years, according
to the most probable, (if not certain) Calculation, which could not be if the
World and Man had been Eternal. Therefore Lucretius reasons very well in his
Fifth Book.

But grant the World Eternal, grant it knew
No Infancy, and grant it never New,
Why then no Wars, our Poets Songs employ
Beyond the Siege of Thebes, or that of Troy?
Why former Heroes fell without a Name?
Why not their Battles told by lasting Fame?
But it is as I declare; and thoughtful Man
Not long ago and all the World began:
And therefore Arts that lay but rude before
Are published now, we now Increase the Store.
We perfect all the Old and find out more
Shippings improved, we add New Oars and Wings,
And Music now is found and speaking Strings.
These Truths, this Rise of things we lately know.
4 thly, Though we may fancy that these greater and permanent Bodies of the
Planets and Stars may have been Eternal, because they have lasted so many
Thousand Years without any visible Change, as is acknowledged by all, yet we
cannot bring our Imagination to conceive the Eternity of successive Beings
possible, for a great many Contradictions and Absurdities do follow it. If
Mankind had never any other Production than what is now, then there was never
any Man who had not a Beginning: And if all had a Beginning, then Mankind
cannot be Eternal; therefore we must of Necessity acknowledge the Production of
some one or more (from whom the rest have descended) in a manner different from
the present: And there is no Account of the first Production of Mankind so
reasonable or so probable, not to say now certain, as that which declares the
immediate Creation of one Man and one Woman by the Hand of God. The like may be
said of all other succesive Beings. But 5 thly and Lastly, Though we should force
our selves to grant the Eternity of the World and all particular Beings, yet it
could not be reasonably inferred from thence that there is no God; for they,
who desire this large Concession, must grant to us too, which cannot possibly
be denied, that there have been from all Eternity Instances of great Power and
Wisdom, from which it necessarily follows, that there is an Eternal, Wise, and
Mighty Being; for Power and Wisdom must proceed from something that is wise and
powerful. Therefore the Old Philosophers, who did hold the Eternity of the
World, did believe it a necessary Emanation from the Being of God, and thought
not that it did, or could subsist without him.

9. It is 4 thly, Objected against the Being of a God, That if it was, it would
render the Being of other things impossible; for if he was, he would be
infinite, and if infinite there could be no Room for the Existence of other
things. But this Argument proceeds upon a mistaken Notion of the Infinite
Nature of God, as if he was some gross material Substance vastly extended,
whereas he is a Spirit, that is, a Substance altogether different from Matter
or Body, who has not the Properties of it; and consequently, we cannot draw
just or true Conclusions about him from what is observable in them. God's
Infinity is not infinite Extension; and though his Omnipresence has some
Resemblance to it, yet the Spirituality of his Nature makes his Ubiquity and
Omnipresence in no wise incompatible with the Existence of Material Beings of
Corporeal Substances: Nay, they are only sustained by the Infinity of his
Essence; and therefore the Existence of so many finite things, which have no
Self-Sufficiency to exist of themselves, does evidently demonstrate the
Existence of an Infinite Essence as the Cause and Upholder of them.

It would be tedious to consider all the little Cavils and Objections of
Atheists against a Deity. The most material are reducible to those we have now
proposed, and may be refuted by the Answers which we have now given; for they
proceed either from wrong Apprehensions of the Nature and Attributes of God, or
from Ignorance of the Nature and Relation of other things, or from an obstinate
Resistance of what is de facto evident; and all of them demonstrate their
Unreasonableness and Absurdity, which does further appear by the absurd and
unreasonable Consequences of not acknowledging a Deity, which is a second Way
of proving it.

10. For, if there be no God, then it necessarily follows, That either every
thing made it self, or that all things came from nothing, and that there are
Effects which have no Cause; for there is Life, Sense, and Reason, without any
being capable to produce them: And there are artificial Contrivances, regular
Proceedings, and wise Adaptation of things to Ends and Purposes far above the
Power and Capacity of any thing which is existent. These and many such things
follow the Denial of a God, which are not only great Difficulties, but such
gross and senseless Absurdities as no thinking Person can either swallow or
digest.

As therefore Deformity shows Shape and Proportion beautiful, so the Belief
of a Deity appears more reasonable, by the Absurdity and Unreasonableness of
Atheism, which contradicts common Sense, overturns the agreed Principles of
Knowledge and Reason, confound Chance and Contrivance, Accident and Design, and
which has its Recourse to Wild, Romantic, and most precarious Hypotheses; for
they cannot shun the owning an Infinity, and the Existence of something from
Eternity; and they are forced to acknowledge that things are framed according
to the Rules of Art and Proportion. Now is it not more reasonable to ascribe
the constant Observance of these Rules to an Intelligent Being, than to Chance
or no Cause? For there is no middle thing betwixt them to be fixed on; either
the one or the other must take place. Nature, which they talk so much of, is an
Obscure Word for concealing their Thoughts and Sentiments: If by this they mean
something distinct from Matter, which moves and directs it, their Nature is God
in Disguise; and if they must flee to this for a rational Account of the
Production of things, why do they quarrel at the Word [God] which carries a
clearer Idea, and in the Sense of which all the World is agreed. Though this
Nature of theirs be equivalent, yet it is more mysterious, and therefore it
smells of some designed Perverseness, as if by the Use of this Word, and the
Disuse of the other, they would turn Peoples Thoughts from God, and God from
the Honor of being the Creator of all things. But if by Nature they only
understand certain Laws, and I know not what Ordinances, by which things must
move; is this sufficient to explain the first Productions of things? For though
it should be true that Matter cannot move but according to these Laws, and that
moving by them in process of Time the Work could have been produced as it is at
present, after that Romantic Manner of Cartesius; yet there was no Necessity
that Matter should move at all, nor could it move of it self. Wherefore whether
they will or not, they must own the Existence of something prior to Matter it
self, or the Motion of it, which Cartesius was sensible of, and therefore he
could not build his airy and fanciful System, without supposing the Existence
of a Deity. And if he had kept his Eye upon this infinitely perfect Being, and
considered the World and all particular things as his Work; if instead of a
vain curious Enquiry how things should have been, if Matter once moved had been
left to it self, he had showed how things are, and explained the admirable
Contrivance of them, if he had given us a History of Nature, and described the
Wisdom of God in the Make, Order, Place, and Relation of particular things; I
say, If Cartesius had done this, as he seems to have been able for it, the
World would have been more obliged to him, his Philosophy should have been more
rational and satisfactory, more useful to others, and of more lasting Fame to
himself; Whereas now by turning his Thoughts from the Ends and Uses of things,
and the Wisdom of the Author and Contriver, he has turned his Back upon the
only true Light that was to have guided him; he has grop'd in the Dark and
produced nothing but useless Conjectures and the extravagant Ravings of his
Brain, which tickled Men at first, as all Novelties use to do, but which wise,
inquisitive, and thinking Men will, and must disgust because there wants
Solidity.

As God is the first Cause and Author of all things, so the Belief of a Deity
is the Foundation of all solid Reason; what is not built on this is Nonsense
and Absurdity. I know the Atheists arrogate to themselves Wit, and Judgment,
and Knowledge above others, and do think that it is the Ignorance and Credulity
of the Bulk of Mankind (as one lately Words it) which make them to be of
another Belief. But I pray you, must they carry away Sense and Understanding
from others, because they are so vain as to think it? Do not those in Bedlam
think themselves wiser than others? All the rest of the World are Fools in
their Eyes, and those who keep them there, not only Fools, but Oppressors and
most unjust. And yet Atheism is a more extravagant and pernicious Madness,
which it is the Interest of Mankind to keep from spreading. But alas it has
been suffered to take Root and spread, nay it is cherished and encouraged. Men
walk the Streets and publicly act this Madness. In every Corner they throw
their Squibbs of Scoffs and Drollery against the Almighty Author of their
Being. They meet in Companies to concert how they may most wittily expose him,
and what is the readiest way to render him ridiculous in the Eyes of others: A
Clinch, or Jest, or puny Witticism is received and entertained as an useful
Discovery, and carried about with all Diligence. Though there be no Reason why
the Atheist should be a Zealot, there being no Obligation on him to propagate
his Opinions; and because the less they are entertained by others he is the
more secure; yet no Sect is become more zealous of late than Atheists, and
their Fraternity, who maintain their Cause by an affronted Impudence, by the
Exercise of a froathy Wit more than Reason, and by Jesting and Drollery rather
than serious Argument. And is this a reasonable or commendable way of handling
a Matter so serious and important? Should Impudence run down Evidence? Should a
Jest or a Witticism be of more Weight than the Dictates of common Sense and
sober Reason? If these Men were capable of Counsel, I would ask them whether
they are absolutely sure that they are in the right? Are they able to
demonstrate that there is no God? This is more than any ever yet pretended to;
and if they cannot pretend to this, ought they not to walk very cautiously, If
there be a God, as there may, for any Assurance they have to the contrary, what
then have they to expect for these bold Insults and that wicked Opposition to
him? A modest Enquiry into Truth, even into the Existence of God himself, is
reasonable, and cannot offend either God or Man: But Spite and Insolency cannot
by any Means be justified. It shows a Desire that there should be no God, more
than Doubts and Scruples about his Existence, which must needs provoke the most
hight God, and draw down his Judgments, both on those who are guilty, and on
the Land which cherishes them.

The CONCLUSION.
THOUGH the Existence of God be most evident, yet I thought my self obliged to
insist the longer upon proving it, because it is of such Importance; for it is
the Foundation of all Knowledge and Certainty as well as of all Morality and
Religion. The Belief of a Deity is the first Article of the Christian Creed,
upon which the Truth and Certainty of the rest depend: And therefore 'twas
necessary to show that this is no vain Hypothesis, or imaginary Supposition;
but a Truth loudly proclaimed, and strongly confirmed not only by Reason, but
every part of the World. So that whatever the Atheist may arrogate to himself,
and whatever Esteem may be paid to him unjustly in this corrupt Age, yet he is
so far from being wiser than others; that by the universal Voice of Nature as
well as Scripture, he will be declared a Fool who says that there is no God.

When I have proved that this God does rule the World, which is also included
in this first Faith, I shall then consider what it is to live by it, and shall
show how necessary it is to the being just and righteous. And I hope that there
is such Satisfaction given in these Essays, that who shall read them will be
desirous of the other that are promised.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 2. read is, p. 3. l. 7. r. Scripture* p. 7. l. 29. r. Principle,
p. 12. l. 12. r. so well, p. 13. l. 17. for touchos r. touch, p. 19. l. 8. f.
Squares r. Square. p. 23. l. ult. for is r. are, p. 40* l. 31. r. as well,
ibid. l. 33, r. a part, p. 42* l. 25. r. the f. their* p. 43. l. 22. r.
exceedingly, p. 45. l. 13. f. be* r. is, p. 46. l. 21. f. should r. would, p.
47. l. 14. r. conjoined, p. 57. l. 20. r. there.

FINIS.

