Bourignianism Detected: OR THE Delusions and Errors OF ANTONIA BOURIGNON, AND
HER Growing Sect. Which may also Serve for a Discovery of all other
ENTHUSIASTICAL IMPOSTURES.

By JOHN COCKBVRN, D. D.

Narrative I.

LONDON, Printed for C. Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's; W.
Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard; and H. Hindmarsh at the
Golden-Ball over-gainst the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, School.

PREFACE.
AS before the coming of Jesus Christ, it is cortain, that God did at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, speak by his Prophets, to prepare the way of
this his only and well-beloved Son, and to dispose Mankind to receive this
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, with all suitable Respect, Honor and
Submission; so since his return to Heaven, many have pretended Divine and
particular Revelations from thence, authorizing them to alter or add to the
Rules and Doctrine which he taught and established, for securing and promoting
our Salvation: which is no small Argument for the Divine Authority, of the
Books of the New Testament, where this is very often and in express terms
foretold.

Almost in every Age, and in every Country, some or other have set up for
Prophets, and have spoken confidently in the Name of the Lord. But there is one
in this Age, viz. Antonia Bourignon, whose Pretenses are greater, and far
beyond all were before; more cannot, nor yet so much can be said for the
Apostles themselves: for they were but Servants and Ministers to Jesus Christ,
who (if she may be believed) only laid the Foundation for her Work, and did no
more than prepare the way for her Design. The last and greatest Manifestation
of the Divine Wisdom, Power, Love and Goodness was reserved to her, and
therefore she is and must be a greater Person than Jesus Christ himself.

It is not rare and unusual to see Persons exalt themselves above measure, and
to think of themselves above what they ought to think: But it is somewhat
astonishing, that others should be affected with their Pride and Vanity, and
taken with their Delusion or Imposture, and that they should become Zealous to
support them. Yet so it is, that the strongest Delusions and the greatest
Imposture, have had Admirers and Followers: and so has Mademoiselle Bourignon.
She had only two or three Disciples, who adhered closely to her in her
Lifetime; for some who admired her upon the first Acquaintance, deserted her
afterward. But since her Death, a good many have been proselited, both to her
Doctrine and the Opinion of her Person: there be several on the other side the
Sea, but which concerns us most, the Infection has spread hither to this Isle,
and has seized many especially in Scotland, which certainly obliges every one
to contribute all he can to put a stop to it, and to prevent as much as
possible, the dangerous Consequence. They are not mean and ignorant Persons who
follow this Woman, they are some of the better sort, who have been reputed, Men
of Sense, Learning and Probity; which should lay the Pride of Man, and teach
him who stands to take heed lest he ^all.

Error, like Sicknss, seizes upon strong Constitutions, as well as the weak:
And as sometimes the Air is more infectious, and the Bodies of Men more
susceptible of Diseases than at other times; so there are times which favor
Error very much, and in which it does exceedingly spread. At present, there
is, all the World over, a wonderful Disposition, in all serious Persons, to
Enthusiasm, and the Delusions which follow it; as in others a tendency to
Atheism and Skepticism: both which are Presages of some impendent Judgment.

I am one of the weakest who may enter into the field, against these Enemies to
Truth and True Religion: But God sometimes does work by the meanest
Instruments; and seeing at this time I have no Charge, which requires my
attendance, I resolve to employ my Time and Thoughts this way, that I may at
least show my Zeal to the Cause of God, to whose Service I was devoted. I have
already published Two Parts of the Enquiry into the Nature, Evidence and
Necessity of Christian Faith; and I intend a Third, as soon as the present Task
is over, if not before it; by which (as well as by many other more accurate
Treatises) Atheists and Scepticks may see that the Christian Religion is no
cunning Fable, but a certain Truth, and worthy to be received. I have turned a
while from the Atheist, only that I may, at the desire of some, encounter the
Enthusiast, who truly does as much disservice to Religion, and is the best Tool
which the Atheist does work by.

At first, I designed only to give some pat Instances to prove that Antonia
Bourignon was not Inspired, nor her Doctrine agreeable to the Scripture; which
is sufficient to preserve any from following this Way: But seeing this is the
first time that Bourignianism was undertaken, I was persuaded to do it fully,
and not to make an imperfect Work of it; and especially seeing the Examination
of this, discovers all other Enthusiastical Impostures and Delusions. Our
Quakers and Philadelphians, as well as the Quietists and Pietists abroad, are
of the same kidney, and do all stand upon the same foundation; so that what
overturns one, overturns all.

To have published at once a full Examination of Enthusiasm, Inspiration,
Visions, and the particular Tenets of Antonia Bourignon, would have required a
longer time than the impatient curiosity of some would alallow: For this cause
therefore, and for some other reasons, I have been prevailed with to set it
forth by Parts, which are independent upon one another. This is the First
Narrative; which shows the high Opinion that the Disciples of Antonia Bourignon
have of her, and the Reasons for it: The next shall go instantly to the Press:
So that one may be expected and had always within three or four Weeks at most
after another. I pray God grant that they may be a means to recover some, and
to preserve others from those Delusions that disturb the Peace and Unity of the
Church, and which lead private Persons unawares both into Temporal and Eternal
Ruin.

Bourignianism DETECTED.
Narrative I.
THE CHARACTER OF Mademoiselle ANTONIA BOURIGNON, By her Disciples, Considered
and Examined.
ANtonia Bourignon, the Daughter of one John Bourignon, and Italian Merchant,
who lived at Lisle in Flanders, was born the 13th. of January, 1616; and she
died at Franeker, in the Province of Friseland, the 30th. of October. 1680: so
that she lived Threescore and four Years, Nine Months, and Fourteen Days. None
of her Friends had the comfort of attending her when she died: but a
Considerable Person, who some days before was allowed to visit her, came very
opportunely to kiss her Feet, as she was laid in the Coffin, and to get her
buried after the manner she her self desired. And he who gives this Account of
her, adds, Lavie Continue, c. 34. n. 3.
That she was the most Divine and the most Pure Soul that ever lived upon the
Earth, since Jesus Christ. She was of a middle Stature, slender and delicate;
her Countenance was agreeable; her Complexion brown; her Forehead broad, and
without Wrinkles; and her Eyes were a little bluish. She had an ingenious Air;
and such an exquisite Sight, that she never used Glasses. Her Nose was well
made, and proportionable. She was Out-mouthed, having Lips and Teeth somewhat
big. Age had whitened her Hairs; Sickness had made her Face lean; and she was
hollow about the Eyes. Her Mien, her Speech, her Address, and way of receiving
Persons, were very taking and agreeable. Her Gate was grave, bearing her Head a
little high; and she did not appear to be above Forty Years old. All her
Senses, except Tasting, were strong and lively. She was of a quick and active
Disposition. She was never sad, but always of an even Temper. She would never
suffer her Picture to be drawn; not only because she did not approve of this
sort of Vanity, but also because it very much concerned her not to be known,
upon the account of her Persecutors. As to the Gifts and Qualities of her
Spirit, her Writings do partly show them; but none is capable to know the
greatness of them, save He who bestowed them.

That from her Infancy she had the gift of Chastity in so high a degree, Ibid.
c. 2. p. 21.
that she often said, That in all her life, she never had, not even upon a
Temptation or Surprise, the least Thought which might be unbecoming the
Chastity of the purest Virgin-state. St. Teresa writes of her self, That God
sometimes favored her with the same Grace. But as for Mademoiselle Bourignon,
she possessed it to that degree, that it overflowed (if one may have leave to
speak so) upon those who conversed with her. Her Presence and Conversation did
send forth such an Odor of Continence, as made others forget the Pleasures of
the Flesh: And I leave it (says he) to the Experience of those who read her
Books with attention, to judge whether they do not feel some Impressions of,
and whether they be not drawn with Inclinations to this Virtue that is so
acceptable to God.

Though this Character of Mademoiselle Bourignon be Jesus Christ; they set her
on the same Level with Him; they honor her with his Titles; they apply to her
the Prophecies which the Church has always believed to be meant of Him; they
draw a Parallel betwixt Him and Her, and do make Him the Type of Her; and not
Him but Her the last and highest Expression of God's Love to Mankind. To
intimate which, God sent a Comet when she was born, another when she first
began to write; and a third at her death, which was greater and more dreadful
than any that was ever seen before. She is the Divine Sun of Righteousness; she
is Truth, pure Truth, and the only Truth that can guide one to Heaven and
Eternal Life. There is no other way of Life Eternal (says he) but what is in
the Mouth, in the Writings, and in the Life of the most holy Antonia Bourignon.
Ibid. c. 34.
And again, If ever the Church of God be edified upon Earth, it cannot be by
any other means but by the Remonstrances, the Rules, Doctrine, Spirit and
Example of Mademoiselle Bourignon. He calls her the Woman spoken of in the
Revelation, who was shown to St. John in a Vision, whom (says he) our Eyes
have seen, and by whom our Ears have heard, and our Hands have handled the Word
of Life. And as he renders unto God Thanks for the Grace of knowing her, Ib. p.
598, 601.
and of being acquainted with her; so he most passionately expostulates with
God, for suffering her to die, who was the only Just, the only Holy, the only
Person who had the Spirit of God. Where, Lord? where is now your Holy Church?
Alas! it is altogether destroyed, and subsists only in ruined Houses, in some
scattered Stones; which, as the Stones of the ancient Sanctuary, are poured out
upon the top of every street, broken, defaced and unpolished, and there is none
to gather them together, nor to set about the building of your New Jerusalem;
for you have taken away the holy Instrument of your Spirit, whom you had called
and filled with the Treasures of your Grace, to labor in that Work! You have
extinguished the Light which you sent to the World, for guiding well-disposed
Souls. Where is now, Lord, the Truth of your Promises? Where are now your
ancient Mercies, which never suffered the World to be destitute of living
Witnesses? How have you suffered the time to come, in which it may be said,
without exception, that the righteous is perished; there is no more a prophet
amongst us, nor have we any who knows how long?

I might bring many other Passages out of this Author, Antonia Bourignon: And
they are not peculiar to him; for all who have taken this Woman's part, are of
the same mind. He who writes the Apologetick Preface to her Works, employs all
the Rhetoric, which Passion, and a strong-heated Passion can inspire, in
defense of this Woman, to remove the Prejudices which are entertained against
her Person and Doctrine, and to convince the World that she was filled with the
Holy Ghost, and sent to renew the Church, and to bring it to its utmost
Perfection. If this Author ought to be believed, all the Words and Writings of
this Woman are Sacred as Scripture it self, they ought to have the same
Authority, and should be as devoutly read; yea, much rather read: for if it be
true what he says, they are more profitable, and do discover more fully the
hidden Mysteries of God: As the Author of the Leipsick Transactions observes,
Acta Lipsica Mense Ian. 16^^. p. 3.
he makes the New Scripture of Madam Bourignon either to confirm the Old, or to
explain them, or to correct them. In this Preface, the Author considers the
several ways by which God may and does communicate himself to Men: and he
asserts confidently of Mademoiselle Bourignon, That God used all these several
ways with her, as Visions, external Voices, intimate Impressions upon the Soul,
and such ineffable Communications, as made her to know and understand the Mind
of God, and all Truths as they are in him: Her whole Life (says he) was a
continued Series of God's Word and Pref. Apol. p. 188.
Discourse with her, and of hers with him. And again, She had so often those
Communications with God, (which he reckons up in the Second Classis) Ib. p. 192.
that they were very common with her, by which God communicated to her the
intimate Knowledge of Things Divine and Humane, Matters of Right and Fact,
Things Speculative and Practical, Things Mystical, Things appertaining to Faith
and Morality, Things Future and Prophetic, such as are the Last Things of
which she has often spoken. Finally, He makes a kind of Union between God and
her Soul, and says, Ib. p. 193.
That they spoke to one another as two Friends use to do; and that the
Discourse which she had with God, as well as that which He had with her,
proceeded not from her self, but from the motion of God, which prompted her to
speak; and that her Books are filled with such Divine Conferences.

Antonia Bourignon, as well as the other above mentioned, who continued and
enlarged the History of her Life, begun by her self, I say, he will not allow
her to be guilty of any slip, or inadvertency, or failing, in Word or Deed,
unworthy of the Spirit of God it self. As it is in the Leipsick Transactions;
Tanta cum Religione veneratur, ut and Soloecismos ejus, and in stylo errata
dictamini divino tribuat. He justifies all she said or did, by Parallels from
the Prophets, from Christ and the Apostles; and confidently asserts, That the
Opposition she meets with, the Prejudices and Outcries against her, or her
Doctrine, proceed from the same Spirit and Principles which persecuted them:
Ib. p. 197.
For to give you his Sentiments in short, She was the Purest, the most
Dis-interested and Self-denied Soul, and the most resigned to God that ever was
upon Earth. The World, and all that is in the World, was of no Value to her;
she was perfectly denied to all Sense, and to every thing that depended upon
Imagination. In her Divine Conferences (that is, her conversation with God) she
used neither Ideas nor Meditations; but was in an admirable vacuity of all
Desire of knowing either this or that: having no will of her own, nor any
Inclination nor Fondness for any Sentiment, no, not the most intimate and most
divine; but a total, perfect, and most accomplished Resignation for receiving
what it would please God to communicate to her, and no other thing, with an
absolute Resolution to execute whatever would please God; though in doing it, it
behoved to combat the World and Hell, and lose a Thousand Lives. In this
Habitual and Invariable State, where she continued from the Eighteenth year of
her Age, to the last moment of her Life: None but God alone could act in the
Fund of her Soul, in all those several ways mentioned: And the whole Conduct of
such a Person could not be but Divine, seeing she was united to God by a
perfect Resignation.

Antonia Bourignon may not stand upon the Credit of two obscure and unknown
Authors, who were afraid to expose their Names; that what has been said, may
not be thought their particular Rhapsodies, I will confirm the same, by
Instances from some who have publicly owned it, and do glory in it. I will
begin with Monsieur de Cort, one of her first Disciples, who was Superior of
the Oratory, and Pastor of Saint John at Mechlin, and who (as it is said) lost
his Life in her Cause. This Man, in a Letter to the Vicar General of the
Archbishopric of Mechlin, after having told him how he had happened to read
that Passage, 2 Kings xxii. about Hilkiah's finding the Book of the Law of the
Lord, and sending to Huldah, the Prophetess, to enquire about it; he writes,
That having made a very serious Reflection upon all this, he was touched with a
sensible Grief, considering that we have here an Excellent Woman, a Friend of
God, the Favorite of Jesus, the Organ of the Holy Ghost, who is greater than
Huldah, to whom God has communicated himself extraordinarily, and to whom he
has discovered all his Secrets. She never yet deceived any person, was always
faithful, firm, constant, immovable; She possesses the Holy Ghost, with his
Gifts of Wisdom, Understanding, Knowledge, Piety, Courage, Counsel, fear of
God; and together with these, she possesses the Twelve Fruits of the same
Spirit; Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Longanimity, Goodness, and the rest: The
Eight Beatitudes do also shine in her; she lives not to her self, but
altogether to God; she speaks as she lives, and she lives as she speaks: Her
words are Lively, Efficacious, and Operative; they are conform to the Gospel
and the other Scriptures. Her Life is altogether miraculous: And I do remember
that which your Reverence has often said to me, how that she was an admirable
Maid, that there was never found her like; we are happy to have such a
Treasure; and truly she has the Holy Ghost. Moreover, I remember, how I have
brought Letters to her, in which you have earnestly desired her Prayers for
your self and for your Friends, recommending to her many particular Affairs;
and ^ow as concerning the Public, in the time of Universal Scourges; in all
these Dangers no body consults her, no body makes Prayers to her, no body
employs her! These Thoughts have touched my Heart very sensibly. As for me, I
have thanked you, and do still thank you infinitely; because God inspired you
to send me to this Creature. I never received, neither from Archbishop, nor
from Bishops, nor from Pastors, nor from my Directors and Superiors, nor from
Saints, nor from God himself immediately, more good than from her by God only.
I beseech you, for the Honor of God, for the Good of the Church, for your own
private good, and for the good of all those who are under your Charge, to
consult her, and to believe her as to that which she shall tell you from God
concerning these deplorable Times. St. Jerome says, That Deuteronomium est
secunda Lex, and Evangelicae legis praefiguratio, that is, Deuteronomy, or the
Book that was found in the time of Huldah, is the Second Law, or the Second
Establishment of the Law of God, and that it is a Figure of what shall be under
the Evangelical Law. Now, I am of the Mind, that the Evangelical Law, which was
first Established, and afterward forgotten and lost, shall be renewed and
re-established, as Deuteronomy was a Second time under the Ministry of this New
Huldah. This Letter is prefixed to the Treatise which bears the Title of, The
Word of God, or the interior Life of Mademoiselle Bourignon: Where also there
are Extracts of some Letters of the same Vicar General, bearing a Testimony
unto her.

Antonia Bourignon, not upon hearsay, or any uncertain Report, but from his
own Experience. There is another still alive, who knew her, was intimately
acquainted with her, and who gives her a Character above what either Man or
Woman (besides Jesus Christ) ever deserved. It is Monsieur Poiret, who may be
called the Chief Disciple, or First Apostle of Antonia Bourignon, he having
spread her Fame and propagated her Opinions more studiously, and with more Zeal
and Fervor than any other. As St. Paul desired to know nothing save Jesus
Christ and him crucified; so this Man seems to desire to know nothing but
Mademoiselle Bourignon. He does not believe a God more firmly, than that this
Woman was divinely inspired: His words were (to some of my Acquaintance who
visited him) Tam certus sum eam Virginem inspiratam esse quam Deum existere.
She is ever in his Mouth, and on all occasions he recommends her Books as
having Light and Instruction, and all desirable Advantages above all the Books
in the World, without excepting the Scriptures. Some few Years after her Death,
he sent a Memorial to Monsieur Bale, to be inserted in the Novelles de la
Republique de la Lettre, that all the learned World might have the Knowledge of
this wonderful Woman: And because Monsieur Bale had dropped something which did
not savor of that respect which is due to Mademoiselle Bourignon, he again
expostulated with him, and corrected him by another Memorial; both which may be
seen in the Ninth Articles for the Months of April and May, for the Year 1685.

All which Monsieur Poiret writes now, is upon the Principles of this Woman:
Her Doctrine is the Foundation of his Economy Divine, in which he imagines
that he has explained all the Mysteries both of Nature and Religion, cleared
all Difficulties either in Philosophy or Divinity, and revealed the secret
Purposes of the Counsel of God, both in respect of what is past, and of what is
to come. All these great things he has done by the Light which his Beloved
Mistress afforded him: Take his own words for it. I ought to acknowledge, that
these Principles and Pref. n. 28.
many other things are not of my own Invention, but that I have been led to
them by the Divine Writings, and by the Instruction of one of Unknown Worth. I
should never have come to the knowledge of these Truths of my self, if the
Light Tom. 3. c. 11. n. 16.
which God communicated to one of his Saints, had not Administered the Occasion:
She is a Person whose Writings have led me into the Knowledge of the solid
Principles of all things. Mademoiselle Bourignon has received from God such
certain and particular Light, as without which I neither could have seen, nor
been sensible in this manner of these Divine Truths, how palpably soever the
Text of Ibid. c. 12. p. 21.
Scripture may seem to lead the attentive Reader unto them. God has drawn me
forth, not by the force and subtilty of my wretched Reason, nor by Study, or by
Reading the Books of Learned Men, but by the Writings of a Woman, through which
God has touched and illuminated my Heart, making me see a perfect Light in all
these Matters and Difficulties, as well as almost in all other Ibid. c. 17. p.
340.
things, whether Divine or Humane, Natural or Supernatural. Behold a great and
notable Truth, and a Key of an infinite number of admirable Lights for
explaining a Thousand Passages of Divine Scripture, and of the charitable and
adorable Conduct of God toward Men? Nothing is wanting to make this rare and
incomparable Truth to be received of Men, but that its Discovery, and the
Explication of these Passages of Scripture, which point it out, have not been
communicated by some Ancient Father, or by some great Doctor, but by an
unlearned Woman, to whom God has been pleased to manifest himself so far,
notwithstanding of the contrary Judgment of some bearded Animals. Whosoever
Tom. 4. chap. 16. p. 379.
would see these things in the most sensible and most Divine Light that can be
desired, have no more to do but to consult the Works of Mademoiselle Bourignon;
particularly, these Three or Four; The renewing of the Gospel Spirit,
Antichrist Discovered, The Light of the World, and the Touchstone: For I do
acknowledge, That I have not perceived, that God, since the beginning of the
World, did ever discover more clearly, more sensibly, more strongly, more
plainly the greatness of Man's Corruption, as he has done in our Days, by that
excellent Organ of the Holy Ghost: And nothing but the Discovery of this Evil
has offended all wilfully wicked Persons at her; their Proud Heart would not
humble it self, nor be covered with Confusion, nor can they be induced to hate
and renounce themselves. The Devil also, their good Friend, who dwells in their
corrupt Hearts, not enduring to be thus exposed; has resolved to employ by his
Diabolical Slaves, against this Divine Light, and this Holy Soul which declares
it, his two ordinary Machines, Lying and Violence, which he has inspired
abundantly into the Hearts of many wicked Persons, both Learned and Idiots, who
have not been wanting hitherto to labor in this, as it becomes them, in favor
of their Master and King, the Murderer, the Persecutor, the Liar, the
Calumniator from the Beginning, who will one Day give them his common Pay, Tom.
7. c. 3. p. 92.
if they do not defeat the Work which they have Diabolically made for him
against the most Divine, the most Splendid, and the most Solid Truth which ever
yet appeared. Thus far Monsieur Poiret.

But that I may not be thought to impose upon the English Reader, by Quotations
from foreign Books, which are little known, and in few hands, I will justify
this high Character of Antonia Bourignon, by Passages of a parallel strain out
of the Prefaces to her Treatise of The Light of the World, which is now rendered
into English, to be read, understood, and considered by all who desire to be
saved, as the Title Page bears. There her eminent Sanctity is declared and set
forth in words which were never applicable to any Creature before; for none but
Jesus Christ was ever said to be perfect, and without sin. But the Purity
Preface to the English Reader, p. 21.
of Antonia Bourignon's Life was exact and constant; she was a perfect Pattern
and living Exemplar of the Spirit and Doctrine of the Gospel. In short, We may
all truly affirm, That we never observed in her any Vice, Sin, or any Weakness
of Spirit; M. Corte's Pref. p. 43.
but a perfect and solid Virtue, surpassing Natural and Humane Strength; which
made us say, That her Life was altogether Miraculous, as if Adam had never
sinned in her. And as to her Knowledge and Understanding, it is made Infinite;
for there were hid in her the Treasures of Divine Wisdom, which Ib. p. 17.
enabled her to utter things unheard of, so mavelous and sublime, that we
often remained quite lost with Admiration; for we had never heard such things.
She explained likewise the Holy Scriptures Ib. p. 41.
so perfectly, that none of the holy Fathers have ever so done, nor any body
since the Creation of the World. Ib. p. 44. 45.
She knew the secret Thoughts of Men's Hearts, and Things to come; and did not
foretell them by way of Supposition, or related them as if she had dreamt them.
We found also, diverse times, that she could tell what past in her absence, and
how our Souls behaved themselves toward God. Ibid.
In short, This Divine Soul told us so many Secrets of the Mystical and Inward
Life, that all our Theology was too short and insufficient to answer her to so
high Questions, not only in Matters of Theology, but also in all other Matters,
according to the various Rencounters and Occurrences which fell out: so that
one would have thought, that though a Man had perused all sorts of Histories,
and grown old in the study of all sorts of Sciences, he could not know, with
such Understanding, all the things which this Pilgrimess told us. It is
impossible to write in particular the admirable things which we have heard of
this Pilgrimess: Ib. p. 46.
so that We may say of her Discourses, what St. Paul said of his Rapture, That
he had seen and heard things which eyes had not seen, nor ear heard, and that
it has not entered into the mind of man what God has prepared for his elect.

Now, lest any should think that this extraordinary Ib. p. 41.
That she never read, nor learned of any body; That she was without Study, even
without Reading; Ib. p. 33.
and, which is more, without Meditation. Years and Experience make others Wise
and Knowing, but she had her vast Knowledge from the beginning: she was not
wiser in her Old Age than in her Youth; for she was infallible in both: neither
was there any occasion for correcting or amending that which she spoke or wrote
in her first years; Ib. p. 21.
For if you peruse her Writings impartially, you will meet with many remarkable
Characters that are not ordinarily to be found in many Writings. A clear and
distinct Account of the Essential Truths of Christianity, with a constant
urging of them as the one thing necessary, and distinguishing them from the
accessory Truths which are not necessary to Salvation; an inimitable simplicity
of Expression, which a Child may understand, with as singular a sublimity of
Thoughts, a convincing power and force going along with them; a plain
unfolding, in a few Lines, the Difficulties about which the Learned write many
Volumes; a constant harmony and uniformity of Sentiments, in the Writings of a
course of forty years, from about the Twenty third to the Sixty fifth year of
her age, in which she died, with an evidence and clearness to the conviction of
our Natural Reason: And all this by one who never read any Books; never
conversed with the Learned, to be instructed by them; never premeditated what
she wrote; never blotted out nor mended what was once written, but being
attentive to the Love of God, in the calm and inward recollection of her
Spirit, wrote as fast as her hand could guide the Pen; and when some Writings
were laid by unfinished, for some years, returned to them and finished them
after the same manner, without reading any more of what had been written, than
some few of the immediately foregoing Lines, to make a due connection. Thus
Memory, and those Rational discussive Faculties which help others to the
knowledge of Truth, were of no use to her; because they make her to have had an
immediate intuition of all things in God, Ib. p. 13.
with whom she had inward Conversation from her Childhood. She neither did nor
would learn any thing from the Scriptures, though they were given by
Inspiration, and were designed to make every Man of God perfect, and thoroughly
instructed to every good word and work. She would take nothing from the
second-hand, but would have all things immediately from God himself; and
therefore she asked Him Questions, and received Answers from Him, Ib. p. 19.
about the smallest matters. In a word, the design of these three Prefaces is
to prove, That all her Words and Thoughts are God's, and that the Spirit was
not given to her by measure, no more than it was to Jesus Christ, and that
there was the same reason for both: For as God had chosen a Virgin for his
Mother; so he had chosen another Virgin to be the Organ of his Light and
Spirit, by whom he designed to renew his Church, and to give the last Blow and
Overthrow to Satan's Kingdom; for which cause she is called the Light of the
World: and these words of Isaiah are applied unto her, The people that walked
in darkness have seen a great light: They that dwell in the land of the shadow
of death, upon them has the light shined. And upon this account, Ib. p. 46, 47.
Monsieur de Cort says, I look upon her Acquaintance, as a greater favor than
all the Graces and Favors which God has bestowed on me in this World, yea,
even than my Creation it self; for that would serve me in little stead, without
the working out of my Salvation, which would have been in great danger, if I
had not attained to the knowledge of my self, and of the Designs and Marvels of
God, which I have learned and discovered by the means of this Creature; and she
has certainly been sent me as the only Means of the Perfection of my Soul, and
of all those who will profit by the recital of this Narrative, which I find my
self obliged to publish, for the profit of many. This is the true treasure hid
in the earth; he who shall find it, ought to sell all that he has, to by this
Ground, to the end he may find and discover this Treasure, and take it up with
Joy, as the most precious thing in the World.

I have insisted the longer upon the Character of Mademoiselle Bourignon, her
personal Endowments and Qualifications, her Divine Mission and Authority, as
they are declared and set forth by her Disciples, because they are Material
Points in our Enquiry about her: And for the same reason, I have chose to give
these things in their own words, that it may appear to all, that I do not
charge them with things which they do not, neither will own.

Bourignon deserves the Character, which is here given to her; if it be true
what these Authors I have quoted do say of her; if their Commendations and
Praises are not rash and groundless, but built upon a solid Foundation, then
she is, not only a very Singular and Extraordinary Person, but, without
exception, the greatest that ever was Born of a Woman; She is above all the
Ancient Patriarchs; she is to be preferred to Moses and the Prophets, to John
the Baptist and the Apostles; and at least she ought to be honored equally
with Jesus Christ, who is said to be God blessed for ever. She was as much
without Sin as he was; and her Body was of a better Frame and Temper; for his
was so much wasted by his Travels and the fatigues of his Ministry, that he
seemed to be Fifty while he was not much above Thirty: Whereas Antonia
Bourignon did not appear to be Forty years old, when she was Sixty and odd. And
though I cannot pretend, that they do assert, in express terms, that she was
personally united to the God head, yet I do think it is a clear Consequence
from what they say; for I cannot understand how otherwise she could know all
Truths, the deepest Mysteries of Nature and Religion, things hidden from the
Wisest in all Ages; nor how she could, on all Occasions, speak and write about
both small and great Matters certainly, clearly, and infallibly, as well as
live up to the highest Perfection of an Universal Piety; and all this without
consulting either Men or Books, without previous Reflection and Meditation; I
say, I cannot understand how all this could be done by a mere Creature; and
therefore she must either have been always personally united to the Deity, and
so to be esteemed God-Woman, or else, as some Ancient Heretics said of Jesus
Christ, her Body and Humane Nature were not real, but a mere Phantome and
Apparition by which God was pleased to declare his Mind and Will unto Men. And
which soever of these be held, or whatever way God acted in her and by her, all
her Words and Writings are Sacred as Scripture; they are of the same Authority,
and do deserve the same respect, and ought to be read publicly, for the Honor
of God, and the Edification of Men. Finally, there ought to be a Commemoration
of Antonia Bourignon in the Public Liturgies, as well as of Jesus Christ, and
of the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. And as the Church has
always used to give unto God Names and Titles, from the Signal Manifestations
of himself; and as the latter took always place of the former, because more
honorable and glorious; thus the God of Abraham, the fear of Isaac, he that
brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and delivered them from their
Captivity, which were God's Names in former times, have been laid aside, to
give way to that of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: So this, and
all these should now give place to the God of Antonia Bourignon, to the Spirit
who spoke by her, because she has brought a greater, a clearer, and a fuller
Light into the World, and has made greater Discoveries of the Wisdom, and
Power, and Goodness of God, than what came by Jesus Christ himself.

Antonia Bourignon; but then they are of that importance, that none, but Madmen
and Fools, will admit either the Premises or Consequence without sufficient
Evidence and Authority. For, if the things that are said be not true; if there
be more ascribed to Mademoiselle Bourignon than what ought to be, then to pay
her such Honor, Respect, and Esteem would be abominable Idolatry and horrid
Blasphemy: If she require it, she is an Impostor, a Messenger from Satan, the
Organ and Instrument of the Devil, whereby he designs to seduce the Simple and
Unwary; She is not the true Light to be followed, but an Ignis fatuus, a false
and dangerous appearance, to be carefully avoided by all who love and seek
their own safety; and they who proclaim such high things of her are false
Prophets; if they believe sincerely what they say, they are sadly infatuated
and deluded; and if otherwise, they are monstrously and egregiously Wicked: if
they be right, we cannot so much as give this Woman one Contradiction, without
betraying our Conscience, Pref p. 47.
as M. de Cort speaks: But if they do not speak the Truth, then if we hearken
unto them, we receive those who speak in the Name of the Lord falsely, and we
shall provoke God's Wrath and Jealousy, by the grievous offense of giving
Divine Honor to another.

It therefore highly concerns us what part we Antonia Bourignon for such a
Woman as they have described her. I will not reflect upon their Honesty, nor
will I deny Integrity to some of them: Nay, I will easily grant that all of
them may speak as they think, and that they have written these things of this
Woman from no other Motive than the sincerity of their own Persuasions. But
what then? This cannot reasonably decide the case: Nor can we, without a most
culpable rashness, join issue with them, until we examine the Grounds of their
Belief, and see their Reasons why they come to be so and so persuaded. Every
one that is Honest, is not also Wise and Knowing: Nor are all infallible who
may be numbered amongst the Wise and Learned. Good Men may be mistaken; nor are
well meaning Persons secure from being deceived and imposed upon: Nay, not only
the Simple and Ignorant are liable to be seduced, but also Men of
Understanding, Learning, and Knowledge, of which many Instances may be brought
both out of Ancient and Modern Histories. Tertullian was carried away by the
Error of Montanus. Neither all the first, nor yet all the present followers of
Mahomet ought to be reckoned Dunces or Designing Men: Nor were it Just to
deprive all the Disciples of George Fox, of Understanding and Sincerity; and
yet he would not act wisely nor conscientiously who should plead for these
Impostors, and justify their Errors and Delusions, because some in other
things of Sense and Judgment, have taken part with them. None indeed, but
wicked Men and Villains will study a Cheat, and endeavor to impose upon the
World that which they know and believe to be false: But how often have we seen
and known Persons seduced and drawn into such hellish Designs, who ought not to
be branded with such odious Characters; though at the same time I cannot but
say, that whatever reason there may be to excuse their Sincerity, there is all
the reason in the World to censure their Judgment, Discretion and Conduct; for
who does not act wisely and cautiously, can never be said to act innocently,
though he may not be so culpable as others.

As no Man loves to be cheated in any thing, so no Man should suffer himself to
be cheated in Religion and Messages from Heaven; for they are Matters of the
highest Importance, and therefore our Sentiments about them should be built
upon some sure Foundation: without some reasonable Conviction, without some
Evidence which may satisfy Sober Men, and which may be defended when required
and called in Question, we ought not to receive Doctrines, nor embrace
particular Systems of Religion, nor should we close with this or that Method of
Salvation, otherwise we are shamefully lazy, negligent and easy in things
which do most concern us. It Is true, the generality of the World practice the
contrary, they take these things upon trust, and are satisfied with that which
is first proposed, and which lie nearest them: But this is a Reproach to
Mankind, nor can there be a greater instance of the Corruption of Humane
Nature, than this, that Men use their Reason least in things of greatest
moment. However we are not to consider what is commonly done, but what should
be done; what is fit to be done by wise and good Men, by such as would build
their present Peace and Comfort, and their eternal Interest, not upon Sand, but
upon a Rock which can hold out against Storms and Tempests.

Now, if in such cases a reasonable Conviction, a satisfying Evidence be
necessary, then to receive Mademoiselle Bourignon as one so highly dignified by
God, and her Scheme of Religion and System of Opinions as Divine, and
absolutely necessary to be followed, we ought to have something more than the
Authority and Testimony of those Men formerly quoted: for whatever their Morals
be, they are fallible as others; if they will not wilfully deceive, yet they
are liable to be deceived; and if they have been imposed upon, where are we if
we follow them. The Testimony of Men is only valuable so far as they are
competent Judges of the things which they declare: It is unjust to deny the
Testimony of sincere honest Men, when they bear witness only to Matters of
Fact, to things which they have heard and seen; but when it comes to Opinions,
Persuasions and Sentiments, both good and wise Men ought to be submitted to a
Trial and Examination, whether there be Reasons for their Belief. Now the Case
before us, is of the Nature of the last; that is, It is not a Matter of Fact,
but a Matter of Faith and Opinion; and therefore we must be allowed to judge
the Validity of the Reasons of these Men's Sentiments of Antonia Bourignon,
before we can or ought to be of their Side: And I am confident, that if their
Reasons be weighed in the Balance, if they be put into just and equal Scales,
they will be found light, and wanting Weight to make them pass for the Value
which is put upon them.

viz. without Reading, without consulting Men or Books, and without Meditation.
6. The apparition of Comets at her Birth, when she began to Write, and at her
Death. From these Reasons they conclude that she was Divinely Inspired, and
sent to the World upon some great Design; and for these Reasons they make her
the Woman in the Revelation who was clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon
under her Feet, they call her the Spouse of Christ, and give her that large
Character which we have seen above.

I intend to consider these Reasons calmly and impartially. First, whether
supposing them true, the Consequence drawn from them be just and necessary, and
then what truth is in them.

viz. her Early and Extraordinary Sanctity. And I do acknowledge that true
Sanctity is only from God. It is not the work of Nature but of Grace; No Man
can be perfectly Holy of himself, nor can the Devil either intend or effectuate
such a thing; if therefore any have the Gift of Sanctity, they have it from
above, God certainly is the Author of it, whose Spirit only can subdue our
Natural Corruption, and raise us to a Conformity to the Divine Nature. And as
this Gift is of God, so it is more valuable than the Gift of Miracles,
Prophecies, speaking with diverse Tongues, and such like; for it is a greater
sign of the love of God, and does better secure an Interest in him. When our
Lord bestowed the Power of Miracles and of casting out Devils upon the Seventy
Disciples, that they might not overvalue this Special Privilege or boast too
highly of it, be said unto them, Luke 10. 20.
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you,
but rather rejoice, because your names are written in Heaven. Now all who are
truly holy have their Names written there: Many who have Prophesied, and cast
out Devils, and done many wonderful Works, shall be disowned in the great Day
of the Lord; they shall be commanded to Depart from Christ our Savior; but
they who are truly sanctified, will never be separated from him, theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven for ever.

But though Sanctity be a great and most desirable token of God's Love and
Favor, yet it is not always attended with extraordinary Illuminations and
Inspirations: It may be without these, and these may be separated from it. Good
and Holy Persons in the other World shall have a full and clear Vision of all
things, then they shall understand the Intricacies of Providence, and the
Secrets of the Divine Counsel; then they shall see God as he is, and know even
as they are known: But at present the best and most Holy see as through a Glass
darkly, and are ignorant of many things, as well as others; nay, persons very
good and holy, and very dear to God, may not know so much as some that are
wicked and unsanctified. What St. Paul supposes, may be proved by several
Instances, that one may have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and yet be without Holiness; for if they may want
Charity, they want a special part of Holiness. Wherefore suppose we should
grant Sanctity to Antonia Bourignon, suppose her to be truly and
extraordinarily Holy; yet she is not therefore to be reckoned Infallible, nor
endued with all Knowledge, nor are her Doctrines to be received Implicitly. Let
her Sanctity be never so great, yet that alone does not raise her to the
Station and Dignity of a Prophet, at whose Mouth the Church, and all particular
Persons, should receive the Law and Will of God; for though Holiness does
certainly not only dispose Persons to receive special Influences of the Spirit
of God, but also give a deeper Sense of Divine Truths than Reading, even as
Practice in any Art does make one Wiser and more Skilful than Speculation; yet
every Holy Person must not pretend a Revelation of all particulars, or to know
the Mind of God in every thing: Wherefore we find St. Paul distinguishing
warily what was his own Judgment, from what he had certainly from God.
Mademoiselle Bourignon might be Holy, and yet no Infallible Oracle.

And there is yet far less reason upon this account to entitle her the peculiar
Organ of the Holy Ghost, the Singular Spouse of Christ, the Queen of Heaven,
the Mother of the Faithful, and the like: For though Saints be dear unto God,
and very precious in his sight; though he has prepared for them things which
Eyes have not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of Man;
though they receive secret Favors and Communications, which none knows
neither can understand, save he who receives them; yet they themselves should
keep still the distance of Creatures, and cloth themselves with Humility, and
acknowledge their Unworthiness: And others when they honor them, should beware
of running into Excess; they should not exalt them unto an Equality with God,
nor yet unto Degrees which approach near to it; for this is to Deify Creatures,
which as it is foolish, so it is very provoking. It Is true, God bestows, in
the Scripture, upon Saints great and glorious Epithets, which are most worthy
of our Contemplation, because they declare the Greatness of God's Love: but
also we may perceive that the Saints were both ashamed and afraid to receive
them, from the sense of their unworthiness and infinite distance from God.
Humility is the foundation of true and perfect Sanctity, and it teaches
neither to reject or despise the free Expressions of that great Love, with
which God is pleased to honor his Servants, nor yet to claim and enhance them
by way of merit. For any to arrogate these Divine Honors as peculiarly
belonging to them, is intolerable Pride; as it is high Presumption and
Insolency for any to take upon them to give or appropriate these unto others,
without special Command and Direction: For the giving of Honors is an Act of
Sovereignty, and appertains to God, and not unto Men. The Saints in Scripture,
showed the greatest Humility when God magnified them most, and they used to
speak of one another with great Modesty. The affecting of great Names and
Titles proceeds from Pride and Vanity, and none but rash, inconsiderate and
unthinking Persons will bestow them lavishly.

High Encomiums are the Effects of a strong, fervent, and interess'd Passion,
and not the Product of a solid Judgment. We ought, indeed, to praise famous
Men, Ecclus. 44. 1*
according to the Exhortation of the wise Son of Sirach, that others may be
excited to imitate them; but then our Praises should be just and true, modest
and proper, suitable to the present Condition of Mankind, which is frail and
mortal, and liable to many weaknesses. We ought to praise Men, but we should
also remember that they are Men, and not magnify them above what they are, or
make Gods of them. I do not know which is more Criminal or more to be censured,
whether the detracting from ones just Praise, or the giving extravagant and
excessive Commendations: perhaps more may be said against this. It has many
pernicious Consequences, and does proceed from the same partial Spirit, which
regards Humor and Interest, more than Truth or Justice: both are reproved and
condemned in Scripture, and the one as well as the other, is very unbecoming
the Spirit of the Gospel, which requires us not to rest in the Admiration of
the Persons of Men, or of any Creature, but to carry our Thoughts from these up
toward God, who alone is worthy to be admired and praised, and who is the
Author of all the good that is in any.

There ought, indeed, to be a Cognizance of the Divine Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
Mercy and Grace which are manifested in any, or toward any; we ought also to
honor those, whom God has honored thus, yet only so as to make them the
Subject Matter of praising and honoring God. But we make Idols of Men, when we
either ascribe to them Perfections which they never had, or fix upon their
personal Qualifications, and consider their Virtues as theirs, without looking
higher. This was a great part of Heathenism, and from hence sprung that
abominable Idolatry which the World was so full of: Immoderate Flattery of Men's
Persons, was the occasion of it. To prevent which among Jews and Christians,
the infinite Wisdom of God did and does still represent those worthy Persons he
made use of, as Men, that is, as Persons of the like Passions and Infirmities
with other Men: The meanest of the Prophets or Apostles were greater by far
than the Gods whom the Gentiles worshipped, and yet that Divine Honor might
not be paid to them, that they might not be adored as Gods, as Originals of
their own Virtues and Qualifications, their Failings and Weaknesses are not
concealed, but exposed to the View of all the World; they showed themselves
Earthen Vessels while they manifested the heavenly Treasures of Wisdom and
Power committed to them, that the Praise may be unto God, and not unto Men. God
is a Jealous God, and is not pleased, when the Glory which is due to himself is
given either in whole or in part to another: which may be done without offering
Sacrifice, or burning Incense, or making Prayers; for this is done by an
excessive Admiration of any ones Person, by thinking of them above what we
ought to think, by ascribing to them much more than is due, and expecting from
them that which God only can be the Author of. Upon this account we accuse the
Church of Rome of Idolatry toward the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, because
she raises and honors them above the Rank and Condition of Creatures: And
yet neither the Virgin, nor any other pretended or real Saint is so much
honored by that Church, as Mademoiselle Antonia Bourignon is by Monsieur de
Cort, Monsieur Poiret, and their Followers. There have been Published several
Blasphemous Encomiums of the Blessed Virgin, but they are all short of that
which has been said above of this Woman: and therefore I can be bold to say,
that the Bourignianists are at least in this as much guilty of Idolatry as the
Church of Rome; nor can they ever justify themselves, without proving that she
is no Creature, but a God or Goddess. Her Sanctity will not excuse them, be it
never so great or unspotted; nor though it would, is her Sanctity so great as
is pretended. Which is the next thing I intend to show.



If the fond Favorites of Mademoiselle Bourignon had only represented her as a
Devout Religious and Virtuous Woman, it might have passed; if they had only
proposed her as a good Pattern, how one may escape the Pollutions of the World,
and be good and upright even in a Corrupt Age, none could have found Fault with
them, nor was there reason for Strangers to suspect the Truth of what they say.
But they have betrayed themselves by an Extravagant Immodesty, and their Truth
and Sincerity may be justly questioned now that they ascribe to her more than
what is possible, if we look upon their Character by the Light of the
Scripture. For they make her Impeccable, at least they say, (as was showed
above) that she never actually sinned, no, not in Thought, and that she derived
no Guilt or Corruption from Adam, which must be Monsieur de Cort his meaning
when he said, that it seemed Adam never sinned in her. Ps. 51. 5. 1 K. 8. 46.
Whereas the Scripture says that we are born in Sin and conceived in Iniquity;
that there is no man, not the most just and perfect, that does good and sins
not; and that none are perfectly righteous in the sight of God, but all are
guilty before him. If Monsieur de Cort and Monsieur Poiret their Description of
Antonia Bourignon be true, she did not as St. Paul speaks in the Name of the
rest of Mankind, carry about with her a Body of Sin and Death, she had not a
Law in her Members warring against the Law of her Mind; she needed no High
Priest, nor Sacrifice for Sin, and the Blood of Christ would be applied to her
in vain, for she is clean without it. If Mademoiselle Bourignon was the Woman
which they represent her, she was indeed a very great Miracle, yea, the
greatest Wonder amongst Mankind, for she was the Offspring of sinful and
unclean Parents, and yet clean her self; she was born of Flesh, and yet no
Flesh, or without the Natural and Inherent Properties of Flesh, and so she or
they give the lie, Job 14. 4.
not only to Job, who said, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one; Joh. 3. 6. 1 John 1. 18.
but also to our Lord himself, who said positively, That which is born of the
flesh is flesh. But shall a De Cort or a Poiret, have more Credit than the Son
of God? Should their words be received in Contradiction to the Scripture, which
we know was given by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost? what Impudence is it in
them to impose such notorious Falsehoods upon us? or how strangely are they
infatuated if they believe themselves? Both he that says of himself, that he
has no Sin, and he that says that another is without Sin, 1 John 1. 8.
is deceived and the truth is not in them. This one Instance, as well as many
others which follow, does sufficiently prove that the Insallible Spirit of God
has not guided the Pens of Monsieur de Cort, or Monsieur Poiret: and that
though they pretend to be the truest and most perfect Christians, because
Followers of Bourignon; yet it is much more probable that they belong to that
Party, which the Apostle St. Jude describes, which he makes spots in the
Christian feasts of Charity, Jude 16.
whose mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage. Antonia Bourignon, was either Mother or Midwife to some
wild Metaphysical Whimsies, and Extravagant Notions, which Monsieur Poiret is
passionately fond of, and therefore to make them be received by all for Divine
Truths, she must be exalted above the present State and Capacity of Humane
Nature. Lord, how does passion Blind Men! How do their Affections transport
them without all bounds of Sense and Discretion?

Poiretans and Bourignianists, that there is no reasoning against Matter of
Fact, that a thing may be true, though it be strange and unaccountable; that
Mademoiselle Bourignon is an extraordinary Instance, and an Exception from the
General State of Mankind. And therefore I proceed further to show, First, That
the things instanced by them, which they insist most upon, and which they talk
most of, are not certain Proofs of Sanctity. Secondly, That several things are
owned both by her self and them, which are very inconsistent with such
extraordinary Sanctity as is ascribed to her.

First, I say, that the things instanced, are not That having considered
seriously both what Antonia Bourignon writes of her self, and the Accounts
which others have given of her, I do not perceive any singular or extraordinary
Instance of Sanctity, besides affected Solitude and Retirement, her Celibacy
and resisting all Importunities to Marriage, Fastings, Watchings, Humiliations,
wearing of Sackcloth, a contempt of the common Ornaments of her Sex, and such
like Austerities; as also great Raptures and Ecstasies in Prayer and Devotion:
none of which are certain signs of true and solid Piety; for as these things
may, and do sometimes proceed from the right Knowledge of God, a sincere Love
to him, and a serious Consideration of our own Nature, and the Nature of other
things; so they may be and often are only the Effects of a particular Temper
and Constitution, as they may be, and often have been counterfeited by Persons
in the gall of bitterness, and bonds of Iniquity.

These things make a great show, which both surprises unthinking Beholders, and
also deludes the Persons themselves; but they deserve not to be admired or
praised, except when they are transacted by Persons of sound and solid
Judgment, whose sense and understanding are under no suspicion of being Sick,
and when they are accompanied with a Spirit of great Humility and Submission
toward God, of Meekness and Charity toward others; when there is a sincere
respect had to all God's Commands, and suitable Honor and Obedience paid unto
Men. But when these things are done by one that is continually a quarrelling
with Providence and the state of Humane Affairs, by one that is vain, proud and
censorious, full of himself, and who has no esteem for others; who observes no
distance, neither pays any respect to other Men's outward Dignities or Moral
Endowments; who is above all Advice and Counsel; who pretends a Privilege from
Obedience, and a Right to Command; then I say these things are to be suspected
and slighted deservedly; then we may, without uncharitableness, conclude that
they are done out of some sinistrous Design, or that they are the Effects of a
melancholy Head, or crazy Brain, or of some surly, peevish predominant Humor.

How many Instances may be given of the long Fastings and Watchings, See
Causabon his Treatise of Enthusiasme, and Burton of Religious Melancholy.
of rigid and severe acts of Mortification performed both by Hypocrites and
Fools? How often have both Madmen and Wicked seemed to be transported strangely
in the Exercises of Devotion? therefore these things are not certain Signs, nor
sufficient Proofs of true solid Sanctity: Which consists in the Rectitude of
the whole Man, in a sincere Conformity of our inward Thoughts and Sentiments,
and of our outward Actions to the Will of God, manifested to us by Reason and
Revelation. And therefore also we have no reason to take them for Divinely
inspired, who mistake the Nature of Sanctity, who take fallible Signs and
uncertain Appearances for sure Demonstrations.

Antonia Bourignon is often represented as having as was constant, and did
shine with such a convincing Luster, that no place is left for doubting it. He
indeed made no vain ostentation of great Austeritius, he did not amuse People
by severe and unimitable acts of Mortification; He wisely avoided these
himself, nor would he enjoin them to his Disciples, because he knew the
superstitious humor of Mankind, how fond they are of an External Religion, how
much inclined to be Bigot, for things of an Indifferent Nature, rather than to
love and esteem that which is really Good, and how ready to make atonement for
the Sins of their Soul by the Exercises of their Body; and therefore he would
not give any Example which might confirm their Errors, and encourage them in
their Delusions: But he gave Instances of a true and perfect Sanctity, a
Sanctity which cannot be contradicted, a Sanctity against which no shadow of
Objection can be framed, either on the account of Deficiency or Redundancy.
None but God can see the Heart of Man, but the Heart may be known by the
Actions, and that the Heart of Jesus was Right, that it was full of the Love of
God and wholly intent upon the pleasing him, is evident to a Demonstration, by
his cheerful compliance with the Will of God in every thing, whether it was to
do or susser; He embraced all Opportunities of showing Zeal for God, and he
went up and down continually doing good unto Men, never wearying in either,
whatever Difficulties, Discouragements and Provocations he met with; He wanted
no Virtue, and exerted every one in the most perfect manner, neither
over-acting any thing, nor yet being defective in any thing; His Life was so
perfect, his Words and Actions so conform to Truth, so well adjusted to the
Occasion, to the Time, Place, and other Circumstances, that Divine and Infinite
Wisdom is not more discernible in the Creation, Contrivance and Harmony of the
Material World, than in the Life and Actions of Jesus Christ, and therefore we
are sure that both proceeded from one and the same Almighty, most Wise, and
most Holy Spirit; for as the Invisible Things of God, his Eternal Power and
Godhead, are clearly seen by the one; so from the other, it is demonstrable
that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in Jesus Christ: for so great an
Effect could not be produced by any less Cause, nor could such exact Sanctity,
such perfect Holiness, proceed from any mere Man. The most inspired Prophet was
Inferior to him, and though this Holy Jesus has had, and I hope still has,
many sincere Followers, yet never any was, neither can any be so perfect, so
holy as he was: for his Holiness will exceed others, as much as the Works of
Nature are beyond those of the most perfect Art. And there is as much, nay more
foundation for a Parallel between the Actions of a Bedlamite and the even Tract
of a most wise and virtuous Man, than for a just Comparison of the Sanctity of
Antonia Bourignon to that of Jesus Christ. His Sanctity, like all the Works of
God, will be found the more perfect and more admirable, the more narrowly it is
examined and considered; whereas the Sanctity of Mademoiselle Bourignon, and
all other (especially Enthusiastical or Conceited Persons) shows best at a
distance: for if we view them near, they appear very defective, and wanting
several strokes to give them a true resemblance to Jesus Christ, who is the
only Model and Standard of perfect Sanctity, whose Life ought to be studied
with great attention, both for getting right Notions of Sanctity, and also for
facilitating the attainment of it. Others are to be followed only so far as
they are Followers of him; and we may assure our selves that nothing is an
essential part of Sanctity, or a necessary Demonstration of it, but that which
he practiced: for as he declared all the Counsel of God concerning us, so he
gave us an Example of every thing that is absolutely good or necessary to
Eternal Life.

Sermon. XV. On 1 Timothy 5. 23.
nor will I at present enter upon the Examination of Raptures, Ecstasies and
Visions, which are given as signs of the extraordinary Sanctity of Antonia
Bourignon, because I may have hereafter a more proper occasion for this: But
before I pass to another Head, I judge it may be of use, to speak more
particularly of Solitude, and a Total retreat from the World, which is
recommended as a Special Act of Sanctity, by the Example and Sentiments of
Antonia Bourignon, and which others also, besides her Followers, seem to be
exceedingly taken with.

Whether the Preference should be given to an Active, or to a Contemplative
Life, has been much debated both by Heathens and Christians, and also by
Ancients and Moderns: And I must say; that very few have offered a just
Decision of the Matter; for the Advocates of either side, as generally those
who manage Law Suits, have endeavored to show Wit rather than Truth, and the
Judges have passed Sentence by Inclination or Interest, more than from the
serious Consideration of the Nature of the Thing. Sanguine Persons have
favored the Active Life, as the Contemplative has been preferred by those that
are Melancholy: Men have been in love with Public Employment, when things
succeeded according to their Mind; but when they went cross, then they turned
peevish, and only admired Solitude. Charles the Fifth was sensible of the
declining of his Affairs, and did foresee a change of his Fortune, before he
thought of changing an Imperial Crown and Palace with a Monastery, or of
preferring the Pleasures of Retirement to the Privilege of Supreme Authority
and Command.

But to come close to the Point, I say, nothing is more disserviceable to
Religion, or more prejudicial to Men's Peace and Comfort, than the consining
Religion to a life of Solitude and Retirement. The appropriating the Name of
Religion to Cloisters and Monasteries, as the Church of Rome has done, is
Unjust, it is Insolent and Scandalous, and is the Cause of much Mischief. It
renders serious and welldispos'd Souls sad and melancholy when they cannot
enter into that State, which is represented as necessary or highly expedient
for their Perfection or Salvation; and it frightens and discourages others from
the Practice of Piety and the serious observation of Religious Duties, upon the
opinion that they are only proper for such as are Cloistered and retired out of
the World. The Providence of God has engaged the generality of the World in an
active Life, and made it impossible for them to retire from Trade and Business;
shall we therefore say that by the Providence of God, it is impossible for the
greatest part of Mankind to be Religious? that all whose Necessity and
Circumstances involve them into Public Employment, or the Affairs of the
World, are exempted from the Obligations of Religion and a good Conscience?
It Is true the Soul is better than the World, and one had better forfeit this
than lose that. But who has Authority to impose harder Conditions than God has
done? Does he require that all should be Monks or Hermits, that there should be
no fellowship or Society kept up, nor business done. He has indeed Commanded
not to love the World inordinately, not to set our Affections upon it, not to
be Covetous, nor anxious about the things of this Life: but neither these, nor
any other Command, make Trade, Commerce, or negotiating the Affairs of the
World unlawful; nor do they imply that a Contemplative Life, or Total Retreat
from the World is more Religious, than Business or Worldly Employments. God may
be served the one way as well as the other; and a Man of Business, who manages
his Affairs with Discretion, by the rules of Justice and Equity, without
Covetousness, without sordid and sinistrous Dealing, keeping a Conscience void
of offense toward God and Man, and who regards the other Life which is not
seen, as well as the present which is seen; I say, This Man is really as Devout
and Religious as any Monk or Hermit, or retired Person can be. Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Lot, Hezekiah, and several others mentioned in Scripture were such,
and they are more worthy Examples, than any which can be produced from amongst
either the Ancient or Modern Asceticks, Anchorets, or Coenobites. Nay, I say
further, That the Antonies and Teresaes, the Brunoes and Catherines, the
Founders and Observers of the strictest Orders, are not only short of those
eminent Examples which the Spirit of God has thought worthy to be put upon
Sacred Record; but also, that they have not exerted greater or more sincere
Piety, than many others who negotiated Business, and conversed freely in the
World: Nor were their voluntary Penances and Austerities, such Acts and
Instances of Humility, Patience, Self-denial, contempt of Honor and Esteem, as
the bearing the Insults and Impertinencies, the Follies and Indiscretions, the
Slights and Affronts, which daily Conversation exposes one to.

And here I cannot pass over a vulgar Error concerning the Clergy, which is,
That they all ought to be Men of Study and Retirement. Indeed, they ought not
to undertake Employments which are below the Dignity of their Character, nor
should they entangle themselves so much in Affairs, or engage in any such
Business as may take them off from the exercise of their Function, or which may
hinder them from pursuing the Ends of their Sacred Calling: And therefore by
the ancient Canons it was not lawful VI. Can. Apost. III. Can. Con. Chalced.
Novel. Just. 123.
for a Clergyman to be so much as a Tutor or Guardian, or the Executor of any
one's Will and Testament, because all these were Encumbrances to the Work of
the Ministry. But yet it is a Mistake to think that they should never be seen
out of their Closets, or only when they are to Preach or Read Prayers; for
their Business is not only to Preach, but to be an example of the Believers, in
Word, in Conversation, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity; which they cannot be if they be
wholly abstracted and retired from the World, for then they put their Candle
under a Bushel, which cannot give light to the House. As in the Pulpit they
teach the Necessity of the Divine Laws, so by their Practice they should show
the possibility of them: And he who can entertain Conversation innocently,
walking by the Faith which he Professes, and the Doctrine which he publicly
teaches; who, as the occasion requires it, can be Serious without Melancholy,
or Cheerful without being Profane; who can hear himself praised without
Vanity, and accused without wrath, who can accept good things when they are
offered without Scruple or brutal Joy, and yet never out of humor when they
are wanting; and who can frame both his Discourse and Actions, so as to make
them suitable to the times and the present State of the Church, his own
Circumstances, and the Circumstances of his Company, I say, he who can do all
this, does answer his Character, and does prosecute the ends of his Calling
better than he who shuts himself entirely up; and his Conversation does more
good, and does more promote Piety than the others Contemplation and Study.

But to Return. True Religion and Piety do agree with an Active Life as well as
the Contemplative; and one who converses daily in the World, may be as devout
and may serve God as faithfully as he who is totally sequestered from it;
therefore John Baptist did not advise the People, nor the Publicans, nor the
Soldiers to abide with him in the Wilderness, or to lay down their several
Employments, but only gave them Rules, how they might follow them with
Integrity and Uprightness toward God and Man. If all Religion consisted in
Study and Contemplation, then every one who desired to be Religious, ought to
seek out Solitude and a retired life; but it is also the Will of God that every
one do that Business which his Place and Station, his Necessity and
Circumstances, or the Duty which he owes unto others do require at his hands;
and as this cannot be neglected without Injustice, so he who humbly submits to
it, and who patiently and cheerfully undergoes the fatigue of it, not out of
respect to worldly Gain and Profit, but because it is the Will of God, and what
his wise Providence calls him to, he does give as great a Testimony of his love
to God, as any who affects Solitude and Retirement: which deserves to be well
considered, especially by all religious Wives and Servants, that out of a
pretext of Devotion, as has been too often done, the one may not neglect the
Service of their Masters, nor the other the Affairs of their Husbands, and the
Care of their Family and Children.

Further, as it is evident that Religion cannot be confined or annexed only to
the Contemplative Life, or a State of Sequestration from the World; so neither
must we think this State more perfect or more eligible than any other.
Perfection is attainable by the Active as well as Contemplative Life; and the
choice of either is to be justified only by the prudent consideration of one's
Natural Constitution, his outward State and Circumstances, for neither of these
are agreeable to all, or proper for all. Retirement may be very prudent and
proper for some in some Cases, and yet neither prudent nor commendable for
others, nor for the same Persons at other times; but may be constructed
deservedly an instance of unmanly Cowardice, and of a shameful desertion of
their Post. So that in my judgment neither of these States is to be preferred
to the other; nor do they wisely consider them who presume to determine
absolutely which is best, for the one or other is best according to one's
personal State and Circumstances or his Public Engagements. And I do also
think that he is in the happiest Condition who partakes of both States, whose
life is neither wholly Contemplative, nor wholly Active; but which is made up
of both by the intermixture of Retirement and Business: For he that is wholly
retired, lives only to himself, which makes him an idle Drone with regard to
others, and he is a Drudge to the World who is always employed in Business, and
who neither has nor takes time to refresh his Mind with the sweet Pleasures of
Retirement. Solitude is more Profitable for one's self, but Business and
Conversation renders one more Useful to the World. In the one we enjoy our
selves best, but it is only by the other that we can do any good, or manifest
the Virtues and Graces which God has bestowed on us. By Solitude we acquire
Knowledge, and by being conversant in the World we learn Experience: In
Retirement we may more easily preserve our Innocence, but without Conversation
and Business we cannot exert Christian Wisdom and Courage, and other necessary
Virtues. Solitude and Retirement are a safe Refuge for weak Constitutions; but
they who are strong, should show themselves upon the Theater of the World. A
Religious Retreat is as necessary to the Spiritual, as Rest is to the Bodily
Life; for by it we renew our decayed Spirits, we recollect our dissipated
Thoughts, and add strength and vigor to our wise Resolutions, and pious
Purposes. It is impossible that one can act wisely, who never thinks seriously;
or that he can think seriously and to purpose, who is always in the hurry of
Affairs. Therefore certainly every one who consults his own Good, and is in any
wise Master of himself, will so wisely contrive his business, and so order his
affairs, that he may have Hours and Days, if not Weeks and Months for
Meditation and Contemplation: That by this means he may have an intercourse and
acquaintance with Heaven, while he lives upon Earth; that he may be fortified
against all Encounters, and be qualified for gaining that Victory over the
World, which will give him a right to the Crown of Glory.

And I am of the opinion, that frequent retreats are more advisable to
religious Persons, than a constant or total sequestration from the World. For
such is the weakness of our Minds, while they are clogged with this gross
Flesh, that they cannot hold out long, without wearying, in those divine and
spiritual Exercises, for which Solitude and Retirement are to be desired. If
our Spirits be too much extended at once, they will flag, and will become no
more capable of being elevated unto degrees of Fervor, than a tired and spent
Body is of quick and vigorous Motion. Therefore the Devotions of Cloistered
Persons are very often-dry and insipid, and they do frequently perform their
Exercises with less taste and satisfaction than Men in the World. If there be
not care taken to preserve those devout and sublime Thoughts which soar above
material Things, and a sublunary World, they will either quite evaporate, or
they will condense into airy Notions, or fantastical Conceits; whence it is
that Dreams and Visions, and such like Extravagancies, do happen unto Persons
altogether or very much abstracted from the World, more than unto others.
Religious Retirements are liable to be abused, and are sometimes attended with
dangerous Consequences, as well as Conversation and Business; nor have Persons
who are entangled in the Affairs of the World more need of Monitors, than those
who have sequestered themselves, of wise Directors.

All I shall add more upon this Head, is, That as the Church of Rome has erred
grossly, in chaining Religion so much to Monastries and Cloisters; so it was a
great blemish in our Reformation, to demolish these Houses entirely, which as
they ought to have been reformed from the abuses that had crept into them, so
they might have been kept up to the advantage of Religion, and to the benefit
of both the Public, and particular Persons: They are very profitable, if the
snare of Vows, and the delusion of a peculiar Sanctity in them be removed.

This Digression, about the nature of Solitude, and a Contemplative Life, is
not altogether from our purpose; which is to show the Mistakes of
Enthusiastical Persons, who commonly are excessively fond of this state, and do
ascribe more to it than it well deserves.

Bourignon: As the chief Instances alleged are not certain Proofs of her
Sanctity; so there be several things, which she her self confesses, and which
they who write her Life do acknowledge, which do not very well agree with that
extraordinary Sanctity that is ascribed to her. For,

First, We are told, That until the Eighteenth Year of her Age, she run into a
vain, light and idle Conversation, and followed the Pleasures, Recreations and
Divertisements of the World, by which she lost her Conversation with God, as
the Author of the Preface to the English Reader says: which, in my judgment,
is a flat Contradiction to what he said some few lines before, Light of the
World,
viz. That from her Childhood, Pref. p. 14.
she had inward Conversation with God. It is, indeed, no strange thing to see
Children and Youth taken with Vanities, when those of riper years do too much
follow them: nor would there be reason to upbraid it here, if Madamoifelle
Bourignon and her Disciples did not pretend that she was Sanctified from the
Womb, and boast that at three or four years of age she was Divinely Inspired,
and that even so early she began to express a sense of Divine Things above what
all the Doctors La Vie Contin. c. 2.
of the Church are capable of. They will have her, when she was little more
than a weaned infant, to be sensible of Christian Perfection, and how much
short of it those about her were: when she could hardly lisp out a word, it is
pretended that she asked seriously whether there were any Christians, or
Followers of Jesus, and where they lived? Now, if all this be true, and if
these things had proceeded from the Spirit of God, to give early notice to the
World, that He had anointed her to be a Prophetess, to declare his Will; I say,
if so, it is no ways likely that God would have left her so soon to her self,
or that he would have suffered her to be corrupted, whom he had appointed to be
so great a Light. Samuel, Jeremiah, and St. John Baptist, who were consecrated
Prophets from their birth, and who were set apart to be special and signal
Instruments of a Reformation among God's People, they never turned aside to a
wicked, vain, or light Conversation; all their Life was unspotted from the
World, and from their very Infancy they were Examples of a severe Piety: But
this New Light of the World suffered an eclipse for some years, though, as is
pretended, it began to shine very early. The early impressions of Piety which
Antonia Bourignon is said to have had, were for some time smothered; and she
who is brought in, at four years of age, complaining of other Christians, did
her self, when grown up, follow their vain Example. Which is not agreeable to
the Methods of the Divine Economy heretofore, if God had raised up this Woman,
and called her out to so great and high things as She and her Followers
allege. It is said of our Blessed Lord, that as he grew in Stature, so he did
grow in Wisdom, and Favor both with God and Man: And if God had designed
Madamoifelle Bourignon a second Savior to Mankind, to finish the Work which
was only begun by the other; it is not at all to be believed that he would have
given place to a Spirit of Folly and Vanity, or that he would have suffered her
to commit such things as were offensive to himself, and contrary to his own
Purposes; that is, which were so far from reclaming Men from their Sins, that
they rather tended to confirm them therein.

That which they say tempted her to this vain course of life, was the Censures
and Misconstructions put upon her early Seriousness and Retirement; for upon
that account, she was represented as simple, melancholy, and wanting Spirit.
But could not the Spirit of God break through this Temptation? Was her
extraordinary Grace too weak to resist it? Could one so Divinely Inspired, find
out no other means of rectifying Peoples Mistakes? And must so holy a Person do
evil, merely to pass for a Wit? Is Sense and Judgment no where to be
manifested, but in the acts of a vain and trifling Conversation? But whatever
was her motive and temptaion, or however she may be excused, she confesses that
she was far engaged into the Vanities of the World, and the love of them: 'La
Parole de Dieu, n. 3.
If we may believe her self, she was ambitious of Honor, and did love the
Pleasures and Divertisements of Sense and Riches, because they did procure
them: she took pleasure in the company of Young Men, admitted their La Vie
Exterieure,. 4.
Courtship and Addresses, and was well pleased when they commended her Wit, and
especially when they praised her for being Handsome and Agreeable, because she
had been called always Ugly, by her Mother. Thus it appears, that Pride and
Ambition, Sensuality and Covetousness prevailed with this Maid: and where these
prevail, the Spirit of God does not much reside. It is said, indeed, That God
did often visit her even in this state; Light of the World,
That he did not cease, now and then, to awaken her, Pref. p. 14.
even in the midst of her Divertisements; but Company, and these Amusements,
still got the ascendant: that is, in plain terms, she all this time resisted
the Spirit of God, and walked contrary to the Dictates of her Conscience: Videt
meliora probatque, deteriora sequitur. Which is not compatible with a state of
extraordinary Grace and Sanctity. I would not exaggerate this so much, if I was
not provoked by the strange Impudence and Delusion of those, who will have us
to receive this Woman, as more than Humane, as without Sin, as equal to Jesus
Christ, who never yielded to the strong Temptations of the Devil, whereas she
was carried away by the weak Persuasions of Men.

Again, As there appeared no extraordinary Sanctity in Antonia Bourignon before
she arrived to the age of Eighteen; so even after this, which is pretended to
be the time of her Conversion, she did not determine the great and important
state of her Life, by Motives and Principles of Religion. It is the End, which
sanctifies our Actions; and Persons truly Devout and Holy, make God the End of
all that they do. They who respect only or chiefly their own Ease, Pleasure or
Profit, are not to be reckoned very holy, or above the common rate of Mankind,
whatever state of Life they betake themselves to: For the height of one's
Sanctity is not to be taken from their Outward Quality and Behavior, but from
the Inward Principles which move them. He that is sober only or mainly for
saving of his Money, or on the account of bodily Health, does indeed wisely;
but his Temperance is no more an act of Religion, than another's eating and
drinking out of Pleasure. He that retires from the World, because he loves his
Ease, and has an aversion to Trouble and Vexation, his Retirement is not
Religious, nor is he himself to be esteemed more holy than another who follows
worldly Employments.

Now if Madamoifelle Bourignon had been so extraordinary holy as is pretended,
if she had been Inspired from Above in every thing, she would have considered
God, and not her self; she would have consulted that which was best for his
Service, and not her own Humor and Convenience: But she resolved upon a
Coelibate State, only because she would not be crossed and uneasy; because she
hated the Restraints and Troubles of Marriage, though they be both the
Occasions and Proofs of great Virtue, which was no great Instance of any
peculiar Sanctity. She did not choose a Virgins State, that she might only care
for the things of the Lord, as the Apostle speaks, and not be encumbered in the
doing that, by the Obligations of pleasing a Husband too: But she preferred
this State to Marriage, only because she had no great or good opinion of the
Husbands, who were offered to her, and because she was afraid that they might
be all like her Father, who was sometimes rough, surly and ill-natured toward
her Mother. This is the Account which she gives her self. La Vie Ext. 6. p. 148.
And he who continues her Life, according to his usual Custom, does enlarge
upon this Passage, and improves it to a great Act of Piety, not without a
Reflection upon the rest of her Sex. La Vie Cont. c. 2. p. 20.
When, says he, she perceived her Father rough and unkind to her Mother,
notwithstanding the Care and Pains which were taken to please him, she retired
and prayed, That God might never suffer her to Marry. A Prayer very unlike to
that of St. Augustine before his Conversion, which was, Lord give me the gift
of Chastity, but not yet; fearing to be too soon healed of the damnable and
transient Charm of the Flesh. And yet (says he) more will favor the Prayer of
St. Augustine, than comply with the Prayer of Mademoiselle Bourignon, which was
so acceptable to God, that he granted to her the full Intent of it.

I leave it to the fair Sex, to make what Resentments they please upon this
Author's plain Insinuation, that all of them have strong Inclinations to
Marriage, that they do heartily wish for an Opportunity, and are guilty of
gross Dissimulation, when they pretend the contrary: But whether this be true
or not, and whatever Opinion this Man may have of Women upon this account, I do
say, that those who embrace Marriage, may do it upon more Religious Motives and
Principles than this Idol Mistress of his did refuse it, who did so, because
she undervalued all she saw, and could find none of Merit enough to deserve
her. Antonia Bourignon, like the rest who pretend to more than ordinary Sense
and Spirit, was nice and difficulty pleased, Critical and Censorious, apt to be
disgusted at the least blemish, whatever Virtues it might be compensated with;
She, as others who have a high conceit of themselves, aimed at something above
what is common, she would have had a more perfect Creature than Nature uses to
produce, and a Husband with all Kinds and Degrees of Happiness, which the
present Economy of the World will not allow: And 'twas a wonder that she had
not the common Fate of that Proud Gang, which is to take up with one at Fifty
or Sixty, Inferior to any of those whom they slighted at Twenty and Thirty.

Thirdly, Antonia Bourignon, by the Account we have of her, seems to have been
of a very obstinate wilful Temper, neither respectful of those who were Elder,
nor tractable or obedient to those, to whom God and Nature had subjected her:
which is so far from being consistent with true Sanctity, that it is a shrewd
sign that it is wanting. For where this Grace is given in any good measure, it
corrects the ruggedness of our natural Constitution; it makes them who are
naturally Stubborn, pliant and advisable; It fills them with Respect and Esteem
toward others, and especially, it renders them Obedient to Parents. So it is
said of him, who was a true Instance of most perfect Sanctity, Luke 2. 51.
That he went down to Nazareth, and was subject unto his Parents. But as for
mademoiselle Bourignon, this wonderful Holy Maid, she was cross and refractory,
she would not obey her Parents in those things, in which they had a right to
command, and pursued her own will, not only contrary to their Inclinations, but
also against their express Commands. I could give several Instances, but one
may serve, which was her Importunity to be admitted into the Cloister of the
Discalceated or Bare footed Carmelites, even after her Father had most
passionately declared against it, La Parole de Dieu. n. 8. p. 5. La Vie Ext.. 6.
saying, That he would rather see her Dead, or a Clinick and Bedridden all her
lifetime, than a Nun of any Order whatsoever. And notwithstanding that, he
charged her strictly to resort no more to the Houses of these Nuns, threatening
to break her Legs if she did; yet she often went, and spoke to one Father
Lawrence, who was Prior, to receive her without her Father's consent; and when
that would not do, she stole away privately from her Father's House, dressed up
like a Hermit, as shall be related hereafter.

Perhaps the Defendants of this Woman will say, That this cannot be reckoned
any Instance of Disrespect or Disobedience to her Parents; because she did it
not only from a Religious Principle, that in that condition she might serve God
better, but also by a particular Inspiration, which ought not to have been
resisted; for it is better to obey God than Man. But what! Is Religion
inconsistent with it self? does it teach a Contempt of Parents! a breach of the
first Command with Promise? Can a Violation of the Natural Right of Parents, be
compensated by a Nuns Hood and Habit? Is it not the express Law of God, that
the Vows of a Daughter shall not bind, unless ratified by her Father? It Is
true, God has a Sovereign Authority over his own Laws, and all Persons; Father
and Mother must be forsaken and hated, when he requires it: But how does it
appear that he gave such a Command to this Maid? She says it, indeed, but is
that sufficient to believe it? have we not seen Bedlamites pretend the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, for most ridiculous things? must every whimsical
Conceit of a disturbed Head, of an uneasy and unsettled Mind be thought to come
from God? When God gives extraordinary Commands, especially which seem to
dispense with any of his former, he gives them with a convincing Evidence, and
at the same time he inclines the Heart of such as have Power and Authority over
those who receive particular Commands and Commissions, that they may either
forward the Execution, or give no hindrance to it. Thus when God commanded
Moses to go to Egypt, the Heart of Iethro his Father-in-Law, was moved to let
him go in Peace, with his Wife and Children: And though God hardened Pharoah's
Heart for a time, that he might have occasion to exert his Sovereign Authority,
to show his Almighty Power, and to demonstrate to all the World, that he was
the only true God; yet the People of Israel were not to move a foot toward
their commanded Journey, until he was willing to let them go. Nor is there so
much as one Instance in all the Scripture, of a Wife, or Child, or Servant, or
Subject, their being commanded to do any thing of an Indifferent Nature, which
is not absolutely and necessarily good, without any regard to the Consent and
Approbation of Husband, Parent, Master, and King. If the Case had been about
turning Christian, Mademoiselle Bourignon ought to have done it without a
particular Revelation, whether her Father would or not; but 'twas not lawful
for her, either to Marry, or to devote her self to a Coelibate Life, against
his Will or Without his Consent: Therefore her obstinacy to be a Carmelite Nun,
was inconsistent with true Sanctity, was not of God, but only a wilful humor
from a sudden inconsiderate Whim which struck her fanciful Noddle at that
time. If it had been of God, the Revelation would have been made plain to her
Father, or by some secret Suggestions he would have been inclined to favor it.
And it was evident afterward, that either she did not regard this pretended
Revelation, or that 'twas not of God, for she did not pursue it, when Father
and Mother were Dead; when she was at her own disposal, she neither engaged her
self into that Order, or any other, but hated and abhorred all. She indeed went
and stayed some time at Mons, with the Nuns of Notre Dame there; but they soon
wearied of her and she of them. But to go on,

I will give you a Fourth Instance, which all unbiased Persons must
acknowledge, very unsuitable to one of Extraordinary Sanctity; nay, which does
not well agree with common measures of Grace and good Nature, because it
proceeded from an inordinate love of the World, and could not be managed
without great disrespect to her Father. La Parole de Dieu, n. 91. p. 62.
And this is her suing her Father at the Law, to divide his Goods with her,
when he Married a Second time.

Monsieur Bourignon, upon his first Wife's death, employed some Priests and
others who were most likely to prevail, that they might persuade his Daughter
Antonia to abide with him, and to take the charge of his House and Family;
which she did with some difficulty, for her Mind was wholly upon Solitude and
Retirement from worldly Business: though her Father's Necessity and Command
showed that it was the Will of God that she should at that time lead an Active
Life, and the Revelation ought to have been very Evident, which could excuse
the not assisting her Father when he wanted it so much; and therefore it was
told her, that even Vows were dispensable in this Case. She says that she
managed the Affairs of her Father's Family very well, and also did take time
for Interior Retreats; but her Father was not so pleased with her Management,
as not to think of taking home a Wife, which he at last did; commanding his
Daughter to deliver up to her the whole Charge of his House. Antonia continued
with her Father four Months longer, but without great Satisfaction either to
her self, or to her Father and his new Wife. As these Relations seldom agree
well together, but are often picking Quarrels and finding Fault one with
another; so it was here: Mademoiselle esteemed her Mother-in-Law a Fool, and
had her in the utmost Contempt, which the other did not bear patiently, nor
could the Father well suffer it. He was obliged to take his Wife's part, and
not to countenance his Daughter, which made her very uneasy; and at last to
resolve upon leaving the House, which Monsieur Bourignon would neither
encourage, nor yet hinder; but he flatly refused her Money, which did very much
Pique her. And while she was in this discontented humor, he who was Husband to
her deceased Sister, persuaded her to commence a Law Suit against her Father.
He himself was a Counselor at Law, and no doubt for his own Profit, encouraged
this Process, hoping to wheedle the simple Maid out of all, or a great part of
what the Law might give her; but both he and she was disappointed at this time,
for Monsieur Bourignon did cast them: And, indeed, whatever Singularities were
in the present case; which might give litigious Persons a foundation for a
Process, it seems very unreasonable to oblige a Father to bestow a Portion on a
Daughter before she be Married, or has any particular occasion for it,
especially when he is willing to keep and maintain her at home, if she will
prove Dutiful.

But suppose Monsieur Bourignon had been obliged in Justice to have granted to
his Daughter a Portion at this time; yet it was not becoming true Piety and
Sanctity to go to Law with him. The using private Methods, and the Entreaties
of Friends to bring him to rights, was allowable; but the going to Law was
hardly justifiable, because it both increased his Displeasure and Wrath at her,
and also exposed him as an Unreasonable, Unjust and Undutiful Father, who
regarded neither the good of his Child, nor the memory of his former Wife. Law
Suits are sometimes unavoidable, and it may be lawful for the most Devout
Christian sometimes to go to Law, but generally Law Suits are Scandalous, and
are very unsuitable to that Piety and Perfection which Christians profess and
should aim at. They show that there is little Justice, little Charity, little
good Nature, and too much of Inordinate Affection for the things of this Life,
either in the Plaintiff or Defendant, and too commonly in both. As a Wise Man
will part freely with some of his Interest, to redeem himself from the Vexation
and Slavish Dependence which are Inseparable from Law Suits; So a Good and
Pious Man will, without the compulsion of Law, do more than that which he is
obliged to in strict Justice. It does not favor of great Piety, when one is
either very tenacious to keep all they have in Possession, or very rigid to
exact of others every thing they may claim. Now therefore, says the Apostle,
there is utterly a fault among you, 1 Cor. 6. 7.
because ye go to Law one with another: why do ye not rather take wrong? why do
ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? If it is unbecoming
Christians to go to Law, except in extraordinary and unavoidable Cases; if they
ought to take Injuries and suffer Wrong, rather than do it, how does the
Extraordinary Sanctity of Antonia Bourignon appear, who went to Law with her
own Father, when she had neither Law nor Reason on her side. She that would
have had others live up to the Letter of the Christian Law, why did she not so
her self here?

Though she gives an account of this Law Suit with her Father, yet he who
enlarged and continued her Life, takes no notice of this Passage, so that it
seems he knew not how to justify it. But he gives an account of another Law
Suit after her Father's Death, for recovering a Share of his Fortune from her
Mother-in-Law, which was justifiable enough, if she had not pretended to so
much Self-denial, to an entire abstractedness from the World, and to be sent to
reclaim others from their Worldly-mindedness, and to Establish a most Spiritual
Kingdom upon Earth. The aforesaid Author was sensible of this Objection, and
therefore he obviates it, La Vie Cont. c. 12.
and according to his Impious and Blasphemous Custom, he ascribes it to God:
And says, That he engaged her in this Suit, and told her, that it was for his
Divine Glory, and that she would have occasion for the Goods she obtained. He
also runs out in the Enumeration of the good Deeds done by Mademoiselle, to
show how happy 'twas for others that she was Rich: and he might have instanced
one more, if the Story be true which goes of Monsieur Poiret, who is said to be
the Author of this Life, viz. That she left him a very good Legacy. But may not
any thing be justified after this manner? Did not Judas varnish his
Covetousness with a show of Charity? Compassion to the Poor was pretended, but
the real cause why he complained of the wast of Ointment, was the keeping of
the Bag. How many do excuse their Covetousness, and sordid Drudgery after the
Things of this Life; by the Commands of being Diligent in their Business, of
providing for their Family? But what signify Words when Actions declare the
contrary? Actions are true Indications of the inward Temper, and it does
sufficiently appear by these Particulars, That though Antonia talked often of a
Contempt of the World, yet like other pretended Saints, her Mind looked very
much toward it.

Which is further made out by her becoming Heir to Monsieur Du Cort, Ibid. c.
22. Dictionaire Hist. and Critique per M. Bail.
to the great disturbance of her own Quiet, and to the Prejudice of others.
This Man was so devoted to this Woman, that he thought nothing good but that
which she approved, and therefore certainly he would not have made over his
Estate to her, without her Advice and Direction, especially seeing they lived
in one House together. Therefore also we may very justly conclude, that this
Saint had a little tincture of Covetousness, seeing she desired Goods which she
had no manner of Right to, which she did not need, having enough besides, and
which she could not possess without defrauding the Relations and Kinsfolk of Du
Cort, nor without a considerable diversion to that great Design, upon which she
pretended that she was sent to the World, viz. The renewing the Church, and the
bringing Men to true Perfection. For this involved Ibid.
her in great Trouble, raised her many Enemies, and was the occasion of very
hot Persecutions; all which she would have avoided, if she had not minded the
things of the World as much or more than the things of God. No man, says St.
Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 4.
that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. If she was called to build the
House of God, how came she to study so much the increase and bettering of an
Earthly Fortune, especially to the wronging of others? Are Riches necessary to
the erecting of a Spiritual House? Is not this suspicious? Was this grasping at
all she could get, a proper method to convert Men from the love of the World?
Was this like St. Paul, who would not use his own Right, that his Doctrine and
Ministry might not be suspected? How can they compare this Woman to Jesus
Christ? How can they raise her Sanctity to an exactness with His, when she
endeavored to be as rich as possible? whereas He, both to show and teach a
true contempt of the World, did choose to be poorer than the foxes, or the fowls
of the air; for the one have nests, and the other have holes, but he had no
place where to lay his head?

But this is not the only disagreement which is betwixt Mademoiselle Bourignon
and Jesus Christ: so that she cannot be reckoned either truly or perfectly
holy, if he be the Standard. For,

Fifthly, As it could be proved by a thousand Passages, she was exceedingly
vain, and used always to magnify her self; she despised others, and could not
believe well of any body; nay, she would not admit that there was so much as
any sincere Christian in the World; she slighted the Sacraments, and all holy
Ordinances, as far below her, contrary to the practice of Jesus Christ, who
though he needed them as little as any, yet he submitted to them, and carefully
observed them, out of respect to the Divine Institution, to give good Example
unto others, and to teach Humility to the most Perfect. She withdrew from the
Public Worship, and did forsake the Assemblies of all sorts of Christians,
contrary to the express Precept of the Apostle, Heb. x. 25. These, and several
other Particulars will fully appear hereafter; and both these and the former
Instances, in my judgment, are incompatible with such great and extraordinary
Sanctity as is ascribed to Antonia Bourignon; they do not appear to me small
Beauty-spots, but like ugly Scabs and Ulcers, which quite disfigure the Face of
a Saint.

Thus the first Pillar which prop'd up the high Character formerly given to
Antonia Bourignon is removed, and I judge the rest may be taken away with as
little difficulty.

A Second thing pretended for exalting Mademoiselle Bourignon above all
Mankind, is, her knowledge of Secret Thoughts, and of things done at a
distance. And if 'twas true, she must indeed be acknowledged to be somewhat
more than Humane: For both Reason and Scripture give it as a peculiar Property
of God, to know the Heart of Man, and their Thoughts afar off; and this is one
of the Proofs of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he was (...): that
he needed not that any should tell him what was in Man, because he knew it
beforehand. But how does it appear that this Woman did penetrate so much into
the Hearts of Men, that she could know what was transacted there, without
communication, and without external appearances? for otherwise it was no
strange thing. We have only some general Assertions of Monsieur du Cort for it,
and not any Instance which may convince us. And by several Instances it does
appear, that he was one very easily imposed upon: He was possessed with a high
Opinion of this Woman; he verily believed that she was Inspired, and therefore
was fully disposed to magnify every thing which she said or did, as her Vanity
was ready enough to feed this extravagant Fancy. Prepossession has a strange
ascendant upon Men's Belief. Thus the Vulgar, who follow Mountebanks,
Astrologers and Fortune Tellers, make one another believe wonderful Instances
of the Skill of these Persons, in the discovery of Secrets: when all the while,
the cunning Men only told them the things which they had learned from
themselves, by their simple and unwary Answers, and the inconsiderate words
which had dropped from them.

The Knowledge of Things at a distance, though it be rare and unaccountable,
yet it is not so miraculous as the knowledge of Men's Thoughts, nor does it
prove the Person Inspired. It is certain, that some Persons, in the High-lands
of Scotland particularly, have that which is called the Second Sight, by which,
sometimes, they have imparted to them those things which are transacted in some
distant place, or which are to fall out shortly: And it is also certain, by
undoubted Testimonies both from credible Histories, and living Witnesses, that
an Account of Battles has been given the very day and hour in which they have
been fought, at some hundred and thousand miles distance. I could give
Instances of both these in our own time, if I had allowance to publish them,
from the Persons whose Names I should be obliged to use.

Wherefore, as there is no Evidence or sufficient Proof, that Antonia Bourignon
knew the secret Thoughts of Men's Hearts; so, supposing that she did sometimes
declare the things done in places remote from her, yet this is not a good
foundation for so sublime and divine a Character as she has amongst her
Disciples; because this has been, and is still done by some or other, who can
lay no claim to any extraordinary Merit, or particular Communication with God.
How this should come to pass, I will not adventure to explain; for I reckon it
among the Arcana Dei and Naturae, which Philosophy it self cannot reach, except
it be said that it is by the means of Spirits, whose Motion and Knowledge do
much exceed ours, who are wrapped up in the thick and heavy Vehicle of the Flesh.

A Third Pretense for Elevating Antonia Bourignon foretell things to come;
which (says Monsieur du Cort) she did not by way of Supposition, Light of the
World, Pref. p. 44.
nor did she relate them as if she had dreamed them: So he would have us to
believe that she foretold future things plainly and positively as they were to
happen, and as they did come to pass. And this, indeed, is so far above all the
Knowledge which can be acquired by Natural means, that it must be confessed,
that they who can do this, must have something more than common Nature bestows.
The Wisest, by either Reason or Observation, can only guess at that which shall
be, and they both may be, and often are mistaken in their most reasonable
Conjectures. Events, and Future Accidents, are not to be seen, by the best
Telescopes, in the Stars and Planets, though Astrologers have long pretended to
it: but the vanity of their Science has been often exposed, and there can be
produced manifold Instances of the foolish and miserable Delusions of those who
have trusted to it.

Some think the Foreknowledge of all things impossible, and therefore they
deny, even to God himself, the Prescience of such things as depend upon the
arbitrary Will and Pleasure of Free Agents, among whom Monsieur Poiret makes
one: But this is a robbing God of an Essential Attribute, which Reason and
Scripture give unto him, and of which he has given many wonderful and
convincing Manifestations. God certainly knows every thing which is to fall out
in the World; See Enquiry into the Nature, etc. of Christian Faith, part. 2. p.
121.
nothing can happen contrary to his Will, or beyond his Knowledge and
Expectation, if I may be allowed to speak so: for as he cannot be resisted, so
neither is he liable to be surprised. This is incomprehensible, but it is true;
and they who think otherwise, have no true Notion, but mean and unsuitable
Thoughts of the Infinite Being. And as God certainly has the foreknowledge of
all things, so unless they be revealed some way or other, no Man can know
beforehand these things which depend not upon Natural Causes, neither are the
Effects of that Order that is established in Nature, as Eclipses of the Sun and
Moon, the Conjunction of the Planets, and the like, which those who are skilful
in Astronomy can calculate for some thousands of years to come.

Sure and undoubted Prophecies, as well as true Miracles, are certainly from
God; they both bear their own Testimony, and are a sufficient Testimony to
Persons and Things which are agreeable to the Nature of God, and which do not
contradict his express and positive Will. St. Peter prefers the conviction
of Prophecy to that of Sense: We have not (says he) followed cunningly devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty: And we have also a more sure
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 19. But
though all Miracles and Prophecies are Supernatural, yet neither Persons nor
Doctrines are to be received as from Heaven, upon single Instances of either
Miracles or Prophecies, especially if the Consequence be unworthy of God, and
contrary to other certain and unquestionable Declarations of his Will. For God
himself has forwarned us, Deuteronomy. xiii. 1. that he may sometimes permit False
Prophets, for a trial to his People, who may do Wonders, and give Signs which
come to pass; and he there not only forbids to hearken to such, but also he
ordains the putting such False Prophets to death, notwithstanding of their
Wonders and Signs. So likewise it is said, That there shall arise false
Christ's, Mat. xxiv. 24.
and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if
it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect.

Wherefore, even supposing that Antonia Bourignon has uttered some Prophecies,
and foretold somethings which came to pass, she may deserve to be rejected,
instead of paying her Divine Honor, as some do. But how much more deservedly
is she to be abhorred, if she has uttered Lies, and spoken falsely in the Name
of the Lord! When a prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, Deuteronomy. xviii. 22.
nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the
prophet has spoken it presumptuously; thou shall not be afraid of him. Now
this Woman has told things very plainly and positively, which have not yet come
to pass; as, That the Last Judgment was near at hand, when she had her
Conferences with Monsieur du Cort; That within Three Years it would begin:
Believe me, Light of the World. Co^f. 2. part 1. p. 17.
Sir, There is nothing more true; we actually live in the Last Times; and the
Judgment is so near, that before Three Years, I believe that you will see (...)
of it. La Vie Cont. c. 19. p. 275.
These Conferences were written in the Year 1664, though they were held long
before; so that it is almost Forty Years since, and yet there is no more
appearance of the near approach of that Terrible Day, than there was some
hundred of years before she was born. So that here is a notorious Falshhood,
besides a great Presumption, to take upon her to declare that which Jesus (whom
we have all reason to believe) says the very Angels in Heaven do not know, nor
any save the Father, and which shall come upon Men like a thief in the night.

In like manner, she put Monsieur du Cort in hopes of seeing Christ actually in
the Clouds: Light of the World, part 1. p. 144.
And as for her self, she did not doubt it, but expected it very shortly; and
yet both he and she are dead, without that desirable Sight. Could she therefore
speak these things by Divine Inspiration? Does it not appear that she was a
Deceiver of others, and also deceived her self? Indeed, she was so much
deceived, that she would not believe that she was a dying, notwithstanding of
her Age and Sickness; and when it came to the extremity, that she see perceived
Death inevitable, she said, La Vie Cont. c. 34. p. 580.
That it was not the Will of God, that she should die then; for she had not
done that for which she was sent, nor that which she should have done and
written. Thus there did not appear in this Woman the true Signs of the Spirit
of God, but strong Delusions to the very last; and they must be strangely
deluded and infatuated, who can believe this Woman Divinely Inspired, when they
themselves do write and publish her gross Deceptions and Mistakes.

Antonia Bourignon to have her in so high esteem, is, Her sublime and wonderful
Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, with an Uniformity and Agreement of Sentiments
both with her Self and Scripture. It must indeed be acknowledged, that this
Woman does speak and write more plainly and intelligibly than any of the
Mystic Sect; and is somewhat more upon the Moral than others of that Gang, who
feed too much upon curious Speculations: nor is she behind any in her attempts
to penetrate into all the Mysteries of Nature and Religion, and is as positive
as any Philosopher can be: which inconsiderate Persons take for plain Evidence.
Her Spirit was not common, and she often takes high flights; but they are
flights for which her Fancy is to be admired, rather than her Judgment. She,
indeed, soars above Dull, Sober, Thinking Souls, who cannot rise higher than
Reason and Meditation will permit; the last of which, they say, she was never
clogged with, and the first very seldom. I do not deny that her Notions are
sublime; and if that be a good reason for giving to her extraordinary Honor,
we ought also to honor no less many a Bedlamite, whose Notions are and have
been as much surprising. But who will not prefer Common Sense, and a Sound
Head, to the most sublime Conceits, if they either proceed from, or be attended
with Madness? Truth is of more value than Sublimity, and Useful Knowledge is to
be studied rather than Curious. Many are presumptuous to thrust themselves
within the Veil whither they are forbidden; they search farther into Secrets
and Mysteries than they are allowed, and they obtrude upon the World Relations
which are not plain and evident; and for that very cause they ought not to be
admitted, nor received with credit, whatever sublimity be in them.

As to the consistency of her Notions, and their agreement with Scripture; if
this was true, 'twould prove something: But it is so far from being true, that
I dare venture my Reputation, to prove that the Notions of Antonia Bourignon do
neither hang well together, nor are they consonant to the Scriptures: Which,
with God's assistance, shall appear to the satisfaction of all unbiased
Persons, in the following Narratives, when I come to examine her particular
Tenets and Opinions.

Antonia Bourignon as one Divinely Inspired, is, The Supernatural means by
which she came to the Knowledge of all things, viz. without reading, without
consulting Men or Books, and even without Meditation. Her Knowledge, as they
say, was not acquired like other Men's, by the fatigue of Reading and Study, or
the trouble of Thinking, but all was immediately inspired into her. And indeed
it must be owned, that she consulted Men and Books very little, for she had
both in great contempt; nay, the Sacred Scriptures themselves were not
considered by her, for she threw them aside, as unworthy of her study, saying,
That she could easily write such Books her self. And yet after all, there is no
great reason to flourish so much in the commendation of her Knowledge, and
sublime Thoughts; for unless they be solid and true, it is not much matter how
she came by them; and besides, they were suggested by her Conversation with
others, by the Sermons which she heard, by Conferences with Confessors,
Priests, and learned Men. They had said something, if they had made her to be
born and bred up in an Island by her self, like ABN YOKOAN, whose History Dr.
Pocock translates from the Arabic; and as it is fabled of him too, if
immediately, upon her first coming forth, without instruction, or the least
suggestion from any, she had been able to speak upon all Points, both common
and extraordinary. It was visible that the Apostles were Inspired, when without
Education, without being acquainted with Letters, when after so many years
drudgery in their particular Trades, they were capable to speak all Languages,
to reason with Priests, Scribes and Philosophers about the highest Points of
Religion, to instruct the fulfilling of dark Prophecies, and to unfold the
hardest Texts of Scripture. But what wonder is it, that one of Spirit, and
quick Imagination, given to Contemplation and Retirement, should talk of things
that were the common subject of those she conversed with, especially when she
misses the Mark as often as she hits it, and runs her self and others into
gross Mistakes.

This Account they give of Antonia Bourignon; and the magnifying her so much
for it, brings to my remembrance two mean Persons, one of them lived within the
first Parish that I had under my charge, the other bordered upon it. This last
could read, and was a contemplative Person; he did not much value the World,
and followed no Trade, except sometimes to teach the Children of his Neighbors
to read; he had not the opportunity of Books, and yet he studied the high
Points of Predestination, Election, Free Will, and its consistency with Divine
Prescience and Providence, of the state of departed Souls, and the manner of
their Resurrection; and I have often been surprised with his Notions. The
Metaphysical Head of Monsieur Poiret would have been much delighted with him;
and if he had known him, he had certainly coupled him with Antonia Bourignon.

The other was a common Weaver by his Trade, and followed it, who could neither
read nor write, but he had a Head capable of Knowledge, and did actually know
both the Historical and Doctrinal part of Scripture, and did point out the
particular Chapter and Verse where any Passage was, as well as those who could
read; he could give some Account of the Primitive Church, the Doctrine,
Discipline, Heresies and Councils of the first Centuries, and understood pretty
well the modern Controversies with the Church of Rome, Quakers, Anabaptists,
and others, and all this merely by his careful attention to Sermons, and by
getting some or other to read to him such Books as he could find, while he was
at work for himself and Family: but which was best in this Man, he was not
vain, nor self-conceited; he did not despise the Public Ordinances, nor set
himself up above the Teaching of his lawful Pastors. None was more ready to
receive Instruction; and I have several times employed him to teach and prepare
some of his Neighbors, especially the Servants and Youth, for their Public
Examinations, that they might be capable to receive the Sacrament.

Bourignon in so high esteem, is, The Appearance of a a Comet when she was
born, when she first began to write, and at her death. This I think hardly
worth the considering, for 'twill have but little weight with Persons of Sense
and Judgment. For though I am far from slighting the Signs, Wonders, and
Extraordinary Appearances which God is sometimes pleased to give in those
Regions above; yet the Inferences are not much to be regarded, which fanciful
and cunning Men draw from them, to amuse unthinking People, and to dispose them
to favor their Humor, Interest and Passions. Eclipses were sometimes as
formidable as Comets; and though Comets be not yet so well understood, because
they appear seldom; nevertheless some Skilful Astronomers have calculated their
Motions, and reduced them to some System, which like that of other Planets, may
be improved by after Observations. Comets indeed are Prodigies; that is, they
are prodigious and stupendous Instances of God's Power, of the Vastness of the
Creation, and Extent of the Universe; But how can they be said to point out
particular Persons and Places? when, like the Sun, they are seen every where.
Mademoiselle must be equal to Jesus Christ in every thing, and because there
was a Star which directed the Wise Men of the East to his very Door, therefore
she must have a Comet; and I wonder that he did not give this Reason, why her
sign was more visible than his, because she was to be the greater and more
Public Blessing; no doubt the next Edition of her Life will have it. But the
Fool should have remembered that 'twas not for the Credit of his Adorable
Mistress, to mention a Comet, or to apply it to her; because all the
Superstitious Observers of Comets, have looked upon them as Presages of the
Divine Wrath and Vengeance: If therefore these Comets were given for a sign to
Antonia Bourignon, they signify that she is the Scourge of God, a heavy
Judgment to all who follow her. Which Interpretation is more just and
reasonable than the other; for there cannot be a greater Judgment, than to be
given up to Lies and strong Delusions, which is the Judgment threatened to those
who do not believe the Truth, but have Pleasure in Unrighteousness, that they
may be Damned.

Bourignon, and have showed the weakness of them; and if the Reasons be not
sufficient to persuade us, the Authority of De Cort, Poiret, and others, who
have published her History will be found yet of less avail; for it is evident
to all who read them, that they take but little heed to what they say: Passion
and Fancy do inspire them more than Truth, and they write not like faithful
Historians, but like Romancers, like Flatterers, and those who are bribed to
make Panegyricks, who study Hyperboles, and the Art of magnifying every thing.
They are far from the Integrity and Candor of the Holy Apostles and
Evangelists, who propose things plainly without any Affectation of Language,
they write the Naked Truth, and despise the Artificial Dress of Words, which in
the Judgment of all Wise Men, does deface rather than beautify; they set the
Matter simply before us, and leave the Readers to draw the Consequence, which
is done like Men who neither are deceived, nor intend to deceive. Whereas the
other disguise Matters, being afraid to show them as they are; they study the
enticing words of Man's Wisdom, and in the multitude of their words, they lose
themselves and the Truth too, and deceive others with an empty sound.

I will give one or two Instances, and let any judge whether I have not Reason
on my side. The First shall be concerning that Passage of Mademoiselle, when
but four Years old, which is very much insisted upon, viz. That then she asked
for the Country of Christians, La Vie Ext.. 3.
and often desired to be carried thither. I do confess, La Vie Cont. c. 2.
that if at that Age she understood what she said, 'twas remarkable; 'twas much
for a Child to be sensible of the contrariety betwixt Christians and the
Religion which they profess; though nothing is more palpable, and that one may,
even in Christendom it self, ask for a Christian, as well as the Philosopher at
Athens did look for a Man at Noonday, that is, one who acted wisely and
reasonably. But yet even this is not Matter of much Admiration, when it is
remembered that common Children do often drop Sayings worthy of the wisest,
without being sensible of the Importance of their own words. This might have
been occasioned by the Pious Discourses of her Father and others about her, See
Light of the World, Part. 1. p. 7.
when they read the New Testament, which Monsieur Bourignon caused to be put
into the hands of his Children, notwithstanding that he was in the Communion of
the Roman Church. However, the Author of her Life shows only his own vain
Humor, when he spends almost a whole Chapter upon it, and magnifies this above
all that was ever said or written. All Doctors and Teachers, Ibid. p. 16, 17.
yea, all the World ought to be silent, and to hearken to the Lisping of this
Infant; and for my part, I love better to hear and meditate on these four
words, ( where is the Country of Christians) than to turn over all the Volumes
of all the Learned of the World. Millions of Millions of Sermons are not to be
compared to them from which more Light, more Instruction, more Saving
Knowledge, more Rules for the Conduct of Life, may be drawn, than from all the
most reasonable Opinions and Speculations, which often do not import much, and
which have not more certainty than the Doctrine fo the probable Opinions of the
new Saviors of the World. Noveaux Saveurs de la Terre.


Again, The Account of her Chastity, which is set down in the Second Article of
this Narrative is a high stretch beyond Truth and the common sense of Mankind;
for however free Mademoiselle might be of carnal Inclinations after her serious
Conversion to God, yet it is hardly credible that all the while she followed a
vain Conversation, she never had one Thought unbecoming the Chastity of the
purest Virgin State; especially when she confesses that she delighted much in
Men's Company. If the Opinion of some be received, that none are pure Virgins
but such as do not know the distinction of Sexes; Mademoiselle cannot pass for
one, for she had as much Philosophy, I will not say Experience, as to know
that, nay, and the use of these Distinctions too; for sometimes she talks
pretty sensibly of the Pleasure of Conception and Propagation, that Sin only
hinders Women from having as much Pleasure in the Birth, as now they have in
the Conceiving, and that in the other World this Pleasure shall not be light
and short as at present, but lasting and perpetual. La Vie Cont. p. 330.
Antonia was not altogether free of Suspicion, but I will not accuse her; yet
if she was not guilty of actual Defilements, there is one Passage which gives
occasion to suspect her Imagination. Take her own account of it, which is thus:
One Sunday after Dinner, La Parole de Dieu, p. 158.
being in a profound retreat, it was said to me, Why does thou not desire
Children? I answered, Children, Lord? give me Children. Instantly the Pastor
(which I suppose was Monsieur de Cort) was strongly imprinted in my Fancy, as
if he had cast himself into my Embraces. I was surprised and said, Men, Lord,
these are Men? It was answered, Yes, they are Men. Upon which, I thought, I
conceived five comely Persons, P. C. E. L. L.

But whatever may be pleaded for Mademoiselle her self; Monsieur Poiret, or
whoever it was that continued her Life, strained a Figure above all Truth, and
raised his Hyperbole to a perfect Falsehood, when he said, That she sent forth
such an Odor of Continence, as made others forget the Pleasures of the Flesh:
For both he and she give an Account how that she was several times assaulted,
first at Blatton, when she fled from her Father's House, disguised as a
Hermit, where she was taken up, by some Soldiers, as a suspected Person, La
Parole, de Dieu, p. 16. Ib. p. 64.
and where the Officer that commanded them kept her all night in a Chamber with
himself, continually importuning her to lie with him. Again, In her Solitude at
the Church of St. Andrew, near Lisle, Ib. p. 77, 78.
a Nephew of the Pastor of that Church made attempts upon her. And lastly, The
famous Monsieur Saulieu, whom at first she took for a great Saint, pursued her
so much, that she was forced to ask the assistance of others, to be delivered
from him.

Now what regard is to be paid to these Men, who do so little consider what
they write, who contradict themselves while the Pen is in their Hand, and are
so impudent as to require a Belief, contrary to their own very Relations. I
know no excuse for this, but that which Monsieur Poiret gives on another
occasion, in his Preface to his Treatise of the Economy Divine; with which, I
suppose, very few will be satisfied:

All Diversity is not Contrariety; often, Contradictions are only in
Appearance, and in the Spirit of the Readers: but to deal ingenuously, I desire
the Reader not to give himself the trouble, more than I do, to adjust my
Sentiments together, but but let him search out the Truth independently from
what I have said before. Commonly, when I write a thing, I do not consider what
I have said else where, but I proceed to discover the Truth anew. Lying, may be
in a thousand ways contrary to it self: whosoever puts off Falsehood, ought to
have a good Memory, and to remember what he has said; Mendacem oportet esse
memorem: but as Truth is uniform, so whosoever follows its course, needs
neither Memory nor Reflection upon what is past.

A most notable way for reconciling Contradictions, and for removing the shame
of belying one's self! By Monsieur Poiret's leave, Memory and Reflection are
very necessary to secure us from wandering out of the way of Truth; and it is
certain, that he who contradicts himself, as he has often done, does not tread
the paths of Truth: And therefore neither his Evidence, nor the Evidence of
Monsieur du Cort, (who are the Heads of the Bourignianist Faction) are
sufficient for receiving Antonia Bourignon as sent of God, and Divinely
Inspired; especially when the same Monsieur Poiret recommends Persons as Divine
and Extraordinary, whom wise and sober Men can have no esteem for, as
particularly Jacob Behmen, who is only to be admired for his wild Notions and
Nonsense. But why should not Fowls of a feather fly together?

FINIS.
Advertisement from the Printer.
The Reader is entreated to put Fancy for Passion, p. 5. l. 19. and to excuse
the other Errata, if there be any.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Short Discourse upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, being an
Exposition upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers of our Church Catechism,
proper to be read by all young Persons, in Order to their Understanding the
whole Frame and Tenor of the Christian Region, and to their being duly prepared
for Confirmation. With Devotions Preparatory to that Apostolic and Useful
Ordinance. To which is added, An Appendix, being a Method of Family Religion.
By Tho. Bray, D. D.

Printed for W. Hawes, at the Sign of the Rose in Ludgate Street.


