A CONTINUATION Of the Account of The Nature, Causes, Symptoms and Cure OF THE
DISTEMPERS That are incident to Seafaring People. Illustrated with some
remarkable Instances of the Sicknesses of the Fleet during the last Summer,
historically related. To which is prefixed, An Essay concerning the quantity of
Blood that is to be evacuated in Fevers. Being the Third Part of the Work.

By William Cockburn, of the College of Physicians, London; Physician to the
Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry, 1697.

TO THE Right Honorable John Lord Berkeley, Baron Straton, Admiral and
Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Fleet, etc.
My Lord,
OCasions of Addressing those of your Lordship's Worth and Quality, have as
often been abused by the undiscreet Panegyrics, and fulsom flatteries of
cringing Parasites, as they have been eagerly caught at. My obligations to
your Lordship make me glad of an opportunity but I confess, I think a
Dedication an improper light for that sacred thing Nobility, and the great
actions of Noble Persons: Grave History, and a good Hand do that picture a
great deal more to the life; for then there is no design, it never sullies, and
the colors hold through all ages; yet if I had as strong inclinations to
Flatter, as my subject is tempting, and hands me fairly into an opportunity,
your Lordship's known and declared aversion to all such practices and flaunting
customs, a true stamp of engrain'd Nobility, that never wanted these false,
(and may I say) satirical lights of silly flatrerers, who never yet made a
better Hero, than Aesop's bird with borrowed plumes: I say, that if my desire
was as great, as my subject's inviting, yet this true Greatness of your
Lordship's would justly check all such unreasonable and impudent designs, that
would so tickle these poor Creatures that are infinitely pleased with borrowed
Feathers, when their Gnatho's after a long study, can find nothing so good to
equip them with, as a piece of old Marble, or a Monument only valuable for the
want of a Nose or L^g broke off by time. But tho your Lordship hates as
inveterately, as you do not want any such ridiculous praises, and I, of all
things, hate a Sycophant the most; yet I may acknowledge, that my Obligations
to your Lordship are very great, and that it is only Gratitude that pushes me
forward to give you the trouble of This; but especially, since your Favor and
extraordinary Encouragements, have mightily contributed toward the productions
in these sheets, that now venture into the world under your Lordship's
protection; and I will hope that you will not only protect this stranger, but
accept of my slender Thanks; till I have a better opportunity to acquit my
self, as ought,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Faithful Servant, W. Cockburn.

THE PREFACE.
I Am obliged, with the modern Poets, to be speak my Reader's favor to the
following Sheets. They contain nothing but what is fact; yet, That appears too
simple in their primitive dress, to bear the Censure of some peevish Critics:
The first draught was done at Sea, and it was my business for an hour after
dinner, only to keep me from sleeping; else these Observations had lain to this
day, wrapped up in that rubbish of an order, in which they we made; for soon
after my Summer's expedition was at an end, I was commanded to attend the
Fleet, under Sir Cloudesly Shovel, into Spain, which is the sole reason, why
these Papers are not filled from some of their roughness, that might justly have
forbidden their seeing the light, if my design of publishing my yearly
observations should not have been broke off: and I know that Ingenious and
Candid Readers will more easily dispense with this Ore, than to have had no
Metal at all. But that they might not prove entirely ungrateful, as the reading
a continued series of Observations always is, I have endeavored to intersperse
something that is more of Theor^ and Reasoning, as often as the thread, nature
and design of the subject would allow me: I never sought a Digression, yet when
I judged it a propos, and for m^ Reader's diversion, I neither shunn^ it, nor
run it out to too great^ length. Histories of Diseases a^^ not for wearing off
a melanchol^ minute, however useful they may b^ and therefore I inclind to
season them with an exercise of reason which gives the greatest satisfaction to
great and thinking Souls: I have related the Histories themselves in all their
circumstances of propriety and time; and have not scruplde to propose new
medicines and even methods of Cure, when they have been the most reasonable,
faithfully relating the success that attended the practice. The relating of
Observations is the peculiar province of Physicians that have lived long and
have had a great practice; or of any One that has been much among sick people,
and with all thi^, they ought to be very capable to know how to ask their
Patients proper questions, to hear what they relate, and distinguish betwixt
these Symptoms that must of necessity attend such a Disease, or at least this
Distemper in a Patient of such a Constitution, and those that now appear by
some accident or a peculiar practice. Otherways; men may live a great (...), as
long as the World is to last, and yet have no more experience, than they had
the first hour they began their Trade; whereas, when they are thus qualified,
the not only improve themselves to an unconceivable pitch for the the good of
their Country; but they are capable too, to hand down to succeeding ages, these
natural Histories of Diseases, which become as certainly and well known by
their symptoms, and as easy to be distinguished as Silver and Gold, by the
properties we relate to belong to each of them; and the Novices in Medicin
being fitly molded in the Schools of the Philosophers and Mathematicians,
approaching the simple but noble discoveries of the modern Anatomists, not
veiled with the ridiculous jargon of an Usus partium, and learning to know
medicines these instruments of health he is to be an absolute master of in a way
he would naturally discover a Stone not to be a F^sh, a Man, or a Horse, and
enquiring what relation they may have to us, how they may affect us, without
being prejudicd by the principles of any sect of Philosophers, he may have
read: then reading and comparing by these helps of Philosophy, Mathematics,
Anatomy, Pharmacy, Experimental Knowledge, etc. such Observations we suppose
him to have now made to his hand, he must needs enter into the world upon such
foundations, better qualified and of more and greater experience, than one who
has already practiced as long as Methuselah lived, but of an other education
and make. We talk a great deal here of the Barbarity of the Chinese, and their
ignorance of a great many Arts that are very well known among us; yet we
deservedly admire the stupendous and astonishing relations we have, of the
progress they have made, and the certainty they have attained to in
Aesculapius's Art, and that with the native plants of their Country, and the
only reason we can assign for their singular and great improvement in this most
noble and useful Art, (which by restoring us to our health, makes us enjoy our
Estates, our Liberty and our Relations, gives us all the satisfaction Mankind
is allowed to enjoy in this troublesome life, and even makes us conquer our
misfortunes) is that they initiate their Children from their tender years in
its mysteries, by a constant attendance upon their Parents, who are often
Kings, Princes, and Brachmans, as well as Physicians, and that they enjoin them
a strict observation of their Parents practice without being diverted and
amused with any thing besides, when they are upon the study of so human and
heavenly a Knowledge, which can bring relief to their languishing friends, and
solace and suppo^t their decaying nature: So there is no wonder if one that is
instructed in the experience of many former ages, having his head turned, and
his nature perfectly molded that way, does arrive to a greater perfection and
certainty in that art, even in a more barbarous and ignorant Country (if we may
suppose them so) than they are capable to do in Nations that are more famous
for Learning, where medicin is begun with nothing so great an advantage,
nothing so much studied not only as there, but even as they themselves study
other things of less concern, and all comprehended in the short life of one
man. I do not write this with any reflection upon our own age, tho I must own
that we have as great a share in this, as our Ancestors, when the telling a
pleasant story, a piece of wit, a gloomy and sullen melancholy alone can
entitle us to the fame of great Physicians; and which is worse, pretense and
impudence are the only stock and furniture of some. There can be no remedy for
this till Patients should become fit judges of their Physicians, which is never
to be expected. But since we see that Observations are so necessary and useful
a piece of Medicin, let us but see what helps the Authors of this kind of
Learning give us. We ought to look back into all the ages of Medicin, if we
were to be exact in this matter, but the talk has been so difficult, that it
has been either industriously shunned or very ill performed hitherto by the
Learned that have lived before us, till at this time the learned Monsieur Le
Clerc has undertaken this work, and has already favored the world with his
first Tome, where he gives us hope of his carrying it on to our time. 'Twere
needless to manage the matter in his way, tho a Preface would admit of it;
since the daily complaints of practitioners are about the short coming of such
observations to their daily business, and how often they lose their way in such
dark paths. But let us compare the Observations of Physicians with a rule which
we ought to make to our selves, about an exact and genuin ennmeration of
symptoms, numbers and force of pulses, colors and quantity of Vrin, its
consistency, time of breaking and the like, the time of the year, the Patient's
age, the time of the disease when we see him, what medicines are given, how
kept, and what is the event, and how the medicines took their effect, with other
more particular questions that may more particularly settle the difference of
the Disease. I say, if we compare the Books of observations with this Rule, Im
afraid we will find them of very little use, not only Forestus, Hollerius,
Horstius, Platerus. etc. but greater Masters of greater antiquity sinking under
the apprehensions of being tried by this general rule; it is not many Names,
many Countries, and many Streets of any one City, that make an observation
complete, but a little more: and really looking into all the modern and ancient
writers of Observations, I must own that it is my opinion that our own Dr
Sydenham has writ in the most exact and particular way, tho he has not come
quite up to the former Rule. It Is surely in Medicin as in all other other
Physical knowledge, the more circumstances we know, the better judgment we are
able to make. This is the scheme I have laid to my self in writing my
Observations last year, and this, which I have endeavored to pursue as far as
the convenience of the place I was in did allow, and tho I saw people in all
the Ships of my division yet I only thought fit to relate my Observations in 3
or 4, where I was most capable to satisfy the particulars of my own rule, as I
have expressly said, in the beginning of the 2d part of my Sea-sicknesses, tho
one or two who pretend more to the way of Writing than the way of Medicin, laid
this as a heavy charge to my door, but the little, one of them writ, especially
in his own profession, may evidently convince the world, that he is almost as
wretched a Writer as he is a weak Physician: It Is true, his Trade's to be a
Physician, but his pretenses are to Wit. I have spent too much time upon a
thing that is the diversion of the Apothecarie's Boy, in every Bill he sends
him, which he is forced to model in another way; since I neither stand nor fall
by his censure, I neither value the Book more or less for his character, which
I knew he would give it, without a reading. I first began a book of this
subject, because it was wanting, and 'twas my particular province; and I must
acknowledge my obligations to the world for the entertainment they gave it; tho
it came abroad in the Summer, an^ when the interruption in the Currency of
money did so much discourage all sorts of Trade: but above all, if I was to
value the Book, I would upon the encouragement it had in the most famous and
learned University of Oxford, the Glory of all Europe for its noble fabric,
but a great deal more for these famous and shining lights she sends abroad at
all times, and in so great and so singular a number, that she is but deservedly
the admiration of the whole earth. But 'twas neither fame nor a desire of
praise that put me upon this task, but an inclination of doing good in the way
providence has put me into; and all my wishes are only, that this and the
former book may be able to men^ some of the many mistakes I found, in that
business, and if I am so happy as in these Observations, to lay one firm Step,
by which others may advance to a greater certainty in their practice, I have
attained to a perfect enjoyment of my proposed design and inclination.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction page 1 The requisites for an Evacuation in Fevers 3 The
imperfect account Authors have given of Blood-letting 6 Their Rules ib. What is
to be thought of the first Rule 7 The second is false 10 What of the third 11
The fourth which is Hippocrates Rule is very uncertain 12 The last is most
false 14 An Observation 16 Proposals for a better understanding the quantity of
Blood-lettiag 18 What a Depressed pulse is 19 The second thing proposed 23 The
first Observation of a fever 26 The 2d Observation 30 A remark 31 Another ib.
Observation 3d 32 A remark 34 Observation 4th 35 Observation 5th 37 The
solution of a considerable Symptom ib. Observation 6th 43 Observation 7th 44
Observation 8th 48 Observation 9th 50 Observation 10th 52 Observation 11th 52 A
remark 56 Observation 12th 57 A remark 58 A remark 60 A Letter 61 A remark 63
Observation 13th of a new medicin for the cure of fevers 64 Observation 14th 66
Observation 15th 67 Observation 16th of an Ague 68 Observation 17th 70
Observation 18th 72 Observation 19th of an Ague personated by the Gout 74 A
remark 75 Observation 20th of a looseness 78 Observation 21st 80 Observation
22d ib. Observation 23d 81 Observation 24th 83 Observation 25th 84 Observation
26th 85 Observation 27th of an Apoplexy 86 A remark about the nature, and
reasonable cure of this Disease 87 Observation 28th of an Asthma 99 Observation
29th of a Clap 101 A remark 102 Observation 30th of a Pox 104 Observation 31st
of the Spleen 106 Observation 32d 109 Observation 33d of a beginning decay 111
Observation 34th of a Melanch. Hyp. 112 A remark 114 Observation 35^ 115 A
remark 117 Observation 36th of a Cough and a spitting of Blood 115 Observation
37th of a Pleurisy 122 Observation 38th of an Anasarca 124 A remark 129
Observation 39th of an I^iac Passion 130 Observation 40th of a Cholera Morbus
135 Observation 41st of a Dropsy 139 A remark 140 Observation 42d of a Quinsey
141 Observation 43d of the yellow jaundice 143 Observation 44 of the same A
remark against the Doctrine of secretions by fermentation
A CONTINUATION OF THE History of the Diseases IN HIS Majesty's Navy, etc.
I Endeavored last year, to give a genuin and true account of the rise and
nature of the Sicknesses at Sea, from considerations about the way of their
living; and the Indications of Cure, which were the results of that Reasoning:
and to these I added the historical observations of that year, which made a
more particular and practical part of that Book: The Continuation.
And now being to illustrate that first part, and perform my promise in the
second, I will confine my self to the Method I proposed for relating these
Observations, and pursue it with all the Candidness and Integrity that can be
expected, without repeating any thing that has been mentioned already: and
therefore I must desire every one that will judge of this, to recollect the
general Theory in the first, and the most reasonable Indications in the second
Part, as the best way to prevent mistakes and obscurity. Only I must confess,
that tho I have put it beyond exception, by arguments from reason and
experience, that Evacuation in the case of Fevers is absolutely necessary
toward their Cure, and tho I have also declared that this Evacuation is to be
proportionable to the interrupted perspiration, that causes our Fevers, that
is, either in the same quantity, with the detained steams, or at least in such
a quantity as may procure more liberal secretions; so that if the quantity that
is evacuated be not equal to the quantity of detained steams, yet making the
secretions more freely, there may be a quantity evacuated equal to these
steams, by the secretions that are now begun: Yet, I say, I must confess that I
may seem to be wanting in setting a standard, or certain mark, which may direct
our Surgeons in the difficult stages of these Evacuations, with as much
certainty as a fixed mark in the Heavens directs our Sailers in their Voyages.
It Is true I might allege that the profound intricacy of so particular a part
of knowledge, and the many blunders I have observed in the most learned Authors
that have but touched upon these difficulties, tho never so slightly, have
deterred me from venturing upon so nice a Task; and after so reasonable an
excuse I could not be blamed for any considerable neglect or omission. But
since this knowledge, tho never so hard, is extremely necessary for the fixing
of a certain Method of practice, I Will set out for once, and if I do miscarry,
'twill be in good company, among the masterly Heroes in Medicin.

Since the quantity to be evacuated is proportionable to the detained steams,
The requisites for this Evacuation.
and the quantity of staems may be very easily valued, (as I hope I shall prove
in its proper place), as I have already intimated in the general, that it
exceeds not two or three pounds; it is plain that either two or three pounds are
actually to be evacuated, or such a quantity that may procure new secretions
which will evacuate the required quantity. And it is no less certain that this
is to be performed according to the different strength and constitutions of our
Patients, and with such Instruments as may not require a larger Evacuation by
rarefying and giving a new motion to the Blood. It Is here the difficulty lies,
to know what quantity our Patients strength will allow to be evacuated, and to
make an estimate of the instruments we use on this occasion, and of the effects
they produce, besides our primary intention. Now it is the uncertainty of the
Sweating Medicines we use for compassing our design of evacuation that occasions
this great difficulty in our first intention, because sometimes they are given
without any success, but heighten the Pulse, and increase the other severe
symptoms we see in Fevers; and at other times taking effect, and causing an
excessive evacuation through the pores of our Body, they send our patients out
of the world another way, instead of curing them by a due quantity, which no
man can pretend to expel by these Medicines, which we are so little Masters of,
that we are not able to foretell, with any tolerable exactness, the quantity of
steams discharged that way, nor the additional heat produced by their small
parts. Next to them are purging medicines, of which tho we are a great deal more
certain, yet they are not exempted from some of the difficulties that attend
the others. So that the surest instrument for performing our design is
Phlebotomy or Bleeding, though even this may create a stronger pulse, a greater
heat, and the like, than was before, after losing ten or twelve ounces of blood
in a certain circumstance, which I shall have occasion to speak of here. And
therefore bleeding being the most certain way, I will for once suppose all the
rest as certain, or at least signify by this more certain way what we intend by
the rest when we apply them them to evacuate the quantity we desire, according
to the strength and constitution of our patient. And now when I am to apply
Venesection to this design, I must confess I can hardly forbear running out
into a long digression concerning some noble Theore^s about the great and
different effects of bleeding, that depend entirely upon the infinitely useful
demonstration of the circulation of the Blood, that crowd into my thoughts; but
I must at present restrain my self now, because the general accounts we find in
Authors about bleeding, are only as it evacuates such a quantity; The imperfect
account Authors have given of Blood-letting.
I will show in the first place how imperfect and useless the advices of our
great Masters are in this affair, and then inform the Reader, what other ways
are to be taken for attaining a greater certainty, tho the more particular
account can never be properly applied in this place; and this will exactly
answer what I proposed.

The Rules and Advices which Writers in Medicine have given us in this matter,
are to let blood according to the strength of the Patient; till he faint away,
till we have taken away enough, and till it change its color from worse to
better, from black to red; and lastly, some others who think they have given
the last touch to this question, take their marks from the bigness and fullness
of the Vessels, and so take away as much as a man may be supposed to lose in a
day without dying, and this way they pretend to confirm by some ^nstances from
practice, in which, the I hope they succeeded in their own practice, yet I
doubt not but I shall convince the Reader, of the unhappy state of those sick
people that are drained of their Blood, by such unsteady and uncertain rules.
What is to be thought of the first Rule.


But to enquire into the first of these, which advises us to let our Patients
blood according to their strength, it is certain that must never be exceeded;
yet there are a great many designs in bleeding, in which that is not so often
to be respected. Not but that if the quantity to be let, should exceed the
Patient's strength, that consideration would become the first and greatest;
yet, I say, there are a great many designs in bleeding, that the quantity to be
taken away is so small, that the strength of the Patient can never be brought
into question: For instance, in making a revulsion, and old and confirmed
operation and practice, tho never to be accounted for, but by supposing
Harvey's noble Theorem of the circulation of the Blood, however contrary to
that Doctrine, the most of our modern Physicians have been pleased to think it.
I say in making a revulsion, or by determining the motion of the Blood, more
toward one part than another, which is to be practiced upon a thousand
occasions; the quantity to be let, if other circumstances are observed, very
often exceeds not six or eight Ounces in the strongest constitutions; now such
a quantity can never be supposed to bring our Patients strength into doubt,
it is evident that in such cases this great rule is, (I had almost said) of no
use at all to us. But next, if our Patient be troubled with a Distemper that
proceeds from too much blood, and we desire to be so nice, as to relieve him of
all the offending quantity, and not to impair his strength, or having others
sicknesses that require Phlebotomy for their cure, and the strength of the
patient comes in competition, so that is never to be injured; yet th^^ Rule is
so precariously enjoined, that no Physician can be instructed, how to put it in
practice; which the learned Galen willingly confesses. Nullam rem, says he,
aeque artem medicam conjecturalem facere, quam Medicamentorum quantitatem. That
nothing makes the Physicians Art more conjectural than the dosing of Medicines.
De curat. rat. per sang. miss. c. 12. But this appears more evidently by
Physicians Consultations in acute Diseases, concerning a healthy young Man
affected, for example with a Fever, Pleurisy, or Quinsie, they all agree, and
are of one judgment, that nothing can so securely rescue him from this imminent
danger, than the taking away of as much blood as his strength can bear: yet
as soon as the Vein is opened, and the Patient has lost some nine or ten ounces
of blood, one of 'em begins immediately to try by his Pulse how far his
strength is impaired; and after a round Trial has been made by them all, they
can come to no positive agreement about their Rule; while one thinks there is
too much, another too little, and a third just enough taken away; so that
however they seemed agreed about letting him blood in the general, and in as
great a quantity as his strength could bear; yet they cannot condescend about
the time of of stopping it, and the rise of all this difference is only from
their ignorance of their Patient's strength, which they thought so easy, as to
settle it for a Rule in this operaration.

Now perhaps they are to measure the strength of the Patient by bleeding him
till he faint away; (...) other false.
and if this be set up, as more evident than the first, it is so far from being
so, that it is a great deal more obscure: for very many who are to be let blood
till they put on this emblem of pale Death, faint away, not only after losing a
very moderate quantity, but even after the loss of two or three ounces, or
immediately after the vein is cut; or even by seeing any other persons blood,
or the Lancet it self. What Is then to be done? nothing; but the wound must be
tied up, and the bleeding delayed till a sitter opportunity. It Is true, the
bleeding may be put off, but the cause of the Disease will not adjourn, but
double its force and dispute the command of the subject. Upon the other hand,
there are many who could suffer all the blood in their Body to run out, before
they faint away, which often happens to those whose dressings fall off in their
sleep, and make their Bed swim with blood, tho sometimes they themselves
recover.

The third rule is just as satisfactory as the other two; What of the third.
for when they advise us to let so much as we may think enough, it is evident
that there will be as many opinions about this enough as there are Physicians,
and perhaps more; for while some are for bleeding and others not, they that
agree in their judgments for letting Blood, differ about the quantity, and very
often the business is carried by him, whom age alone gives the killing
authority, or an habituated impudence has taught to overtalk the rest; so that
we may very well say with the learned Galen, Fortunatum esse aegrotantem qui in
manus boni Medici inciderit, aut cui fortuna seu Deus potius ita faveat, ut eam
caeteris praevalere sententiam faciat, quae sit utilior: That sick person is
very lucky who falls into the hands of a good Physician, or whom fortune or
rather God Almighty favors so much, that he makes that opinion prevail, which
is the most useful. Now this third Rule is certainly true, but at the same time
it is very obscure and hard to be understood; this is an aim or design in every
bodies eye, but it is not so easily performed by most Physicians, for the
reasons we gave before, and what more learning does a Doctor show, when he
orders a Surgeon to let so much as is sufficient, than a Woman, who seeing the
blood run out, desires them to take no more than may be enough. Yet this enough
is only presumed to be known, by the other signs we have just now condemned,
and therefore it is plain, how well it is like to be done; and how certain a Rule
this will prove.

And when they persuade us, with Hippoc. Hippocrat, Rule very uncertain.
to make the color of the blood the rule and standard of the quantity that is
to be taken away, they confine this useful and noble operation within too
narrow bounds; and to say no more, if the blood was only to be taken away when
it is black, tough, and seizie, and till it become red: the redness of the
blood being the mark beyond which we are not to go, it is evident that when the
blood is so, there will be no want of bleeding. Yet, in a great many
Apoplexies, Fevers, etc. the blood is not often discolored, at least not very
considerably, and yet this operation is extremely useful and necessary.
Besides, when one of the best habit of body has just fallen from a high place,
a wise Physician easily foresees that the vessels of those parts that come
first to the ground, will be considerably comprest, and that by this
compression the blood cannot move so easily through those parts, and by its
stopping there, will produce terrible symptoms, according to the greatness of
the compression, and the office of the part whose vessels are thus compres'sd:
And therefore, he thinks it necessary, both for lessening the quantity, and
perhaps quickening the motion, to cause this person to be let blood, and that
in a considerable quantity, with very great success. Yet the blood in those
people, immediately after the fall, is not much, if at all, altered from what
it was before the fall, and being then supposed to be of a good color, or red,
it is evident that by this Rule he could not lose an ounce, and the consequence
would be, most troublesome and dangerous contusions, Apoplexies, Rheumatical
and Pleuritical pains, difficulties of breathing, a Fever, and the like, which
we see happen upon suth occasions. But upon the other hand, let us suppose that
blood was never to be taken away, but in this ill color of the blood (which we
see is not so) and till it has acquired a better one, yet they cannot so
qualify this Rule, that we may know the degrees of this ill color, and how
much blood we may take away before it acquires a better one, and whether the
blood that seems necessary to be evacuated, can be spared by the Patient, which
would have been highly useful, and even necessary for making their Rule
complete; whereas by our historical account of the last year, it is evident that
the blood may be mightily changed by an interruption of perspiration, and now
in case of a fall, in less than 24 hours, and that bleeding may actually
dispose the blood for becoming better, by promoting the secretions, and
recovering its color and strength in almost as short a time as they we^e lost.

Now one that speaks very high on this subject, and whom the rational bleeders
at this time follow, says we can never fail, if we have respect to the fullness
of the vessels, and the quantity of blood a man may be reckoned to spare. This
the most false.
But this Rule is too general to be put in practice: it is true, as he says,
that fat people, whose veins are generally small, and consequently cannot
contain much blood, if they be drained of an indifferent quantity, will feel
the inconveniences of the want of blood, or of a dispirited blood, very soon
and fatally, by cachectical diseases and a Dropsy* Yet it is no less certain,
that melancholy splenetick men, or women that are troubled with vapors, whose
vessels are generally wide, and actually contain a great deal of blood, and by
this Rule can spare the most; yet they, for the most part, can never bear so
large a bleeding, even as those fat people we just now spoke of, and very
seldom can endure the loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood without a sinking
in their heart (as they call it) dimness of sight, or as it is expressively
called by the French, une Defaillance des esprits; so that their overmuch comes
sooner than that of the fat people themselves, which plainly contradicts this
Rule. Now, I would gladly ask any of those Authors, whether or not the other
part of the Rule, What a man can spare, be not the same with that of the
strength of the Patient, which we find to be very true, but not plain enough to
be of any use: Or if they think they may take as much blood away, as we find
people have lost by wounds, bleeding at the Nose, Piles, etc. without losing
their Life; they may if they please, but I shall never think it reasonable to
have recourse to a Remedy, which no less than the distemper must always require
the help of a Physician. An Obser^ation.
'Twas upon this precarious and general way of practice, I saw a learned man,
and a Physician too, who had been sick of a Looseness for some weeks, if I may
not say months, by which he was brought to a very low condition; yet I know not
what odd fancy possessed him who was called to his assistance, to take from him
12 or 14 ounces of blood at that time, and I think repeated it next day,
contrary to the rules of common sense, as well as of Physic, with as great
boldness as indiscretion, and of which the Sufferer was so sensible, that when
I was proposed to be sent for by some of his friends, he said he was convinced
of their mistake, but that it would disoblige men of their Character and Dotard
Seniority to send for a younger Physician; and so he ended his days with a vast
deal of Ceremony. I am sorry I must relate so ungrateful a story, but it is but
one of too many I have seen, tho I must confess there are as great mistakes,
and greater, occasioned by the neglect of bleeding; and therefore since on both
sides, they are fatal and pernicious, 'twou'd be needless to observe, that
there ought to be a great deal of care taken about it, not only in performing
the operation, which is the easiest that can be, by an Instrument; but in
determining the just quantities in different Patients, which you see Authors
have endeavored by desiring us to let them blood according to their strength,
as much as is sufficient, as much as they can spare, which are all the same
thing; only I think better expressed in the first. But the question at first
asked was, what will the Patients strength hear, what is sufficient, and what
may he spare, which is left in as great obscurity as when they begun it.

Now to clear this a little better than it has been by others, 'twould be
necessary not only to write a Book of Phlebotomy, but for greater distinctness
to apply the consequences of its noble Theorems to particular diseases,
constitutions of our Patients, seasons of the year, etc. which it is plain are
foreign to my subject. Yet to direct my Brethren in the Navy in their thoughts
and practice, as well and shortly as this confinement will allow me, that they
may make evacuations fit to discharge the excessive quantities of detained
steams, without impairing or destroying the strength of the Patient, I shall
propose these two ways, Proposals for better understanding the quantity of
Blood-letting.
which if rightly inquired into and thought upon, cannot miss of success.

And first, since the strength and velocity of the blood, is to be understood
by the Pulse, it is to That we must have regard, that we may know how far they
either exceed or are lower than their ordinary measure; and proportionably to
the number of pulses, more than in a natural state, so to let blood, that the
blood after venesection may come to a greater cohesion, may not be so much
attrited and broken down, and so there may not be separated so great a quantity
of animal spirits. Or the pulse being depressed, very full, and not so
frequent, we ought to let blood, not only in a quantity able to raise the
pulse, and make it more frequent, but even afterward to abate this frequency
by a larger bleeding as before: For there is nothing more ordinary than in the
most natural fullness (if I may so say) where there is a Plethora ad vasa (as
Physicians term it) a great abundance of the best blood, the fittest, of its
own nature, to make animal spirits, and to produce all the consequences that
follow upon good blood and a great abundance of spirits; I say there is nothing
more ordinary than to have a depressed pulse as I described but now, in a
natural or artificial fullness; for the blood is so confined within its own
vessels, and its parts so crowded one upon another, that there is not a
sufficient secretion of its fine and subtle parts, but even by this great
quantity the distractile blood-pipes being very much distended, compress the
nerves over all the body, and hinder the conveyance of the animal spirits into,
and through these vessels, according to their force of going outward, and the
resistance of these in the different parts; so that tho there is a greater
quantity of blood contained in the vessels, yet that being propell'd or driven
forwards with less force, will occasion a full, tho slow, pulse: and therefore
since this less secretion of animal spirits, their slower motion, etc. proceeds
entirely from the quantity of blood contained in the veins, but especially the
arteries, and produces the effects of a real want, yet its motion is only to be
heightened, its sense of greatness to be advanced, by taking off such a quantity
that may remove this huddling up of the blood, and make the secretions more
free* that so there may be a greater quantity of spirits derived into, and
determined through, the whole series of the nerves, upon which there will follow a
quicker and greater pulse; tho if it exceeds its natural state in these
properties, another bleeding must be appointed in pursuance of the
abovementioned design, which will prevent the use of bleeding in Fevers, as we
use a charm to blood, and that all.

Now in both these cases you see the natural pulse is the standard, and before
you can know whether it is depressed, slower or quicker, you must know that
which is natural to which the rest are referred; and not only so, but before
you can determine any quantity of blood to be taken away in either of these
cases, you ought to know what cohesion, what loosoness is fit to make the pulse
so much quicker, or depressed, or to make an estimate of the number of pulses
by the blood in the best state, and of their strength: the last of which I
intend to attempt in a Review of my O Economia Animalis, that it may want
nothing of the perfection I can give it, and may become more worthy of the
learned Mr. Bridgeman, under whose protection it ventured into the world with
so great advantage.

Yet the first is very considerable, and even necessary for its use; for unless
we know the natural pulse of every single Man, we are called to, we can never
know, when it is sickly and defective; for example, supposing that more
especially the number of pulses pecu^iar to men were of three sorts, as I have
endeavored to prove them to be in my Animal Economy, viz. from 55 to 65 in
some, from 60 to 70 in others, from 70 to 80 in a third sort, and all in the
same part of time, viz. a minute; it is evident, that if he who has sixty for
his natural pulse, comes ever to beat eighty, the motion of his blood must
certainly be more than naturally augmented, that is, he has a Fever; since that
is only an immoderate velocity or quickness of the motion of the blood,
accompanied with heat. It Is no less certain, when a pulse that beats naturally
80 in a minute, comes down to 60, that the person labors under some
cachectical Distemper, and a want of spirits, except his pulse be depressed:
yet both these are the natural pulses of several people, beyond which it is not
convenient to go, and to which their other pulses are to be compared. And
therefore it would be necessary to settle this affair, and to enquire into the
peculiar pulses of every constitution, that by them and other concurring signs,
we may be infallibly guided, not only in Evacuations, but other administrations
in Medicin. However, I shall forbear to proceed in this Enquiry, since I have
treated designedly, and at large upon that subject, in my O Economia Corporis
Animalis, to which I refer those that love to be informed, and do hope to see
that matter more fully done, in some practical Treatise of pulses, with which
some generous Promoter of useful Knowledge may one day oblige the public.

The second thing I would propose as useful in this matter, is the application
of the Thermometer; for since the warmth of our blood, another pathognomical
sign of a Fever* depends upon its motion, as I have often proved; if we can
settle the warmth that is proper to every constitution, or proportion the
warmth to the certain numbers of pulses in the particular constitutions; we
may, by applying the Thermometer, not only know how far the blood has exceeded
its natural motion and warmth, but even, in other cases, how much it has fallen
from them too; and because the only difficulty in discovering this excess and
diminution, may consist in the comparison with that warmth, which is peculiar
to every constitution and number of pulses, which has never been particularly
considered, I will endeavor to lay down my observations on this subject. And
first, the heat of a man's body, whose pulse is of the first sort raises the
Oil in the Thermometer to about 16 or 16 degrees, the pulse of the second to 17
degrees, and that of the third to about 20 or 21 degrees. And therefore the
differences of the degrees will not only make up the true warmth and different
pulses, but comparing the warmths upon occasions in Fevers we can find how much
more it is than that which is natural, and even the exceeding numbers of
pulses, which will not only be of infinite use for evacuating in Fevers which
we propose, but if we compare the different and vast excesses of heat that may
be in our body, will soon be convinced, that the most violent symptoms may
proceed from them, tho they seem never so opposite to each other in the judgmen
of the unskilful: and this still the more easily, if we observe how different
the effects seem to be, which proceed from the various degrees of the Sun's
heat; for example, the Summer's heat in the air raises the Oil in the
Thermometer to 7 gr., The heat of a man's skin whose natural Pulse is sixty in
a Minute, to 16 gr., The heat of boiling water, to 52 gr. The heat of red hot
Iron, to 156; wherefore according to this calculation, our natural heat is
double the Summer's heat, and scalding water is only somewhat above three times
hotter than our skin; and lastly, the heat of red hot Iron is almost ten times
greater than the heat of our Skin; yet there are no symptoms in a Fever so
different, as these which are produced by the heat of our Skin, and that of
red-hot Iron, tho they only differ in degree. But not to insist further upon
this use, I may conclude that the true mark of letting Blood, or evacuating in
Fevers, is more truly regulated by these ways, I have now hinted, which are
truly the Strength of the Patient, we are all puzzled so much about, yet never
otherwise to be known; and I hope I have explained them too as fully, as my
time and subject, and my resolution to avoid incroaching too far upon the true
doctrine of Pulses and Phlebotomy will allow: and therefore I shall proceed to
the Cure of our sicknesses this year, which is the main design of this work.

Observation I.
The first, then, I was called to this year, was a Dutch Captain, Commander of
the Amsterdam, upon the fourth of March, who had lain ill three or four days of
a continued Fever; the pains in the head, back, and other parts that begin
these Fevers were vanished, his Pulse beat very high and frequent, his thirst
was very great, he watched most part of the night, and was now and then
delitious. He had taken all that time nothing but a sort of a disagreeable,
immiscible mixture of oe. canc. sang. Drac. camphor. sperm. cet. ant. Diaph.
all jumbled together with some White Wine; some sunk, some swam a top, and the
Wine was left clear in the middle. His ordinary drink was Rhenish Wine, he was
not let blood, neither vomited, nor so much as had a Clyster, tho he had not
gone to stool during all that time. Seeing him, then, in these circumstances, I
ordered him immediately to be let blood, to the quantity of ten ounces, and
next day to take this vomit, then to begin the Testaceous powde s.

Vin. emetic. j. oxym. scyllit. vi. aq. theriacal. ss M. ac capiat cras mane
cum regimine.

oc. 69. ppt. ij. pulver. rad. serpent. Virginian. sal. absynth. an ss. M. ac
divid. in ix part. aeq. Quarum unam capiat ter in die.

Tamarind. optim. ss. hord. muudat. M. ss. boq. in s. q. aq. font ad hord.
crepituram, Colatur. vi. calid. affund. fol. senn. virent. ss. cin. acerr.
Crem. Tartar. an gr. xii. Stent per noct. in infus. ac mane colatur. add. sir.
de spin. cerv. ij. M. f. potio quam capiat die quarto consumptis pulveribus.
Potus sit decoctum hordei cum aceto probe acidulatum.

These are the Medicines I prescribed him, but his Surgeon knowing all the
Medicines and their quantities, but not one word of Latin, I was forced to leave
him directions in Dutch by the help of one of the Lieutenants, who spoke very
good Latin, and so I left him, with a design to see him by that time he had
taken all those Medicines; but the weather was so very stormy for 5 days, that
no Boats could go off from a Ship. On the tenth, the Sea not being so great,
they sent their Boat for me, and when I came aboard, I found he had not taken
one half of his powders; he had taken no vomit, and but one half of his purging
potion, which wrought twice, and his drink was still Wine. His Pulse was great,
and very frequent, he was very deli^ious, and had a violent thirst. I desired
he might continue the powders prescribed before, and the drink, of which he
should not only drink as often as he called for it, but should be remembered to
drink of it: and if he did not go to stool once or twice a day, to have a
Clyster. Besides, I ordered strong blistering Plasters to be applied; one to
the nape of his Neck, and one behind each Ear, to be removed next morning,
applying to the sore part the simple Melilot Plaster: before I left the Ship,
I saw the Surgeon mix the Plaster, but when he spread it upon the Leather,
'twas not bigger than a Filberd nut, so I shaped the Leather and spread him
large Plasters, leaving him to apply them, and intended next day to see the
sick person, but it blew so very hard, that I had not opportunity to see him,
till at our return to the Downs, it proving easy weather, I went on board that
Ship, and tho it was least three days since I was there before, the Plasters
were not removed: the two behind his ears had risen very well, but the largest
that was to be applied to the nape of his Neck, being laid among the hair, the
skin looked scalded, but had never risen. He had not even then taken his
Medicines as directed, yet his pulse was slower and great enough, and he was not
quite so delirious. I desired the Surgeon to be more careful about the use of
the former Medicines, to shave his Neck, and to apply there a great and strong
blistering Plaster, and so took leave; but after we came into the Downs, we
had again very blowing weather, and the first news I had of my Patient was,
that he was dead; which was not so surprising to me, as that he had lived so
long, with such management.

Observation II.
..... Robie, being about fifteen years of age was taken ill, on board the
Edgar, on the 27th of April last, with a pain in his head, back, and loins, a
coldness, sudden weakness, a slow pulse, and want of appetite; all which kept
him three days, then he was hotter, had a quick pulse, a great drought, and
could nor sleep.

He was let ten ounces of blood next day, and the morning after he took three
grains of Tartarum emeticum, which made him vomit about a quarter of an hour
ofter he took it; and being well plied with thin water gruel between the times
of his vomiting, he vomited four times and had one stool, and was much easier
that day. He had no paregorick, which too commonly is made the constant
attendant of a vomit, or purge, because of the recommendation of some of the
best Physicians; but I not only give none my self in the Fevers, of which I
write, but must even desire every body to abstain from that practice, who would
not surrender the management of his Patient to the hurry of an impetuous blood,
and a depraved delirium.

On the thirtieth he began to take the following powders.

oc. 69. ppt. jss. sal. prunel. ij. sal. tartar. ss. M. ac divid. in ix. part.
aeq. Capiat unam ter in die, donec consumantur integrae doses novem.

His ordinary drink for the time was Barley Decoction sharpened with Vinegar,
which I think better than either spirit of Vitriol or oil of Sulphur per. camp.

By these his blood was kept very moderate, he had a stool every day, and on
the first of May at night he slept a little: on the third in the morning, he
took the following laxative.

Decoct. senn. Gereon. iv. sir. rosar. solutiv. ss. aq. Cinam. hordeat. i. M.
ac capiat mane cum regimine.

It purged him six times, and abated his thirst, and other feverish symptoms;
he slept easily that night, and next day awakening very hungry, I allowed him
some water gruel. On the fifth and sixth in the morning, he had six ounces of
the bittet draught without the purgatives, and recovered every day, till eating
a hearty dinner of salt beef, he fell into an Ague, for which he took another
vomit on the tenth of May, and then the following electuary.

. Cons. ros. rub. vi. pulver. Quinquin. subtiliss. pulverat. ss. Theriac.
Andromach. ij. Sir. cujusvis grati q. s. selectuar. quod consumat in intervallo
paroxysmi.

The Fit not returning three days after, as it would, otherwise, have done, he
only lived more cautiously and recovered his health.

Observation III.
Laurence Douthey, a Marine Soldier, about twenty three years of age,
complained of a violent pain in his head, and back, a pain in his bones, and
want of appetite: he was costive and very weak; in a day or two his Pulse
became frequent, he had a great drought, his tongue was very white and chinkie;
he could not sleep, and was delirious.

On the 11th of April he was let blood to the quantity of twelve ounces, and
that evening had a suppository, which gave him two stools: on the 12th he took
5 grains of Emetick Tartar, and drinking Water Gruel, as in that case, he
vomited six times, and had three stools: he took the preceding testaceous
Powders for theee days, and drank Barley decoction acidulated as before, the
whole time; and on the 16th took this Purge.

pulv. rad. jalapp. ij. Crem. Tartar. i. M. ac capiat multo mane cum regimine.

He had eight stools with this, and was very easy; in a day or two he began to
crawl about upon Deck, an hour or two in the warmest time of the day; but,
coming up a little too soon, he caught cold and relapsed on the 24th, and was
obliged to go over the former course, as near as his weaker body would allow;
but on the 27th he turned very delirious, and had a very quick Pulse; he could
not sleep and had an unsatiable drought. I allowed him as much of the
Barley-decoction as he would drink, and ordered his Mess mate who attended him,
to give it him unaskt, if it was a great while before he asked it. On the 28th
in the evening, I caused a large and strong Blister to be laid upon the nape of
his Neck and downwards, which rose very well, and was removed, applying a
Plaster of Melilot to the part next day; he was mightily relieved by it, his
Delirium abated, and his Pulse was not so frequent, but still he could not
sleep, which puzzled me extremely, finding the ill consequences of Opium, or
Opiars, the Medicines which Physicians depend on for the removal of this
symptom; and therefore reflecting upon the Theory of this symptom, as I
demonstrated it in the first part of my Book of Sea Sicknesses for 1695, I
could not think of any thing that would be so reasonable an indication from
that Theory, as the applying of a double Linen Cloth dipped in Oxycrat round his
head, which I ordered to be done with so great success, that he slept almost
all that night, and was mightily refresht. I ordered his blister'd Neck to be
kept as long running, as possible; and to drink the Decoctum amarum alterans
for four days, and on the fifth to add the Purgatives that he might have four
or five stools, which being done, he recovered without any further trouble.

Observation IV.
Francis Marpole, aged twenty six years, whose natural pulse beats about sixty
in one minute, was taken ill, on board the Edgar, April the 29th, of a pain in
his head, and bones; he was weak, had no appetite to his victuals; his pulse
beat but 45 in a minute, and he was very cold; The next day after, he was let
blood, his pulse was more frequent, and even exceeded its natural number; he
was very hot, and restless, had a great drought, and could not sleep.

On the 30th he was let blood in his right arm to the quantity of ten ounces,
and next day took 5 grains of the vomiting Tartar; and being treated as people
ordinarily are, after they have taken a vomit, it wrought six times, and gave
him seven stools. Next day he began the following powder.

oc. 69 ppt. i. pulv. fl. chamom. ij. sal. prunel. ij. M. ac f. dos. ix. ut
capiat unam ter in die.

His ordinary drink, all the time he was taking these powders, was Barley
decoction sharpened with Vinegar, of which he drank as much and as often as he
pleased. On the 4th of May he took this purge.

pulv. Cornachin. ss. tartar. vitriolo gr. vii. M. ac capiat mane cum regimine.

This purged him seven times, and he was very easy thereafter. Only I must tell
you, that all the time he was taking the powders he was restless, and did not
sleep in the night, till by applying the Oxycrate, he was very (...) and
recovered without any other help than drinking half a pint of the altering
bitter decoction every morning, for four mornings.

Observation V.
John Kock, a Man of three or four and twenty years of Age, complained on May
8th, of a giddiness in his head, a coldness, sudden weakness, and want of
appetite; his pulse was low and depressed yet, in a day or two after, it grew
very frequent and strong; he was very hot, had a great drought, and could not
sleep.

It Is plain from this description, that this Man was taken ill of a Fever, the
symptoms of which I have already resolved and demonstrated; yet in this case
there being an unusual symptom, not yet accounted for, I cannot omit explaining
it, however hard it may be, and maintain my design of plainess, which I have
hitherto endeavored. It Is known that those who are giddy or vertiginous, have
such a sensation, as if every thing they see were turning round, however fixed
and immovable it be; and truly this Phenomenon, tho it may often happen in
Fevers, yet either as a symptom of them, or as it is an essential Disease, has
not too often had the good fortune to be sufficiently explained; and if I
except two or three, I may venture to say, that among so many thousand Authors
who have written Medicinal Treatises there is not one that has spoken common
sense upon this subject; we may hear what a late learned Author, who is thought
to speak the fullest and most satisfactorily, says; that the immediate subject
of this disease are the animal spirits, the more mediate those parts of the
Brain, where imagination and common sense reside, and from whence the nearest
way is into the Nervous kind, which are the callous and strious Bodies; for in
these parts they love to range and divert themselves as in a spacious field,
and pass through all the pores and thickest passages of the Marrow, with full
force like a ray of light: hence it is that, while they glide along in the same
Line, from the utmost borders of the Callous Body toward its middle part, they
represent pleasant appearances and imaginations; and whilst they slow, in
another line, (perhaps through other passages, from the middle of the Callous Body
into the gyri of the Brain) they transfer thither the marks of Notions to be
laid up for our future remembrance; and, again, whilst they pass into the
Strious Bodies, and the beginning of the Nerves, they actuate all the moving
parts, and carry to them, upon occasions, the instincts of the motions they are
to perform*

But in the Vertigo these equal emanations of the Spirits seem to be
intercepted, and variously perverted in different places, because some
quantities of the Spirits are obscured, others are determined into other ways,
and turned to and from in so many Vortices one over another. Wherefore confused
phantasms, wandering, and etc.

Here is a most poetical flash of a description, but how true, every one must
see, that will give himself the trouble to remember the Anatomy of the Brain,
and since its make will not at all allow of such a roving and sporting
expansion, or so melancholy a circumgyration or turning round, we must seek its
cause some where else, and yet this sense is not afforded us from the object it
self, which we suppose to be, and often is immovable, and therefore, since
this sense is not caused by a turning round of the Animal Spirits, nor by the
object that is thought to turn round, it can be no where else than in the
Optic nerve, the Eye it self, or something that goes to its construction. And
first, it is evident that any object will seem to turn round, if the images
that come from it fall successively upon different parts of the retina, going,
viz. from the left, while the object is not really moved, and the images that
come from it represent always the same distance; I say that object will seem to
be turned round from the left to the right; for the images have a contrary
posture in the retina, yet this may be done while the motion is only in the
Eye, the object remaining unmoved; for whether the object be moved while the
Eye is quiet, or the object be quiet while the Eye is moved, the rays that come
from the object, will not fall upon the same part of the bottom of the Eye; and
therefore since we judge of the change of place where the object exists, by the
change of place upon which the object is described, it is plain that the object
which has no motion will seem to move, and may be thought to turn round to the
Eyes that are moved* Moreover, the object and Eye may be both unmoved; for if
the optic nerve be only moved, the rays will not always fall upon it in the
same situation; and therefore since a direct and oblique falling do not affect
the Nerves alike, but excite different sorts of motions; then, the object that
is quiet will seem to have changed its place, when only the optic nerve is
moved, the representation of the place where it was being changed. And
therefore it is evident that any thing that can move the Eye, Optic nerve, or
Retina may cause this Giddiness, tho the object be not moved. Now there are a
thousand things that may produce this effect, but nothing can more readily
press upon the Brain than the distended arteries that are next the optic
nerve; and since we have seen how the fullness of all the vessels is occasioned
by an interruption of perspiration, the cause of our Fevers; there can be no
further doubt, but that this fullness may occasion the Retina's being removed
from its place, together with the optic nerve, so that it cannot receive the
rays from the objects at the same part of the bottom of the Eye; and
consequently while the Images change their place in the Retina, the objects are
represented to our mind, as if they were constantly moved. This being premised.

He was let ten ounces of Blood on the 9th, and on the tenth, he had five
grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which made him vomit half an hour after he took
it. He drunk large draughts of thin water gruel after every time he vomited
till it had done working; which it did very well and made him go twice to
stool; next day he began the testaceous powders, and on the fourteenth he had
the following purge.

. pulv. rad. jalapp. j. resin. jalapp. gr. vii. Crem. Tart. gr. xv. M. ac
capiat cum regimine.

It purged him eight times, and he found himself very easy; but since he had
no inclination to sleep, I caused a doubled linen wet in vinegar and water to
be laid round his head, by which he slept, and awaked very much refreshed on
the sixteenth.

All this time he drunk water gruel sharpened with vinegar; and, after his Fever
was gone off, the decoctum amarum every morning for four days, and recovered a
pace, 'till, I cannot ^ell by what accident, he died apo^lectical, and very
suddenly.

Observation VI.
Edward Powis, a man about twenty years of age, and never at Sea before this
Summer, was taken ill on board the Edgar, the twelfth of May, of a Coldness,
want of Strength, and appetite for his victuals, this pulse was low and
depressed, he complained of violent pains in his head, back, and bones: In a
day or two his pains went off, his pulse was high, he was very hot and had a
great drought.

On the 13th he was let twelve ounces of blood, and next day took four grains
of emetick Tartar, and vomited 6 times, and went thrice to stool. I always use
to give them vomits in the beginning, for they mitigate all the Symptoms
through the whole progress of the sickness, and the Patients are more easily
managed: on the fifteenth he began to take these powders.

. oc. 69 ppt. j. sal. absynth. pulv. s^. chamom. an. ij. rad. serpentar.
virginian pulverat. ss. M. f. pulv. divid. in tres p^ a. Capiat omnes die
crastino tribus vicibus.

The day after, he drunk this purgative.

. tamarind. ss. hord. mund. M. s^. Coq. ad hord. crepitur. in s. q. aq. font.
Colatur. iv. affund. sol. senn. ss. semin^ aris. contus ss. crem. tartar. j.
maneant per noctem in infusione, maneque liquori colato add. sir de rham. i. M.
ac^ capiat cum regimine,

This purged him eight times, and having applied the Linen dipped in Oxycrat, he
slept all night, and recovered daily. His Drink at the time of his sickness was
as much of the Barley Decoction sharpened with Vinegar as he would; and half a
pint of the decoctum amarum for four days after his Fever was gone off; after
which he began to recover.

Observation VII.
Thomas Post, being about 26 years of age, was taken ill, on board the Edgar,
where he was the Captain's Cook, of a pain in his head, and over all his body
as if he had been beaten, his pulse was depressed, he was costive, and had no
stomach for his Victuals; in a day or two his pains left him, he grew very hot,
he had an insatiable drought, and could not sleep.

On the 6th of May he was let 12 ounces of blood, and in the evening had a
Clyster which gave him two stools; next day he took the tartarum emeticum which
vomited him very well, and made him go to stool; so that on the eighth he began
the use of these powders.

oc. cancr. ppt. ij. pulv. fl. chamom. j. sal. prunel. ss. M. ac divid. in ix
parts aequales, ac capiat dosin unam ter in die.

He took all these Powders, and then this Purge.

. pulv. rad. jalap. ss. tartar. vitriolat. gr. viii. M. ac capiat cum regimine.

It purged him six or seven times, and he was pretty easy that evening, and
the most of the next day, till on the 12th in the evening he began to be
delirious, and his pulse beat very quick; so I ordered a large Blister to be
laid to the nape of his neck, and one behind each ear, and to remove them next
morning, dressing the blistered parts with the Melilot Plaster. The morning
comes, but the Blisters had not risen; I was told of this in the afternoon, and
when I went to see him his sight was dim, he could hardly speak, and looked
almost like one who is apoplectical: I caused 6 ounces of blood to be taken out
o^ his jugular vein, for the reasons I will give in the case of an Apoplexy
that happened to a Sailer this Summer, and ordered him immediately to begin the
following powder.

. Rad. serpentar. Virginian. pulverat. fl. chamom. sal. absynth. an ss. antimon
diaphoret. ^. M. ac divid. in tres part. aeq. quas consumat partitis vicibus,
cap^enda dosin quarta quaque hora; in cochleari julap. seq. superbibendo
alterum.

aq. lact. alexiter. i^j. decoct. hord. i. aq. epid. i. sir. poeon. ii. M. ^.
julap.

I saw him at eight a clock that evening, and he spoke easily enough, tho
weakly; and therefore I only ordered a piece of Linen we^ in Oxycrate to be
laid round his head. He slept all that night, and till ten a clock ne^t day,
when he awaked, and desiring something to eat, I ordered him some Water Gruel
with the juice of a Limon squeezed into it, whereof he took half a dozen
spoonfuls, and fell asleep; he slept again till six in the evening, and had
more Water Gruel prepared as before, when he awaked; and thus he slept for
almost two days, and recovered very fast; his ordinary drink, during his whole
sickness, was Barley decoction sharpened with Vinegar; and sometimes Water,
Sugar, and the juice of Limons.

Since that time I ordered the Surgeon's Mate always to observe when their
pulse began to grow low, whether their face was reder than ordinary, whether
their eyes began to stare, or whether they complained of an illness or
heaviness about their head; which I conclude to be the symptoms of the blood's
going slower through the carotid arteries of the face, and brain; and, in this
case, I desired him always to open the jugular vein, and to let out 6, 8, or 10
ounces of blood, according to the urgency of the symptoms.

Observation VIII.
William Mayes, being about twenty years of age, May 29th, complained of a
violent pain in his head and bones; he was very cold, his pulse weak and
depressed; then he was hot, very restless, his pulse quick, had a violent
drought, and his tongue was very white.

On the 30th he was let xij of blood, and next day took five gr. of tartar.
emetic. which made him vomit six times, and go twice to stool; he drank
Water Gruel plentifully during the time of its working, and brought up with the
nasty stuff several large Worms, some of which had flat heads, and some sharp.
On the first of June he began the following powders.

oc. 69 ppt. aut testar. ovor. pulverat. ii. sal. prunel. ss. M. ac divid. in
ix part. aeq. ut capiat unam ter in die in cochl. decoct. hord.

After he had taken these powders for three days, he took this purge.

. Pulver. Cornachin. ss. resin. jalapp. gr. iii. Tartar. Vitriolat. gr. v. M.
ac capiat cras mane cum regimine.

This purged him six times and he was pretty easy that night, yet his Fever did
not take leave of him; so we continued the testaceous powder prescribed before,
and finding his pulse grow quicker toward the evening, and his face very red,
I began to suspect that he was inclining to be delirious, and therefore I
caused six ounces of blood to be taken out of his Jugular Vein; he was quieter
all that night, and next day, and on the 7th I purged him again, whereby he
voided a great abundance of the small Worms they call Ter^tes, and was very
well. All the time of his Sickness he drunk as much as he pleased of the
Barley-decoction sharpened with Vinegar; and half a pint of the decoctum amarum
alterans when he began to recover, which prevented his falling into the
Melancholia Hypochondriaca, as some are apt to do upon their Recovery, if we do
not help them in their digestion.

Observation IX.
Thomas Ties, a lusty Man, and never at Sea before, nor ever afflicted with
sickness, was taken ill on the 5th of Jun^ with a pain in his bones, a
heaviness and pain in his head, a sudden weakness, his pulse was deprest, and
he had no appetite for victuals; but in a day or two he became extraordinary
hot, his pulse was frequent and great, he had a great drought, he was delirious
and could not sleep. On the 6th he was let 12 ounces of blood, and on the 7th
took the Tartarum Emeticum, which wrought very well, drinking great draughts of
thin Water Gruel in the intervals of his vomiting; it purged him but once, and
he was a great deal easier in all his pains. On the 8th he began to take this
powder.

. Oc. 69 pptorum, aut testar. ostrecrum sine igne praeparatarm ij. sal. prunel.
iss. Crem. Tartar. ij. M. ac divid. in ix doses, quarum unam capiat ter in die
in cochl. cujusvis liquoris convenientis.

On the 9th he had a gentle Clyster, because he had not gone to stool since his
vomiting; and on the 10th in the morning, having been furiously delirious the
night before, he was let 7 ounces of blood out of the Saphaena of the Right
Leg, which bled freely without being put into warm water, and that evening had
the Oxycrat applied to his Temples and round his Head, and next day was to be
purged if his Delirium should go off; he was easier that night, but being still
lightheaded, I caused 6 ounces of blood to be taken out of the Jugular Vein on
the 11th, and the Oxycrat to be continued that night, which he past in quiet
sleep, and awakening easy next morning took the following Purge.

. Decoct. senn. Gereon. iv. sir. de spin. Cervin. i. M. ac capiat cum regimine.

It purged him five times, and he had a good nights rest thereafter; next day
he awaked very hungry, and had some Water Gruel.

He drunk all the time of his Sickness a great deal of Barley Decoction
sharpened with Vinegar, and sometimes some Sal Prunellae, dissolved in a Spoon,
given him in a draught of the Decoction.

Observation X.
Thomas Hoskins, on the 11th of June, was taken ill of a violent pain in his
head, and such a pain in his bones as when one is beaten, he was cold and weak
of a sudden, he was costive, and had no appetite for victuals; in a day or two
more the pains went off, except a little in his head; he became very warm, his
pulse was quick, he had a great drought, his tongue was very white and chinkie,
he could not sleep.

On the 12th he was let 12 ounces of blood, and vomited a great deal while he
was bleeding, tho he had not taken any thing, and did not vomit before, next
day he had six grains of vomitive Tart^r, which wrought seven times, and gave
him three stools; he drunk a great deal of water gruel in the intervals of the
vomiting, and went sick to his Hammock, but a little after was very quiet, and
slept about half an hour. On the 14th he began the Powder, which is made thus.

. testar. ostreor. in subtiliss. pulver. super porphyrit. red^ct. ij. sal.
prunel. i. crem. Tartar. ss. M. ac f. doses ix^ Sumat unam ter in die.

On the 16th, being a little lightheaded, and his pulse very high, he was let
8 ounces of blood out of his Jugular Vein, and had the Linen wet in Oxycrat
laid round his Head, by which he slept most part of the night, and next morning
drank this potion.

. Tamarind. (...). hord. integ. M. ss. Coq. l. a. in s. q. aq. fontan. ad hord.
crepitur. Colatur. vi. calide affund. fol. sen. ss. semin. soenic. duic.
contus. ss. Crem. Tartar. i. Maneant per noctem in infu^. ac Colatur ae mane
per express. factae add. sir. de spin. Cerv. ss. M. ac bibat cum regimine.

This purged him six times, and at night the Linen wet as before was laid
round his Head, and he had so good a night, that the outcry next morning was
hunger, which was soon quenched with a little thin Water Gruel. His drink all
this time was Water Gruel sharpened with Vinegar; he slept a great deal for a
day or two, and recovered every day. It Is not without extraordinary difficulty
that we are able to restrain them from eating Salt Beef even in the beginning,
which they are so far from being able to digest, that no sooner do some, that
will not be managed, eat a hearty belly full, but they immediately relapse, and
are forced to go through the greatest part of this process a second time, with
far greater danger than before.

Observation XI.
William Gray, a man about 33 years of age, whose natural pulse beats about
sixty in a minute, complained of a most violent Headache, a pain in his Bones,
his Pulse beat six and forty in a minute, he was costive, and became weak very
suddenly; as his pains went off, the warmth and heat increased, his pulse was
higher, that once when I felt it I reckoned eighty strokes in one minute; he
was very dry, and could not sleep.

On the 27th of July he was let xiv ounces of Blood, and vomited very much
while he was bleeding, which made him a great deal easier; as I have observed
in many others: next day he had five grains of Tartar. Emetic. which, being
well assisted with large draughts of thin Water gruel, gave him six vomits and
one stool. On the 29th he began the testaceous powders, as I ordinarily
prescribe them, and took them three days, the last two having a Clyster in the
evening. On the 1st of July in the evening he began to be delirious; the
Surgeons-mate bled him in the Forehead, but with no great success; for he was
furiously delirious all that night, and his Mess-mates were forced to lash him
in his Hammock; next morning he took six ounces out of the Saphaena, with no
greater benefit, but at five in the evening he let him 8 ounces out of the
Jugular, and in an hour after he fell asleep, and had a pretty good night. Next
day he was purged with an easy Medicine; all the time before the Purge he took
he testaceons Powders, and drank Water Gruel frequently: in the evening after
the Purge he drank some of the following Emulsion.

. semin. iv. frigid. major. i. semin papav. alb. ij. amiyd. dulc. N. xvi.
Contund. s. a. affundend. decoct. hord. lbij. f. emuls. cum sach. edulcorunda;
de qua bibat haustum ad libitum.

He recovered very well, without that lingering weakness, that generally attends
our men for want of convenient Victuals; whereas if but their Burgoo were made
more pleasant, by a small addition of Butter, it would prove very good and
nourishing Victuals for them in the beginning, and would fit them in a short
time for eating the Ships provisions without any injury. It is a great deal
better than Rice, which I find makes them very Costive; and therefore I could
heartily wish some consideration was taken about this matter.

Observation XII.
Thomas James, Captain Munden's Cook, in the London, was taken ill on the 23d
of June of a pain in his Head and Bones, was weak of a sudden, he lost his
appetite, his pulse was depressed, and he was very costive; in a day or two,
tho he was very hot, he had a strong and quick pulse, was very restless, had a
great drought, and was very delirious.

On the 24th he lost 12 ounces of Blood out of his right Arm, tho he be at
least fifty years of age; and next day took four grains of Tartarum Emetic.
which wrought very well, and gave him two stools; he was pretty easy all the
rest of that day, and had the testaceous powders, as I generally prescribe them
in the beginning of Fevers, strictly observing that he had a stool every day.
His ordinary drink was Water, Lime-juice, and Sugar; of which he had as much as
he would drink: yet on the 28th in the evening he proved very delirious, and I
caused him to be let vi. ounces of Blood out of the gular Vein, and then
ordered a piece of Linen doubled, and wet in Vinegar and Water to be applied
round his Head; after which he slept pretty well that night; and next day took
this purge.

. decoct. Sen. Gereon. iv. syrup rosar. solutiv. simpl. ss. M. ac Capiat cras
mane cum regimine.

This purged him four times with a great deal of ease, and he had a pretty good
night after; but in the morning, being a very peevish sort of a man, and
complaining of a very great weakness, I was alarmed with his dying; which was a
very great surprise to me, who thought of nothing less the evening before; so
down I went, and feeling his pulse run between the Radius and the Ulna, it was
not to be felt without some art; however, turning his wrist a little round, the
Artery lying more upon one of the Bones, was easier felt, as I have observed in
my Oecon. of the Humane Body, speaking of pulses. It was very strong, and not
at all frequent and therefore declaring all things to be in a good way, I
ordered him the following powder.

. oc. canc. ppt. ij. pulver. fl^chamom. pulver. rad. serpentar Virginian. an
gr. xv. M ac f. dosestres. Capiat omnes eodem dis, sed vicibus partitis, in
cochl. decoct. aord.

He had the wet Linen applied afresh once more, by which he slept very well;
and only eating Water Gruel for five days, he recovered without further help.

I Am sure by repeating some things so very often, I must needs weary the more
delicate Reader, as I confess I am my self; but this is not entirely designed
for him; and those that are to be bettered by repeated instances, I hope will
reap some advantage, and so I have sufficient reward for all my labor: and
therefore I shall only trouble you, and let you know, I advertised all the
Surgeons I came to talk with, about this observation in opening the Jugular;
which they have acknowledged to have practiced often with the like success; but
there being one thing that happened to Mr Chapman, who is a careful and an
expert Surgeon, easy to follow an advice when reasonably given: I say one
thing very singular happened to him and me, in the case of a man who had been
treated after the same way while I was on board the London; yet in warmer
weather he was very delirious; Mr Chapman went to let him blood in the Jugular
in the morning, but the Vein would not rise: he tried to bleed him in the Arm,
but with the like success; he immediately sends for me, I felt his pulse, which
was very depressed, and beat not above 30 times in a minute, and while I looked
upon his failing senses, and dim eyes, and feeling it again, it beat but 27.
Things being at such a pass, I ordered two* Cupping glasses to be applied, with
Scarification, which was done; but he scarify'd very deep before the blood
appeared; yet getting about six ounces out of the lower part of his Neck, the
pulse immediately grew quicker; and in two hours after, he let him eight ounces
of blood out of his Arm with a very easy Ligature; by which, and other things,
as given before, he recovered. This is a very unusual accident, and not to be
accounted for, but by a thorough understanding of the Doctrine of Apoplexies;
and because I shall have an opportunity, as I said before, to speak a little to
that subject, I shall content my self with referring you to that place; and
conclude this Observation with a Letter I had sent me, about what I have
written.

SIR,
I Most willingly account my having your company one whole Summer, and a great
part of this, amongst the happy parts of my Life; when I see the most exact
practice I ever saw or read in my days; and all this mightily heightened by your
condescension in giving me most solid rules and reasons for giving and doing of
things, upon certain occasions. Any one that knows what I have improved by
this, must needs envy me, and acknowledge with my self, the misfortune I had to
be deprived of you, when we made our Bilboa Voyage; yet returning now into
England, I hope you excuse my taking the first opportunity to let you know,
that tho we had an abundance of sick, we have not buried one; for which, next
to God Almighty, you are to be thanked: Yet I must tell you, that tho you
advised me to let blood in the Jugular, in more stupid deliria, and in the
Saphaena when they were more furious, which has done very well; yet I have
opened the Saphaena and the Frontal in the case you advised me, but with
nothing of that success as opening the Jugular, which has most surprising
effects. This I presume to tell you not only for your own thoughts, but as I
hope and desire would make us in the Fleet, and even others that look higher,
happy in a Continuation of what you have begun: So I must beg you you will do me
Justice to the World in this; whom I would have know too, that I have all the
obligations worth and esteem can enjoin, to be

Your Most Humble Servant. S. S.


Notwithstanding of all this, and what I have often proved, I cannot be wanting
in any thing may be of advantage to the Service, but acknowledge that tho what
I demonstrate about the Nature of Fevers, and that they are entirely owing to
the fullness occasioned by an interruption of perspiration, and that therefore
he that would cure a Fever must either evacuate a quantity equal to the
quantity of detained steams, or such a quantity that the secretions being
better performed, there may, at length, a due quantity be evacuated; yet the
instruments we use in voiding this quantity by sweat, being so uncertain, that
either not having the expected effect, they make the most healthy patient die
the most furious and mad death, or even when they prove effectual, yet by their
warmth add a greater heat and velocity to the blood, than they help by their
evacuation, which makes a very unsuccessful practice, and deterred me from
having recourse to that way. Bat having, of late, fallen upon a medicin, that,
in half a quarter of an hour, puts the patient into a large sweat, without any
warmth, and judges his Fever, especially if he has the good fortune of a Cabin;
I must relate two or three instances of about forty, in which I have used this
medicin, and with the same success.

Observation XIII.
Joshua Manning was taken ill the latter end of July on board the Duchess, of
a pain in his head, and bones, and was very weak of a sudden; his pulse was
depressed, he was costive and had no appetite.

On Friday 24th, Mr Birkly, who is a very expert and knowing Surgeon, let him
twelve ounces of blood; next morning he took 5 gr. of Tartarum Emeticum, which
vomited him four times, and made him go twice to stool* That evening he took ss
of Syrup of white Poppies; and on Sunday the 26th the medicin, which made him
sweat from eight in the morning till six in the evening, with so good success,
that next day about noon he sat up in his Cabin, and in a day or two when I
came on board, I found him walking upon the Deck.

Observation XIV.
Mr Noble, first Lieutenant of the same Ship, was taken ill after the same
manner, and Mr Birkly, after he had let him blood, and given him a vomit, and
the Syrup de mecan in the abovementioned order, he gave him next morning the
Medicin, which had so great success, that in the afternoon he found himself so
well that he thought he might put on his Clothes, and go upon Deck; which he
did, but catching cold, he relapsed; I happened to be there the day after his
relapse, and finding him incline to be delirious, I caused a Blister to be
applied to the nape of his Neck that evening, and next day ordered him to take
the medicin a second time, which he did much to his advantage, and being more
careful for a day or two, he recovered very well.

Observation XV.
Thomas Munden, a Kinsman of Captain Munden's, who commands the London, was
taken ill, on Tuesday, July 28th at night, of a sickness in his Stomach, an
exquisit pain in his Head, his Bones, and all his Joints; his pulse was a great
deal lower than naturally, and he had no desire to eat.

On Wednesday he was let blood; next day, had a Vomit, and the third, the
Medicine; which produced a very good effect, to the satisfaction of us all. On
Saturday he was very hungry, but I would allow him nothing but Water Gruel; and
on Sunday he took Physic, and recovered very fast every day.

At the same time one of Mr Chapman's Mates was ill, was treated after the same
way, and recovered as soon, tho not quite so well, being a little warmer by the
heat of the Cockpit where he lay; so mischievous is the least extraordinary
warmth in Fevers, tho it has not hitherto been so well looked into, but rather
encouragd.

And now, since I have given you^ these 4 instances of this easy way o^ Cure, I
shall only add, that all the Experiments I have had occasion to make of this
method, have proved equally successful, so well may a^ practice be mended; and
therefore I will not tire your patience with more histories of continued
Fevers, but keeping to the order of my last Book^ I proceed to these that are
intermitting^* In the mean time I must desire you to peruse with attention, the
Theory in the first part, and the Indications in the second, of that last book,
which are but the consequences of the former; for otherwise you cannot
understand the design of the practice.

Observation XVI.
John Orran, was taken ill after dinner, on May 2d, of a coldness and trembling
which lasted two hours, all which time his pulse was depressed and weak; but
afterward he became a great deal hotter, his pulse was quick, he had a great
drought, and the fit ended in a sweat that lasted 3 hours.

'Twas evident to me that it was a formed Ague, and because most Spring agues
are Tertians, I suspected (...) to be so too; yet that we might (...) seem to
torment him without ^ein^ sick, we delayed giving him any thing till he should
have another fit; accordingly on Monday by nine in the morning his fit came
violently upon him, and held him as before; and on Wednesday by five in the
morning, ^e took 5 grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which vomited him ten times. I
did not allow him to drink so large draughts of Water gruel, as I prescribe in
continual Fevers; for the reasons I assign, when I speak of Agues in the 2d
part of my Sea-sick^esses: However, with this severe fit ^e missed of his Ague;
and next morning he took the following medicin.

Decoct. amar. alterant. cum dupla ^uantitate radic. gentiaan. viij. Bibat ^ras
mane; ac repetatur ad vij. alias ^ices.

After he had drank this four or five mornings, he began to recover hi^ color
and flesh, which is always a certain sign of their recovering health.

Observation XVII.
Michael Sunderland, was taken the latter end of April, with a coldne^^ and
trembling after dinner, his Puls^ was depressed, he had a great desi^ to vomit,
his Lips and ^ace were very pale, and he had no appetit^ for his victuals; in
an hour or tw^ after he became very warm, and wa^ hot for more than an hour,
his Puls^ was very quick, and he sweat a^ hour more, which ended (...) fit.

On the first of May, in the morning, he took five grains of Tartar^^ Emeticum,
which vomited him fo^^ times, and gave him two stools about eleven in the
forenoon his (...) returne^* but it was nothing so seve^^ as his (...); after
he had swea^ and all was over in pretty good o^der, he began to take the Jesui^
powder in this form.

Pulver. cortic. chin. chin. j. cons. rosar. rub. vj. sir. fl. caryophill. q.
s. ut f. electuar. Cujus capiat magnitudinem nucis moschatae majoris tertia
quaque hora, superbibendo vin. hispanic. aut Canarin. poculum, after which his
fit did not return; yet to prevent a relapse, I prescribed him the following
Tincture.

rad. gentian. j. helen. aristol. rotund. an ss. Zedoar. ij. summitat cent.
min. flor. chamom. an M. j. cortic. aurant. ss. baccar. Juinper. ij. Pptis. s.
a. affunde vin hispanic. lbij. ac postquam fuerint per biduum in infusione,
bibat cochl. iv* bis in die.

Having drank this ^or some time, he began to recover his color, which is
always a certain sign that the Patient is out of danger of a relapse; yet he
infused the medicines a second time, and did very well.

Observation XVIII.
Richard Osburn, was taken ill of a coldness after dinner, which was succeeded
with a trembling, an inclination to vomit, his Pulse was very depressed, and
his Lips were of a perfect clay-colour; yet instead of death came a great
warmth* his Pulse was quick, he had a great drought, and his heat was so sharp,
that he was very restless, till a plentiful sweat succeeding, made him more
temperate; this Fever returned once in 24 hours.

When I saw him first, the fit, which lasted six hours was just gone off, and
expecting the return next day about ten in the morning, I ordered him five
grains of Tartarum Emeticum, to be taken by eight that morning. which wrought
very well, and had done its operation but a little before his sit came upon
him; the cold fit was a great deal easier, and did not continue so long as
before, and just as it was ending, he took j. of pulv. gasconic. He fell asleep
and awaking in a fine sweat, he judged that fit to be very well; and
immediately after the fit, began to take the powder made into an Electuary, as
follows.

Pulver. quinquin. vj. cons. rosar. rub. ss. theriac. Andromach. ij. sir. de
mecon q. s. ut f. electuar. molle; quod consumat partitis dosibus ante
paroxysmi sequentis adventum.

By the use of this he missed his fit; yet to confirm his strength, he took 6
spoonfuls of the following Tincture, till it was ended.

rad. gentian. helen. an j. summitat. absynth. cent. min. fl* chamom. ac M. j.
semin. coriand. ij. cortic. aurant. ss. baccar. juniper. ij. limatur. m^rt. ss.
Tartdr. alb* crud. in pet. ligat. ij. (...). fund. per biduum in vin. hispanic.
lbiij. dein bi^at cochl. ^ bis in die.

After he had drank this for some days, his color and flesh returned, he got
an appetite for his victuals, and recovered daily without a relapse.

Observation XIX.
M -- Captain of his Majesty's Fireship -- was taken ill for a great while of a
pain in his Heel, in the evening, so that sometimes he was so lame in the
morning, that he could hardly walk till nine or ten of the clock.

In my first visit, I found he had a great may symptoms that happen to people
in Agues, and for that reason, I was the ap^er to think it one, since I have
seen twice before such strange personating of Agues, particularly in a Lady of
Quality, Sir Thomas Millingtoun and I was concerned in, who had an Ague
personated by the most violent hysterical fits, that ever were described by any
Author, but I forbear relating it, because it happened not at Sea. Yet whoever
understands perfectly the Theory of Agues, and especially about their Return,
will easily be persuaded, that there may be such obstructions in the smaller
and less comprest vessels that may produce such effects, and these (...)
suppl^ied and discussed, that very way end one paroxysm and begin another: tho
I must confess, that the diligent Doctor Sydenham was the first, who took any
particular notice, and gave us a plain account of any such fact; tho he thought
the reason was never to be assigned. This he does in his letter to the learned
Doctor Brady, at present Kings professor in Cambridge. Hic autem, says he,
commemorare libet, quod sub primus* hujus constitutionis annos symptoma qaoddam
insigne Febribus intermittent ibus quandoque supervenerit. Nempe ear um
paroxysmi non cum ^igore and horrore, quas postea Febris exci pit invadebant
sed aeger ijsdem plane symptomatis tentabatur ac si Ap^plexia vera laborasset
quae tamen nihil ali^d esset, utcunque hunc affectum, aemularetur, qua^ ipsa
Febris caput impetens; ut ex alijs signis, it a ex color urinae satis
liquebat: quae intermittentibus ut pluri^um rubore saturato extat, qualis
c^rn^tur in urina eorum qui Ictero laborant, etsi non adeo intense rubet, and
pariter sedimentum deponit pulverem laterum fere referens. Hoc autem in casu,
etc.

But I must now take notice that a very considerable symptom attended these
intermitting Fevers, about the beginning of this constitution. Their paroxysms
made not their approach with a shaking and shivering, and then had the Fever
following; but the sick person was affected in that very way, as if he had been
ill of a true Apoplexy; which, nevertheless was nothing else but the Fever it
self attacking his head. However, it imitated that disease, as was most evident
by a great many signs, but more particularly by the color of the Urine, which,
in Agues, is commonly of a deep red, such as that is in those that are ill of
the Jaundice, tho it be not quite so red, and likewise breaks into a sediment
almost like Brickdust. But in this case, etc.

The great Doctor Sydenham is imitated in this by Doctor Morton, who endeavors
to follow so exact a guide in writing observations of some diseases; but
whatever people may think of that way of writing, I think it is the hardest
thing to perform well in the world, which makes the observations of Platerns,
Horstius, and a great many more Authors, who have been mightily commended of so
little real use. I say that Doctor, Morton does here pursue the hint from
Doctor Sydenham at greater length about the 82 and 83 page of his Pyraetolog,
and give us the pathognomical sign, the Vtinam bone tinctam, sedimento
lateritio saturatam, an Urine of a deep color, stuffed with a sediment like
Brickdust.

And therefore, by the conduct of Doctor Sydenham, for I had not read the other
Author when such a symptom first appeared to me, and the reason I have already
assigned. I believed in my former patients and in this, that he had an Ague
personated by a fit of the Gout. During the paroxysin I endeavored to allay
the pain, but designed to prevent a relapse by the Jesuits powder, which
succeeded very well given this way.

On the 8th of May he had a fit in the evening; next day, he dined by eleven in
the forenoon, and at five took this vomit.

Vin. emetic. i. Oxym. seyllit. ss. aq. theriacal. ij. M. ac exhibeatur cum
regimine.

This made him vomit six times, and gave him one stool, and having his Fit in
the evening, he began the Powder in the night; it was made up into an Electuary
this way.

cons. ros. rub. j. pulv. chin. chin. vi. sir. de succ. limon. ^q. s. f.
electuar. molle, quod consumat ante reditum sequentis. paroxysmi.

He took it accordingly, and prevented the Fit; he had the Tincture too, for
the design I use to give it, and suffered no relapse.

Observation XX.
The order I proposed in the beginning, leads me next to the other part of our
stationary sicknesses the Loosenesses and Scurveys; and I shall give you a few
instances of a great many that happened, as clearly and shortly as is possible.

Peter Pierce having returned from the Streights, was troubled with a violent
Flux: he was put ashore at De^l, and Gosp^rt, but returning without any Cure, I
saw him on the 9th of June, on board the Queen, where Mr. French, a very
careful Man, is Surgeon; he went to stool some 14 times a day, and was very
uneasy in the night, he had no appetite for his Victuals, and was in a very
weak condition: next day he took the following Purge.

Pulv. rad. Rhubarb. i. cinam. pulverat. ss. M. ac capiat cum regimine.

He did not void much more than usually, with thsi, and in the evening he took
the powder I prescribe for this disease, made into a Bolus, with conserve of
red Roses, by which he recovered without taking any more remedies.

Observation XXI.
John Hall at the same time came from the Streights with the sickness upon him,
and had the fate of the former; he had tried every thing that is prescribed by
Physicians in this case, but to no purpose; at last taking the purgative as
before, and then the Bolus, he did not go to stool for two days, and once every
day thereafter; and recovered his health.

Observation XXII.
At the same time I saw Edward Mc Kaffrey, who had returned from the Streights
in that Ship, and was put ashore for his illness, but to no purpose; he took
this purge on the 10th of June.

Pulver. radic. jalap. cortic. cinam. subtle. pulverat. an j. M. ac capiat cum
regimine.

He had ten stools that day, and in the evening took the powder made up with a
little of the Conserve of pale Roses, and Syrup of White Poppies into a Bolus,
it kept him from going to stool that night, but he having three or four stools
next day, and being a little gripped he had a Clyster that day, and in the
evening the Powder made up with Conserve of Red Roses, and recovered perfectly.

Observation XXIII.
Alexander Ferguson, one about sixteen or eighteen years of Age, returned from
the Streights with the rest, but went to stool sometimes twenty times a day, he
voided little but blood, and a skinny sort of substance, which he would be apt
to take for the coats of the guts.

He was let 5 ounces of blood in the arm, that evening, for revulsion.

Now the reasonableness of this practice will appear from what I shall write
about the cure of an Apoplexy; and the success of such a revulsion may be seen
in Authors: in particular, Amatus Lusitanus says, Ad virum illum, qui
Dysenteriam diuturnam, and forte triginta dierum, ingenti cum febr^ patiebatur,
ac post multa and varia adhibita remedia, imbecillis and gracilis est factus,
perseverante etiam fluxu ventris multo cum sanguine; Medicus cordatus ingressus
est, qui sanguinem ex basilica dextri brachij extraxit, sed quanto juvamine,
audite. Ilico, mirum dictu! sanguis cohibitus fuit, perseverante adhuc fluxu
ventris. Caetetrum saccharo ad aliquot dies, and nonnullis ingestis
Clysteribus, ac topicis astringentibus remediis adhibitis; Alvus, in totum,
restricta est.

Rad. Rhab. elect. subtiliss. pulverat. j. cinam. gr. xv. balsaem. Capyi. gut.
j. M. ac capiat cum regimine.

This purged him easily, and that evening he took the Medicin in this form.

Pulver. contra Diarrhaeas j. Opobals. gut. viij. cons. ros. rub. q. s. ut f.
bolus quem capiat hora somni.

He slept easily, and was not disturbed that night, he had no stool next day;
and but one the day after, and was restored to his health.

Observation XXIV.
Hearing that there were some persons troubled with a looseness, on board the
Sandwich, Commanded by Captain Mees; I went on board for that purpose on the
23d of July, and saw Robert Alvin, Edward Huggin, Charles Child, Thomas Star,
and Robert Craig, who were very much weakened by most troublesome loosenesses
that had kept them for three months, in spite of all that the Physicians, or
any body else could give them.

On the 24th they were all purged with the powder of Rhubarb and Cinnamon,
which had all the success imaginable, and in the evening going to bed they took
the bolus, which put an end to their troublesome disease, without any
inconvenience whatsoever.

Observation XXV.
Henry Lloyd, having been troubled with this distemper so long, that for a
fortnight he came not out of his Hammock, but as he was carried in men's arms,
and was so weak that he could not turn himself, had this Clyster in the
afternoon.

Decoct. commun. pro Cl^ster. (in quo coct. sint sl. chamomil. Melilot. an. M.
ss. semin. ^nis. contus. ii. baccar. juniper. jj) viij. terebinth. in vitel.
ovi solut. j. M. f. enema injiciendum hora quinta pomeridiana.

He could not keep it above half an hour, and when he voided it, it brought
along with it a great deal of slimy stuff; and in the evening he took the
medicin, as I used to prescribe it; he drunk for three or four days after the
Decoctum album, and recovered without any relapse. After he had been ten days
free from his flux, and began to crawl about again, he was sent ashore to
recover strength, which he did in a very short time, blessed be God.

Observation XXVI.
-- Servant to Lieutenant Colonel Lutherel, was taken ill on board the
Duchess, in the beginning of August. When I saw him he had had six stools in
one hour that morning; he immediately had the purge, and in the evening the
Bolus, and recovered.

I will not trouble you with more instances, since these are sufficient to
demonstrate how powerful that medicin is, and of how great use it may be in
those Countries where this disease is epidemical; and destroys so many
thousands, as it has done in all the Armies and Navies in Europe, since the
beginning of the present war.

In the next place I proceed to the Cure of Scurveys, which, I bless God for
it, are not so frequent as people imagine, and these that are truly Scorbutical,
recover better in three days ashore, than in three thousand on board, tho very
many recovering imperfectly of their Fevers and continuing weak, are always
said to have the Scurvey, and this might even be pretended with a little more
care, and therefore I will say no more on this subject; and the mistaken
Scurvy, or Melancholia Hypochondriaca shall have its place among our
interfering Diseases, which I now begin to account for.

Observation XXVII.
John Davis, was taken suddenly with a loss of his Speech, he fell down as if
he had been thunderstruck, and fast asleep, without feeling or any motion,
except Respiration, the motion of the Heart, and consequently that of the
Pulse: yet, the Respiration and Pulse were so very small, that the sick person
seemed to be dead for a great many hours, his breathing was high, as when a man
snores, and he foamed a little at the mouth.

It Is certain, that this is a Fit of an Apoplexy, a Disease not necessarily
occasioned by our way of living at Sea, and therefore not to be minutely and
particularly accounted for, in this place; yet to make the method of cure to be
better understood, 'twill be necessary to say something, in the general, of its
production: and therefore, let us only consider what we observe upon this and
the like occasions; we have here a sudden and universal deprivation of sense
and motion, except those already mentioned in the foregoing History; so that
whatsoever is capable of producing this universal and sudden Deprivation, is
the immediate cause of this Disease. Again, let us remember that when I proved
in my O Econ. Anim. that there was a liquor propell'd through the Nerves which
we might call Animal Spirits, I did it upon an experiment of a part's losing
its sense and motion by making a ligature upon the nerve with which that part
is provided; and now since we see that a member, or a particular muscle may
lose their sense and motion by making ligatures upon their Nerves; if so many
ligatures or something that produces the same effect, be supposed to affect
every Nerve and ail its parts, or all the Nerves in their Original, which may
be more easily done, 'twill not be difficult to apprehend this universal and
sudden deprivation of sense and motion, which is required.

Now any thing that may depress the small and tender Nerves in their rise, in
the Brain, and Medulla oblongata, will hinder this derivation of animal spirits
through the Nerves and cause an Apoplexy; whether the sides of the Arteries be
stuffed with too much blood (through its vis^idity, too great quantity, or its
being too much rarefied) bending outward with greater force than these Nerves
have resistance; or whether these Nerves are thus deprest, by any of the
vessels of the Brain being broken, and their liquors driven through all the brain
by the force that propell'd those liquors; extraneous bodies bred in the brain,
a depression of the skull, which compresses these vessels, and the whole
substance of the brain; all which may produce the required effect.

Now if the compression be of such a kind that either few animal spirits are
derived, or none at all; if the last, the consequence is death, because of the
absolute and perfect want of those spirits that distribute sense over all the
body, and motion to all its vessels and liquors: but when these spirits are
conveyed in a very small quantity, they go with no unequal force into all the
muscles, and consequently they effect equally, as to our observation, the whole
muscles; and because the muscles of the whole body are counterpoised by their
Antagonistical Muscles, except the Heart which has no Antagonistical Muscle,
and they being equally affected with this small quan^ity of animal spirits,
their powers will be equal, and all detained in equilibrio, except the Heart
whose faint motion, from so few spirits, does continue; and the pulse too,
which depends upon the motion of the Heart. Now from this Theory 'twere easy to
establish the Cure, according to the different ways of the production of this
Disease; as that an Apoplexy from extravasated liquors or extraneous bodies
bred in the brain is incurable, because we know of no way to bring back these
liquors into their vessels, or to destroy these growing and compressing bodies
in the brain: and that that from a depression of the skull requires the raising
of the skull, and a practice according to the hurt the brain has received by
this depression. But the Cure of that which is occasioned by the stagnating of
the blood in the Arteries of the Brain, and Medulla Oblongata, can only be
performed by such means as may put this blood into motion, and empty those
vessels from the extraordinary quantities; upon which views, straight come into
our mind all sorts of Evacuations, as Bleeding, Vomiting, Purges, Clysters,
Sweating Medicines, etc. then such Medicines as cause pain, which occasions the
vessels and muscles to be more violently contracted, that so the stuffing
liquors may be the more easily cast off. Now, tho Authors do mightily depend
upon such evacuating Medicines for curing the paroxysm of an Apoplexy, yet it
were easy to demonstrate the unsuccessfulness of that practice, by proving how
such Medicines cannot affect the body in this circumstance, and therefore can
afford but a very weak help; but this not being my design, I will only put 'em
in mind of an instance of daily experience, and defer other Arguments to a more
proper occasion; and that is, if we give a very strong Vomit to any one in a
Quartan Ague when the cold fit is begun, we find it never has its effect till
the cold fit, which may last three or four hours, is over; the vomitive parts
of any medicin not being capable to affect the Blood or animal Spirits, in this
viscid state of the Blood, or when it has a slower motion in the cold fit of an
Ague, so as to produce their natural and constant effect; yet so soon as that
is over, we find that, in a reasonable time, this small quantity of a medicin
that has been in reserve, for some hours, in a place, that uses to digest our
most solid food, and transmit its healthful juices into the blood for our
sustenance in less time, at length, and then only begins to move us; and since
this is the constant fate of vomits taken in such circumstances, 'twill be very
plain to those that can see into the reason of this obvious observation, what
we are to expect from this medicin in the fit of an Apoplexy, where all feeling
and sense seem to be at a final period, the equable and exact motion of our
Liquors interrupted, the Pitcher broken at the Fountain, and the spring and
origin of motion taken off: And if all this happens to vomits, the medicines,
that of all others have the most violent effects upon us, what must the weaker
helps of the other medicines be thought to perform? just nothing; and if we can
cram them into him, it is only to plague him after he has recovered without our
help. Now, if this is all that internal medicines can do, even when we are to
use violence upon our Patients to make 'em receive them; we must certainly
depend upon external operations, for any service we can expect to do, as
anointings, which can do least, smelling at things that may affect our Senses
and create pain, which may do more; but if we can hinder a greater afflux of
Blood to that which already stagnates, and even take off some of the stagnating
power, we may reasonably hope that the Heart may recover such force, as may
propel the stagnating Liquors in the Brain, and Medulla Oblongata, or that we
may relieve our Patients with a great deal of certainty and in a short time,
and to put him in a condition to reap advantage from internal Medicines that
could do him no service before: And this may be done by such ways of bleeding,
whereby the blood being determined more to one part than another, more to the
place where there is no cause for obstruction, than to one where it already is,
there may be some of the obstructing force taken off, or it may be done by
Revulsion and Derivation, a practice so confirmed by daily experience, as well
as by that of the Ancients of all Ages; tho its reason was never to be
assigned, but by supposing Harvey's most noble Theorem, the Circulation of the
blood, Whatever; contrary use some of our Modern Physicians have pleased to
make of it, without any reason. For, if the Blood's motion is quicker by
bleeding, and in that Vessel where the wound is made, than it is in any other
Vessel of the opposite side, and that has no communion with this, or even in
the same Vessel; before the bleeding; It Is certain that there will a greater
quantity of blood flow through that Vessel than there does in its opposite Vessel
in the same space of time, or did throw it self before the Ve^esection; and
that if this emissary is made upon a Vein that is continued with an obstructed
Artery, this new outlet of the Blood will take off some hundreds of degrees of
resistance that it had from the blood contained in its Channel; or by the
different ways of bleeding there will be Revulsion and Derivation as was to be
proved. Now the blood's motion must be quicker, because the powers that propel
the blood, or rather the blood it self, does not communicate, or does not lose,
by a great deal, so much of its force, when it moves thorough a Vessel, or its
processes even to the Heart, as where there is an emissary made, where there is
none. This is most evident upon this account, because the parts of blood that
are next to the Heart propelling the parts that are more remote, lose a
thousand times more of their motion when they propel the blood thorough a whole
Channel, than when the Vessel has a large emissary made upon it, the proportion
betwixt the column of blood as it runs in a continued course (the parts of
blood being contiguous one to another in their motion from the left Ventricle
of the Heart, till they return into the right) and as it runs thorough an
emissary into the air being as 1 to 1000, or by some calculations as 1 to 1200
or thereabouts. But not to insist upon this, and that some who are accustomed
to more nice calculations, may be capable to conceive the truth of this
proposition we advance; let them but call into their thoughts what happens
constantly in bleeding; where we may see run out of one Vein some ten or twelve
ounces of blood in little more than a minute, and showing such quantities over
all the body, then considering the Mass and bigness of the Vessels, and so
he will find this excessive velocity is either to be allowed, or else his
quantity of Blood must grow infinitely upon him, and extraordinarily beyond a
reasonable allowance. And now it being clear, that not only the Doctrine of
Revulsion and Derivation is to be accounted for by supposing the Circulation of
the Blood, but even that they who believe that this Doctrine is contrary to this
Proposition, are perfectly ignorant of this noble Theory, the Circulation of
the Blood, and its great Effects; I will proceed to the Cure of the Patient in
the Fit of the Apoplexy; and because things could not be got ready soon enough
for a more considerable Revulsion by Bleeding him in the Foot, I caused eight
Ounces to be taken out of his Arm, through a large Orifice, and thereafter,
because he had abundance of Blood, xvj. were taken out of his right jugular,
because they convey the Blood immediately from the Sins of the Brain, into
which these Arte^i^s discharge themselves; which Operation, with smelling at
some strong Spirit of Hart's horn, brought him out of the Fit while the Surgeon
was Bleeding him; after the Fit was over, he had a Clyster, not at all stronger
than usually, and took now and then three spoonfuls of this Julep.

aq. lact. al^xiter. v. spirit. vin. ij. aq. theriacal. j. Tinctur. Castor. j.
M. ac cum. sir. fl. caryophyl j. f. julap. Cujus bibat (...). iij. tertia
quaque hora.

He had a Seton in his Neck for one Month, and his ordinary drink was the
following decoction.

lign. Guaiac. vj. Cortic. ejusdem ij. santal. rub. citrin. an. vj. Coq. and
digerant. l. a. in s. q. aq. sont. ad lbvj. Circa finem addend. passul. major.
integr. v. Colatura servetur usui.

All this time he had suffered no relapse, nor since as I can learn.

Observation XXVIII.
T. ^ -- who had been ill of a long time, of a difficulty of Breathing, of that
sort that is called an Asthma, according to an Ancient verse,

Disnia se celat, canit Asma malumque revelat,
Ortonia quoque morbo vexatur utroque.
His Pulse was slower than usually, he had no Appetite, and was of a
Cachectical disposition.

Now, since an Influx of the Animal Spirits into the Muscles of the Thorax, in
its proper disposition, as that of the Lungs, Air and Blood are absolutely
necessary in a natural respiration; so any one or more of these, or all
together being viciated will occasion a difficulty of Breathing, which are more
particularly to be accounted for by those that write, on purpose, upon that
Subject; in this case, his thicker Blood not being able to pass quickly enough
through his Lungs did produce this Asthma; and therefore being first called to
him while he was in a very severe Fit, I ordered him immediately to be let
twelve Ounces of Blood; next Morning which was the 25 of June, he took gr. vj.
of Tartar. Emetic. which produced the desired effect; and the day after he took
this purge.

resin. jalapp. gr. x. mercur. d. gr. viij. trochisc. Alhand. gr. ij. gum.
ammoniac. solut. ac parum inspissat. q. s. ut f. pil. No. v. Quas capiat multo
mane cum regimine.

After he had taken these Pills, he began this Tincture, which I had ordered to
be prepared in the mean time.

rad. gentian. ij. summitat. hyssop. puleg. centaur. min. M. j. baccar.
juniper. ij. croc. Anglic. in pet. ligat. j. ^illeped. viv. ac mundat. No. xl.
preparatis s. ^. a^^und, vin Xeresens. lbij. ac post quam fuerint per biduum in
infusione, bibat cochl. v. bis in die.

He found himself in less than a Month, a great deal easier than he had been
for a year before, and I hope he has e're now recovered his perfect Health.

Observation XXIX.
T -- B -- was taken with an Efflux of yellow Matter out of his Yard, in one
days time, after some impure Embraces, he had a scalding of his Urin, a painful
erection, and une chorde.

He complained to me as soon almost as it appeared, and he was perfectly cured
of this misfortune, the Gleet and all its attendants in twelve days, by the
method I hinted in my last Book. The Gonorrhaea in this way of Cure, has this
constant appearance through the whole course, as I have hitherto observed; for
the first three or four days, it runs but moderately of a thicker kind of
stuff, from the Fourth or Fifth, to the Ninth thinner and in a greater
abundance, very yellow and sometimes green; about the Ninth it generally
changes its color to an equal substance, and the desired whiteness, decreasing
considerably in its quantity, till on the Twelfth, Thirteenth or Fourteenth, it
quite vanishes, daily lessening by degrees, its substance becoming thicker and
whiter, the (...) it grows; after the same very way which we observe in other
Ulcers.

I could relate more Instances of this kind, if it were not too tedious to read
Cures, without knowing the Method, and Instruments that contributed toward
them; and therefore I will add no more Observations of this Nature, but rather
divert our selves a little with some Reasonings about its Antiquity, which, in
my Opinion, is pretty plainly to be read in a great many places in Ancient
History, but more especially among the Comodians. Though this has seemed to be
very obscure, and we are contented to refer its Original to the Siege of
Naples; yet to lay aside profane History, at this time, I will only allege
that an Account of may easily be found in the Holy Scriptures themselves, and
by the way of expressing it there; this seems to be as Ancient as the time of
Women having Monthly and Childbed purgations, which succeed the description of
our Diseases here, from the very beginning of Mankind. The place where I think
this is so plainly intimated, is when Moses Institutes the Ceremonies of the
Jews purifying themselves, he says in the 2d verse of the 15th Chapter of
Leviticus, When any Man has a Running Issue out of his Flesh, etc. It is
described very plainly and beyond a guess: And the Word Flesh here spoken of,
is frequently taken in holy writ for the Privy Member of a Man, as in the
Institution of the Circumcision with Abraham, in the 17th Chapter of Cenesis at
the 11th verse, and when God Almighty denounces his Wrath against the Whoredom
of Jerusalem, in the 26th verse of the 17th Chapter of Eze^^^l's Prophesies, he
says, Thou ^^st also (...) ^ornication with the Egyptians thy ^^^^bours, great
of Flesh, as he had (...), cum, Mutoneatis Aegyptis; and in the 20th verse of
the 23d Chapter of that Prophet's Book, For she doted upon their paramours,
whose Flesh is as the Flesh of Asses, etc. Now seeing the word Flesh here spoke
of is Penis, we can be at no dispute about the Accident related of it in the
sequel of this Chapter, in Leviticus: And it being the Running of the Reins or
Clap, that Moses Institutes this Ceremony of Purification for, it is evident
also, that this Sickness thus to (...) Purified for, was known to Moses, and
frequent among those that recei^^d those Laws, or that it was (...) among the
Children of Israel; and so, among the most Ancient things that we know, and
more Ancient than the most of, or any other Diseases: But this is still more
clear that we read it in the French Translation, or in that of the vulgar
Latin. And therefore it is plain, from this single Instance, that this Disease
is more Ancient than the first of the times we use to assign, as I intneded to
prove.

Observation XXX.
D -- J -- a Boatswain's Mate in his Majesty's Ship the -- was seized with the
abovementioned Disease in an East India Voyage, and had a Cure, that stopped his
Running; about three Months after, he was troubled with great, thick, crusty
Scabs on his Arms; for which he had a great many Liniments and other Med'cins,
by which the Scabs fell off, but still sprung up again; 'till meeting him this
Summer he was perfectly Cured by the following method: He took a Bolus of
Turbith Mineral twice a Week, and his constant drink was a decoction of Guaiac.
for one Month, the Remedies were these,

Turpeth. mineral gr. vij. cons. rosar. rub. q. s. ut f. Bolus, quem Capiat cum
regimine Repetatur ad alteram vicem hac septimana, ac bis hebdomadib. seq. ad
mensem integrum.

Rasur. lign. guaiac. ij. corti^. ejusd. ss. Coq. s. a. in aq. fontan. s. q. ad
lbij. Circa finem addendo passul. major. integr. iv. aut liqu^rit. raspat. ss.
f. Colatura in lagena vitrea recondenda ad usum.

In the short time he used these things, his Scabs fell off, and he became very
fat; neither had any return of his fulsome Disease.

Observation XXXI.
Mr. Ankers, Captain Greenway's Clark in the Edgar, was troubled with a want of
Appetite for his Victuals, a prodigious spitting, an apprehension of dying
suddenly, belching, a weak and rare Pulse, and a sinking at his Heart, with a
difficulty in fetching his Breath.

It Is evident that this Sickness which held him of a long time, and for which
he had advised with a great many, to no purpose, is no other than the
Melancholia Hypochondr^^a, or that which People commonly call the Spleen, though
it often times has tho least part in that Disease; and almost none of these
Symptoms I have just now named, can be the consequences of that Part's being
any way affected, as I might easily demonstrate by a more particular resolution
of the Symptoms of this Distemper: But since it is no otherways under my
consideration, at present, than as it is an Interloping Sickness, I may suppose
its Causes, in laying down the Indications for its Cure. And therefore, because
these Belchings, Indigestion, and Windiness in the first Passages, the Slowness
of the Pulse, Vnactiveness, and Whiteness of the Urine, argue a defect in the
attrition of the Chyle, and an unfirness for its being mixed with the Blood, I
ordered him a Vomit both to cleanse the first Passages, that the Chyle and
Med^cins might be transmitted into the Blood in their full force, and that
without any loss of Spirits, as also that the thick and languishing Blood might
receive a new tour and determination, by the violent Contraction of almost all
the Muscles, in the time of vomiting. The Vomit was five grains of Tartarum
(...), dissolved in two or three (...) of White Wind; he dr^nk now and then
large draughts of thin Water Gruel in the intervals of the vomiting. It wrought
very easily for 3/4 of an Hour, in which time he had four vomits and two
stools; about an hour after it had done working, he drank a glass of warm
Sherry, and laid himself to sleep; and next Morning took the following Potion.

sol. senn. sine slip. iij. rad. rhab. elect. incis. j. infund. ^epid. per
noct. in decoct. fortior. passul. major. viij. mane colaturae per express.
factae add sir. de rhamn. ss aq. epidemic. ij. fl. til. ss M. ac. hibat cum
regimine.

This purged him five times without any griping, and to the satisfaction of us
all: The day after he began an infusion that was preparing for him, from the
beginning of this course, whereof this is the form.

rad. gentian. ij. Aristol. rotund. j. summit. cent. min. absynth. Card.
Benedict. an M. j. fol. cochlear. hortens. M. ij. Cortic. aurant. j. baccar.
juniper. iij. praeparatis s. a. a^^und. vin. Xeresens. lbiv. ac macerent. per
dies quatuor vel quinque; dein bibat cochl. iv. bis terve quotidie. Infusio,
vero, tantum coletur tempore usus; ac persistat in hujus infusioni usu ad
mensem integrum.

He drank this Tincture the whole time appointed, which dissipated all his
fears of a sudden Death, and brought him a good Stomach, and easy Nights.

Observation XXXII.
A -- M -- Captain of his Majesty's Ship -- was taken ill of a want of
Appetite, Thoughtfulness, Disturbance in his sleep, Melancholy dreams, and a
Defect of Spirits; his Pulse was weak, and there were small Swellings in
different parts of his Body, in the Morning especially, though they went off
about Noon.

It Is evident that the Sickness is of the same sort with the former, and
therefore I ordered him to be let nine Ounces of Blood, and next day to take
this Vomit.

Tartar. emetic. gr. iv. Solv. in vin. alb. Gallic. cochl. uno vel altero, ac
Capiat mane cum regimine.

It wrought five times, and made him go once to stool, all the time of its
Operation he drank large draughts of Posset Drink; next day Morning he took
these Pills early in the Morning.

pil. Rud. gr. xxv. Merc. d. gr. vij. Tartar. vitriolat gr. v. elixir.
proprietat. q. s. ut^f. pil. No. v. Quas capias multo mane, cum regimine, ac
superdormiendo.

They purged him four times with a great deal of ease; and next Morning he
began the following Electuary.

cortic. aurant. condit. rad. helen. condit. ij. z. in z. in Ind condit. vj.
pulver. Ari composit. ij. theriac. Andr^^^^. j. lyr. chalybeat, q. s. ut f.
electuar* de quo Capiat quantitat. nuc. moschat. major. bis in die,
superbibendo (...) ^ujust^bet generos. poculum.

Every Evening about bed time, he took a Dose of these Pills.

gum. ammo. (...). sagapen. j. en^. vener. ij. croc. Anglic. subtle. pulverat.
ss sal. volatile. succin, C. C. gr. xv. elix. proprictat. q. s. ut f. pil. N^.
xl. ac Capiat tres alternis noctibus, eundo Cubitum.

With the use of these Med'cins, and such a bitter Infusion as was prescribed
before, he recovered perfectly in the space of one Month.

Observation XXXIII.
B -- D -- Surgeon of his Majesty's Ship the -- after a Summer's custom of
drinking drams of Brandy and other Spirituous Liquors, was perfectly dried up,
and decayed; he had no Appetite for Meat, he had a great drought, he Sweat very
much in the night, and could not sleep: He had taken a Vomit and was drinking
decoct. amar. ashore when I saw him first; so I forbid him to use the decoction
any longer, and desired his whole diet might be Water Gruel, Whey, Milk and the
like, and to take frequently some of the following Electuary.

pulp. passul major. cons. cyno^bat. cochlear an j. cortic. citr. condit ss
ocul. caner. ppt. ij. sal. prunel. jss. sir. alth. Fernel. q. s. ut f.
electuar. Cujus capiat magnitud. nuc. myristic. bis vel ter in die,
superbibendo seri lact. recent. ac non salsi poculum.

He continued faithfully in the use of these Med'cins for a Month, and
recovered sensibly every day.

Observation XXXIV.
F -- L -- Captain of his Majesty's Ship -- was troubled with a pain in his
Stomach, a want of Appetite, and what he eat, lay heavy and did not digest, his
Pulse was a crawling rare Pulse, he was subject to sudden Faintings, and had
always most Melancholy dreams.

This being another Fit of the Melancholia Hypochondriaca, I ordered him to
take a Vomit, next Morning, of five Grains of Tartar. emetic. drinking large
draughts of thin water gruel between every Fit of Vomiting: The day following
he drank this Potion.

fol. senn. virent and a st^ipit. mundat. ss rad. rhab. elect. ac in^is. j. fl.
chammo^^il. pu^. ij. crem. Tartar gr. xv. inf. per n^ct. in d^coct. passul.
major. vi. C^latur. mane per expr. fact. add. aq cin. ^ordeat. j. M. ac bibat
cum regimine.

This purged him six or seven times but gripped him a little, and intermitting
one day, on the third the Potion was repeated with the same success as before;
then, he began to take this Infusion.

rad. Imperator ij. raphan. armorac. jss. fol. menth. puleg. beton. summitat.
cent. min. fl chamom. an M. j. rad. galang. ss. z. z. alb ij. cortic. aurant.
iij. mac. ij. limatur. chalyb. lbviij. In. in vin hispa^. lb viij. post
macerat. quatour dierum, bibat jejuno ventriculo, cochl. iv. ma^e, and totidem
hora quinta post meridiem.

He drank also two drops of ol. sulphur. per camp. in a glass of wine half an
hour before Dinner for a whole Month, and recovered very fast.

To these Histories I could add a hundred more, of People that have been in the
same condition after Fevers; for how can it be expected, that after one, who is
very weak and just recovered of a Fever, and falls, without due strength, to
the eating of the Ship's salt Provisions, which I proved to require a vast deal
of Exercise, Work and Fatigue, at any time; I say, how can it be expected that
he can recover strengh upon such a diet, which he is not so much as able to
digest? But this may be almost entirely prevented, by making their Burgoo-diet
more grateful, by a greater allowance of Butter, or fresh Provisions, which
will not do quite so well. I am confident that this one thing would save a
great many Men's lives, how small and inconsiderable soever it may seem to be,
and make the Service to be better performed; and I dare positiv^^, affirm, that
there can be no inconvenience reasonably alleged, so much as by a thousand
Consequences, to the contrary, except a little more Expense and Charge to the
King, and that but very little, and even that saved by the discreet management
of the Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy, which has been singular^ in
this long War. But as things stand now, I have prevented very much this
inconvenience, by confining them, as much as possible, to a diet of
Water Gruel, Burgoo, Bread and Butter, for the first week of their recovery;
drinking half a pint of the bitter draught without the Purgatives, every
morning, or longer as it is needful. But we have more considerable Errors in my
way, or the administering of Physic to the Fleet, which would be less
chargeable, and of greater advantage, if amended; and I must believe, that all
these things will be sufficiently looked into, in their proper time.

Observation XXXV.
Mr. Smith, second Lieutenant of the Victory, was troubled with a Cough, and
difficulty of breathing, he had a pain in his Breast, he was Costive and had no
Appetite.

I ordered him immediately to be let fourteen Ounces of Blood, and next day to
take this purge.

pil. Rud. ss calomelan. gr. viij. Tartar. vitriclat. gr. v. elix. proprietat.
q. s. ut f. p^l. No. v. quas Capiat. multo manc cum regimine and
superdormiendo. Repetatur ad alteram vicem interjecto die u^ico.

When this was done, he was a a little better, yet the pain in his Breast
continuing, I ordered him again to be let Blood, and taking once more a dose of
the Physic, to begin the use of this Electuary, and to live very a^stemiously,
drinking no strong drink, and eating only Water Gruel.

pulp. passul. major. conserv. rosar. rub. ij. theriac. Andromach. iij. sir.
alth. fernel. parum, ut f. electuar. de quo Capiat magnitud. nuc. moschat. bis
vel ter in die.

Before he had consumed this Electuary, he was perfectly well. I know that I
shall be blamed among great Persons that neglect all small things, for
observing this trivial thing of a Cough, and for Curing it this way: But I am
not ashamed to own my inclinations to observe the meanest things that may
happen; though, at the same time, I think a Cough one of the greatest Distempers
that may be, either as it is the beginner of the greatest Diseases, or as it has
been the least accounted for, and the Indications of Cure most injudiciously
established. For a Cough naturally introduces Fevers, Apoplexies, Consumptions,
Convulsive Diseases, etc. and the sooner by the ordinary way of Cure, which is
generally endeavored by thickning Lozenges, or diaphoretical Med'cins; or,
which is ridiculous, by such things that absorb Acids, those pernicious Causes
of this Disease, as they are pleased to think. The first method in any Cough,
that does not go off of it self, makes the Patient Asthmatical, Lethargical, or
throws him into some Convulsive Disease; the second, which is done to open the
Pores, which most pro^^bly were never shut, nor can be ^^agin'd to be so, by
any reason yet alleged, is the plain beginner of Fevers and Sicknesses of that
sort; and as the third is prescribed without a design, so it never produces any
good effect, but prolongs the Disease, so that if it does not go off in spite
of the Med'cins, it ends in a decay. But whoever will give himself the trouble
to remember the time wherein we are most apt to catch cold, may easily discern
that it is the too great lightness of the Air that occasions the slower motion
of the Blood, which is the immediate cause of this Distemper; for the Blood
being more slowly moved, does especially produce that larger discharge of
Lympha in the Salival Vessels, after the manner hinted in my Oecon. Animal.
which Lympha being separated in a great abundance about the Mouth, Throat, or
in the Aspera Arteria it self, and falling into the Lungs, does very often by
its own weight provoke the Lungs into that action we know by the Name of Cough;
though this be not the proper place either to explain what it is, how it is
produced, or what are its causes: Only it is evident that this large discharge
of Lymphae, and the other accidents in a Cough proceeding from the Blood's
slower motion, and greater quantity; that this greater quantity is to be
lessened, and the Blood's motion heightened by ways that are not repugnant to
one another, which may be done by the foregoing method, though the reason is to
be deduced in a great measure, from what I have said about the Cure of
continued Fevers, in the Second Part of my Book of Sea Sicknesses.

Observation XXXVI.
Mr. Listock, a Lieutenant in his Majesty's Ship the Royal William, was ill of
a violent Cough and a spiting of Blood, which made him very pale and lean; he
had a weak Pulse, he did not sleep well in the Night, and was sometimes
Feverish.

The Cough and spiting of Blood, being the great Diseases in this case, and the
other Symptoms but the consequences of them; it is certain that a spitting of
Blood being only produced by the greater force made upon the tenderer and
smaller Vessels, about the Nose, Mouth, Throat, Aspera Arteria, and the Lungs
themselves; that the natural way of Curing this Disease, is by lessening this
violent force of the Blood, that may come from its extraordinary Rarefaction,
Quantity or Motion, and repairing the defects and inconveniences the Vessels
have sustained by this eruption: But before I speak of the Cure, some will
expect that I should determine the part for which this Blood was voided, which
is of no great consequence to the Cure, though it may be in a clear Prognostic,
yet even this I have neglected, because 'twould spend too much time in settling
more evident and certain signs, than we find among Authors; for who that has
read any thing of Physic, does not see that we all follow Hippocrat. 5. Aph.
13. Quicunque spumantem sanguinem extussiunt, iis ex pulmone educitur, in
settling this Eff^ux from the Lungs, rather in the Throat or any where else,
where it is demonstrable that Blood may be frothy, though it never came from the
Lungs; and that there may be Vessels broken in the Lungs, out of which a great
deal of Blood may be voided, and yet this may not be frothy. I say not to spend
too much time, and from the purpose upon this Subject, I am content to give an
account of the way how I cured my Patient, though he eat salt Victuals almost all
the while.

He was first let Blood, both to lessen the quantity and to make a Revulsion,
and then because the spiting was not so frequent, and his Blood seemed to be in
an ill condition, he was purged with half a dram of Rhubarb, and next took this
Electuary.

cons. cynosbat. pulp. passul. major an ij. lapid. haematit. ppti. pulv. sang.
dracon. an ij. sal. prunell. iss. theriac. Andromach. ij. sir. de ros. sicc. q.
s. ut f. electuar. Cujus capiat quantitatem nuc. muschat. major. bis vel ter in
die.

His drink was Water, and a little red Wine, and in every draught, he had ss.
sal. prunellae; and at Bed time he took twice a Week the following Bolus.

spermat. cet. non rancid. gr. xv. pil. de styrac. gr. vj. cons. rosar. rub. q.
s. ut f. bolus, quem Capiat hora somni.

After he had taken these things eight or ten Days, he found himself a great
deal better, and continued using them for a Month or two more; only the
Electuary was a little altered, and made not so binding.

Observation XXXVII.
G -- D -- Purser of his Majesty's Ship the -- was taken ill of a sharp
pricking pain in his left side, he was somewhat Feverish, he breathed thick,
and with a great deal of difficulty, his Pulse was hard and frequent, and
withal he had a Cough.

It Is evident by this description, That he was ill of a Pleurisy, and because
this affection is only an in^^ammation of the P^^ura, and, perhaps, of the
Muscles themselves, which is produced by the Blood's stagnating in the Arteries
of these parts, where this affection is: And therefore, I ordered twelve Ounces
of Blood to be taken out of his right Arm, and the very same minute I saw him;
and enjoined it to be repeated, if the pain did not sensibly abate in four
hours time, and in 24 hours time, he lost 48 Ounces of Blood at convenient
intervals: his drink was barley decoction, in every draught of which, was mixed
a dose of purified Nitre; and at night, going to Bed, he drank off this
Emulsion.

semin. iv. frigid. major. j. semin. papav. alb. ij. amygd. d. No. x.
Contundant. l. a. in mortar. marmor. ac f. emuls. sensim. affundendo decoct.
hord. x. Colatur. ^lar. add. sir. de mecon. j.

He abstained from eating any thing but Water Gruel for ten days, yet a day or
two after the violence of the pain was abated, I ordered him this Purge, for
the same reasons he was let Blood, though it is generally forbidden by Authors.

fol. senn. sine stipit. ss. fl. melilot. pug. ij. crem. tartar j. inf. per
noctem in decoct. tamarind. vj. Colatur. per express. fact. add sir. de rhamn.
j. M. ac. Capiat cum regimine.

This purged him very easily, and with a great deal of success and
satisfaction; and besides these things, he took nothing else, only the part was
anointed with a liniment of the Ointment of Marshmallows and Linseed oil, and
so he recovered.

Observation XXXVIII.
John Turner, had been ill for above a Year of want of Appetite, a Swelling,
for the most part of the day, in the Muscles of all his Body, but especially of
his Legs, his ^^lour was greasy, and like Clay, ^is Pulse was weak, and he
made but little water.

The History of these Symptoms, plainly declares what this Disease is, that it
is a Dropsy, and of that sort they call an Anasarca or Leucophlegmatia: The
ancient Physicians thinking that it was entirely Phlegm subsisting some way
between the Muscles that gave this white or pale color, and made the Flesh
capable to retain the print of any thing, that was pressed upon it, for some
time. It Is certainly a very great weakness of the whole mass of Blood, even so
great, that it seems the Heart is not supplied with a sufficient quantity of
Spirits to propel the mass of Blood, and to accommodate the thing to their way
of speaking, seems to be full of Phlegm; but we must believe, that when the
Sickness goes no farther than an Anasarca, there is no breach of the Vessels,
none of this stuff lodged between the interstices of the Muscles; because it
would produce quite other effects than we see. This weakness may be procured
many ways, either because the Spirits are mightily exhausted (...) too great
evacuations, made by our selves or such as may be customary or critical, or
because there are not sufficient quantities of Spirits made, through an ill way
of living, or the Blood may even be made so thick by some usual evacuations,
being suppressed, that this defect of Spirits may be very sensible. In all
these Circumstances, this weakened Blood not having that quantity of motion, I
have proved necessary for making the Perspiration; the steems that are daily
voided that way in a great abundance being detained in a great measure, and
heightning the bulk of this sordid mass of Blood that was not easily propell'd,
must needs lose of its motion, by this daily addition, and subsist in the
smaller and more capillary Vessels, especially in extreme parts of the Body,
and proportionably to this addition, the growing swelling will be.

Now, for the Cure of this Disease, the want of Spirits we must endeavor to
supply, and to correct the viscidity and toughness of of the Blood: Upon these
designs, Authors have advised sweating Med'cins, which seldom have their effect
in this Disease; and I must believe very hurtful, if they had, by carrying off
some of the more spirituous parts of the Blood; and it is certain that when this
Disease succeeds any immoderate evacuations that the famed purgatives are as
unreasonable as letting of Blood: though when it comes from a suppression of some
usual evacuations, purgatives conveniently used may be of great advantage: Yet
Vomits for the reasons assigned in the second part, about curing of Agues may
be of infinite advantage, as Authors have found in their practice.

The method I pursued for his Cure was this; he first took gr. vij. of Tartar.
emetic. which wrought very well, Vomiting eight times and giving him four
stools; next day he took the following purgative.

Pil. Rud. ss. Calomelan. gr. xij. elater. gr. j. Elixir. proprietat. q^^ ut f.
pil. No. v. quas capiat multo m^ne cum regimine ac superdormiendo. Repetantur
semel vel bis qualibet septimana.

radic. gentian^raphan sylvestr. an. ij. Zedoar. Galangae an. j. summitat.
absi^h. card. Benedict. centaur. min. an. M. j^^ss salvi. agrimon. rut. murar.
cochlear. a^. M. j. cortic. aurant. j. ^^^^eran. ss. baccar juniper. iv. semi^.
sinap. jss. pptis s. a. affundant. cerevis. plus quam mediocr. lb xvj. Stent
^^^^d^em unum aut alterum in infusione; dein bibat pro^ potu ordinario:
Affunde. tamen poterit cerevisia eisdem materialib. adalteram vicem.

With the first opportunity he was desired to purchase this Electuary and to
take it as I have here prescribed it, upon Riverius recommendation in the 97th
Observation, Cent 2.

cons. fl tamarisc. capil. vener an. jss. conserv. rad. enul. ss. conf. al^^rm.
iij. sal. absynth tamarisc. an. j. rasur. ebor. pulverisat. spec. diarrhod.
Abbat. an. j. sir. capil. vener. q. s. ut f. opiat. Cujus capiat quantitat.
castan. singul. diebus duabus horis ante pastum superbibendo vini enjuslibet
generosissimi poculum.

By the exact use of these things he recovered wonderfully, and attained to his
perfect Health in the space of three Months.

But besides Anasarca's, it is almost a wonder that that other sort of Dropsy
and Ascites is so rare amongst People of gross enough habits of Body, that
drink so much of spirituous Liquors; and they really observe themselves, that
such as drink dry Drams (as they call them) seldom escape this misfortune;
whereas when their Brandy is tempered with Ship's Beer or rather in Flip or
Punch, it becomes a most wholesome and useful Drink, considering their Diet and
way of living. For this is it that these dry Drams drank at Sea or a Shore do,
they shrivel all the Membranes and Membranous parts of our Body, by which our
Stomachs is made less sensible of hunger, and incapable of performing its
office in digesting our Victuals, our Veins, Arteries and Nerves are dried up,
so that they are not so easily contracted radic. gentian. raphan sylvestr. an.
ij. Zedoar. Galangae an. j. summitat. abs^^h. card. Benedict. centaur. min. an.
M. j. ss salvi. agrimon. rut. murar. ^ochlear. a^. M. j. cortic. aurant. j.
Win^eran. ss. baccar juniper. iv. s^mi^. sinap. jss. pptis s. a. affundant.
cerevis. plus quam mediocr. lb xvj. Stent per d^em unum aut alterum in
infusione; dein bibat pro potu ordinario: Affunde. tamen poterit cerevisia
eisdem materialib. ada^^eram vicem.

With the first opportunity he was desired to purchase this Electuary and to
take it as I have here prescribed it, upon Riverius recommendation in the 97th
Observation, Cent 2.

cons. fl tamarisc. capil. vener an. jss. conserv. rad. enul. ss. conf. al^erm.
iij. sal. absynth tamarisc. an. j. rasur. ebor. pulverisat. spec. diarrhod.
Abbat. an. j. sir. capil. vener. q. s. ut. f. opiat. Cujus capiat quantitat.
castan. singul. diebus duabus horis ante pastum superbibendo vini enjuslibet
generosissimi poculum.

By the exact use of these things he recovered wonderfully, and attained to his
perfect Health in the space of three Months.

But besides Anasarca's, it is almost a wonder that that other sort of Dropsy
and Ascites is so rare amongst People of gross enough habits of Body, that
drink so much of spirituous Liquors; and they really observe themselves, that
such as drink dry Drams (as they call them) seldom escape this misfortune;
whereas when their Brandy is tempered with Ship's Beer or rather in Flip or
Punch, it becomes a most wholesome and useful Drink, considering their Diet and
way of living. For this is it that these dry Drams drank at Sea or a Shore do,
they shrivel all the Membranes and Membranous parts of our Body, by which our
Stomachs is made less sensible of hunger, and incapable of performing its
office in digesting our Victuals, our Veins, Arteries and Nerves are dried up,
so that they are not so easily contracted and bent outward, which of it self
creates old Age, and a thousand other inconveniences: These dry Drams with
their loose Spirit, that is so freely put in motion where ever it is, disperses
and destroys the native and benign Spirits of our Blood, and so disposes it to
a lesser motion. But not to insist upon the infinite misfortunes that attend
these dried and withered Vessels, especially the Arteries; how by their not
being Contracted and Distended, the Blood may want some considerable
determinations in its Motion, the secretions over all the Body may be
diminished, and the Liquors separated even not propell'd through their proper
ducts into their proper Receptacles or sometimes into the Air; but I say, not
to insist upon these inconveniences, which are so considerable, that upon them
only depends the well being, nay indeed the being at all of the Creature; yet
if the Vessels be thus hardened and shrivel'd with such spirituous Liquors,
Brandy, Plague-Water, etc. they are not at all fitted either to the Motions we
are to perform, or the greater or lesser quantity of the Blood; for the Blood
must either never be rarefied or possess greater space, or we never change our
postures, else these Vessels must break; because, when the Vessels are so
hardened, and proceeding, as we may conceive them, in different shapes from the
Heart through the whole Body, they cannot remain whole and entire, except they
keep the same Posture; but that cannot be, if the parts thorough which they run
change their Posture, and this is changed in every one of their Motions; the
same may be alleged of the Blood's taking up more space in its augmentation.
But in this hardening of these Vessels we cannot apprehend them to be rigid
Bodies, perfectly stiff, and so not to break as matter in that circumstance;
yet being harder, and not so pliable as musculous Membranes or parts made up of
Fibers and Muscles or Blood Vessels variously interwoven as they originally
are; they must be torn in considerable motions or growth of Blood, which
emissaries and holes transmit Liquors that can pass the diameters of these
small Wounds, and in a quantity proportionable to the resistance the sides of
these Holes make to the circulating Blood: So it is no wonder if considerable
quantities of Serum are thus discharged into the cavity of the Abdomen, Thorax,
or on the Brain it self, as it may ouze thorough these small emissaries upon
these places; and make an Ascites, Empyema and Hydrocephalus, which are of a
very considerable consequence to deter all excessive drinkers of these loose
Spirits, whatever specious names some of them may have.

Observation XXXIX.
Adam Wilkins, was troubled for two or three years with a Costiveness, that he
almost never went to Stool, but once in four or five days; at last having not
been at Stool for a fortnight, he began to have violent Cholick pains, a
vomiting and a suppression of Urin, with a prodigious heat upon the Reins of
his Intestins or over all his Belly.

The Surgeon had given him emollient Clysters of Oils, and decoctions of
Plants, gentle Purgatives, and such other things before I saw him, but without
the desired success. When I first visited him, he had a most violent pain, and
had not slept for a great many Nights. And besides, Hippocrat. his prognostic
in his praenotiones, verse 48. Cum Ileosis interceptio est Vrinae cito Mors
venit, gave me but little hopes of any advantage that might accrue to him by my
help; since our reason as well as the authority of that great Physician makes
always this appearance most ominous; for, that the Urin may be intercepted by
the Ileum, this Gut must be so swollen as to compress the neck of the Bladder and
adjacent parts, which will be a great and irreparable tumor: And if the tumor
is not so great as to compress the neck of the Bladder, but does compress the
Vreters, both which in their whole length lie immediately under the Ileum, so
that the falling of the Urin into the Bladder is intercepted, it must of
necessity cause Death, both because of this swelling of the Ileum, and this
interruption in the Urin which cannot be separated from the Blood. But because
we cannot be positively sure of the power and efficacy of our Med'cins, the
strength of our Patients, and other circumstances; we are obliged to use our
best endeavors while there is life; and therefore I ordered him doubled pieces
of Flannel, wet in hot anodyn Fomentations to be applied over his Belly
frequently every Day. His Drink was a decoction of Chamomile Flowers with a
little white Wine added to it: And to stay his vomiting he had the following
mixture.

sal. absynth. ij. succ. limon. cochl. ij. M. ut fermentescant, ac bibat
priusquam penitus desierit ebullitio.

This stopped his vomiting for some time, and stronger things as Opium ^^^us
morbi asylum, as a learned Doctor ^a^ls it, seemed unreasonable because of the
vast inflammation that seemed to be upon his intestins, and the continued
Costiveness. I caused eight or ten ounces of an emollient decoction to be
injected, to which was added two ounces of vin. emetic. turbid^ the Clyster
came off by it self, but nothing like Excrements. In the evening he took this
Bolus both for his Urin and Costiveness.

milleped. pptorum, sal. polychrest. an. ss. terebinth. venet. q. s. ut f.
bolus, quem capiat eco chleari syrup. de alth. Fernel.

He found himself easier after it, and passed a little Urin; but all I could
contrive was not of a force capable to vanquish his Distemper, for in three
days after I saw him, he had an end put to his troublesome days, by, I Am
persuaded, a more desirable Death.

Observation XL.
Adam Littleton, was taken ill of a vomiting and going to stool for three days;
he vomited a gre^^ deal of yellow and green stuff, slept little or none, all
that time, and was very weak.

This being a Cholera morbus, which does not at all proceed from any
heterogeneous, unconceivable mixture of unnatural and improper ferments with
the Blood; but rather from some nasty, sharp stuff lodged in the stomach, by a
thousand things that may be antecedent causes to it, which being affixt to its
coats, does determine the animal Spirits in its nerves to Convulsions, and by
the greater sharpness of this matter affecting the upper part of the stomach,
and the pylorus makes this violent vomiting and purging. This matter brought
upwards, is thought of some to be sincere bile, contrary to all reason or any
thought of how it ought to be supplied: Indeed, the small quantity of bile,
that is pressed out of the Gall bladder, and brought into the stomach by this
reverse motion, is very capable to color a great deal of Lympha that is
squeezed out of the glands of the stomach, or brought from the Pancreas, and to
affect it with its bitterness, without bringing us into a needless necessity of
supposing this impossible supply of Bile. Upon the other side, there are some
who seeing how closely the Pylorus is shut, in the case of vomiting, will not
allow that any Bile can at all be conveyed into the stomach, from the
Gallbladder; and would rather have all this quantity to be given from some
small glands we may sometimes discover in the stomach, and which contain a
yellowish liquor, not very bitter, and of no quantity. But not only the greater
quantity we see voided here, and sometimes three or four Mouth fuls of pure
gall, brought up in the end of an artificial Vomit, convince us clearly that
these are not the fountains, and source of so great a provision, wheresoever it
is to be brought from: But it were easy to make it very plain, how the Gall is
conveyed into the stomach, if this were the proper place; and I will only
remember them of something of greater bulk that uses to be conveyed, without
dispute, from the Guts, in an Iliack passion.

Now, since the whole cause of this Disease, is entirely lodged and confined to
the Stomach, and he had strength enough left to proceed in the surest method; I
resolved to promote the evacuation with something that was no Vomit of it self,
but that washing away the sharp stuff lodged in the Stomach, it might be
carried off by the common course of vomiting; and when this store was
exhausted, the Cure might reasonably be expected to succeed; and therefore I
advised him to drink large draughts of Ship's-beer made blood warm, which he
did to so great an advantage, that he had not drank and vomited above twice,
when his vomiting left off: That evening, though he had the following mixture,

decoct. hord. ij. aq. cinam. hordeat. spirit. vin. an j. diascord. fracastor.
ss. M. ac bibat hora somni.

He slept very well, and keeping up three or four days, he was purged with vj.
of the purging bitter Draught, and so recovered.

Observation XLI.
George Jones, of a thick habit of Body, and about twenty eight years of Age,
was troubled with a Dropsy, for a whole year, his Legs and Belly swelled
prodigiously; but there were no signs of any Water contained in the cavity of
the Abdomen; he had a difficulty of breathing, and his Pulse was weak.

His Pulse and shortness of breath, gave me but small hopes of his recovery;
because, this more especially proceeds from the Mediastinum and Lungs, being
too much crowded by an overgrown Liver, which is very often Schirrous or full
of purulent matter, and so past our recovering; yet having declared the danger
he was in, to those that were about him; I prescribed him the following
Med'cins to be taken in that order as I mention them hereafter.

elixir. proprietat. ss. spirit. C. C. gut. xx. M. ac Capiat. gut. xv. bis in
die in pocul. vini cujuslibet merosioris.

urin. homin. san. lbj. terebinth. venet. vitell. (...) solut jss. sal.
prunell. ij. f. enem. quo^idie nijiciendum.

This Clyster, after an hour, came off, with a deal of nasty slimy stuff, and
made him void great quantities of Urin; by which he was mightily revived; yet,
on the fifth day after the beginning of these Med'cins he died. The day before
his Death, he had such a violent pain in his Side and shortness of breath, that
he could not be easy any way he lay; 'till about ten hours before he died, his
pain vanished, though his difficulty in breathing increased, and he always said
that he found something break within him; which was not improbable, and it
might be his Imposthumated Liver; though I can do no more more but suspect so,
since I was not there when he died, and the Surgeon did not give himself half
an hours trouble for my satisfaction.

Observation XLII.
John Lambert, was taken ill, on 28th of August, of a pain in his Neck; he
could not spit, he had a difficulty in fetching his Breath, his Eyes were red,
he star'd and complained of a great heat in those parts.

It Is plain that this sickness, I have now described is a Quinsey, and though its
seat is on the Neck, yet it may be easily apprehended how it affects the Face
and Eyes, and might produce many terrible Symptoms by communication with the
Brain: For, since the Carotid Arteries and the Jugular Veins creep along the
Neck into the Head, they may be asserted and comprest by this inflammation, so
that the Blood can neither flow freely into the Brain, nor returning, be
carried into the Lungs; but stopping about the Face, must needs make this
redness of it and the Eyes, and their fullness of Blood makes that staring, that
almost Tonical motion and fixed look; and wheresoever there is a stoppage of
Blood there must be Heat and Warmth.

But to proceed to the Cure, I caused him be let eight ounces of Blood out of
his left Arm; and, in six hours after, ten out of the right Jugular; for the
reasons I assign in a like case p. 169. of my former Book of Sea sicknesses; by
which he was a great deal more easy, that flammeous color of his Face and
redness of Eyes disappeared upon that last bleeding, he was easier in his
Breathing, and his Spittle was thinner; next day he took the following Purge.

decoct. amar. purgant. iv. syrup. de spin. Cervin. j. M. ac Capiat cras mane
cum regimine.

It purged him twelve times, and had the desired effect to all our
satisfaction; and then he began to take of this Lohoch.

oc. cancr. ppt. j. pulv. fl. papav. rhaead. spermat. cet. non rancid. an ij.
sir. alth. vel mel. puriss. q. s. ut f. eclegma, de quo Capiat sapius indies.

His Drink was a decoction of Barley sweetened with Honey, which he drank as
often, and as much as he pleased. His Purge was renewed, and he recovered his
Health, without any more trouble.

I gave him no Gargarisms, which are always used in such cases; because if I
were of opinion that they could be of any use, yet I Am convinced they are of no
use, since seldom or never they can reach the part.

Observation XLIII.
I -- D -- Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ship the -- was taken ill the latter
end of March, with a Costiveness, Sleepiness, want of Appetite, and his Skin,
especially under his Nails and the Coats of his Eyes were all of a yellow
color.

There being in this case such a thickness of the Blood, and Gall, that it was
not separated in the Liver, nor conveyed into the Gallbladder, but being of an
oily substance and swiming on the top of the Blood in the Circulation, and some
perhaps, sticking to the Vessels does certainly give this Color; and it not
being discharged from the Gallbladder into the Intestins, neither tinges the
Excrements nor contributes toward their excretion; and therefore, that the
Blood and Bile might be freed of its viscidity, and its obstructing parts
promoted in their motion, I first ordered him a Vomit, and then other Med'cins,
the forms whereof I add.

Tartar. emetic. gr. v. solv. in vin. alb. cochl. ij. ac bibat cum regimine,
hauriendo affatim de aqua tepida quolibet intervallo vomitorij nisus.

This Vomited him six times, and gave him one Stool; next Day he drank this
Potion.

radic. rub. tinctor. chelidon. major. an. j. summitat. cent. minor. Card.
Benedict fl. chamomil. aa. M. j. baccar. junip. iij. Stent per. biduum in
infus. cum. vin. hispanic. lb. vj. bibat cochl. vj. bis in die.

When he had taken of this, for some Days, his Yellowness went off, he began to
Eat with an Appetite, and perfectly recovered.

Observation XLIV.
L -- P -- Commander of his Majesty's Ship the -- was taken ill with a want of
Appetite, a difficulty in digesting his Victuals, his Excrements were White,
never tinctured with Bile, his Urin was very high colored, and his Eyes yellow.

It Is almost plain that in this weaker secretion of the Bile from the Blood,
its want of conveyance into the Intestines, and by its frequent and repeated
Circulations with the Blood, that this extraordinary thickness of the Blood,
and Bile is to be mended, without having any respect or consideration to the
particular ferment, which some Authors fancy, contributes toward the
separation of the Bile, in a healthy state, and to be now defective upon this
occasion; and because I have proved that Vomiting does contribute powerfully,
toward making the Blood more Fluxil, and resolving obstructives especially in
the Liver; I ordered him this Vomit next Morning.

Tartar. emetic. gr. v. solv. in vin. alb. cochl. unic. ac bibat cum Regimine.

It wrought seven times with him, and made him go twice to Stool; and the Day
after he took the following Purge.

decoct. amar. purgant. cum duplici s^nna vj. sir. de rhamn. ij. M. ac bibat
cum Regimine; ac inter jecto die (...) vel altero, repetatur ad aliam vi^^m.

The success answering our expectation, he began to Drink of an Infusion I
ordered to be ready for him, against he had taken his Vomit and Purge; and
'twas made thus.

rad. gentian. rub. tinctor. an ij. summitat. centaur. minor. absynth. an M.
ij. fl. Chamomil. sambuc. genist. an M. j. cortic. aurant. sicc. ss. baccar.
junip. ij. croc. ij. In^un. bid. in vin. alb. lb. iv. bibat. cochl. v. bis in
die.

By all which, and drinking fifteen drops of Elix. proprietat. in a Glass of
White Wine, before Dinner, he recovered perfectly in a fortnight.

But as I was saying before, it is most pleasant and diverting, to see what
absurdities, these patrons of an unreasonable ferment supposed to be lodged in
a certain and peculiar part, are brought into; for besides the Chimerical
Existence of this Notion evidently made out in the mentioned Book, they are not
only obliged to maintain a ferment to separate every one of these ferments in
Infinitum in every one of these Solutions; or else to fix upon some single one
that was implanted in every one of these Parts, in the beginning, and at the
first minute of Generation; which nevertheless must be diminished in part, by
its action upon these Liquors it dissolves, melts down and precipitates; and
yet it must never be entirely wasted; and if it is entirely exhausted, there
can no way be assigned how it is to be recruited and rapair'd; but even, if we
be sick by any of these Ferments falling from their natural state, they are
never to be repaired by the force of any remedy, except it be separated from
the Blood, without the help of any ferment, for if no solution can be in the
Blood, without the help of a Ferment, neither will any specific Med'cin give
its force to the languishing Ferment; because it is requisite that the
specific Med'cin of every one of these Ferments be derived into their Cells,
and that this may be done, it must be mixed with the Blood, and separated from
the Blood into these different Cells, and so be mixed with the languishing
Ferment; but, by the supposition, there can be no secretion, without a Ferment,
and, because the Ferment is decayed, wasted or spent; therefore this specific
remedy for recovering this Ferment, cannot be separated from the Blood and mixed
with it; wherefore the languishing Ferment can never be repaired by (...)
specific Med'cin that is transmitted to the Blood.

And if it be true, that our Patients by the taking of such Med'cins do recover
their Health, we may conclude from hence, that such peculiar and specific
Ferments are mere Chimera's, and have no real being, and that the cause of the
Disease was not through the defect of any decayed Ferment; since the sick Person
does recover his Health, without the Med'cins that they supposed to be the
recruiter of the languishing Ferment, arriving at the Ferment it self; and
therefore the conclusion is evident, that there are Secretions without a
Ferment, and that peculiar Ferments are no less confidently than weakly
established by their Patrons. I might have easily passed by this, in perfect
silence, but that this supposition of a Ferment is such among the Chemists, and
of that consequence, that they make the whole Art of Physic turn upon it; and
yet it is plain to any one how great difficulties they put themselves upon, who
maintain and suppose these specific or peculiar Ferments; and with how weak
and uncertain a Foundation he is contented with, who sets up with a dependence
upon this Doctrine of Ferments.

The more I reflect upon the way of making Secretions from the different
Velocities of the Blood, as it is found asserted in my Oecon. Animal. I do not
only think it infinitely to be preferred before this precarious way by specific
ferments, but even before any other hitherto alleged, as I have proved at
great length: But it seems the most natural in resolving Phenomenon of the
Secretions; and the more so, if we consider that it is sufficient and only
necessary that the make of a Glandul is such, that the parts of any Liquor that
^lows mixed, but loose, into its Cavity may be derived into the discharging
duct; not entirely and in the confused mass, but such and such parts only as
come nearer to their separation, by consequence of the different velocities the
Liquor has in its departure from the Heart: And we must still more readily
assent to this, that we bring into our Memory the common accidents that happen
to Blood every Day, by Phlebotomy. The red part of the Blood that seemed to
fill up all the Porrenger in time of the Operation, does as 'twere contract it
self by degrees toward the center, and removes peace-meal though sensibly from
the surface, and the growing space which it leaves a'top, is filled with a
clear Liquor, that congeals upon the Fire, and we commonly call the Serum of
the Blood. All this while, the redder part of the Blood which thus contracts it
self in the center of the Vessel, becomes Hard or grows together; and if we
hold our Nose and opened Mouth over these Liquors, they send up such steams
that affect our smelling very ungratefully, and create in us a very unpleasant
and nauseous Taste. We see here what secretions are performed, without a
Ferment? And that That which affects our Tongue, and Nostrils, rises out of the
same very Vessel, and offends both these senses with its ungrateful touch; yet
this Liquor (which by the bye cannot be thought Homogeneous) is separated from
the other Liquors, and without a Ferment to^^; but this Liquor was contained in
the Blood, and if it had been brought into a Glandul, fit to receive this
invisible steam, it might have been as easily separated in this Glandul without
a Ferment, as we see it is separated in the Vessel. And so we might reason
about the other parts. But if we conceive (...) we ought to do, that this
effect of the different velocity can (...) the same things that the (...)
degrees of Heat do in a (...) Vessel, (for it must not be (...) I think that it
can make any Ch^mical preparation, but that these different velocities can
dispose the Blood for several Secretions, as the different degrees of Heat can
produce several Bodies in the same Vessel:) I say that all this will be most
evident and plain to such as can run this Parallel to its proper length.

From my Lodgings in Great-Suffolk-street near Charin-Cross, Sep. 28. 1696.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grashoper in the Poultry.
AN Account of the Nature, Causes, Symptoms and Cure of the Distempers that are
incident to Sea^aring People. With Observations on the Diet of the Seamen in
His Majesty's Navy. By W. C. of the College of Physicians, London: And
Physician to the Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet. price 1 s. 6 d.

Oeconomia Corporis Animalis. Autore Gulielmo Cockburn, Collegii Medic. Land.
Perm. Ac Classis Sereniss. Regis Magnoe Britanniae Medicorum Altero. Octavo,
price 1 s. 6 d.

Chirurgorum Comes; Or, the whole practice of Surgery. Begun by the Learned
Dr. Read; continued and completed by a Member of the College of Physicians in
London. To which is added, by way of Appendix, two Treatises, one of the
Veneral Disease, the other concerning Embalming, Octavo, price 6 s.

Dr. Sydenham's Complete Method of Curing almost all Diseases, and description
of their Symptoms. To which are now added, five discourses of the same Author,
concerning the Pleurisy, Gout, Hysterical Passion, Dropsy and Rheumatism.
Abridg'd and faithfully Translated out of the Original Latin. With short and
useful notes on the former part, written by a late Learned Physician, and never
printed before, Twelves, 1 s. 6 d.

Advice to a Physician: Containing particular directions relating (...) the
Cure of most Diss^s: With reflections on the Nature and Uses of the most
Celebra^^^ Remedies. By way of Aphorisms. Done from the Latin.

Musaeum Regalis Societatis. Or a Catalogue and Description of the Natural and
Artificial Rarities belonging to the Royal Society, and preserved at Gresham
College. Made by Nehemiah Grew, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the
College of Physicians. Whereunto is subjoyned the Comparative Anatomy of
Stomachs and Guts, by the same Author. Illustrated with a great number of Cuts
curiously Engraven on Copper Plates. Folio, price 12 s.


