A DEMONSTRATION OF TRUE LOVE UNTO You the Rulers of the Colony of the
Massachusetts IN NEW ENGLAND; Showing To you that are now in Authority the
unjust Paths that your Predecessors walked in, and of the Lord's Dealings with
them in his severe Judgments, for persecuting his Saints and Children. Which
may be a Warning unto you, that you walk not in the same Steps, lest you come
under the same Condemnation.

Written by one who was once in Authority with them; but always testified
against their persecuting Spirit, who am called William Coddington of
Road-Island.

Printed in the Year 1674.

TO THE READER.
Friend,
THe Original being burned, to satisfy the Desires of my Friends, and clear my
Innocence, I have given forth a Copy thereof; It was directed to Richard
Bellingham, Governor of the Massachusetts, Simon Broadstreet and William
Hauthorn Assistents, or whom else it might concern; which Letter about the
middle of the 7th Month, 1672. was by a Woman Friend left at the House of the
said Richard Bellingham: Presently upon the Receipt thereof, or some small Time
after the same Day, he sent for Nicholas Moulder of Boston, Merchant, and
demanded of him a needless Question, whose Letter it was? for he might have
seen whose Letter it was, being dated from Road-Island, the 12th of the 6th
Month, 1672. my known Hand and Seal to it; but Nicholas answered, as he
supposed, It was mine; whereupon the said Richard very furiously in Anger and
Passion replied, I was an old sottish Man, to that effect; and caused his Man
to fetch a Candle and light it, he being in Augustine Lindal's House, the
Iron-monger, and in Augustine's Presence, Nicholas and his Man's, opened my
Letter, then tore it, and put it into the Flame of the Candle, and burnt all
the Writing, without reading of it, and bad Nicholas to take Notice of it.

Thus, after he had contrary to all Law and Right, abused my Letter, and his
public Trust, in burning a Letter of public Concernment, directed to two in
Authority with him, and to others of his Spirit, that it might concern, which
shows his great Weakness and Wickedness, standing out all Warning from the
Spirit of the Lord in his Servants; yet notwithstanding it had this Effect, the
three Beholders have expressed some Tenderness; the young Man that then lived
with the said Richard, and waited on him, and lighted the Candle by his Order,
he was troubled in his Mind, and as they termed it, Distracted, and told the
Governor, he had deceived him, and that he would not pluck off his Hat to him,
and such like; so that he sent him home to Newbery with his Father: Thus having
abused me, as is said, he also abused my Friend Nicholas Moulder, and asked him
where his Security was, or else he would send him to Prison, to answer the next
Court; but for what, he expressed not, nor do I believe he knew; and so calling
him proud Quaker, that durst stand with his Hat on: Nicholas being bound to
appear at their Court before, he therefore let him go.

Now this Abuse was not done by the Government of the Massachusetts, but by the
Elective Governor, as a private Man, in a private House, before three private
Persons, without his Counsel, and in Anger and Fury; an evil Disease I know he
has been long warned of, when I was joined with him in Authority in the
Massachusetts.

Now let the rational and impartial Reader judge, not leavened with a
persecuting Spirit, whether I might not so express my self, as I have in the
ensuing Letter, being entrusted in the first settling thereof (and with the
chiefest in all public Charges) even before Boston was named, or any House
therein, I builded the first good House, in which the said Governor and
Merchant Brakel now dwell: I having spent much of my Estate and Prime of my Age
in propagating Plantations, and now come to the last Period, the 70. Year of my
Age; in Discharge of my Conscience toward God, and in tender Love and due
Respect to all, I write, as I have done, to warn you of your general Calamity,
upon which I parted from you, that persecuting Spirit let loose, that has so
much endangered and hindered your Good both Spiritual and Temporal, and hazard
both your Patent, Lives and Estates, as in my Letter, to which I refer you, may
appear; and rest your in true Love,

William Coddington.

Oh Friend Richard Bellingham!
THE, who professest thy self a Christian; how can thou persecute, and
banish, and imprison such as are Christians, whereas by the Command of Christ
Jesus, thou art to love thine Enemies? and how do thou love thy Neighbor as
thy self, and God above all, and keep the Commandments of God, when thou do
persecute and banish his Servants, as thou have Solomon Eccles and Nicholas
Alexander of Jamaica, a Justice of Peace and a Captain by Commission from the
King? Is this thy entertaining of Strangers (and the King's Commissioners?) was
thou so entertained by me at Road-Island, when thou wast a Stranger there and I
Governor? Did I take thee out of one Prison and put thee into another, as thou
have done my Friends, with Hazard of their Lives, being weak and sick, and not
yet recovered? What! Have thou not innocent Blood enough yet? Do thou think
that this will be well taken at Jamaica, when your Shipping comes thither? But
as Persecutors were ever blind, so art thou; the Lord will one Day account with
thee, as it is said by him which is Faithful and Just, Luke 12.45, 46. The Lord
of that Servant will come in a Day when he looks not for him, and in a Hour
when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
Portion with Unbelievers; mind that seriously as thou wishest thy own Good. Now
for thee, Friend, that do not only profess thy self a Christian, but one of
the highest Forms, and that was against the Bishops in England, and suffered by
them; O! how is that Tenderness lost since thy coming into Authority in
New England, that thy Colleague John Endicot deceased and thee, are numbered
among the Persecutors and Wicked, whose Names and Memorials shall stink and
rot; for you two, whom I say, I did know, formerly had some Tenderness in you
(for I have known you both long, thee above this forty five Years) I say, for
you so far to degenerate from Christianity to Hardness and Cruelty, as to give
Sentence of Death upon five of the Servants of the living Lord, four of which
were executed, barely for their Conscience toward God, and only for being such
as are called Quakers, and coming into your Jurisdiction (and you would not
suffer the Graves of the Martyrs of Jesus to be enclosed) to prevent which, I
know, you had many Warnings from the Lord by Men, Women and Children infinites
of Days, and by me William Coddington the Aged; for in much Tenderness was I
moved of the Lord to write unto you, even so mourning over you when I was in
writing, that my Tears blotted my Paper, to warn you in the Name of the Lord
(to take heed and not to join to that Spirit, that then had lead you into
Imprisonments, Cruelty, Whippings, cutting off Ears, Fines, and taking away
Goods, Banishing on Pain of Death the Servants of the living God) for following
the Leadings of that Spirit that would lead you to take away their Lives: But
as none of the former Warnings from sundry of the Servants of the Lord's
Messengers, that spoak to you in the Name and Power of the Lord; so that though
the Lord would, ye would not; for the Friend that brought my Letter, being in
Company with William Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson, you imprisoned, and
cruelly whipped: So, though I came over with your Governor, as an Assistent in
Commission with him, etc. and for seven Years in Authority, as a Magistrate
and Treasurer of the Country, and equal with you in other respects, and parted
from you, because you would persecute as by a Remonstrance in Court, when
others and my self were Members of it, appears; yet notwithstanding, my Letter
found no better Acceptance, then is aforesaid; never returned me one Word in
Answer to the several particulars therein expressed; but have been so filled
with the Devices of your own Hearts and Ways, that your Cruelties have filled
the Contents of two printed Treatises hitherto, which cannot be sufficiently
expressed, which is the World's Wonder, and the Astonishment of all that are
Men of Ingenuity and Tenderness: I say, it has filled two Books in Quarto,
though since 1667. your unjust Doings have not been printed, of which this is
one, I shall now write unto you of, though my Letter find no better Acceptance
then my former did, viz. There were so many Books that cost ten Pound Sterling
in England, sent to Barbados, which were to have been transported to this
Island for me and other Friends, in Shipping belonging to this Island; but
through Mistake, was by William Mastra brought to Pascatua: No Opportunity
presenting for Transportation to us, some of your Magistrates or Officers
searched his Vessel; he informing me thereof, that your Officers had taken the
said Books, and that they were brought to Boston, I demanded my Goods of
Richard Bellingham, then and now Governor: Thou not denying to have received
them, but gave me a scoffing Answer, not becoming thy Gravity; therefore I
shall not only demand them of thee (my ancient Friend) but of two others of
your Magistrates; my ancient Friend also, viz. Simon Broadstreet, no others but
him (that I know) now living in the Massachusetts, that were in England chosen
with me Assistents to the Governor of the Massachusetts, now above forty two
Years past: Friend, I have often read thy Name in the said Books, and of thy
being in England, when some of the People of God came to confer or examine thee
about the putting to Death or murdering of some of their Friends in
New England, whether thou had a Hand in it, and by what Law thou did it;
and whether you were subject to the Laws in England? and thou answeredst in a
fearful Manner, Guilt being upon thee, and would shuffle it off thy self, and
said, you had a Law by which you put Jesuits to Death: It was asked you,
whether they were Jesuits; and whether you put them to Death as Jesuits? And
thy Answer was, Nay, thou did not believe they were Jesuits: So then it was
said to thee, that you had murdered them, when no Law of England could be
instanced by thee, by which you had put them to Death: And so soon after got
out of England, before William Robinson's Father came to the City of London;
and there were some that were in Power in England, that were much troubled at
our Friends in England, because they would not seize upon thee and thy Company,
as Murderers, who had murdered the King's Subjects, and forfeited their own
Patent, and acted contrary to the Laws of England, in murdering his Subjects,
having no Law of England for it, and manifested your selves to be Rebels to the
King, in putting his Subjects to Death without his Laws, and denying his
Subjects their Appeal to the King of England and his Laws, when you murdered
them: And what was Mary Dyer a Jesuit, whom you murdered, and put to Death,
and hanged on your Gallows; and when you had done, your great Major Aderton
came into your Court, and boasted to your Court, and to them under the Sentence
of Death and Examination, how Mary Dyer hanged like a Flag, who had been that
Day executing of her, thinking thereby to have terrified them; but the Servants
of the Lord were carried above all your Threats and Terrors, and him who
boasted of your murdering of her: And the Day will come you will have small
Cause to boast in such Murders, as he had no Cause, as his End made manifest,
as yours will do, as will beseem, as his has been to all New England; for when
the Servants of God warned him of the Judgments of God to come upon him, he
boasted and said, You tell us of the Judgments of God to come upon us, but when
will they come? we see none yet: But they suddenly came upon him, and made him
a Spectacle to all the Blood-thirsty Priests and Magistrates in New England,
for you to look at, as he said to you and our Friends, Mary Dyer hanged like a
Flag to look at, who soon after was made a Spectacle for you to (gase at) And
was not his Eyes like Sawsers for you to look at? And did not his Blood run
through the Floor of your Courthouse, where you had given Sentence for taking
away of the Blood of God's People, yea, in the Place where the said Man had
boasted that Mary Dyer hanged like a Flag; but soon the Vengeance of God took
hold of him, and made him a Sign to you, and to all other blood-thirsty
Persecutors.

Now Friend, though I thus write for clearing my Testimony; yet have I nothing
but Love in my Heart toward you; for thou art my ancient Friend; thou wast
known to me before thou wast married, when thou came to Boston Lector, and
after we came to New England in the Arbella: I say, when I was informed out of
England, that G.F. and others of our Friends had been with thee, as is said,
and that they had left you to the Judgments of God, which you could not escape,
it would be too hard for you; for the Lord of that Servant would come in a Day
he looked not for, etc. Luke 12.46. for John Norton one of thy Company, who
when you paused upon the executing of William Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson,
and forbear one Day (it may be at the Mediation of my ancient and worthy Friend
Jo. Winthrop Governor of Coneticut, who did much interceed with you to prevent
your Shedding of innocent Blood) he encouraged you thereunto, and the rest of
your cruel Works; this bloody Persecutor being at your Worship-House in the
forepart of the Day, and intended to go in the after-part, the Lord came upon
him in a Day he looked not for, and in an Hour he was not aware of, and so cut
him off; for he fell down dead: And did he not say, the Judgments of God were
upon him? which I leave to thy Consideration, lest it be said of thee, thou
had Time to repent, and yet repentedst not, as it is said of Jezebel. William
Hauthorn, my third ancient Friend, that I have said I would write to; Thy Name
is also often mentioned in the said Book or Books: I cannot now say, how far,
with my other two ancient Friends, thou art guilty of the Death of our Friends
before-said; but this I can say, that though Hand join in Hand, yet shall not
the Wicked go unpunished: Friend, since thou came in Authority; for in the
Ship, I know thou wast tender, serious and retired, as became the Gospel of
Christ (for I had Speech with thee many times) and both then and afterward
barest thy Testimony against Persecution, and stinting or limiting the Spirit
of Prophecy in any, viz. to restrain from Preaching, but by Allowance of
certain Persons; if that should take Place in New England, thou lookedst at it
as one of the most horridest Acts as ever was done in New England, and would be
as great a Token of God's forsaking New England, as any (I know where thou
spoke it) and it was a good Speech; for this is the Day of God's Appearance in
his Sons and Daughters, in pouring out his Spirit, so they must prophecy; and
who can withold the Work of the Lord? Are you stronger then he? What has all
your Persecution come to, mentioned in the foresaid Books? though Briars and
Thorns have set themselves in Battle against the Lord, yet he has gone through
you all; for since your opposing the Truth in your Jurisdiction, have not many
been brought to know him, whom to know is Life Eternal? You may as well
withhold the flowing of the Tide into the Massachusetts Bay, as the Workings of
the God of Truth in the Hearts of his People in the Massachusetts Jurisdiction,
or to limit the holy One to a Company or Tribe of Priests, who make a trade of
the Scriptures, keeping People always under their Teaching that they may be
always paying of them. Now for the Books taken away by your Officers, detained
some years, demanded of your Governor, is an Act of such Hostility, that (by
me) cannot be paralleled: Should we seize of your Merchants Goods in other
Places, as you have done of ours, would you not say we had done right? as you
had done to others, so others had done unto you? Had I been in Spain (as I have
been) in the great City of Malego, and the Inquisitors had come aboard our
Ship, or Ships, and they had found Books that they disliked, yet should I not
have lost the Propriety of my Books; they would seal them up, and when the Ship
or Ships were ready to sail, I should have them again: Is this to do as you
would be done by? The Papists will condemn you in this, as contrary to that
common Equity that ought to be, and also the Privilege of an English Subject:
You have taken away all Law and Justice, and have usurped it into your own
Hands; for you are Court, Jury, Judge, Accusers, Witness and all; no Justice is
to be had in this Case. Oh the Honesty, the Honesty of the Papists! they will
not destroy Proprieties, though they be Sectaries, out of the pure and
undefiled Religion, that James speaks of; out of the Truth and Worship in
Spirit and Truth, that Christ set up above sixteen hundred Years ago.

I appeal to your own Masters of Ships and Merchants, if this be not so: Did
ever any of you loose a Book? But we must loose ten Pounds Sterling, as they
cost in England, because they were in your Government; a Reason against Reason.

Let me have a fair Arbitration upon it, if you will not deliver them up, and
your own Merchants shall determine it; for this Case is properly to be
determined by Merchants, that know Lex mercatoria, the Law amongst Merchants;
for though the Estate seized is not great, yet the Consequence may be great;
and they that will not do Justice in small Matters, will not in greater
Matters; But it may be, I shall receive them again, when I receive the Reward
promised me for my Pinace, which took the Pinace of John Oldams, when he was
slain by the Indians, and Thomas Stanton, yet living, cut in the Back, and set
ashore by them of Block-Island, whose Pinace and whose Charge was John Oldam's
Pinace taken from the said Indians, and some of them brought Prisoners to
Boston; John Gallop Master and John Wood his Mate: Indeed John Gallop had a
small Island given him in lieu of that Service (called, it is like, Gallop's
Island to this Day) then was I promised a Reward answerable to my Charge and
Adventure, etc.

But after a persecuting Spirit arose amongst the Priests, and Ann Huchison and
John Whelcwrit must be banished, and all that stood in their Way must remove,
and the unclean Spirit like Frogs, came out of the Mouth of the false Prophets,
so that Persecution was ushered in, all Persons that were against them, were
noted as the removing Party; so as I am a Man and a Christian, I would have no
Hand in it; so that being against it and a Magistrate, after three days Debate
in Court (the Priests animated their Party; for of the Priests none but John
Cotton was with us; some fell from us, so that we were the minor) we drew up a
Remonstrance, that our Dissent might appear to succeeding times, which after
some Debate, was admitted according to our Desires, to stand on Record; so ever
since that, I have been none of you that persecute; for I would not number my
self, as a Man amongst Persecutors, whose Names shall rot in succeeding Ages,
much more as I am a Christian, to love one another, and to love Enemies, and my
Neighbor as my self, and God above all: I therefore bare my Testimony (as it
is said by that Remonstrance) against that persecuting Spirit that was let
loose to deceive all in Authority: And though I was in the greatest Way to be
great in the Massachusetts to the outward; yet the Locusts that were come out of
the bottomless Pit blasted all to my Continuance there, and my Mind was for
removing. And the Planters Play, and John Cotton's Sermon, which was in 1630.
printed by John Humphery our Agent, to satisfy the Godly-minded of our Removal
out of England, all did satisfy me to remove, as Lot out of Sodom, being
grieved for your unrighteous Dealings: So that as I am, or was for that seven
Years I lived in the Massachusetts, a Merchant, and the chiefest theree; so by
Merchants, that walk by the Rule of Righteousness, To do unto others, as you
would have them to do unto you, let my Cause be issued; for if you were such,
you would not do as you do, to persecute and destroy common Right that is among
Nations, and mantained by the Law of Nations. That you New England Professors,
that profess the Scripture of Truth, and that are out of Possession of that
Life that gave them forth; for you to say, you have a Law for it; what Law
contrary to Law, that is no sooner made, but void by England's great Charter,
and your Patent, as repugnant to Law? I find a printed Paper dated in Yarmouth
Road, aboard the Arbella, April the 7th 1630. by us the Heads, that then
brought over the Massachusetts Patent, in the Name of the whole Company, John
Winthrop Governor, Thomas Dudly Deputy, Sr. Richard Saltingstal (so called)
Isaak Johnson that married the Earl of Lincoln's Sister, the Lady Arbella: Our
Ship, a warlike Ship, called the Eagle; the Admiral of the Fleet, in Honor of
the Lady, was named the Arbella; they two before-said and William Coddington
Assistents, with others, as in that printed Paper yet extant may appear, and
the Planters Plea (both printed the same time, to satisfy the Godly-minded)
wherein their Prayers were desired, and the Ground of our Removal expressed,
viz. To propagate the Gospel, and other Grounds therein mentioned, as well
performed, as that which was by John Humphry (a known Man that married the Earl
of Lincoln's Sister, that printed them) dispersed into most Parts of England.
Oh! how have you propagated the Gospel, that have made use of such Weapons,
that the Apostles of Christ did never make use of, as in the two Books
aforesaid, writ and printed by Geo. Bishop, to which I refer you, may appear:
Did ever Paul wrestle with Flesh and Blood, as you have done, by your
Imprisonings, Whippings, cutting Ears, and Banishments upon Pain of Death, and
putting to Death the Propagators of the Gospel, who with that blessed Apostle
desired you were as they (except those Bonds you laid on them for the Gospel
sake) that prayed for you and loved you, when you persecuted and were full of
Envy toward them; yea, and persisting therein, as witness not only your
Imprisoning and Banishing Solomon Eccles and Nicholas Alexander of Jamaica, as
is aforesaid; but also Imprisoning James Lancaster, John Stubbs, a learned Man,
as witness the Battle-Door in thirty five Languages, John Raunce, Thomas Eaton
and Robert Hornden, five Strangers more, the Servants of the Lord: And is this
your entertaining of Strangers? Is this to do as you would be done to? Was ever
any that came into our Jurisdiction so entertained? Did I so entertain Richard
Bellingham your Governor (which signed the Warrant) let him witness against us
if he can: Did I not entertain him and his Company for nine or ten Days in my
House on Road-Island? They had the free Exercise of their Conscience, John
Danford to preach to them in my House: I have demanded the like of him, to do
to me and my Friends, as I did to him and his; but we have been molested and
haled before the Authority, and so Evil rendered for Good, and Hatred for my
Good Will. The first Day of this present Month, Geo. Heathrot was by you
committed to Prison, that is a principal Owner and Commander of a Ship; he
delivered unto you Solomon Eccles's Letter, did he not? and he did not put off
some Part of his Clothing, it may be his Hat; and is this the Honor that you
Massachusetts Magistrates look after (that know not that Honor that comes of
God alone) you think your selves higher then King Charles, who frequently
admits Friends into his Presence, without any such vain Observations; he knows
it is their Conscience so to do, and takes no Offense; but them that pretend
comment-Matters, not Conscience, who have made Shipwreck of it (Mind that of
Mat. 25. that dreadful Sentence of Christ the Judge, our Lord and Master, to
such as have not visited him in his Members, much more to such as have
Imprisoned, Banished and Persecuted him in his Members) and some of you that
are in Authority, that have had a Hand in shedding innocent Blood, are so
stupefied and hardened in your persecuting, that do not you now say (even now,
notwithstanding the King's Toleration and releasing out of Prison) that if it
was to do, you would do it again, and so render your selves Murderers in the
Eye of the Law (as has been said) so hear Christ's Sentence, Go ye Cursed,
come ye Blessed; ye Cursed shall go into Everlasting Punishment (mark that) but
the Righteous into Life Eternal: They shall shine for ever and ever; but the
Name of the Wicked shall rot: Is this to answer the Grounds of your Removal, in
propagating the Gospel, as declared in Print to the Land of our Nativity? O
gross Hypocrisy and Dissimulation! profess it in Print, and persecute it in
Deed; also to burn, suppress and imbecil such Books, as tend to the Furtherance
of that which you have declared of in Print: To whom shall I compare you herein
(that persist to persecute, as is said) except it be to Bonner's Story and the
Persecutors in the Marian Days? read their Stories in Fox's Acts and
Monuments, to suppress Gospel-Books that came out of Germany, the low
Countries, etc. And therein you may read your own Actings, and read their Ends;
and read the Scriptures, from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of
Revelations, and you shall never find, that any that persecute the People of
God, as you have done (and repented not) that ever were unpunished. Now to come
to an End; I understand that you take away Peoples Goods, to maintain such
persecuting Priests, as were never sent of God, and called of Christ Jesus unto
that Work they pretend to, as their Fruits do manifest; and they that hear them
not, or never set them to Work, must pay them, or never hired them: And that
which is yet more unjust is, That they that cannot hear them for Conscience
sake, must not only pay the Priests that preach for their Hire; but you that
love to have it so, have made a Law to pay five Shillings a Day for not hearing
them: So you that fled from the Bishops, are worse then they, and set up a
worse antichristian Power: Is it not in matter of Worship they do against God
and Christ, if in Case they do trespass? And is not Christ Judge in such
spiritual Matters, that will recompense to every one according to their Works;
and therefore commands all Persecutors and Pluckers to be still, to suffer the
Tares and the Wheat to grow together till Harvest, which will be the End of the
World? And at that time he will send his Angels to reap the Tares from the
Wheat; and so commands his Servants to be still; for it is his Angels Work.
Gamaliel would be no Judge in such Matters: You that profess the Scriptures to
be your Rule, what Rule have you in Scriptures, To persecute any for Religion
or Conscience toward God? but to love Enemies, and to love one another, etc.

Therefore turn to the Light within you, wherewith you are enlightened, that you
have contracted and blasphemed as Natural, etc. Even Christ in you the Hope of
Glory, which was declared to you by the Servant of the Lord John Cotton, on
Acts. 4.13. on his Lecture Day, the Ships ready to depart for England; he
stated the Difference, it was about Grace; he magnified Grace within us, the
Priests Grace without or upon them: So all the Difference in the Country was
about Grace, notwithstanding the Difference was as great (says he) as between
Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell, Life and Death: For as in the Text, when
they saw the Boldness of Peter and John, they perceived they had been with
Jesus; and from the Spirit of Jesus did he then declare, and so do our Friends
when they come amongst you, and you might perceive had you the spiritual
Eye Salve: Therefore turn to the Grace of God within you, that, as in former
Days, so in this is the Saints Teacher, then shall you never be without a
Teacher: And repent of the Evil of your Doings, before your Day be passed over,
and it be hidden from your Eyes, though you seek it with Tears, as Esau did.

And as for me, I pass not to be judged of you, or of Man's Days; he that
judges me is the Lord, and his Witness is with me in what I write; and as for
my Books so taken and so detained by you (after demand) as is said; let me have
your Answer in Writing; a small Request from him, that for seven Years served
with you, as a Magistrate and Treasurer of the Country; yea, and had to this
Day, if in so doing he could have served the Lord Jesus; for I am yours in the
Service of Truth,

W. Coddington.
Road Island, the 12th. of the 6th. Month, 1672.
Upon Burning of my former Letter, I writ this, directed to Richard Bellingham,
Governor of the Massachusetts, as follows,
FRiend, My Letter directed to thee Richard Bellingham, Governor of the
Massachusetts, Simon Broadstreet and William Hauthorn, Assistents, and whom else
it might concern, which Letter was about the middle of the 7th Month, 1672.
left at thy House; upon the Receipt thereof, or not long after, thou sentst for
Nicholas Moulder of Boston Merchant, and demandedst of him from whom that
Letter was; Nicholas answered, from William Coddington; whereupon thou very
furiously replied, I was an old sottish Man, or to that effect.

Now Friend, see what thou art fallen from: I have known the time, that thou
would not have allowed thy self in Fury and nonsensical Discourse; and
whereas thou reproachest me for my Age, thou art older then I; and it is a
Crown of Glory, being found in a Way of Righteousness: and it is for Christ's
sake thou do thus reproach me, because I bare my Testimony against all
persecuting Spirits; otherwise thou would have called me, as thou know I
have been called amongst Men these forty five Years; and so to fill up the
Measure of thy Iniquity, caused thy Man to fetch a Candle, thou being in
Augustine Lindal's House the Iron-monger, and in the Presence of Augustine, and
the said Nicholas, and thy Man, openedst my Letter, and tore it, and put it
into the Flame of the Candle, and burntst all the Writing without looking on,
or reading any of it, and bad Nicholas take notice of it. Now Friend, thou
show what Spirit thou art of, by thy Untrustiness and Wickedness in burning
a Letter, that concerned others in Authority with thee, and the Country to take
notice of: Is this thy fulfilling of the royal Law, To do to others, as thou
would have others to do to thy self? Would thou be contented to be so done
by, to have thy Letter, when thou demandest what is due to thee, to be torn and
burnt, and thou called out of thy Name? Is this the Restitution thou make for
the Wrong thou have done, taking away the Goods of another, contrary to Law and
Justice, without Trial, repugnant to the Laws of England, contrary to your
Patent: Show a Law of England for what thou have done. David says, He that
rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of the Lord, which is, to hate
Evil, Pride and Arrogance; And every evil Way, and a froward Mouth do I hate,
says Solomon the wisest of Kings, then would thy Government be for the
Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well; but Justice
is turned backward, and Equity cannot enter, and be that departs from
Iniquity makes himself a Prey: Thy Iniquity is notified already to succeeding
Ages; thou needst not bid the Standers by Take notice of thy tearing and
burning a Letter of public Concernment: What put thee into so much Anger and
Fury (it was not the Letter) if thou had been altogether ignorant of the
Contents of it? thou either knewst, or might have known whose Letter it was,
having of it in thy Hand, dated from Road-Island, the 12 th of the 6 th Month,
72. the Place of my outward Abode, and my known Hand and Seal to it: So that
thou either did or might have known certainly whose the Letter was; so the
Question was needless, to require of Nicholas Moulder whose it was (that knew
not what was in it) Now see what Regard thou have to Justice, by what is said;
and further to threaten to send an innocent Man to Prison, and demand where was
his Security to answer at your Court; but tell him not for what, and I believe
thou know not for what, but only that thou wast transported for the present;
thou wast warned of that Evil, when I was in Authority with thee in the
Massachusetts.

Now in Coolness, Friend, Consider if thou be not him that was spoken of in 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. That he that comes near thee in thy Fury, though he be sent for
by thee (as Nicholas was) had need to be fenced with Iron and the Staff of a
Spear; thou art utterly burnt with Fire in the same Place: Had thou not been
in the same Place of a Governor, thou would not have been so discovered, so
that the least Child of Light may discover thee to be of a persecuting, Spirit.

Now see if thou can, if thou have not sinned out thy Day, what thy forty
five Years Profession of the Scriptures, being out of the Life and Power that
gave them forth, is come to, that to speak plain Scripture Languages, Thou and
Thee to a single Person, and to stand with his Hat on, is a Crime culpable of
Death, as in William Leddra's Case.

Also consider that forty five Years past, thou did own such a suffering
People, that now thou do persecute; they were against Bishops and Ceremonies,
and the conformable Priests; they were the Seed of God that did serve him in
Spirit, then called Puritans, now called Quakers, God having put Enmity between
the two Seeds; the Serpent's Seed disgraces the Seed of the Woman with
Nicknames, which Seed of the Woman the Servant of the Lord John Cotton in
Verse describes.

Of Puritans two Sorts I find,
The Moral and the Ceremonial Kind:
The Ceremonial God's great Name to hallow,
Will strain at Motes, as well as Beams not swallow*
His tender Conscience makes his fleshly Heart
At smalest Pricks and Scruples back to start.
But I will write to thee no more of them at this Time, because I would not
have thee burn them, as thou did my last Letter. These I say, thou did then
own these Verses, and diverse more John Cotton wrote about sixty Years since,
long before thou came to dwell at Boston: So I am thy ancient Friend, and so
will be, do what Injury thou can to me.

Road Island, the ^0th. of the 8th. Month, 1672. Still waiting, If at any time
God may give thee Repentance unto Life, W. C.
This my last Letter to Richard Bellingham, Governor, was delivered to John
Leverit Deputy Governor, who said he would deliver it, and speak to him to
read it. Shortly after, the said Richard having completed the Measure of his
Iniquity, dies distracted, the 7th of the 10th Month, 1672. The Hand of the
Lord cuts him off, not giving him Repentance to Life, that other Sons of Belial
of his persecuting Spirit might be warned, not to put the Evil Day far from
them, Idem*

W. Coddington.




