THE Dignity and Duty of a Married State.

IN A SERMON Preached at the CELEBRATION OF A MARRIAGE, IN THE English
Episcopal Church at Amsterdam.

HBBR. xiii. iv. Marriage is honorable in all. By JOHN COCKBURN, D. D.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Friars, near the Waterside.
For the Benefit of the Poor.

THE PREFACE.
IT is not usual to send single Sermons abroad; without the Recommendation of a
public Command; nor is it customary to preach at a Marriage, which was the
Occasion of the following Sermon. But as ther^ is no Law nor Reason to hinder
the one* so it would seem that the other (...) been formerly done, and still
our Liturgy supposes that it may and will be done: For the Exhortation after
Marriage, is appointed to be used only in case there should be no Sermon on the
Subject.

Having obtained from the most Venerable Burgomasters of Amsterdam, amongst
other Privileges, that of Marrying according to the Manner prescribed by our
Church* I judged my self obliged to preach on the first occasion of doing so.
Here is the Discourse I then had, and I yield to the desire of publishing it,
for the same Reasons I first preached it; that I may give my small help toward
retrieving the Honor of Marriage, which has been so often burlesqu'd, and run
down by the Licenciousness of the Stage. The Impious Railleries and profane
Witticisms which have been uttered about this matter, are regarded as Maxims of
undoubted Truth; those are laughed at who make Marriage their Choice, as they
are pitied who are under any necessity of engaging into it.

This Mockery and Contempt of Marriage, as it is most prejudicial to the Civil
State; so it has contributed very much to the growth of Atheism: for it has
encouraged those unlawful Liberties, which are taken both in and without
Wedlock, which cannot be defended otherwise than by denying a God, or the
Authority of Sacred Scripture* When Men are byasi'd, weak Arguments prevail,
and any thing is readily received which flatters their Lusts and vicious
Inclinations. Debauchees think it their Interest that there be no God, that
Religion be discarded, and so are easily drawn to deny and disown them. And for
this cause it is necessary, as to maintain the Foundation of Religion, so to
vindicate its holy Institutions from the blasphemous Aspersions cast upon them;
which beget a Prejudice both against them and all Religion in general. I have
not that Opinion of my-self, or of my performances, as to think that they alone
can stop the Mouths of Gainsayers: I only desire to show my Good Will, and
offer my Endeavors. It is not absolutely necessary that all of an Army be
Heroes, a Victory may be, and is often forwarded by many who cannot pretend to
that Character. I have not said all that might; but what is said, is certain
and evident: Yet I should not be surprised if the Truth of it be not admitted;
nay, if many entertain our Attempt with Scorn. The Corruption of this Age is
too deeply rooted, to be plucked up at the very first: But, Whether they will
hear, or whether they forbear, they should know, that there have have been
Prophets among them*

HEBREWS xiii. 4. Marriage is Honorable in all.
MARRIAGE being Common and Ordinary, a Discourse about it may be thought
needless, and to some unpleasing; but I do judge it neither needless nor
improper. For it fares with Marriage as with most things common and ordinary,
that though in themselves very valuable, yet they are but little regarded; so
that the Generality are not sensible of the Good of them, nor yet suitably
thankful for the Benefit of them. Wherefore I shall lay hold on the present
Occasion to discourse of this Subject, which however common and ordinary, I
believe not well understood; the Dignity and Importance of which are set forth
in the words of St. Paul I have now read.

In the Original, it is only Marriage honorable in, with or among all: so that
something must be supplied to make the Sense clear and perfect, wherefore some
render it by way of an Affirmative Proposition, as in our Translation, whereby
the Dignity of Marriage is asserted; others turn it into a Precept, requiring
all to hold Matrimony honorable, as if it should be, Let Marriage be
honorable.

It is not material whether it be taken the one or the other way; for if it be
a Duty to hold Marriage honorable, then it is so, because it is in it self
honorable; and if marriage be by Nature, or by Virtue of its Ends and Uses
honorable, then it is the Duty of all to honor it, and to have it in great
Esteem: So whether the Text be an Affirmative Proposition or a Precept, it
establishes the Dignity and Importance of Marriage; for whatever is or should
be esteemed honorable, must be supposed excellent in its Nature, and important
in its Effects and Consequences. In handling this matter, I shall do Two
Things: First, I shall give some Reasons why Marriage should be had in great
Honor and Esteem. Secondly, I shall show what is incumbent on those who enter
into this state of Life, that they may reap the Good, Benefit, and Comfort of
it.

1. First, Of the Reasons why Marriage should be had in great Honor and
Esteem. To mention all, and to enlarge upon them, would take up too much time;
therefore I shall only name some. And first, Marriage should be held
honorable, because it is an ancient and universal Custom. Antiquity is
venerable, and it is both just and usual, to regard with Veneration those
Things that are of long standing. Indeed Time does not change the Nature of
Things, nor can it make that which is evil ever to be good; but both good and
innocent Things are deservedly more respected, as they are the older: Now
marriage is as ancient as any thing can be. 'Twas from the beginning, and
commenced with Mankind it self. If the Calculation of some may be believed, Man
was married on the very day he was made, and when he was but some few hours
old: And what was so early begun, has ever since continued. Whithersoever Men
Transported themselves, they carried the Custom; so that there never was any
Nation or People which did not observe it. The most Barbarous do not live like
Beasts promiscuously; and even where unlawful Liberties were common and
allowed, yet Marriage was preferred, and accounted honorable. Wherever
Knowledge, Policy and good Government took place, and were cultivated, Marriage
was distinguished with particular marks of Honor. Among the Romans; married
Persons had diverse Privileges above others, until the days of Constantine, who
abolished those Laws, to gratify some who betook themselves to a Celibate
State, from a mistaken Notion which then prevailed, that it was more proper for
the Exercise of Religion, which was the Beginning of that Corruption and
Apostasy, foretold by the Apostle, 1 Timothy iv. 1. The Lacedaemonians held
marriage so proper and necessary, and them who despised it so unreasonable and
dangerous, that they appointed a Fine both for them who married not at all, and
for them who were late or long a marrying. How honorable Marriage was, is
evident from the Solemnities every where used at the entering into it; for this
was and is a public Declaration that it was an honorable State, and that they
were worthy of Honor who entered into it. Hence came the Saying, That every
one had Three Days of chief Honor; the Day of one's Birth, the Day of
Marriage, and the Day of Death or Burying.

2. But, Secondly: Christians have a better Precedent for honoring Marriage,
than the Example of Men and Nations. We have the Example of Christ, the Eternal
Son of God, whose Example outweighs the Authority and Practice of all others in
the World. Indeed he Himself did not marry, nor could He, because a marriage
with any single Person on Earth could not suit with his Dignity, nor the end of
his Coming to the World: But he would be born of a Woman, joined in lawful
Wedlock; and He gave the first Manifestation of his Glory at a marriage in Cana
of Galilee, where he turned Water into Wine; not for the simple Ostentation of
his own Power, but also to contribute to that innocent Joy, which was suitable
to that Occasion. This He would not have done, if marriage was either unlawful
or trivial, and not worthy of all Honor. And as his showing Himself thus first
at a Marriage, was not Accidental or Occasional, but Choice; so he chose to do
it, that he might set forth the Honourableness of this State; foreseeing that
some false Spirits would arise to discredit and disparage marriage: And
certainly, whoever speak against it, whoever represent it as unlawful, or as
mean and unbecoming a good or wise Man, or the aim or study of Perfection; I
say, whoever do so, do thereby show that they are not of God. For,

3. Thirdly: Marriage is a Divine Institution. God is the Author of it. 'Twas
no Invention of Man; nor were they led into it by Policy, Necessity or
Experience, as into many other common Customs, but God himself from the
Beginning did ordain it. He at the first made Man male and female, and joined
them together, that the two might become one Flesh, for an Example to others
that should follow. He commanded and ordained them to multiply and bring forth
their Kind; but only in the State of Wedlock, and by the Imitation of that
Example which he had set them in the first Man and Woman. If therefore all
Divine Ordinances and Institutions should be honored for God's sake, so should
marriage; nor can any speak dishonourably of it, without blaspheming God, and
reflecting on either his Authority or Wisdom.

4. Fourthly: The time when marriage was instituted, adds to the Honor of it.
This was before the Fall, in the State of Innocence, while Man was in his
Uprightness, as he came from the Hands of God; which proves Marriage to be
suitable to the greatest Perfection and Purity of this present Life. It came
not as a Remedy to After-Corruption; 'twas not prescribed to avoid greater
Inconveniences, but the Wisdom of God saw it agreeable to a Paradise, to the
purest and most perfect Condition of humane Life: Therefore they talk falsely
who make this State inconsistent with Religion; and they are weak and ignorant
Persons, who pretend that it is a clog or hindrance to their Virtue and
Devotion; yea, even to the Perfection of them. Indeed we read of some, who when
they were called to the Divine Feast, excused themselves because they were
married: I have married a Wife, and cannot come; but this was only a Pretext to
cover their Aversion and Unwillingness, for if they had valued the mercy of the
Call, and been willing to embrace it, their marriage needed not to have hindered
them, they would have come and brought their Wives with them. Turn over the
History of all the Celibates from the beginning, can any be showed more just
and upright than Noah, more constant in his Faith and Obedience than Abraham,
more holy and devout than Job? and yet they, as all the other Scripture
Worthies, were married, and some of them but very indifferently too. Indeed
there are Temptations and Encumbrances in a married State, and so there are in
a single Life. God may be served in the one as well as the other; and who
excuse themselves on the account of either, do but declare that they have not a
real mind to it.

Finally, Marriage ought to be held most honorable, for the important End of
it, and the good Effects which were intended by it, and which will follow those
who seek and study them aright. When God had finished the Creation, He viewed
all his Works, and saw them all very good: Now Woman was included in these
Works, therefore she also was found good, and consequently marriage is very
good and useful; for the Woman was created for that end. As all God's Works are
good, so are all his Ordinances and Institutions, and particularly this of
Marriage. Therefore, Prove. 18. 22.
says Solomon, Whosever finds a Wife, finds a good thing, and obtains
favor of the Lord; meaning, as he explains himself in other places, a prudent,
virtuous Wife; one that deserves that Honor, and answers the Character
suitable to it. God by ordaining marriage, intended the Good both of private
Persons and the Public; because it was most agreeable to our Nature, and did
naturally tend to further the Happiness of all in this present Life. Indeed
marriage is a Yoke, which once taken on, cannot be put off till Death; or that
which is worse than Death, I mean the heinous Sin and Guilt of one or other of
the Parties: but it is a profitable Yoke, and it may be made easy too, if
Persons have the Understanding to use it aright.

I. First, Marriage brings great Advantage to private Persons, by securing
them of a constant, intimate and familiar Friend. Society and Friendship are
the Life of Life. Nothing is more agreeable to our Nature, nothing more
desirable. It is as natural for Man to crave them, as for the Sparks to fly
upward. Hence Aristotle observed, that what delighted in solitariness, must be
either above or below a Man; that is, either a God or a Beast: A God, because
Self-sufficient; or a Beast, without Sense or Understanding, and so unable to
communicate it self, as insensible of the Benefit of mutual Communication: But
as most Beasts, except the Savage Kind, even love to herd together; so if this
Philsopher had had that Light of Revelation which we are blessed with, he would
have found that the Godhead is not solitary, though Unity be one of its
Essential Attributes. Our Religion shows us Three Persons in the Godhead, which
are one in Nature, and intimately united both in their Counsels and in the
Execution of them, which makes the Felicity of the Godhead equal to the
Perfection of its Nature, both of them Incomprehensible and Infinite. The more
Noble any Being is, the more it affects Society and Fellowship. Because God is
infinitely good, He created other Beings to partake of Himself, and by that
participation to declare his Glory. Man was made after the Image of God, and
consequently it must be natural to Man to seek the Fellowship of others that
are after his own likeness. When God made Man an considered him, He saw 'twas
not good for him to be alone, and for that cause proceeded to make Woman, to be
a Help meet for Man. The Dominion of the World and over all Creatures, would
not have given unto Man full Satisfaction, if he had been left alone without
such a Companion. Let outward Circumstances be never so good, there is but half
Contentment without a Friend and Copartner. It Is true, there is and may be a
dear, a sweet and intimate Friendship between one Man and another, but the
Pleasure and Benefit of such a Friendship cannot be always enjoyed. Duty and
Interest often separate them, whereas marriage, by these very Ties of Duty and
Interest, makes one sure of a faithful, loving and inseparable Friend at all
Times, and in all Circumstances, whether better or worse. A Man must leave
Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and so must the Wife do to her
Husband. Besides, God has so framed the Nature of Woman, and given her such
particular Endowments, as render her Conversation more grateful and agreeable.
The Friendship of a Man may chance to be more instructive, and may sometimes
have the preference for Counsel and Advice; but a good Woman has more Charms to
divert the Fancy, to ease the Spirit, and to alleviate the Mind. It is a true
and notable Saying of the Son of Syrach, Eccles. xl. 23. A Friend and Companion
never meet amiss; but above both is a Wife with her Husband. The Sweetness and
Delicacy of her Temper is proper to file off that Roughness, which is ready to
grow upon the Nature of Man. Therefore commonly single Persons are more morose
and surly, and less conversible, than those who are well married especially if
naturally peevish and melancholy; for these grow upon Men by the lonesomness
of a single Life. Indeed an ill Woman frets the Spirit and crushes the Mind;
but an excellent Wife is to her Husband as David's Harp to Saul, she charms
away the evil Spirit of Melancholy, which is apt to seize men by the Vexation
of Business, the Encumbrances of Affairs, and the Impertinencies of the World.

Again: Marriage is of great Advantage to private Persons, because of the
mutual help which they give to each other: God did not intend that the Woman
should be a Clog, or Burden, or Encumbrance to a Man; He did not ordain her to
live idly or sumptuously on the Sweat of his Face; but he made her to be a
Help unto him; that is, to be both a Companion and Assistant, to partake of his
Labors, to bear half of his Burden, as well as to share of his Happiness. He
that has a prudent Wife, has double the Hands, the Eyes, the Ears and the Feet
of a single Person. He can be at Home and Abroad at once; She can manage the
Affairs of the House, while he is transacting Business Abroad; and so is in a
better way of Thriving, of promoting the end of Life, and of providing for the
Necessities and Comforts of it. Some may think that all this may be as well
done by Servants; but a little Reflection on Experience show it a mistake, for
though great Wages may make a Servant faithful, they cannot give that
Concernment which a Wife has. Wherefore the wise Author I last quoted, says,
Blessed is the Man that has a virtuous Wife, for the number of his Days shall
bedouble. A virtuous Woman rejoices her Husband, and he shall fulfill the Years
of his Life in peace. A good Wife is a good portion, which shall be given in
the portion of them that fear the Lord. The Grace of a Wife delights her
Husband, and her Discretion will fat his Bones. A silent and loving Woman is a
gift of the Lord, and there is nothing so much worth to a mind well instructed.
A modest and faithful Woman is a double Grace, and her continent mind cannot be
valued. As the Sun when it rises in the high Heaven, so is the Beauty of a
Wife in the ordering of her House. Again he says, The Beauty of a Woman
cheareth the Countenance, and a Man loves nothing better; if there be
kindness, meekness and comfort in her Tongue, then is not her Husband like
other Men. He that gets a Wife, begins a possession, a help like unto
himself, and a pillar of Rest. Eccles. xxvi. and xxxvii.

Thus private Persons have great Advantage by marriage. In the next place, the
Public receives no less Profit by it. For by this means Children are
multiplied, and the People increased; which is the Strength, Security and Glory
of a State. Unlawful Liberties without Wedlock, add little to the Increase of
People; nor even in those Countries where pluralities of Wives are allowed, is
it common and usual to have so many Children, as with us by one Man and one
Woman. So marriage, according to its first Institution is more for the
multiplication of Mankind, than any other way.

And as it tends to the Increase of People, which is for the good of the
Public, so it is the best Security of a good Education to them that are born,
which is no less for the public Good. If Children were not taken care of, they
could not live to be Men; and if they were not well educated and trained up to
some Art or Profession, they would be of little use when grown up; both which
would be very much neglected, if Children were not born as now in lawful
Wedlock. Women perhaps might have some regard to the Fruit of their Womb, but
Men would take little thought of those, whom they knew not whether they were
their own. But as it is now, Parents love their Children, and lay themselves
out to provide for them, to educate them well, and to make them happy; all
which turns to the Advantage of the Public.

It was very inadvertently said of a Lord Bacon, in his Essays.
Great Man, That Wives and Children were Impediments to great Enterprises of
either Virtue or Mischief, and that the best Works, and of greatest Merit to
the Public, were performed by unmarried or Childless Men: For the very
contrary may be proved from History. And who can be thought more concerned for
the Public, than they who are to leave with it their Darlings, and the Pledges
of their Affection? Commonly single Persons look no further than their own
Times, but those who are married, extend their Thoughts and Care to Posterity.
Nor are they who are married and have Children, more obnoxious to Bribery, and
perverting of public Justice; for a Servant may be worse than a Wife, and do
often abuse the Master's Ear more. Nor are Wife and Children a hindrance to
Charitable Works; which is one pretended Reason why marriage is forbidden the
Clergy in the Church of Rome; for Covetousness and Selfishness prevail among
them that are not married, as much as with those that are. There are as many of
the one as of the other, stingy, narrow-soul'd, and hardhearted, both to
themselves and others, neither given to good Works. Indeed, those that have no
Children should give more as they are more able; but those that have Children,
have yet a greater Obligation to be Charitable, even that they may secure a
Blessing to their Children, which may and will be more steadable, than a
visible Inheritance, which often slippeth away: For, says David, I have been
young and now am old, yet have I not seen the Righteous, that is, the merciful
Man, forsaken, not his Seed begging Bread; he is ever merciful and lends, and
his Seed is blessed, Psalm. xxxvii. 25. Thus you see, that there are a great
many Reasons, why marriage should be honorable among all, as is asserted or
enjoined in the Text. I proceed to

II. The other Thing proposed; which is to show, What is Incumbent on those who
enter a married State, to the end that they may reap the Good, Benefit and
Comfort of it.

This is important and necessary, but very little considered; and that is the
reason why those Advantages of Marriage are not so common. Marriage is not a
Physical but a Moral Cause of them, they follow not joining of Hands
necessarily, as the Fire burns; or as Meat nourishes, which happens whether
we think of them or not: But how good soever a married State be, the Benefit
and Comfort of it depend on the wise Behavior of those who enter into it. If
they remember their Obligation, and study their Duty, they shall be happy; but
otherwise, both Shame and Misery will attend them. There are indeed many
unhappy Marriages in the World; there are very many rendered miserable by coming
into this State of Life, but it is their own Fault, because they engaged
unadvisedly, nor mind what such Engagements require of them. They run into this
state for some present Satisfaction or Advantage; and having got that, they
become uneasy with the perpetual Tie. They do not consider the Necessity of
yielding to one another; but as before, they continue altogether Selfish and
Humoursom, craving to be pleased, but are at no pains to please those they are
joined with. Such were mad to marry; and by marrying, they have entailed both
Guilt and Misery on themselves for Life. The Man or Woman that marries, must
resolve to deny themselves, to put off at least something of their own Humor,
and to put on a ready Complaisance with others; otherwise they can never be
happy: They must resolve by all means to seek to please and gratify, tho with
some restraint on their personal Inclinations and Constitutions. Nor on this
Account should marriage be reckoned a Slavery; for this is no more than what
common Conversation, and the engaging into any Society oblige one to: He should
be debarred all Company, and excluded all Society, that requires every body to
humor and yield to him, without suitable returns; they do not understand
either Honor, Liberty, or reasonable Satisfaction, who are uneasy with the
Obligation of pleasing and gratifying others. Certainly a Noble Soul and a
generous Mind, will take more delight in the Occasions and Opportunities of
doing a Pleasure to others, than in the Services paid to themselves. Man and
Wife may reason together, but should never scold and rail, nor use contemptuous
Speeches. Persons have often occasion of being angry with themselves, and so
there may happen just Occasions for both Man and Wife their showing some
displeasure with each other; but it can never be just to do it, to the breach
of Peace and Love. They must not divide and quarrel, however they may reason,
except in cases where true Honor, Conscience* Religion, and the Cause of God
do interpose. God must be pleased above all, He must be preferred to Husband or
Wife; but if nothing be required which displeases God, any thing should be
done, rather than suffer a Breach; for better any Inconvenience than that.
Husband and Wife should endeavor all that is possible to make one another
easy, by mutual pleasing: This is both their Duty and their Interest; for it
is one end of the Institution. They are neither wise nor virtuous, who contend
and ^ar for small and trivial Things, and commonly the Ruptures betwixt married
Persons, are only for such Things: For the generality of Mankind let their
Passions master their Reason, and are so foolishly fond of their Humors, as
for them to quit their Interest. There is a most remarkable Instance of this in
the History of Peru; which shows the extravagancy and mischief of Humor and
Passion, when not curbed. There was one by the misfortune of Shipwreck cast
upon a barren desolate Rock, where there was neither Man nor Beast, nor shelter
against Wind or Weather: In this miserable place he lived two Years; and then
Providence sent thither in the like manner another. The Comfort of a Companion
was certainly most valuable, and the only mitigation of that miserable
Condition. If they had united heartily, there might be some abatement of it;
but they soon quarreled for some small matter, and their Difference grew to
that height, that they parted, and lived at the distance of the Rock from one
another* neither, for the space of Seven Years, if I can remember right, spoke
together, or saw one another: So, out of crossness of Humor, they derpived
themselves of the Comfort and Advantage which Conversation and mutual
Concurrence and Assistance might have given* This is a Parallel of that Man and
Woman, who through Providence are tied for Life by the Bond of marriage, but so
little wise for themselves; that rather than forego their peevish and pettish
Humors; they choose to throw up their Comforts, and to make their Condition
more miserable.

As the studying to please to the utmost is incumbent on married Persons, so
for this Cause Love is required and absolutely necessary. It is hard to study
to please those who are not well liked. Where there is Love, there is a
forwardness to please; but if Love be wanting, it is shifted or awkardly
performed; therefore they who enter a married State should be brought into it
by Love. Love should be the principal motive that brings them together; and
while they are togegether, it should be their Care to cultivate and improve it,
If Love be wanting, they will be a grief and a burden to each other; but if
Love abound, they have all Joy and Contentment. Where there is Love, they part
with Reluctance, and meet with Pleasure; their Hearts burn with Desires when
absent, and if present they live joyfully together, as Solomon injoins. Love
will keep the Woman from gadding Abroad, and 'twill make the Man impatient to
come home. St. Paul says, That Love is the fulfilling of the Law, concerning
our Neighbor; and so it may be said of the Duties of Marriage. Love both
teaches them, and prompts to the Observance of them: For all that is enjoined
Husband and Wife, are only proper Expressions and Declarations of true Love. He
that loves his Wife, will be far from abusing her, or treating her roughly; he
will honor her himself, and endeavor to have her honored by others: He will
deal tenderly by her, and cherish her to the utmost of his power; he will not
deny her the Satisfactions that are reasonable and in his power, but will be
active and industrious to provide for her. And if the Man do this, the Woman
must be unnatural, if she be not gained by it. The Wife must love too; and if
she love, nothing injoined will be grievous. Obedience which sounds so hard and
so harsh to self-willed and unthinking Woman, will not be unpleasant to her
that loves: For Love is obsequious and observant, and is glad of the Occasions
and Opportunities of testifying it. The Obedience of the Wife is indispensible;
but if there be Love, it will not be complained of. By exacting Obedience, the
Wife is not so hardly dealt with; for it is easier to obey than to command
aright, and the Praise of Obedience may be due, where there is no Honor in
Commanding. It is an express and often repeated Command of God, that the Woman
be obedient, and it becomes her to be so, even where the Man does not
personally deserve it; and then she shows her regard for God, which is her
Praise; and for which she shall be surely rewarded.

Finally: To ensure and complete the Happiness of a married State, both Husband
and Wife must with all care mind Religion, and keep up the Fear of God between
them. This is the surest way to prevent Miscarriages; to secure against all
Ruptures, and to engage to the right and serious performance of all Things
proper and necessary, to promote the Peace and Happiness of this State.
Religion makes all Things sure; it ties the Knot harder, and makes both willing
to bear the Yoke. If the true Fear of God possess the Heart of Man and Wife,
neither of them shall go astray, nor be liable to the Rack of Jealousy: No
uneasy Suspicions shall disturb their Breasts. They will not provoke, but
cherish one another. They will be studious to please when out of Sight, as well
as in it; and whether absent or present, will be equally Faithful. Where the
true Fear of God is, there will be no occasion for Exhortations and
Persuasions, for each will be forward to all Duty. If Persons understood it,
true Piety has the greatest Charms, nor do they fade with Age. And the greatest
Contentment may be expected from a Religious Husband, and a Pious Wife. This is
more to be valued, than all those Things which are now the common Motives to
Marriage. This is better than Houses or Possessions, than Bags of Money, or
Tuns of Gold. Favor, says Solomon, is deceitful, and Beauty is vain; but a
Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, Prove. xxxi. 30. Besides, the
Fear of God brings his Blessing, which contributes more to Peace and
Happiness, than all our own Endeavors, or any outward or visible Means. Except
the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build it. And as He builds
the House, so He makes them that are in it to be of one Mind. All Blessings
are promised to them that fear the Lord, and particularly those of a married
State, as you may see Psalm. cxxxi. Thus I have run through the Chief Things
incumbent on Man and Wife, that they may reap the Good and Comfort of a married
State. pray God that all concerned may remember, consider and observe these
Things, which would make the Church Glorious, the State Prosperous, and
increase the Peace of Families: This would make the present Generation happy,
and would draw down and entail a Blessing on Posterity.

Now unto God, who is the Author of all Good, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
be all Glory, Honor and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

