Kitchin-Physick: OR, Advice to the POOR, By way of DIALOGUE

Betwixt Philanthropos, Engenius, Lazarus,
Physician, Apthecary, Patient.


WITH Rules and Directions, how to prevent sickness, and cure Diseases by Diet,
and such things as are daily sold in the Market: As also, for the better
enabling of Nurses, and such as attend sick people; there being nothing as yet
extant (though much desired) of this Nature.

Parve nec invideo, etc.

Ovid de Trist. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the
Poultry, and at the Ship and Anchor at the Bridge-foot on Southpark-side, 1676.

GVLIELMO, Viri famigeratissimi Gulielmi Whitmore, unico proli, Necnon Costae
suae formosae Et Castissimae, Dominae Fran. Whitmore, Filiolae Viri nobilis
Thomae Whitmore Equitis Aurati, (...) hoc T. C. Med. D. D.
IN all Dedications, there is something of design, self and interest; and to be
true to you, that which made me single you out for a shield and shelter, was
partly to gratisie the Stationer, who must needs thrive and fare the better,
for coming under your Roof. And had the Book, no other worth in it, than that
it bears so great a Flag and Canvass, as the name of your illustrious Father,
it were enough to make it sell, and recompense the Reader for buying it.

Another End I have in it (though you do (...) Epulari) is, to set before you
some wholesome and necessary Directions for Diet; That being indeed, the best
Physic and Physician, you and your Amiable Lady can ever hope to meet with,
both to preserve your healths, and Prolong your Lives; which so much concerns
the Poor of this Town, City and Country, that they may call me cruel, if I do
not all I can, that you may (to imitate in true Charity and Munificence your
Renowned Ancestors) long live and Prosper, which is the most passionate desire
of your Servant and Neighbor.

Thom. Cock.

AN Advertisement To the PATIENT.
WHereas diverse persons in, and about London. Some under the name and notion of
Chemists: Others under the pretense of Charity, do delude and entice people to
their daily destruction, to make use of their cheap, safe, and harmless
Medicines (as they call them) though indeed (as has been often made appear;)
both dear and deadly; promising also, and warranting cures, though incurable:
And whereas also, it is the opinion of diverse sober and considerate persons that
one great cause hereof, is, because College Physicians, and such as are
approved, and have been Educated in the Universities, do not take more care of
the poor; it being not in their power to pay both for Advice and Physic.

THis is therefore to certify all persons whom it may concern, that there are
several Physicians, and Persons of known integrity, who have voluntarily, for
the good and welfare of the poor; undertaken to give all persons advice gratis
that shall come unto them: And to write them bills to what Apothecaries they
themselves think sit; or give them instructions what to do, or how to prepare
Medicines themselves, that are not able or willing to make use of the
Apothecary.

And that all things may be done to the greatest security and advantage of the
Patient; the aforesaid Physicians have not only set those Medicines they intend
to make use of, at such low and mean rates, that none can imagine it is done
for any other end than to gratify the poor, and the Apothecary to have an
honest livelihood for his pains; no Medicine exceeding six pence; and some not
above half so much. But also upon any occasion, either the Patient, or the said
Apothecary in their behalf may have free access to any of the aforesaid
Physicians.

Note.
That you may be informed where, at any time to speak with some one or more of
the Physicians above mentioned, at one Mr. Briggs, an Apothecary by
Abch-Church, or near the Salmon in Spittle-fields; and it is hoped, that in
other out parts of the City, where there is most need and most poor, that some
of the Honorable College of Physicians, will in their Christian care, and
compassion to the poor, take the like care for the preservation of paupers, and
preventing Mountebanks, Mechinicks, silly women, and such like intruders on
Physic.

N B.
NOw I am lanch'd, I expect nothing but storm and tempest: but, as yet, all
that I could ever hear objected against any thing contained in this
Advertisement, was, that the Medicines are cheap, and consequently (as some
suggest) not good; as if God had not ordained things necessary for the
preservation of the poor, as well as rich. This made the Philosopher thank
Heaven, that it had made all necessary things cheap and easy to be attained;
but all things dear and difficult, not necessary. Besides if you consider that
the intent of this undertaking, is in favor of the poor, there will be little
reason then for this querulous complaint.

Some again that would fain say something, will it is likely tell you, the dress
and style is too plain and poor, too mean, faint and seeble, to contend and
meddle with Goliath among the Philistines. To this, I answer, that I did never
fancy new, affected, and oftentimes non-sensick words for old matter: Or, to
put the Reader to the trouble of learning Greek, only to understand the Title
page of a Book, lately exposed to the press called (...): But above all things,
I hate that sneaking trick with daring, doubtful, and difficult words to
confound sense, hoping thereby to make them pass for reason: all which, being I
think great crimes in our Methodical and Orthodox Chemist, I have endeavored
to avoid them my self; or at least, I tell the Reader by another Character, or
an, i. e. that I am not quite so silly, as not to be sensible of so great an
error, where there is no necessity or cause, but vapouring.

Others, for want of better arguments, and to gratify their own discontents,
will it may be cavil at the subject matter, esteeming it below the state and
Grandeur of a Physician, and more fit for some waiting Gentlewoman, Nurse, or
Master of the Pantry: but this savours so strong of calumny, design and
arrogance; that it stinks alive, and stands in need of nothing, but contempt
and scorn to make it more odious; or else, I might produce Emperors, Kings and
Queens, and the best of Physicians to be their Judges.

Some also peradventure will more gravely argue, from the bad consequents of
this undertaking: but upon better thoughts certainly it will appear to them,
that I have done nothing herein to the prejudice of any; the Emperick, the
Searcher and Sexton only excepted: and what makes poor people run headlong to
Mountebanks, silly Women, Mechanics, Psendo-Chymists, and their Graves, but
that they have no other refuge to flee to in sickness, it being impossible for
them (they say) to pay both for advice and Physic: Physic and Physicians, are
only made for rich men, and wait on Princes, and receive gifts of Kings, but
never thanks, nor prayers from him who has no other Fee; all which with
Hosanna's may be prevented by such an attempt as this; the advising them
(especially where personal advice and visits cannot be had) to very little
Physic, but rather to proper Cordials, and a Di^t proper to their Disease,
being the only safe* honest, easy, and effectual way, both to pacify their
just clamors, and prevent their dangers in being ruined by bold ignorant
practitioners, which understand neither themselves nor Medicines they boast of;
our Orthochymist* and author of the (...), (as the Learned calls it) being only
excepted.

How justly herein do the poor complain and tell us, that the Art of Physic,
which was instituted to save them, by the corruption of times, and intruders on
Physic, by neglect of Magistrates, and want of personal visits, now ruins and
destroys them: and that they are deprived of life, by using (as they think) the
means to preserve it: Is not Physic confessed on all hands, a pernicious, a
deadly, a dangerous thing, if it be not used as it ought? Is it used, as it
ought, without the Physician's visiting the Patient, or the Patient the
Physician? And is the poor Patient visited as he ought by the Physician?
without which, the Nurse, the Neighbor, the friend and messenger that comes
from them is the Physician; it is they indeed act his part: and if these guides
mistake their Disease and Symptoms (as what else can be expected) where is Art
and Medicine? and is not this the common case of Paupers?

For redressing of which (where visits cannot be had) there needs no more than
such a Negative as, meddle not with Physic, or very little: but let nature
alone with a peculiar Diet, or only some well prepared Cordials proper for your
distemper: And in behalf of the poor, it were to be wished, that no such thing
as Physic, (unless Diet; our Ambrosiopaeas or Cordial Spirits may deserve that
name) might be permitted them, until Physicians be allowed them, or encouraged
by authority personally to inspect and visit them. And that this may not seem
the bare conceit and opinion of One, who may be thought easily overtaken with
mere idaeas, whims and speculations (as I really think our Chemist is) I could
else produce the voice of authority, and suffrages of the most eminent
Physicians, for what I have said, although they have not in a set Treatise,
handled it in this manner; which I readily acknowledge, (if this occasion would
permit) stands in need of a greater volumn and more authentic Author: However,
that I may a little comply with the mode and humor of times, and swagger in
print as well as others; give me leave (good Reader) to tell thee, that having
been beholden to both Universities for my Education, and spent in this City
alomst twenty years in the practice of Physic; I may I hope, among the crowd
and crew of votaries that daily attend the shrine of Aesculapius, be allowed,
Locum Philosophandi; if not, I crave leave for my considence, and yet, cannot
but still remain confident, till some more generous hand than Mempsis (or in
plain English Doctor G. T.) helps the poor to better cheer, than a few airy and
empty Notions, that I have herein done them no wrnog, having given them, in
this discourse on Diet, no worse than I use my self, and am sure will tend much
to their preservation and welfare.

All that I have else to add in favor of my self, and for the Errata's of the
Printer* is, that from my first perusing a late Book, entitled all in Greek A
Direct (though in truth an indirect) method of curing Chymically; to the time
of fitting this for the press, was not above eight or nine days; so that I hope
all my own, and the errors of the Press, will at most amount to no more than a
nine days wonder.

If any one think, I need not have been thus concerned for this affair, I can
tell him, if all men had been of this mind, the Book, to which this relates,
must have escaped without any reproof, which in my opinion stands in as much
need of correction, as any thing I ever met with, since I could distinguish
between Truth and Error: and the whole design of this in opposition to that,
is, to offer a more direct and real way of curing and preserving the Patient;
and if the Chemist dare say; it is no matter what we eat, or what we drink; I
dare upon as good grounds say, it is no matter whether we eat, or whether we
drink. There is something else I could say for my self; but that long Apologies
have usually more of stick than stalk, and like May-poles, not only tall and
long, but troublesome and fruitless.

But to say no more of these Logo-Daedali, Gin-cracks, Windmills, and Chemical
Camaera's; it is very observable, that Paracelsus, and almost all that
Fantastic gang, notwithstanding their immortal Medicines (as they call them)
they dyed young, and in the prime of their age, and not only impartial
Historians, but those that have some fancy and favor for them, confess that
though they performed many admirable, and stupendous cures, yet (as it is
supposed of the Jesuits powder) their distempers either returned again, or they
seldom lived above a year or two after, verifying herein the old Adagie; That
it is easy to cure the disease, if you will but venture to kill the Patient,
whom God defend and keep from danger and delusion is the prayer of their Votary.

T. C.

Note.
That the few following Dialogues are inserted only to amplify, and make more
familiar and evident, the intent of this Advertisement; and to give the Reader
a practical prospect of whaet is contained in it, and meant by it.



Part the first By way of DIALOGUE Betwixt Philanthropos. Eugenius, and Lazarus.
Physician, Apothecary, and Patient.

Laz. I Am glad, Sir, to find you within: I have brought you a water, and
desire your opinion of the party that sends it.


Phil. Not to keep you in suspense, without any more ado, there is no certain
judgment to be given by Urine; whatever is done that way, which so amuseth you
and others, is by collusion, fraud and confederacy.


Laz. Why then, Sir, do you Physicians permit us to bring our Waters? besides,
there are those, that do undertake to tell us, who, and what the party is;
whether they shall live or dye, and much more to this purpose, which I forbear
to trouble you with.


Phil. Well Lazarus, take it for an undoubted truth, that they are all but
impudent lies, and contrived stories to drive on some design and interest: and
if you will credit me, some of the chief and archest of them have confessed as
much to me; besides, (as ignorant (as you make your self) you cannot imagine
such silly illiterate persons* as generally they all are, that boast of these
mighty deeds, and upon enquiry are found to be either conceited Women, or some
decayed, bold, ignorant Mechanics: nay, High waymen, Bauds, and common
Strumpets, Gypsies, Witches and Conjurers, commonly called cunning men and
women should be most famous in this profession. Is it to be supposed, that all
Universities, Colleges and learned Societies, (as our Mempsis will have it)
throughout the whole world, could remain ignorant, after the greatest
endeavors they could use, as upon Record, and in all their Writings they
solemnly protest they do) if any such thing as these persons boast of by Urin,
or their Universal Medicines, were to be known or attained unto?


Laz. Truly, Sir, there is something in what you say, and it seems to call in
question ones discretion to believe all that is talked of: But I pray, Sir,
would you not have us then bring the Patients water when we come to you?


Phil. Yes, by all means good Lazarus, but not with any expectation of
conjuring; for though there be no certain knowledge of any Disease, nor any
safe judgment to be given only by the Urine; yet it serves often times to
indicate or hint something to us.


Laz. If Urine be thus uncertain, and insignificant; I pray, Sir, then how came
this custom into such request, and what still continues the repute and use of
it?


Phil. All the account I can give you of the original and growth of this error
is, chiefly the ignorance, and credulity of the vulgar, either in not
apprehending the devices, secret combinations, and stratagems of juggling
Vro-manticks; or else the peoples mistake, and fond conceit in thinking the
Physicians chiefest skill lay in the Urine, merely because they observed them
to view usually the water, when they visited the sick; and on this mistake, but
chiefly to prevent the charge of visits, as also the Physicians condescension
to the imposition, has occasioned the use of this pernicious custom. But
because there are some other errors I would advise you of in their proper
place, I shall conclude this Section, with these few directions.


I. That whenever you visit the Physician, you ever bring with you the sick
persons water: only that it may be in a readiness, if the Physician sees
occasion to require it, but not with any expectation of being resolved any
thing that is certain and material by it.

II. Though the Physician should omit to ask, yet do not you forget to tell him
all you know of the sick: tell him his age, sex, calling, complexion, habit of
body and constitution: his customs in eating and drinking, and what course of
life he has led: what time he was first taken: whether he has a vomiting, or
looseness, or both: whether he sleeps much, or wants it, or has a cough,
stitches, or pains in any part: whether his thirst be great, or he sweat much,
and in what part most, or whatever else the sick person at that present labors
under, and complains of; and be sure you do not conceil what Medicines he has
already taken by the advice, or persuasions of others; and who they were.

III. Let your visits be at the beginning, and first onset of the Disease, and
not be put off till the last, which makes the Disease, not only the more
difficult, but dangerous also, and oftentimes proves fatal: you may as well,
when your house is on fire, forbear going about presently to quench it.

IV. When you have the direction of such a Physician as you ought to confide
in; be sure you keep to him, and punctually in every particular observe his
directions; a little error herein, be it in your Diet or Physic, may be your
death: and run not from one Physician to another, though perhaps more eminent
and able than the first: it being a most certain truth, that Multitudo
Medicorum, and Medicinarum, etc. A multitude of Medicines and Physicians do
very often destroy the sick -- But as to our present concern about Diet; take
notice: That

I. All tender, temperate, sedentary, and sickly people, all Infants, aged,
idle and decrepit persons ought to eat often, but yet very little at once;
because much food, (like much fuel thrown upon sire) extinguisheth their
natural heat: and as weak and wasted bodies are to be restored by little and
little, so also by moist and liquid Aliments, rather than dry and solid,
because, that kind of Diet does nourish soonest, and digest, and distribute
easiest.

II. Those that have an imperfect health, or are under any manifest Disease,
and eat much, and get little strength by eating; it is a sign they have used
themselves to too full a Diet: and the more you cram and cherish such bodies;
the less they shall thrive by it, but grow worse and worse; because, by much
feeding, you do but increase the vitiated and bad humors, which should be
wasted by Bleeding, Purging, or Abstinence. And this should caution all good
Women, Nurses and Chemists, how they importune, and impose upon sick persons,
their comfortable, Cordial, and good things (as they call them) and continually
encourage the sick, say the Physician what he will, to be eating one good thing
or other to encourage the V. Authorem
Archeus: To reform this, and other unreasonable customs in Diet, was
instituted in Old times, that Order of Physicians called Clinicks, or such as
directed the diseased how to order themselves in sickness, which is now (the
more is the pity) lest to the discretion of every idle, conceited and ignorant
Nurse or Gossip.

III. Never, though in perfect health, eat at once, till your Appetite be quite
satisfied: eat not till you have an Appetite, and eat not so long till you have
none, was Galens rule, who lived an hundred years without any manifest
sickness: This Rule also the Emperor Aurelian, Cato, Seneca, and all the
samous Dietists carefully observed, and without it esteemed Physic, but an
insipid and insignificant thing -- When we want our healths, we complain that
we have taken cold, or eaten something hard of digestion, or make some such
frivolous excuse or other; whereas, the real cause lies in a long continued
disorderly diet: It Is rare unless we offend in quantity, that any food that is
common to us or mankind, does offend us by its Quality; if there be any such
thing as Quality, as there is not, says Mempsis.

IV. If you have eaten or drank too much at once, use so much Exercise or
Abstinence, before you so transgress again, as will perfectly digest the
superfluity and excess of your former eating and drinking; or else there will
be a necessity of being beholden to the extraordinary helps of Physic to
prevent Gouts, Catarrhs, Scorbuts, loss of appetite, Crudities, Obstructions,
Palsies, and what not?

V. If you eat a large breakfast, eat no dinner: if you eat no dinner, eat an
early supper: if you eat a supper, eat no breakfast: if no breakfast, eat an
early dinner; and by this means you will keep your stomach clean, strong and
vigorous, and preserve thereby a good digestion, and distribution of your food.
Custom and company cause us commonly (more than thirst and hunger) to eat and
drink: but when hunger and thirst invite us; it is to be preferred before
occasion and opportunity: But if you resolve both to breakfast, dine and sup,
let your suppers be early and largest, your dinners least, and all the time
after supper (if your occasions will permit) be disposed to honest and innocent
recreations and mirth.

VI. Keep constantly to a plain, simple, and single Diet: none enjoy more
health, and live longer, than those that avoid variety and curiosity of meats
and drinks, which only serve to entice us to our own ruin: Note also, that
when you are directed to a Diet, you keep most to those Aliments in that
Chapter, which least offend your stomach, and most refresh and please your
fancy, to this end let the sick, or some for him, be often reading over the
ensuing Ghapters for Diet: and if your food be solid, hard or dry, besure to
chew it well, and drink the oftener.

VII. Begin your meals, with something actually hot, and such things as nourish
most, viz. things that are sweet, thin, luscious and liquid, moist, slipery,
and most passible, as Cherries, Apples, Pears, but above all things Flumory:
But all solid, hard, dry, acid, sower, sharp and astringent meats and drinks
are to be used last.

VIII. If at any time, yet at meals drink not much at once, rather drink often
and little: This will make the meat and drink mix well in your stomach; prevent
Fluctuations, crudities and sower belchings; also (for most) morning* draughts
of strong drinks and frequent compotations, or tippling betwixt meals are to be
avoided.

X. When you are in perfect health and temper, eat and drink things temperate:
and when distempered and sick, eat and drink things contrary to your distemper
and sickness, though not contrary to your stomach and appetite: you may
gratify Nature* but not your disease, v. 8. If your Disease be cold, your Diet
(though it dislike your fancy) must be both actually and vertually hot: and if
your Disease or Constitution be hot, your Diet must be cold or cooling; and so
of all other Diseases according to the Chapters hereunto annexed: and ever more
remember, that an erroneous, and irregular Diet, will undo, all that the
Physician, or Physic can do for you: and Galen (a man as much to be believed
and depended on as Mempsis) in his Tract de Theriac, affirms all Remedies
ineffectual without a due Diet.

X. The particular Chapters for Diet (there being variety enough in every
Chapter) must be exactly kept to; and no other food made use of, than is
mentioned in those Chapters, till the Disease be cured, let standers by, and
Dogmatick Chemists, say what they will to the contrary: it is keeping to a
proper Diet that cures, and without this, they do but Insanire, or act like
madmen, that either give or take Physic.

Lastly. And above all things; devoutly invocate God for his Benediction,
without which, neither Paul nor Apollo, Galenist nor Chemist, Food nor Physic
can do any thing; as is more amply thus signified in the words of Sirac to his
son Jesus: In thy sickness pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole:
Leave off from sin, and order thy ways aright; and cleanse thy heart from all
wickedness: Then give place to the Physician; for the Lord has created him:
the hour may come that their endeavors may have good success: for they also
shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that, which is given for the
prolonging of life: for the Lord has created food and Medicines out of the
Earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them: and he has given men skill,
that he might be honored in his mavelous works; for, of the Most High only
comes Healing.

Phil. But to come a little nigher the business I aim at: pray tell me
Eugenius, what sick people have lately been with you? and how manage you that
affair of Paupers?


Eugen. There was with me just now a Lazar, so afflicted with the Bloody flux,
and so extremely indigent; that he has neither house nor home, friend nor
money, and what to do with him, I know not.


Pbil. Give him two or three drops of the Doctors Pseudochymical,
Alexi-stomachon: A good draught of Pepper posset, Egg-caudle, Mace-ale, mull'd
Sack, or burnt Claret; it may be will do as well.


Eugen. But, Sir! the man is almost dead, and starved with cold and hunger, and
has no two or three shillings, nor farthings to buy the Doctors drops, or a bit
of bread!


Phil. You must resolve then to relieve him, or let him dye.


Eugen. That Is a hard saying: I am loath he should perish, and yet to relieve
all that may on this account come to me, is to ruin my self.


Phil. That Is more than you know Eugenius: Providence is not so dead and dull a
thing, as too many make it: he that bad the young man sell all he had, and,
etc. knew how to recompense his Faith, and confidence in God: besides, you and
I, have our names for naught, if we look no further than self and interest: Be
but you faithful in not imposing upon poor; and careful in serving and saving
the Patient, (be he poor or rich) and never question an honest satisfaction: As
Paupers cannot pay, so also, prudent and generous Patients will not, let Art
and Industry go unmaintain'd.


Eugen. Would you have me then, Sir, give him Physic gratis?


Phil. I, I, Eugenius; good convenient food and money too; if you are convinced
he is such a real pauper, as he says he is; or else all the Alexi-stomachons,
Polyceas, Panaceas, and Ambrosiopaeas, that you, or the Hermetick Doctor can
give him, will do him little good: here, bid him provide him a good warm
lodging, and buy himself a pound or two of Rice, and let* him torrifie, or
parch it a little, as he is to use it, in a hot fire-shovel or frying* pan; or
bake it for bread with a few Seeds, Nutmeg, Pepper or Cynamon, and eat nor
drink any thing but Rice, thus prepared with scalded Milk, or Milk and Water,
for seven or eight days, and your Patient, Eugenius, may live, to deride, and
laugh at all the twelve-penny drops of Chemists, and charitable cheats of poor
needy Mountebanks and Mechanics.


Eugen. Would you have me, Sir, use nothing else but Rice? It Is a great disease
he labors under, and methinks Rice should not master it.


Phil. If it does not; give him often a dose of honest Diascordium, or (if that
should fail) of our Hypnotick tincture, and Cordial Spirits: But you forget,
Eugenius, that I told you, great diseases may be cured by keeping to ordinary
Medicines proper for them.


Eugen. But Rice, Sir, is no Medicine: it is so common a food, that I wonder you
should count it for Physic any more than Bread!


Phil. I count Bread, and every thing we eat and drink Physic, provided it be
contrary to a Disease: For instance, if instead of a loose and moist belly,
your Patient was troubled with a hard, dry, and costive belly; what Medicines?
what Alexi-stomachons and Panpharmacons can do more, if so much, as such meats
as moisten the guts and stomach? Sc. Pruens, Pears, Apples, Butter, Oil,
Watergruel, Flumory, French barley, Spinach, and many such like moist and
anodine Aliments, of which hereafter: and when the bowels and stomach are over
moist, relaxed, and slippery as in your present Patient; what can Physic do
more than gradually, as Rice does, both heal, alter, bind, dry and strengthen;
especially as it may be cooked? And you would find it, Eugenius, a hard task to
tell me of any one Disease, that I cannot hope to relieve or cure by a proper
Diet, and very little else, as safely and surely, though not perhaps so
suddenly, as the proudest Medicine the Chemist can produce.

What Disease is there that proceeds not from some of the simple or compound
qualities; and though no man is so completely wise, as to explicate them in all
their causes and effects, which makes Mempsis absolutely deny, their is any
such thing as qualities, which is no less absurd, than to affirm there is no
such thing as Summer and Winter, or Fire and Water, because in all things we
know not their causes and effects, and yet it is certain, they really exist, and
are (by the Suns absence, or more immediate presence) made up of such
qualities, as we call, hot, dry, cold and moist: and as certain it is, that all
essential Diseases are caused, and all Medicines cure those essential Diseases,
by some or all of those four qualities, hot, cold, dry or moist: And what meats
are there not, as well as Medicines, that are not in one degree or other
opposite to those causes? And if so, as so it is, what hinders then (as strange
as the Chemist makes it) that food may not perform those cures, and if you
please, not improperly be called Physic, there being this only difference
betwixt Food and Physic, that in health Nature, i. e. his Archeus, requires
things Homogeneal, or of like qualities and temper to its self; but in
sickness, things Heterogeneal, or of contrary qualities to the Disease, the
neglect of which absolute and necessary distinction makes the Chemist so
skeptical as he is.

Of such force and power is food for the preventing and curing Diseases, that I
could name you no meaner a Master of Physic than Avicen himself, who cured (to
use his own words) innumerable Diseases by Diet; and esteemed it so honest (as
indeed it is) safe, easy, pleasant, and useful a science, that no good, nor
wise men (but the Chemist) would neglect or undervalue it: However, if Diet
should, (as in some sudden and great Diseases, it sometimes does) prove
ineffectual, you are hereby no more prohibited the judicious use of greater
Medicines, in such great and violent Diseases, than the blowing up houses, to
prevent and put out fires, when such natural and rational helps as water will
not do it. And that I may no longer detain you from what at first I most
intended; I shall without any more ado, in several distinct Chapters propose
you a proper Diet for Diseases; by the help of which, our Cordial Spirits, etc.
I can with the satisfaction of a good conscience assure the Reader, that he may
safely, and with good success (especially where the Physician cannot visit the
Patient) practice on himself, and avoid the danger of putting themselves into
the hands of Pseudo-Chymists, silly Women, Mountebanks, Mechanics, Fortune
tellers, and such like cheats. And to do this, there needs not much more, than
to be directed, or have the opinion of some honest and able Physician, whether
your Disease be mixed, or comes immediately from a hot, a cold, a dry, or moist
cause, and then, as you are directed by these ensuing Chapters; to use a mixed
or simple Diet contrary unto that cause.


CHAP. I.
Treats of a Cold or cooling Diet, for Hot Diseases and Constitutions.
THere is nothing that we can think on, that belongs to Aliments so absolutely
necessary, so good cheap, and easy to be attained, as w^ter, without which the
whole Universe must stand still, or run into immediate confusion.

It Is peculiar prerogative is, to moisten, cool, relax, relieve ease pain,
evacuate, thicken, thin, and contributes something to all the active and
passive five Qualities, Dryness, only excepted: By its cold and moist Qualities
it quenches Choler, and Lenifies sharp, acid, salt, and adust humors, and
relieves all inflammations, inward and outward, and is the only potent refuge
for all volatile, saline, thin and sharp bloods.

A glass of good spring Water, with a little toast, and a little loaf-suger
mixed, is a very good mornings draught, for all hot, lean, sanguine, choleric
and hectic persons. So is Water* Caudle made thus: Take three pints of Water,
boil in it a little Rosemary or Mace, till it comes to a quart, then beat up an
Egg and put some of the scalding hot water to it, then give it a wame or two;
aad with a little Sugar, drink it hot or cold; three pints of Spring Water put
to one pint of Milk with Sugar Candy, or double refined Sugar, is a drink that
Princes may, and do often refresh themselves with. So also is running Water
with a Lemon, and some part of the Rine slit into it thin, and a little Sugar
and Wine put to it; or Syrup of Rasberries, Baum, Violets, Mint, or Clove
gilly-flowers; you cannot take too much of it, in ardent Fevers out of a bottle
cork'd close, and a quill run through the cork to drink out of: Note, that raw
cold Water, in Fevers, Inflammations, and Choleric Thirst, being drank at once
in great quantity may cause obstructions, and many dangerous Diseases, as
Dropsies, etc.

But if you first boil well the water, and use it after it is again perfectly
cold, instead of obstructing it will deobstruate, or open obstructions, and may
thus be given at any time, in all sorts of Fevers, either malignant or ardent,
especially if a little White Wind Vinegar be mixed with it.

That Water is best, which is insipid, or without taste, clean, light and
bright; but to make bad water good, and good water better, boil it well, and
then let it cool again before you use it.

Of Water is made Watergruel (the sick man's Food and Physic) when the Archeus
abhors all Cordials and high Diet: this is ever very acceptable and pleasing,
and consequently, not to be neglected by Mempsis himself, there are these
several ways of making it:

Take two pints of River or Spring Water, boil it first, and then let it cool
again; then put to it a due proportion of Oatmeal, a handful of Sorrel, and a
good quantity of picked and well washed Currants, (eston'd Raisins of the Sun,
and other ingredients, as the Disease will permit, may also be added) ^ye up
these ingredients loosely in a fine thin linen cloth or bag: boil them all
well together (with or without a little Mace, Nutmeg, Rosemary, etc. as
occasion offers) when it is sufficiently boiled strain the Oat-meal, and press
out all the juice or moisture of the Currants and Herbs; throwing away the
husks; as you eat it, sweeten it with a very little Sugar, Salt, Butter, and
fine Manchet may be added, unless the Disease be very acute: Or,

Take a quart of water, put to it a spoonful or two of Oatmeal, and a little
Mace, when it is sufficiently boiled, put in it seven or eight spoonfuls of
white, or Rhenish-wine, to make it more nourishing (if the Disease will bear
it) beat up an Egg with a little Sugar, and put some of the hot liquour to it,
and then give it a walm or two: Or,

Take Tamarinds or Pruens, wash them in several Waters, then stone them, and
cut them small; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water and Oatmeal, and
strain the juice from the flesh, as you did the Currants, and add to it a
little Sugar when you eat it.

All sorts of Broths, Ptisans, and Suppings made of Barley clean picked, hul'd,
and washed in many waters, is very pleasing to persons sick of hot Diseases; So
are all tart, sharp and sour things, as Verjuyce, Barberries, Vinegar,
Gooseberries, Cervices, Oranges, Lemons, dried Grapes, or our common red
Cherries dried, quench thirst, cool cause appetite, and please most sick
Pallats, Sorrel, is a most noble and useful plant; Possets made of it, are
excellent in ardent or malignant Fevers, the Green-sauce made of it, is the
best of all Sauces for Flesh, Gooseberries not full ripe, sealded, and eaten
with good Water, a little Sugar and Rose Water, Marmalade of Gooseberries is
also a dainty repast for weak and sickly persons, so is their Quideny, the
Quideny of Currants, both white and red, do the like; so do Barberries either
preserved, or in the conserve, and many such like d^^nties made by ingenuous
Gentlewomen; Tamarind Possets are also very pleasing, and profitable in all hot
Diseases: It Is made thus:

Take three pints, or two quarts of Milk, boil in it about two penny worth of
Tamarinds (which you may buy at the Apothecaries) until it turn the Milk, then
strain it from its Curds: Thus is made Whitewine, Rhenish, Lemon, Orange,
Sorrel, Pippin, and all Possets made of sour things, wh ch are excellent in
Fevers, and all Diseases coming of Choler; Vinegar Possets will do as well as
any.

Apples quodled, and eaten with Water, Sugar and Verjuyce, are grateful to a
hot and dry constitution: So Pru^ns stewed with Sorrel, Verjuyce, or Juice of
Lemon, Endive, Succory, Dandelyon, Spinach, Beets, Pur^lain, Borrage, Bugloss,
Violet* Strawberries Cy^qfoyl, Raspeberries, Mulberries, Burnet, Quince,
Plantain, Dampsons, Lettice, Cucumbers, Eggs potch'd into Water, Vinegar or
Verjuyce, and eaten with Sorrel sipits or Vinegar, and fine Sugar may be
permitted persons, whose Disease is not acute, or Eggs beaten in a Platter with
Butter-milk to a moderate thickness, and sugared is also excellent.

Two-Milk Posset: that is, boil a quart of Milk, to this put a pint of
Butter-milk, take off the Curd, and you have a pleasant Posset: This Bocheet
made of Ivory is also excellent.

Take Spring Water three pints, boil it away to two; when it is cold, put to it
one ounce of shavings of Ivory, a few Coriander, or Carryway-Seeds; you may add
also as many bruised Currants as Ivory, put them all in a Tin Coffeepot, adding
as you think fit, a little liquorish, and let them stand simpering by the fire,
four or five hours, then strain them, and keep the liquor in the pot to drink
when you will as Coffee; to make it a more pleasant repast, you may put a
little Rhenish*wine to it, and dulcifie it with a little powder of white
Sugar*candy. Cullis, and Jelly of Ivory and Hartshorn is a good Restorative
Diet; for hot maciated persons, make it thus:

Take a Chicken or young Cockerel, Pheasant, Snipe, or Wood cock; those that
have not too much money, may take Hogs feet, Lambs, Calves, Pigspettitoes or
Trotters; or take the bones of Veal, Mutton, Hens, Pullets, Capons, etc. which
have sinews sticking to them; Boil all, or any of these in the water wherein
French Barley has first been bolled, throw away the Barley, and add to the
Water some shavings of Ivory, and a few Currants, or estoned Raisins; when the
broth is thoroughly boiled* strain it, and when it is cold it will Jelly; take
from it when it is cold all the fat from the top, and dregs at bottom; and to a
Porenger of this melted, put the yolk of a new laid Egg beaten up with the
Juice of an Orange, and a little Sugar, and let it stew gently a little while,
and so drink it.

Note.
That all salt, and bitter, and very sweet things; and all hot and dry things,
are to be avoided while you use this diet, and are advised so to do by your
Physician, as Pepper, Ginger, Cynamon, much Salt, Tobacco, Brandy, and wine
unless mixed with Water, strong Beer and Ale, and meat especially much roasted,
and very fat: But cooling Odours, as Vinegar or Water, wherein Rose leaves,
Violets, or any sweet temperate Herbs have been steeped; or a turf of fresh
earth often smelt to; or to receive much the sent of Cow Dung is good and
necessary for hot blooded people.

CHAP. II.
Treats of a Hot Diet, for Cold Diseases and Constitutions.
THe intent of hot Aliments is to heat and dry a cold and moise Constitution;
to cherish and restore our Native heat, when it is deficient, by any cold
accident or disease. If Food vertually hot, exceed the second degree of heat;
as Garlic, Onyons, Mustard, Radish, Brandy, etc. It may not then improperly be
called Physic; and more fit to be used so, than as food; and though our bodies
are best preserved by things con-natural, or moderately hot; yet when we do
accustom them to things immoderate, as much Wine, Brandy, Tobacco, etc. We
seldom long escape death, or some great disease: But away with these
distinctions of qualities, says Mempsis: All that concerns this Chapter, is to
mind you of such things as are contrary to a cold disease, a faint, weak, vapid
and watery blood: and it is endless to assert all that may be said on this
subject: I shall therefore only single out such as are sufficient. This Cullis
is counted excellent.

Take a large Cock, Capon, Sparrows, Partridge, Snipes or Wood-cocks, boil all,
or any of them, in a gallon of Spring Water, till they fall in pieces, or come
to a Pottle: then take off all the fat when it is cold, and put to it two quarts
of Whitewine, and then boil it again to a Pottle: then clarify it with two or
three Whites of Eggs: then dulcisie and Aromatize it, with about a quarter of
an ounce of Cinnamon grossly beaten, and about four ounces more or less of fine
Sugar: color it with Saffron, and perfume it with a grain or two of Musk, or
Amber-greese; and to make it more cordial and costly, add to it confect. of
Alchermes, and Hyacynth, q. v. strain it through a gelly bag two or three
times, and eat it alone, or mix it with other broths. Or,

Take Calves-feet, Cow-heel, fresh Pig-pork, Veal or Trotters, let them simper
ten or twelve hours by a soft fire, in a sufficient quantity of Springwater,
with Mary-golds, Rosemary, Time, Savory, Sweetmarjoram, Mace, or Cinnamon: when
it is almost boiled enough, add to it a crust of bread, then strain it: To make
it more nourishing, put to it, as you eat it, the yolk of an Egg and Sugar. Or,

Take a quart of Sack, burn it with Rosemary, Nutmegs or Mace, then temper two
or three new laid Eggs* with four or five spoonfuls of it: Give it a walm or
two with the Eggs, and add to it Sugar to your content: Thus also for cheapness
it may be made with Ale, stale-beer or Sider: Or,

Take two or three spoonfuls of Brandy: put to it a pint of Ale, boil the Ale
and scum it, then put to it Sugar and drink it: Or,

Take three or four leaves of Sage; twelve leaves of Garden, or
Sea-scurvy-grass, shavings of Horseradish root, as much as will lie on a
shilling, Raisins of the Sun eston'd, Number. 20. put them into a quart bottle of
Ale or Beer, after two or three days you may drink it constantly for your
ordinary drink against the Scurvy, Dropsy, Green Sickness, or any cold Disease.

Egg-caudle, and all sorts of broths, Bocheets, Caudles, Cullices, Jellies, and
liquid Aliments, made with Flesh, Eggs, Sugar, Sweet-fruit, Wine, or Aromatic
Spices, nourish more and sooner than things that are solid, and in the
substance, and on this account, no diet can exceed Eggs eaten any ways.

Take any flesh reer-rosted or boiled (Mutton is best) press from it the Juice
or Gravy: let it simper over a soft fire, with so much white or Rhenish Wine,
as there is Gravy: to which add the yolk of Eggs as you see occasion, Sugar,
and a lirtle Cinnamon, Nutmeg or Mace; drink often four or five spoonfuls of it,
or eat it with crumbs of sine Manchet, or Naples Biscuit: The bottom of any
well-seasin'd Venison Pasty, or meat (...) stewed in a sufficient quantity of
Wine and Water, or Ale and Water, or Water only makes a good stomach Potage.

All Aromatic Plants, all exalted Sauces with Anchovacs, Saffron, Shalots,
Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Mustard, or Horseradish roots,
Chervil, Cresses, Mint, Penny - royal, Taragon, etc. Steept, sliced or shred
into Sack, are good Sauces for cold and crude stomachs.

Note.
That Ambrosiopaea's, or our Cordial Spirits, much Flesh, and good Wine
moderately taken, may be used while you are under this diet: Rich aromatic
scents, odours, and perfumes are also excellent: Galen counted them the solace
and support of his life: The sauce and food of his Spirits; and that Reverend
Divine, the learned Hooker, found them so to fortify rature, that he could not
live without them: And certainly, most distempers incident to a cold and moist
brain (the original and prime cause of most diseases) are prevented, relieved
or cured by Aromatic Odours: these and good Air, are says, ('it is Hippocrates,
I think) the (...), charms against all evil.

CHAP. III.
Treats of a moist diet for dry diseases and constitutions.
MOst of those things mentioned in the first Chapter against hot diseases, may
be useful also against dry, because such diseases as are hot, are generally
also dry; and therefore it is, that moisture and dryness are counted passive
qualities: But besides what are already mentioned in that Chapter, there is
nothing can come in competition with Milk: and had Gods providence confined us
only to this Aliment, and bread we had no cause to complain of his bounty.

It Is generally supposed to be of a cold and moist temper; but being nothing
else but white blood, I rather think it (as blood is) temperately hot and
moist, and so like the blood of our bodies, that nothing can exceed it for
nourishment, and therefore it is that Milk in acute distempers is accounted
offensive, unless alaid with water: Asses Milk for Medicinal use is in greatest
repute, because it is not so thick, to obstruct, nor so thin as not to nourish:
both which may be performed by Cow-milk, either by taking from it the Cream,
called Fleetmilk, or putting to it a due proportion of Whey, especially if the
Whey be first well boiled, and put to it cold, and then it will answer all the
intents of Asses milk: But such as are sound, and under no manifest distemper,
stand in no need of these cautions and directions, nor can err in eating it,
only observing: 1. That they do not eat it raw and cold, when they are hot: 2.
Not to eat it on a full stomach, or mingled with other meats: this makes
children so subject to Worms: 3. Use no violent motion immediately after it. --
A draught of warm Milk from any Cow; ('it is but conceit and opinion to count on
a red-Cow, more than a red-Woman: the brown and black of both Kine are best, so
that they are young, well fed, and well fleshed) their Milk, I say, taken in
bed about an hour before you rise, is an absolute refection for a hot, lean and
dry constitution, if you put a little Sugar, or Salt in it, you need not fear
its curdling or corrupting. This trifle made of Milk is pleasant: Take a quart
of Milk; boil in it a blade of Mace: then take it from the fire, and dissolve
in it two or three spoonfuls of fine Sugar: then when it is blood-warm, put to
it about a spoonful of Runnet, stir it, and dish it out for a wholesome repast:
some do it with Cream instead of Milk, they are both good: There are many of
the like nature, which this short Essay will not permit of.

Fish of all sorts is also cold and moist, especially those that live in fresh
waters, but Fish that dwell in salt waters, and among Rocks, and gravel Rivers
are best. Fresh-cod, Whiting, Shads, Place, Flounder, Sole, Bream, Barbel,
Smelts, Carps, Gudgeon, Perch, Pikes, Roche, Mullets, Jacks, or broths made
with these, and Oysters, Cockles, crumbs of bread, and yolks of Eggs are sine
feeding for sick maciated people.

Fruit of all sorts, Pears, Apples, Prunes, etc. Stewed, roasted, boiled or
baked, are good also against dry Diseases; Carrots, Cowslips, Purslain, Letice,
Asparagus, ripe Mulberries, Spinache, Strawberries, Dates, Violet leaves,
Sweet-almonds, Mallows, Beets, Endive, Succory, Borage, Burnet, Liquorish,
Scorzonera, Raisins, Currants, Whey, Wheat, French barley, Oatmeal Puddings,
Frumety; but above all things Flumory, the worth of which is known to few: it is
made thus: Take half a peck of Oatmeal, take from it the supersine flower, put
it to soke three or four days in a stand, or any earthen Vessel, with so much
water as will more than cover it, shift the water every day to take away the
bitterness of the Oatmeal, let it stand in the last water till it sour: and
when you would use it, stir it well together, and strain so much as you would
use at once: then boil it up to the consistence of a gelly, and eat it at any
time cold or hot, with a little White Wind or Sugar, Sack, Claret, Sider or
Oat-Ale; though it seems worst, that sort of Flumory is best which looks clear
and sheer, and tastes sharp and sour: Thus also may be made Flumory of Wheat,
Rice, French barley, etc. Frogs and Snailes are counted good food in France, so
may Toads, Spiders, or any Vermin, if they come from thence: Our English Hens,
Cocks, Veal, Lamb, Chickens, Kid and Capons, are, I think, every whit as good
for saline, hot and dry bodies: If your Lamb and Veal be very young, you ought
to stick it with Cloves or Rosemary, as you do Beef; and it eats more pleasant,
and is more wholesome. The brains of most Animals are over moist and
Phlegmatic: But the Rumps, Tails and Tongues of all Beasts, (but one) are
temperate and restorative. The Lungs also of Flesh and Fowl are good for hot
and dry constitutions: So are the Eyes, Gizards, Sweetbreads, and feet of most
creatures, especially boiled. Cassia or Currants boiled in Chicken or
Veal-broth, cools, moistens, and loosneth the belly: This is also a good, cool,
moist, cheap and nourishing potage: boil any Mutton or Veal in water, with or
without Oatmeal; when the Meat is a little more than half boiled, put in it a
bundle of sweet Herbs, and the green leaves of Marygolds, Sorrel, Spinach,
Lettice, purslain, Violet, and Strawberry leaves: add to these a sufficient
quantity of the tender part of Asparagus, or a good quantity of green Pease
will do as well, especially if you bruise some of them before you put them in:
Or boil Damask Pruens in two quarts of water; after they have boiled a quarter
of an hour, put to them a saucer full of wheaten bran; let your bran only steep
in the hot water till it is cold, then strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar, and
drink it frequently: Or steep a pound of Pruens, and a very little Liquorish in
three or four pints of cold water* thirty or forty hours, and drink it for
common drink: Or this Emulsion: Take Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Currants of
each a small handful, Lettice and Purslain seed of each bruised two or three
drachms, boil them in a Gallon of Spring water to a Pottle; then blanch two or
three ounces of Almonds, and bray them in a stone Mortar: strain the liquor,
and put into it the Almonds; then strain it again, and with sine Sugar make an
Almond Milk, and drink it blood warm, as often as you will. In short, nothing
moistens the body more than much sleep, ease and rest, and living in such a
moist Air as Lambethmarsh, Hackney, or Dengy hundreds: And though that Air is
simply best, which is most serene, clear, sharp and dry; Nay, our Native Air,
though by its simpathy with our first matter, often times most repairs and
mends our decayed Natures; yet sometimes a gross, thick and moist Air, or
indeed any Air opposite to the Disease we labor under, must by us always be
reputed best: it being a sure rule that all things cure best by contraries, be
it Air, Aliments, Food, Physic, or any of the non-naturals.

Note.
That while you are directed this Diet, all things are to be avoided, which are
forbidden in the first Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Treats of a drying diet, for moist Diseases and Constitutions.
BRead, is so inseparable a companion of life, that neither sound nor sick can
subsist without it; and did I not stand in awe of time, and feared prolixity: I
would write its Paragraph, and make man*kind sensible, how with this, Milk or
Water, and very little else, we might contemn the curiosities of a Court, and
encounter with death it self. Epicurus (that Cormorant and Monster of men) only
with his (...) could entertain himself so well; that he could dispute felicity
with Kings: and in his morals tells us, that when he would entertain himself
more splendidly* he mended his cheer with a little Milk, and found so much
satisfaction by it, that he bids defiance to the pleasures, which the ignorant
and sensual world so much like, and cry up in magnificent feasts, great
entertainments, rich Wines, costly Meats and Junkets: and certainly says our
wise man, most that have addicted themselves to variety, extravagancy and
excess, have thereby either loaded themselves with new cares, or contracted new
vices; and so become obnoxious to various and great troubles, and frequently
commit Rapines, Cheats, violating Justice, Faith and Friendship, and many times
precipitate themselves into grievous Diseases, losses and disparagements; which
by Frugality, Temperance and Sobriety they might have avoided: Nature requires
little, opinion much, and he that has not this faculty of abdicating from his
desires, his mind is like a Vessel full of holes ever filling, but never full;
and to him, that is not satisfied with a little, nothing will ever be enough:
and whosoever covets no more, than that little he enjoys; however the world
(deceived by vain opinion) may account him poor, yet he really is the richest
man alive; and the way to make ones self truly great and rich, is not by adding
to ones riches, but by detracting from our desires; and what reason is there,
then says our brave Philosopher, that any man should stand in fear of Fortune,
or court it is favor, since few or none are so poor, as to want long these
things, or ever was reduced to a lower ebb, than Sallets, Bread and Water; nor
know I, whether more than this, with a quiet mind, and good appetite, (without
which none need eat) is worth contending for. How many by high drinks and diet,
riot, and luxurious compotations have dyed on their Close-stools, expired in
privies, and took their leaves of this base world over a Chamber Pot, or at
least, only outlived the conflict, with Gouts, Palsies, Catarrhs, Surfeits,
and many other ignominious Diseases: and what great matter can be expected in
Church or State, from that man whose joints are infeebled, his sinews relaxed,
his head clowded, eyes bleered, and mouth full of curses and clamours, and all
by reason of debauchery, excess and luxury; which chokes rather than cherishes
Nature, and clogs the Veins and Vessels with such superfluous moisture, that no
Meats nor Medicines can command those unmanly Diseases, that are the effects of
it: and though Bread will do as much as any thing, yet, unless temperance,
abstinence, or a spare diet be joined with it, all that Physic or Food can do
is in vain. No persons are more offended with Crudities, Worms, Fluxes, and
Defluxions than those that eat none, or too little Bread: No Flesh, Fish or
Fruits that we can feed on, but putrify and convert to slime and water for
want of it: No country, no place, no people; (in some sort or other) are
without it: Some bake it, some broil it; others fry, tossed and boil it; some
make it of dried Fish* some with roots of Plants, and Barks of Trees: some with
Seeds, Nuts Acorns: Among our selves it is made of Barley, Rye, Oats, Misceline,
Wheat; of all which Barley Bread is worst, and Wheaten best, especially if it
be not too fine, and without leven, or spoiled in making or baking: The crum is
best for Choleric, the crust for Phlegmatic and moist constitutions; or they
may eat it tosted: the newer it is; the more it nourishes; the older it is,
the more it drys: I have known Children cured of the Chincough, by drinking
little, and eating much Bread; it is good also against the Rickets: and the
reason why Fluxes, Surfeits, Fevers and many other Diseases, are so rife in
Fruittime, is, because Bread is not eaten with them: the more moist and liquid
our meats are, the more Bread is to be eaten with them: dry household Bread,
Manchet or Biscuit, eaten for a Breakfast, for Supper or last at meals, with a
little Wine, is the only refuge for Rheumatick and moist constitutions. Galen,
by much study, was troubled with distillations, but preserved himself many
years by eating no other Breakfast or Supper, than Bread dipped in Wine, and with
good Odours. Rice made into Bread, or dried in an Oven, and steeped in Wine or
stale strong Beer, and then boiled or baked with a little Pepper, Seeds, or
Cinnamon is good, so are all spiced, and Aromatic Aliments: Eggs roasted and
eaten with Pepper, much Salt or Cinnamon, and a glass of Wine or good Drink
after them, nourish and dry much: All Wild Fowl, Partridge, old Pigeons, Ducks
and Geese; Stares, Thrushes and Black-birds; Larks, Sparrows, Teel and Widgeon,
Rabbets, Beef, Mutton, Venison and Hare dry roasted, dry up Rheum: Broth made
with Rabbets, Rice, Sorrel, Sage, Sparrows, etc. All sour things also dry
much, as Vinegar, Verjuyce, Orange, Lemon: Alum posset is incomparable for a
gargel to hinder defluxions, or take it inwardly in hot and moist distempers:
Make it thus: Take a lump of Roch-Allum, put it into a quart or two of boiling
Milk, stir it till it is very well curdled; take off the curd, and drink it
hot, in malignant and putrid Fevers: Broths made of China and Sarsa; or let all
your Beer and Wine be drank out of a Lignum Vitae cup: Some have abstained from
all manner of drink, for many months: there are many other things that might be
added to dry a moist Disease and Constitution, which we omit, because most of
the Diet in the second Chapter against cold Diseases, may be used here as a
drying Diet.

Note.
That our Ambrosiopaeas, or Cordial Spirits, at, after, or before meats may be
used, while you are under this diet: But Milk, much Sugar, much Drink, and all
moist things, mentioned in the third Chapter must be omitted; But Abstinence, a
spare diet; much exercise, little sleep, especially in the daytime, and
presently after feeding is pernicious, for fat, Phlegmatic, and moist bodies;
for hot, lean and dry bodies it is necessary, especially in Summer and hot
Seasons.

The Conclusion.
And the sum of all is this: when a Pauper and sick person comes to me; I
direct him (if any) no more Physic than is absolutely necessary; next I bid
him keep a proper diet, or take a proper Cordial against his Disease. If his
Disease comes from a hot cause, I bid him keep (till he recovers) to the
Medicines and diet belonging to the first Chapter. If from a cold cause, then
to use no other Diet and Medicines than is contained in the second Chapter. If
from a moist or dry cause, then to the Diet, and Directions in the third and
fourth Chapter. If Diet and our Cordial Drinks do not do, then I recommend them
to the Stove and Artificial Bath, mentioned in the second part of these
Dialogues; and if then, and there they mend not, you may conclude their case
desperate and more fit for the Divine than Physician.

Finis part the first.
Miscelanea Medica: OR, A SUPPLEMENT TO Kitchin-Physick; To which is added, A
short DISCOURSE ON STOVING AND BATHING: WITH Some transient and occasional
Notes on Dr. George Thompsons (...).

-- Nec lex est just^^r ulla
Quam necis artificis art perire sua.
LONDON, Printed in the year 1675.

HIPPOCRATIS and GALENI FAUTORIBUS, Speciatim Erudito viro, mihique observando,
Thomae Austen Armigero, Mei amicissimo, Necnon Egregie Doctis J. N. and T. S.
Medicinae Doctoribus.
PEllaeo Juveni, Cultor non sufficit unus -- Duos igitur tanto Heroi, diversi
generis, obtigisse, memoriae traditur, Craterum scilicet, (...), and
Hephestionem, (...), ab eodem appellatos. Quorum, ille quidem Regem, hic vero
Alexandrum, coluisse dicitur: Mihi quoque, in publicum prodeunti, analogo
quopiam, multo magis opus esse, quis dubitet? Repertis enim libclli, and causae
quam tractat justissimae patronis idoneis, alios etiam, Scriptoris protectores,
exquirendos facile persensi: Nec mora, Vos enim, viri egregii, illico mihi in
mentem rediistis, (unde quidem, (ut verius dicam) nunquam abestis) qui me,
vestra familiaritate, olim dignati, sic me, sic med omnia, utcunque tenuia,
estimatis, and vel landare, vel saltem excusare, parati estis, ut aliis, hunc
tractatum inscribere, vel alios, mei Defensores adoptare, nefas duxerim.

De meipso (more Chymicorum speciatim (...) and (...), G. T.) multa promittere
modestia non patitur; and quamvis mihi non sum tam suffenus ut quidquam de me
magnopere pollicear, in utraque tamen Academia educato, exactis etiam viginti
prope annis in studio and praxi Medicinae, Chymiae, and Anatomiae, liceat mihi
dicere me non prorsus ignarum esse plurimorum, sive Dogmatum sive
Experimentorum, quae alicujus in hac art momenti sunt. Quapropter navem
solvendi and hunc oceanum discurrendi copiam facile mihi dandam confido, gratum
aliquid and utile humano generi exponere studenti. Valete viri egregie docti,
Accipite hoc offerentem (...); Pergite mihi (quod semper facitis) indulgere,
meique patrocinium suscipere, dignemini: and perpetuo favete

Addictissimo Vestri, T. C.

Miscelanea Medica: OR, A SUPPLEMENT TO Kitchin-Physick.
The Second Part.
ALL Physicians whom we ought most to confide in, do conclude and have
determined it as a most undoubted Truth, to cure with contraries, and preserve
with Cordials, according to that confirmed Aphorism of contraria contrariis
curantur: Similia similibus, conservantur.

Paracelsus, Theophrastus, Bombastus, Van-Helmont, and some of their late
conceited Disciples, without taking any notice of this distinction, do morbum
morbo curare: and venture to attempt the putting out of fire with fire: Or,
curing hot Diseases with hot Medicines, and consequently cold Diseases with
cold. Hippocrates, Galen, and their more aged Offspring; on the other hand
judge it more reasonable and practicable to put out fire with water; and to
subdue the cold effects of water, by heat or fire: and to this end, if the
Disease be hot and dry, as a Fever, they advise such Food and Physic, as is
cold and moist; and hot and dry Meats and Medicines to subdue a disease that is
moist and cold; never neglecting (as is supposed by the Chemist) to supply
Nature, though not the Disease, with convenient, delightful, and proper
Cordials, always remembering, not to nourish, but to oppose a Disease, with
things that remove, or alter it by their qualities.

We are much beholden to the temperament and qualities of things, for the
preservation of our health, and curing Diseases, nor is there, through the
benignity and bounty of God, any accident or distemper, but has its remedy
assigned it, by the matter, form, temperament or qualities of Medicines, knew
we but certainly how, and when to apply them: and therefore it is, that
Physiology, and all the five parts of Physic, are more absolutely necessary,
than the most exalted, and accurate Medicines of the Chemist: and though by
some (who know the vulgar neither do, nor will know any thing but what is
vulgar) the Galenist and Chemist are represented, as two distinct, different
and inconsistent things, yet it is certain, they both serve but to make up one
entire Artist: And I could tell you Eugenius not only of some Physicians, but
some also of your own profession, that can compare, if not outdo the greatest
Don and Heroes (as they think themselves) of the Chemical and Hermetick Sect:
And because you may depend upon it for a Truth, that all Diseases and Remedies,
may as well and better be comprehended under some of the simple or compound
Qualities, than any other invented Idea, Name or Notion whatever of the
conceited Chemist, to this very end, the foregoing Chapters in the first Part,
have given you a practical account of such things, as do preserve by their
agreement with Nature, and cure by their contrariety to the Disease; and not to
advise people to a Diet, that is answerable to their Disease and Physic they
are prescribed, is to ruin them: nor are they by any but conceited
Prac^tioners and Humorists, to be left at large, to feed as they think sit on
old Cheese, Red-herring, or to inflame themselves with the more subtle and
penetrating Spirits of Brandy, Punch and Aqua Vitae, which, though at first
they seem to content Nature, and exalt the Archeus, or vital and natural heat
of our bodies, yet they so alter also the natural tone, temper and ferments of
the pancreas, blood and stomach, that (in a little time) they leave them
languid, faint and vappid: By these things the Chemist may for a while,
seemingly make his Archeus or Nature blaze the better; but (like a Torch with
often beating) it will certainly burn out the sooner: and it is rare to find any
accustomed Brandy, or Aqua vitae Bubber, when once sick ever to recover,
because the frequent use of such things, make all other Cordials useless and
invalid in time of sickness, and when Nature should stand most in need of them.
Besides, they either at first so inflame the vital Spirits, as to produce such
acute, sharp, and sudden Diseases, as Fevers, Apoplexies, and the like, or else
in time (as one fire puts out another) they extinguish the vital heat and
moisture, and thereby occasion such chronick and fatal Diseases, as Gouts,
Dropsies, Palsies, Hecticks, Scorbuts, Consumptions, and death it self.

In short, our blood and spirits may as well be too much agitated as idle, and
the volatile Salts may stand in as much need of fixing, as the fixed Salts of
volatizing, nor is their less danger in one than the other: and how the
Chemist, only with his hot fiery Cordial Spirits at one and the same time, can
serve two such different Masters, I understand not, and must herein submit to
better judgments than my own, and surely, such a modest and mannerly
condescension, as this would have better become Mempsis, than an unmanly
disdaining others to magnify himself; nothing being more intolerable and base,
than inurbanity: Nor can I but wonder with what confidence he can pretend (as
he does, page 187) to subdue the irregular passions, and reform the sinful
inclinations of others by his Medicines, when, after so many thousand Doses, as
he says he has taken himself, (only to animate others) as yet he has not
conquered his own: his prevaricating in this is enough on all occasions, to
call in question his integrity, and to make him suspected a -- Chemist: Nor are
we so much to conside in the loud Hyperbolies of his Medicines, and great brags
that are daily made of Pantamagogons, Alexi - stomachons, etc. As to some few
well digested institutions, that may practically relate to the six
non-Naturals, and a Directory for Diet.

Like Food, like Flesh, like Meat, like Medicine, was once almost grown
proverbial: and some old Philosophers, by the continual succession of new
matter by Aliments; have not only affirmed; that from sick men we may become
sound men: but of late the Chemists have so improved, and advanced the Notion
in behalf of their Aetherial, and supernatural Spirits, that we may (say they)
also become new men; and one of the best and most accomplished of the Chemical
Cabal (meaning Mempsis) has undertaken (on condition his Majesty will be
gracious to that profession) not only to cure his Subjects of Incontinency,
Atheism, Profaneness, and all manner of Sin and Debauchery: But will make them
also Just, Devout, Loyal and Religious, only by cokesing, tameing, and tickling
the Archeus with his Hermetick and Chemical preparations: and to gratify
farther, his sacred royal Master for so great a kindness he engages (to use his
own words, page 187. of his (...)) by the powerful operation of his (...) (i.
e. in plain English his profound skill in Physic) to convert Quakers,
Catabaptists, Independents, Separatists, Schismatics and the multitude of
Phanaticks to the Church of England. Do this, and thou shall have my consent,
not only to be honest George, Doctor George, and George the Doctor: But Sir
George, St. George, and George the Saint.

But in good earnest I wish, dear Doctor, thou had conceil'd the Divine and
Moral operations of thy Medicines, upon the hearts and consciences of poor
Mortals, because in these his Majesty's Dominions thou can now never more
hope for any practice and employ as a Medicaster: for surely the profane
Cavalier he will not meddle with thee, for fear of being made a Schismatic, a
religious Rebel or Roundhead: Nor will I Am sure the devout Phanatick, for fear
of being damned for an Atheist, a debauched and honest Royalist: now then or
never recant, and own the Doctrine of Contrarieties: now, now or never is the
time to make it appear and convince the ignorant Heretical, Reprobate, and
unconverted Galenist, that thy Chemical and Hermetick Physic, can at one and
the same time work such contrary effects, as to make the Serpent (thy self dear
Doctor) a Saint; a Royalist, a Roundhead, and a Rebel a Royalist; Now I say is
the time, the very time for thee, O Mempsis, to work these wonders; or else,
(with pity and compassion I speak it) thou must, I, thou must pack up, and be
gone into some of those horrid regions, where people are neither for God nor
the King; for King nor Parliment, no, nor for my Lord Mayor, nor Common Council.

I wish also, that the Doctor had not intimated, and suggested to his Majesty
that in good conscience (for the good service he has done himself, and Royal
Father of blessed Memory) he ought, or can do no less than overthrow, or at
least new Model, and purge with his reforming Physic, his College of
Physicians, and two famous Univerties, Cambridge and Oxford.

But above all things, after all thy glorious boasts and brags of Loyalty, thou
were bewitched to petition the Parliament for no less (in effect) than his
Majesty's; there own, and the peoples lives and liberties: for what difference
is there betwixt their being ruined, and their erecting a College for Mempsis,
with immunities for him, his Heirs and Assigns to dispense all the Medicines,
that must be made use of in his Majesty's Dominions.

This George, however reasonable, and necessary it seems to thy self; yet,
after thou have fluttered a little longer like a Feather in the wind, thou will
find that the Parliament will let thee drop, and take no more notice of thy
Phanatick Freeks and frisking Seminalities of thy brain, than if a
Tom*tit*mous, an Owl, or a Jack-daw had flown over Westminster. Let Wisdom
baul, and utter her voice never so loud: let her scream and tear her throat in
pieces; it is (as thou say George) all one, as if thou should vociferate
Neptune to forbear swallowing up Ships, since it is his Nature to do such dirty
and mischievous tricks: All which the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen taking
into their consideration, and that there is no hope, that either the King or
Parliament will accommodate thee with a College; our Senators and City Heroes
are at this time preparing one for thee at Moor-gate.

And now, seeing he is so hardly dealt with; let his Majesty, his two Houses,
his Nobility and Gentry; the Bishops and Clergy; the Lawyers and Laity; the
whole City, Town and Country look to it as they will, it is to be seared, that
whatever Chymick and Hermetick Physic can do, shall be done to have the same
effects on them as on himself: and (if Heaven helps not) convert them all to
non conformity, faction and sedition.

This zealous Mempsis in another place of his Evangelium Chymicum (for all he
says is Gospel) has a hymn to his Creator (and by the way let me solemnly tell
him, I wonder how he dare concern so great a God! in his little designs) for
putting it into the hearts of rusticks and Mariners, with their Punch, Brandy,
and Aqua vitae bottles, to teach sottish Galenists, the use and excellencies of
his well distilled Spirits, and the foolery of their dull Julips, fulsom and
fruitless Apozems, Bochets, Cullices and Gellies, as you may read at large in
several Paragraphs and Pages of his Book.

But to leave these extravagancies, and flurts of the Hypocondres: Lets hear
what Galen upon Hippocrates says concerning this affair of Aliments: This grave
Philosopher in his Book De Elementis, tells us, that by a dissent of the first
qualities (not from the Punctum latens, the little Atoms in the Archeus, and
Seminal Idaeas in the Materia prima, as our inspired Mempsis will have it) but
from the dissent of these first Qualities, says our Author, which proceeds
immediately from the Elements themselves, and the Aliments; man is born for the
Physician, and were it not for the defects proceeding from these two, man could
never dye.

From the four Elements, come the four Qualities of heat, cold, dryness and
moisture: from these arise the temperaments peraments of Aliments; and from our
Aliments, come the four humors, called Choler, Phlegm, Blood and Melancholy;
and out of these humors the parts; and from those parts the whole, or what we
call a humane body: and when any of these four temperaments or humors are
extinct, depraved or hurt in Quantity, Quality, or Motion, then follows
Sickness and Death: So that in effect, Life and Death, and every man's temper
and constitution, depends more or less upon the Aliments he feeds on; and the
humors themselves are nothing more than the effect of food, v..g Choler is the
fomes of blood made of Aliments over digested and concocted, and serves to
ferment, agitate, or brisk up the constipated Ideas of the Archeus. Phlegm is
made of Food, (for want of natural heat) not enough concocted, and bridles
choler, and keeps the blood and humors from burninig, tames, and fixes the
Spirits, and makes the body, cool, fat, moist and soluble. Blood is made of
Food, perfectly elaborated to augment and nourish the parts: good Food makes
good Blood; and good Blood makes good Flesh: So that in effect, Flesh and Blood
is only good Food. Melancholy is the Terra damnata: The Devil, the thick and
drossie part of Food and Blood; and was intended by Nature to bridle the (...),
the somes or froth of sperm and spirits; to temper rage and lust, to compose
the thoughts and imaginations: but being depraved, it works contrary effects,
as we see in our friend Mempsis.

From this little representation of man, an intelligent, and considering person
may find out as easily, as by the Idaeas, Atoms, or Magots in the Archeus, how
we come by Diseases, our dissolution and death; and also how necessary, a
direct and due diet, such a diet as may answer to the four temperaments, and
humors of our bodies, choler, phlegm, blood, and Melancholy: how necessary
this (I say) is for the preventing, and curing Diseases; as might be farther
amplified, but that I must avoid prolixity, that the Book may not be too
chargeable for the poor: Or else it might be made evident, that a diet may be
collected, not only to heat, cool, dry and moisten, but also to Bind Relax
Restore Thicken Thin Deobstruate Lenifie Revel Resist Poison


And all things else, that Pharmacy it self can necessarily lay claim to,
toward the conservation of man. But this will not consist with a short essay,
and therefore as concisely, as the subject will permit, I shall only add a
description of the Nature, Use and Virtues of an Artificial Bath, and stove
hereunto annexed; with which, our Ambrosiopaeas, and a proper Diet may be
performed as much as can reasonably be expected from the means.

What a help it is to Nature, to throw off by sweat those saline, acid,
sulphurous, and corrosive particles of blood, which are the root of all
Diseases, is manifested by the daily experience of such as are daily relieved
by it, in Gouts, Scorbuts, Hecticks, the Evil, Palsies, and the like: as it
helps thus to discharge the Serum Salsum, the salt, sharp and watery parts of
blood by the skin; how far this, I say, may extend it self, both for the
preventing and curing many potent Diseases, when Diet and other Remedies are
deficient, and cannot do it, I leave to the bounty of a prudent and liberal
conception.

It is so contrived that it is impossible for the patient to take cold, to faint
or sweat beyond their strength, and own inclinations; nor is there any
nuissance in it, that is incident to Stoving, or sweating in other Baths.

Place here the Figure.
AN APPENDIX: OR Practical Cautions AND DIRECTIONS To be observed about STOVING
AND BATHING.
STtoving and Bathing are two different things: the first may not improperly be
called a dry Bath, the other a wet; and when ever you meet with the word Bath,
you are to understand swearing in something that is liquid, as lukewarm Milk,
Milk and Water, or only warm water, or water prepared with ingredients proper
for the diseased person.

Note also, that a Bath with very hot water, drys more than it moistens, and
contracts the skin and pores, rather than relax or open them; and serves to
supply the intention of a cold Bath; or bathing in cold water with such parts
and persons, as cannot safely go into cold water: But a Bath of heated, tepid,
or warm water, is of so great a latitude, that it extends it self to most
Diseases, and serves (to use the words of a learned Author on this subject, Dr.
J. F.) effectually more than any thing Physic is prescribed for, to defecate
the blood and humors, to mollify the hardness of the Spleen and bowels, to
moisten, cool, and nourish a hot and dry constitution and liver, to rarifie and
resolve also all cold congealed humors, and to prevent Barrenness and
miscarrying, that is occasioned by any intemperies of cold, heat or dryness.

When you meet with the word Stove, you are to understand sweating as in a
Hot-house, without any thing that is moist and liquid: You will also sometimes
find the word Vaporarium used in this Appendix, the meaning of which will be
known hereafter.

The Romans were most addicted to Bains or Baths; the Lacedaemonians, Russians,
Germans, and most Northern Nations to Stoves: The Turks, French and Italians,
use both Baths and Stoves: and as soon as they come out of the Stove, they
enter into a Bain or Bath of warm water, to wash away the recrements, slime,
mador or mud (as it were) that stoving without bathing is apt to leave upon the
skin.

By this means also, the skin is not only made pure, clean and smooth, but also
plump and fleshy: and according as the Bath may be dulcified and prepared, it
will nourish, feed and refresh the limbs and musculous parts, more than food:
nor is there any thing to be done by the natural Baths at Bathe, but may be
also performed by artificial Baths of Sulphur, Bitumen, Nitre, etc. and being
advisedly used, they do as manifestly answer the expectation of the patient, as
any remedies whatever; in order to which observe these few Directions.

1. Never Stove when the blood wants ferment, or (according to the Notion of
the Chemist) when the fixed salts of the blood have overruled the volatile, as
in Dropsies, and some sorts of Scurvies: But when the Sulphur of the blood is
too much exalted (the fomes of most acute diseases) or acrimony and acidity has
insinuated it self into the Mass, and yet the blood not vapid, then the Stove
is a proper, and most effectual remedy: Or, more plainly, according to the
significant, apparent, and practical meaning of the Galenist; Stoving is not so
proper and beneficial, for weak, lean, hot, hectic, dry, choleric, maciated,
melancholy and squalid bodies, as bathing; nor bathing for cold, moist, fat,
corpulent, plethorick, phlegmatic and hydropick constitutions and diseases, as
stoving: The Stove is most proper for the Spring, Autum and Winter; the Bath
for the heat of Summer: the Vaporarium is neither bathing nor stoveing, but
differing from both, and to be used by all sorts of persons at any time.

2. Before you Bathe, or enter into the Stove; if your body be not naturally
soluble, be sure it be made so by Art: Take a gentle Clyster over night, if you
intend to sweat next morning, or take the like Clyster in the afternoon, if you
intend to sweat at night. An hour before bedtime, and two or three hours after
you have eaten a light supper, is the best time both for bathing and stoving,
because you may lie all night after in your bed, and have your body well
refreshed and settled by morning. Note also, that while you are sweating in a
Stove, Bath or Bed, you may refresh your self with Mace-ale, Egg - caudle,
Chickenbroth, or any convenient Bocheet, supping or liquid Aliment.

3. When you come out of any Stove or Bath, take great care you take not cold:
For preventing which, and many other accidents, nothing has ever yet been
invented comparable to this (...), Balneum, and vaporarium, now all in one
presented to you; which is so safe, so commodious and effectual, both for
preventing and curing almost all Diseases, that nothing ever was, or can be
advised better, for private Families than to have one of them constantly in
their houses; it being so contrived, that it may stand in any bedchamber, with
as much convenience and ornament, as a well wrought Chest of Drawers or Cabinet.

In Italy, France, Germany, Turkey, and many other Countries, they are so
curious, and (not without good cause) so addicted to stoving and bathing, that
they count their habitations not completely furnished, and well provided and
cared for, until they have them in their houses, esteeming them the most
commendable and necessary furniture that belongs to them: and scarce a Family
of any remark and quality is to be found without them; and if our English
Gentry, especially those that live in the Country, remote from Physicians, did
also take up this custom, they would have no cause to repent them of their care
and consideration: Besides, not only their healths, but interest and good
husbandry might induce them to it, it being the most profitable Physician and
Apothecary they can make use of.

Another benefit of having them in their houses, is the accommodation of their
sevants, attendants, bedding and linen, and the avoiding many accidents by
lying, bathing or stoving after strangers: by this means also, they will be
encouraged to use them the oftener; at least it is likely it will induce them not
to fail, spring and fall; those being (though no time amiss) the most necessary
times to prevent Diseases, and preserve their bodies in a perfect (...), health
and integrity the whole year after.

I know, and am well assured, that Physicians would frequently advise their
Patients to stoving and bathing, had they them in their own houses, but the
charge and trouble on all occasions of providing them, does too often
discourage both the Patient and Physician. By this means also you may avoid
Spring and Fall, the use of Diet-Drinks, Physick^ale, and the like, which being
at those times so rashly and promiscuously used as they are, do more hurt than
good. Letting blood also in the Spring, may by this means be prevented, only
observing then a spare and cool Diet, which the Ancients called their (...), or
succedaneum to bloodletting: Abstinence rather than bleeding being their way to
abate blood, and prevent diseases: and to deal uprightly in a matter of so
great concernment, for a preventive, it is to be preferred before opening of a
Vein, which I do not much fancy, but in cases of extreme necessity, and not
upon every trivial distemper, and occasion that offers it self: Bood being that
which makes blood, and (as the oil and lamp of life) not prodigally to be
expended, lest like the foolish Virgins we have our Oil to buy, when we should
have it to burn.

The particular benefits of bathing and stoving are not easily to be reckoned
up in a transient discourse, but that which they are so generally famed for, is
to depurate the bad recrements of the blood, the lassitude, and lumpishness of
the limbs, and to make the whole body brisk, nimble, light and airy.

They prevent and cure all Agues, and Fevers of all sorts, both ardent,
hectic, putrid and pestilential; and in times of contagion, are of absolute
use, provided the place they sweat in (as it commonly happens) be not
infected; which (if for nothing else) were enough to encourage persons to have
these Stoves in their Houses.

And as there is nothing more effectual to prevent the Plague, than sweating
moderately in these sorts of Stoves, once or twice a week: So also, if
infected, nothing can exceed them for a Cure, taking at the same time
convenient Cordials: Nature by a Metastasis, being thereby assisted to throw
off the poison and venom of the blood, from the Center, to the remote parts of
the body, which is the only intention of the cure, the like is to be said of
the Smallpox, malignant Fevers, and all contagious diseases.

It relieves or cures all sorts of pains and aches, as Sciatica's, Gouts, etc.
it cures also limbs, that are weak and relaxed, and all cold, and moist
diseases got by cold.

Bathing by the mildness of its heat, mollifies and relaxes, softens and
smooths, and on this account is very proper, and very prevalent to cure
contracted members, and parts obstructed, either outward or inward, as the
breast, spleen, liver.

Bathing also, wonderfully relieves and eases Nephritick pains, and such as
are tortured and troubled with the Stone, Cholick pains, Hemorrhoids, stopping
of Urine and Courses, and makes a costive belly soluble and loose.

All diseases of the sinews, and all internal diseases proceeding from a cold
and moist cause, are prevented and cured by Stoving, as Rheumes, Palsies,
Lethargies, Cramps, Deafness, weakness, swelling and numbness of the joints:
it is also a specific against the King's Evil and Jaundies, Scabs, Itch,
Chilblains, and all efflorescences of the skin. In short, it so alters and
defecates the blood, that you may alter as you will by them and diet, the whole
habit of the body, and make it another thing than what it is; like the ship at
Athens, though it continued still a ship, yet had it not by often reparation,
one foot of the timber it was first built with.

And not only sick and diseased persons, but such as are in health may receive
profit, but no prejudice in the least by them: and my ingenuous friend Mr. H.
H. has told me, that in his travels to Russia, Sclavonia, and other Eastern
parts of Europe, he observed that in those Countries, it was not possible for
the inhabitants to live (for want of ventilation) were it not for their Stoves,
but by the continual and frequent use of them, no people are to be found more
sound and healthful; and are thereby so little beholden to Physic, that the
name is scarce known among them: and not a place of any note, but has one in
them

So also the Scorbute or Scurvy, by often and frequent Stoving, is never heard
of among those people (though for want of perspiration) they would else be
inclined to it more than we in England. It Is their only refuge also to prevent
Fevers, Gouts, Palsies, etc. after they have debauched themselves with high
drinking, which these people, to the great scandal of their Country, are most
infamously addicted unto.

Many people, especially such as are Hysteric and Hypocondriack, by Stoving in
common Stoves and Hot-houses, are subject to fumes, headache, swounings, and
suffocating vapors: But in this sort of Stove, (the head being in the open
Air, all the while they sweat) these and many other evil accidents are
prevented, nor are they at all offended with any noisome vapors or suffocating
fumes.

The manner of using it is thus.

Your body being made soluble by some gentle Lenitive or Clyster, go naked into
the Stove; stay in it about half an hour more or less to your content, or the
nature of your disease, taking while you sweat some comfortable supping, as
Mace ale, or whatever else may be advised by your Physician: while you are
sweating, you may increase or decrease the heat your self, and sweat as you
please; after you have sweat to your content, you may have the Flammi^ers, or
^^re Vessels removed; and the neck-board slided away, and so slip down into the
wet Bath and there wash off the recrements, the slime and filth of your former
sweat, with balls invented for that purpose: Then (after you have bathed about
half an hour) stand upon your feet, and wipe your body dry and step out of the
Bath into a warm Bed, and lie warm till your body be well settled, and
afterward rise, and having taken some warm broth, you may go abroad, renewed
to admiration, and sufficiently recompensed for what you have done.

That which we call vaporarium, is a place in the Stove, contrived chiefly for
diseases of the Womb, Anus, and diseases of the inferior belly; as
Dysenteries, Hemorrhoids, Cancers, and fistulated Ulcers, Scyrrhous tumors,
Barrenness, Abortion, Menses, Secundines, and every (...), and were it for
nothing else but decency (Cum vapor per infundibulum and fistulam plumbeam* in
Vterum, vel anum ingrediatur) it was enough to induce private Familes and
persons to have one of these Stoves by them.

It still remains, that I give some account of the Hydroticks which feed the
Flammifers; or how and what it is that causes the patient to sweat; it is not
caused by any gross material fire of wood, coals, etc. as the common Chairs and
Stoves are, but it is by an essential Oil, cohibited by retorts with well
rectified Spirit of Wine; and if you have the true exalted, and perfect
Oyly-spirit so well incorporated, and separated from its phlegm, as it ought,
it will penetrate, and prove as active as lightning it self.

There are some who know no better, who do in these cases use common Brandy,
and our poor, mean English Spirits, and they succeed in their cures
accordingly, there being seldom any visible or manifest benefit received by it:
Whereas, those mighty and potent diseases, of a confirmed knotted Gout, an
ulcerated King's Evil, Palsies, and the like, are frequently subdued by the Oily
spirit rightly prepared* as might be made appear, did it not savor too much of
the Pseudochymist, the Mountebank and Mechanic.

All that I have else to add, being confined to a short Treatise, and supposing
that after the publishing this manner of Bathing and Stoving, there will be no
want of undertakers, and such as will pretend to the utmost that can be done by
it; yet, that abuses may be prevented, and none but wilful people deceived,
this is to signify, that the very same preparation of Spirits for the
Flammifers, that produce those great effects by sweat, and that I use my self,
may be had at Mr. Briggs an Apothecary, at his house by Abb-Church near
Cannon-street: or in Spittlefields near the Salmon. By the help of which
Spirit, any that have these Stoves of their own, may do as much with them
toward curing themselves, as can be done for them, by the most mighty hand,
and most magnified Medicine of a Chemist.

Those that desire more ample satisfaction on this subject may read Galen, do
sanitat. tuend. The Learned Lord Verulam, de vit. and morte: And the wise
Seneca's Epist. de Baln.

FINIS.
Books sold by Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry.
Folio.
THe Regular Architect: Or the General Rule of the five Orders of Architecture
of Mr. Giacomo Barozzio Da Vignola. With a new Addition of Michael Angelo
Buonaroti. Rendered into English from the Original Italian, and explained by
John Leeke, Student in the Mathematics, for the use and benefit of free
Masons, Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers, Playsterers: In
General for all Ingenious Persons that are concerned in the famous Art of
Building.

Quarto.
A Golden Key to open hidden Treasures, or several great Points which refer to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness, with the Resolution
of several important Questions, the Active and Passive obedience of Christ
vindicated and improved, II. serious singular Pleas, which all sincere
Christians may safely make to those 10. Scriptures, which Speak of the General
Judgment, and of the Particular Judgment that must certainly pass on all,
etc. the first and second part. By Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at
Margarets New Fishstreet.

A Practical Exposition of the Ten Commandments: With a resolution of several
Momentous Questions and Cases of Conscience. By the Learned Laborious, and
Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, James Durham. Late Minister of the Gospel at
Glasgow.

Paradise opened: Or the Secrets, Mysteries, and Rarities of Divine Love, of
Infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel, laid open to Public View. Also the
Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious Transactions of the Father and the
Son in the Covenant of Redemption opened, and improved at large, with the
Resolution of diverse important Questions and Cases concerning both Covenants.
To which is added a sober and serious Discourse, about the Favorable, Signal
and Eminent Presence of the Lord with his people in their greatest Troubles,
deepest Distresses, and most deadly Dangers. Being the Second and Last Part of
the Golden Key. By Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel, at Margarets
New-Fishstreet.

Letters of Advice from two Reverend Divines, to a young Gentleman about a
weighty Case of Conscience, and by him recommended to the serious perusal of
all those that may fall into the same Condition.

FINIS.

