GIEIN, OR, A Plain and Practical DISCOURSE Upon the First of the Six
NON-NATURALS, viz. AIR:

With Cautionary Rules and Directions for the PRESERVATION of People in this
time of SICKNESS.

Very Necessary for the Gentry, and Citizens that are now in the Country, to
peruse before they come into LONDON.

By THO. COCK.

Poena praesens (si animum afflicti convertit) finis est Culpae praecedentis;
Si autem minime convertit, initium est poenae sequentis. Curandum est igitur ne
de tormento ad tormenta transiamus.

Grig. de Podagra. London, Printed by E. C. for Philem. Stephens Sen. at the
Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. Philem. Stephens Jun. at the Kings Arms in
Chancery Lane. Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultery. Joseph Leigh at the
upper end of (...)ing (...)ll Street near the Nags-head Tavern* 1665.

To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS BLUDWORTH KNIGHT, Lord Mayor of the City of
London GIANEIN.
My LORD,
IN all Dedications, there is something of Design, Self, or Interest, -- Et
omnium sunt stultissimi qui auriculas studiose tegunt: Especially before one so
quicksighted and descerning as your Lordship; and therefore I shall with very
little Reserve, tell your Honor all the ends that induc't me to make choice of
your illustrious Patronage: One is to testify that real Reverence and
Veneration I have to your Person, Place, and Dignities: and upon this account,
common Decency and good Manners would have upbraided me to have made choice of
any others Protection; especially in such dangerous and deadly times we now
live in; Detraction like Infection being almost in every ones mouth, ready to
poison the best and greatest endeavors that can be used for a Preservative;
and therefore neither Art, nor Nature, nor Self, nor Interest could in charity
advise me otherwise, then to take such an effectual and sovereign Preservative
as your Patronage, before I ventured into the open and common Air.

Nor could Policy direct me better then to borrow your Name; for if there be
no other worth in the Treatise, yet, it will both invite, and somewhat
recompense the Reader to see so fair and stately a Frontispiece as your Honors
Name place't before it: at least, they must like it much the better, and think
it the more deserving for bearing so great a Sail.

And though I cannot, without huge Arrogance pretend it to be a Present suitable
to your Greatness and Deserts; yet it may pass for an acknowledgement of that
high opinion, or rather certain knowledge, I have of your Virtues and Merits.

I have many other reasons to allege in defense of the Dedication, as, your
Lordships Power and Abilities to promote and reduce to practice, what others
only can advise, discourse, think on, and wish for.

But, my Porch (I see) grows wide; and a large Preface will not so well suit
with that little knowledge you have of me, and acquaintance I have with your
Honor: besides, long Apologies, have usually more of bud, blossom, and color,
then consequence; and most commonly are like May-Poles, long and fruitless.

And therefore notwithstanding all the Alligations I have or can use, I shall
entirely cast my self upon your Lordships goodness for Approbation and
Acceptance, of what is due to you from

Your Lorships most humble and affectionate Servant T. Cock.

A PERORATION to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, with the Right Worshipful
the Aldermen his Brethren in general; and all the worthy Members of it In
Particular.
My Lord; and Gentlemen,
NOt only my own Resentments; but the desires of diverse Deserving Persons, and
Eminent Citizens have obliged me to proffer the subsequent Discourse to your
Grave and Solemn considerations; least, (as to Physical and Natural Causes) the
defect of a Praemunition, and Polemick Praecaution; the next Summer prove as
formidable if not fatal as this If your Honors please to peruse the first
Caution toward the latter end of the fifth and the beginning of the sixth page
of this following Treatise, you will find something relating to this Paragraph.
.

In compliance with your necessary Concernments, and weighty Employments, I
have resolved against Prolixity; and to keep within the Circle, as much as the
lines of its account will permit, and shall only therefore, as it were, prime
the Cloth, and strain the Canvis, that I may chalk out a Design, intending some
such able Masters as your selves to finish and put life to it.

At the beginning of this Contagion, I had (in favor of the enclosed Paper)
the Honor to wait upon the Committee appointed for this Infection: I then in
person made a proffer, and Transient Discourse on what I now more deliberately
perform in Paper: But the misfortune then was, (and will be till a way be found
out to Retrive the matter) that their Power was Limited, and they must proceed
Legally, and by that means they could not take farther cognizance of the case.

I was thereby justly silenc't, and saw no reason then to do in Person, what I
now submissively hope I may in Paper; it being as significant in a time of
Death and Sickness to cast about for life and health, as in a time of Peace to
make provision for War.

To come (my Lord) now a little nearer the business I aim at, and that is in
the behalf of many deserving Citizens who are herein supplicants to your
Lordship; That you would at the next Sessions, and Sitting of Parliament, move
their Honors to take into their Considerations the Penal Statute, Primo Jacobi
31. concerning shutting up Visited and Infected houses.

Unless my Author mis-informs me, it was then debated, Whether such
Confinement, or Removing the Sick and Well, into several and distinct places,
and Out-parts of the City, (as the Artillery-Ground by Finsbery, etc.) were
most expedient? But the state and exigencies of affairs then inclined them,
(though with some Reluctance) to determine the former under the Penalty of
death, and being proceeded against according to the Statute against Vagabonds
made the 39. of Eliz. 4.

His Majesty, our Royal Sovereign, in Christian care and indulgence of his
People at the beginning of this Infection also constituted the Lords of his
Privie-Council a Committee for Inspection, into what was most expedient and
proper, for the preventing, spreading and increase of this Plague: Their
Lordships accordingly required the Honorable and Learned College of Physicians
to Add, alter, and ordain as they should find the present times and occasion to
require: But still with this Restriction, viz. In pursuance of former
Presidents in the Reign, etc. or else, surely it would have been thought on as
a thing most eligible to have caused a Separation of the Well and Sick, (which
cannot but be acknowledged as necessary as water to quench fire) but yet by
such proper aids and helps as might best answer its end and Intention.

And indeed (to speak heartily) it seems to me, as if the College had some
such thoughts in reserve, and in compliance with the Act, went as far as their
line would let them, the words in their Sixth Section being these -- That upon
the discovery of the Infection in any house, there be presently means used to
preserve the whole; or, if the whole be to be removed; notice to be given to
the Dverleers of their Remove, that care may be taken they shall not wander
until they be sound.

That by the whole is meant that part, or such persons as remained whole and
well in Sick-houses, is evident by the Hypothesis -- if the whole be to be
removed: but I leave that Honorable and Learned Society to be their own
Commentators, as the occasion shall require: Errors in this nature, by the Wise
man's words, being as stones cast upon the waters; (...), one circle raises up
another until the latter is bigger then the former.

However, as to my self (others as yet keeping silence) so far as my reason can
insure me any thing, I cannot but think, that the medium 'twixt the two
extremes of letting all infected persons loose, or * the shutting up all well
persons with the infected, would be the only expedient to preserve the whole:
the one when things grow to extremity, though never so much endeavored, cannot
be observed, nor the other prevented or avoided: neither can I by all that I
have as yet heard in favor of the * latter, persuade my self but that it is as
well as the former, rather a great promoter then preventer of the Plague: the
Mortality being hereby greatly increased, and after such hard and severe
usuage, those that are left alive, having done their penance, and thereby
absolved and released, become far more Infectious (unless the Longer, the
Lesser they are tainted) then if they had been never been so shut up, or
restrained. Neither is it any absurd Annotation, That the greatest Plagues that
ever were in England, were when it first was Instituted, and most observed*

Something dissonant to this, An. 36. in as formidable a Plague in its
beginning as ours, was with good success constituted by his late Sacred Majesty
of ever blessed memory Charles the First: and I have by some persons of good
Quality, now alive, then Visited, and so disposed of, been informed that not
one of Twenty among the well persons so removed fell sick, nor one in Ten of
the sick died; which next to Gods Goodness they imputed to their freedom of
Airing, Walking, Recreating, and refreshing of themselves by an honest and free
Conversation one with another: hereby also they had the voluntary, free and
freequent Visits of the best and most able Physicians, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries, little hazard by this means attending their Cures: the dejection,
horror, fear, and consternation of their Spirits (great Incendiaries and
Promoters of a Pest) were hereby also taken off, and much abated: Searchers,
Bearers, Nurses, and other licensed Visitors (whose walks are far more
perilous then diverse that are occluded and shut up) would hereby also become
almost void and useless.

(Would to God upon no less penalty then death, they were debarred the Society
of all well people; and not only have some visible and signal badge about them
when they go abroad for persons to avoid them, but they also severely enjoined
to avoid others, especially Children and Fools that are not sensible of their
danger: Four of each (if any) in every Parish would be requisite: Two of each
to be assigned only for such houses, where the diseased upon good grounds, may
be thought not to die Infected; it being most unreasonable, that Families which
are clear, should run the hazard of such Searchers and Bearers as are allotted
for the Infected.

This Paragraph, my Lord, I have added, only with the breath of a Transition,
and large Parenthesis, to blow upon the feather of Custom and and Opinion,
which often weighs down by (a kind of nonsense) its Levity, the most weighty,
profound, and solid actions of our lives.)

Hereby also the Public Magistrate may with Courage, Confidence and Security,
manage City affairs: Citizens and Tradesmen, safely keep their houses, and
follow their employments: many childing-women, and sucking children,
fatherless, helpless, and friendless persons supported and preserved. The
Cunning and Craft of such as have Soars and dissemble their Sickness to the
ruin of those they converse with (only to avoid shutting up) might be
detected: The outrages, insolences, number, and neglects of Nurses restrained,
prevented, and abated: Thousands of persons lives preserved; poor people
cheaper and better provided for and attended; and above all, God better
pleased; and the well effectually kept from the Conversation of the Sick,
whereby the Contagion and Mortality, (as to Natural Causes) is chiefly, (if not
only) augmented and increased.

I have given you, my Lord, herein a draught of my private thoughts, but no
otherwise then Apelles painted his Pictures, with his Pencil ready to strike
out, or put in, what ever may seem necessary and acceptable to

Your Lordship.
RULES FOR Returning CITIZENS, AND Such as are already Returned.
TO give a precise and ample account of the Nature, Causes, Signs, and Symptoms
of the Disease; and of all that may or can be said in Physiology, Pathology,
the Semiotick, Hyg^ine, and Thearepeu^ick parts of Physic relating to it, were
like reading Lectures of Martial Discipline to a Soldier, when he should
fight, stand upon his guard, and be on service: or teach the Art of Navigation
in a storm and shipwreck; whereas the Maxmium urgens and only thing then to be
thought on, is, how to escape drowning, and throw overboard all things of less
concernment then themselves.

To this end, I have avoided all the parts of Physic, unless the Hygeiastick;
also all that concerns that but the First of the Six Non-Naturals, viz. Air: it
being (in submission to better Judgments) the Unum Necessarium, or at least One
of the most necessariest things that concern the Subject I referr all unto,
viz. the Preservation of such as are Returning, or are Returned out of a good,
sound, wholesome and generous Air, into one that is vitiated, infirm, crazy and
sickly.

As Meat and Drink is to the Body, so is Air to the Spirits; which are weakened
and corrupted, preserved and supported, as much by a good or bad Air, as our
Bodies by good or bad Diet: And hence it is, that all Physicians and
Philosophers in all ages, have in their Institutions made as great provision
for Air as Aliment, it being of as great force and power to alter our Bodies,
as the very food we eat, in regard it communicates its qualities to the
Spirits, and by the Spirits to all the parts of our Bodies; and therefore
Physicians have in this Infection, been all along so important for the use of
all such rational helps as might cleanse and rectify the Air: as among many
others, the making of large fires in every street; which had it been rightly
managed, was as brave and as effectual an expedient for the ridding (quantum
res humanae patiuntur) the City from this Infection, as ever was, or will be
thought on; and if over God should give the City the like deplored occasion; if
then instead of making Fires as formerly within the City, they were but to be
made without it, (I mean the Suburbs also) and at the same time special care be
taken, that none but Infected persons might come near those fires; I do assure
my self (as to Natural Causes) it would answer its desired effect.

If this may seem too troublesome and chargeable, there is another way near
allied to it to be thought on, that has very little of charge or trouble
attending it; and that is to make at the four Quarters of the City, four vast
huge fires of Coal, in some such fit and apt place as Tower Hill, or
Smith-Field, etc. and to let them be kept burning fiercely, and clear from
smoke (it being though a sulphurous body of little or rather no worth in the
case) for three or four days and nights. This being done every 12 or 24 hours
at farthest, ought to be made near the said Coal Fires, (which are still to be
kept burning) a large and brisk Wood-fire for an hour or two, of some light
brushie and flamable substance, as Babbings, Tarr-barrels and the like; and to
exalt its flame, it is necessary to throw in now and then, Salt-P^eter, Oil, or
a bag of Gunpowder so big as may safely be permitted.

The reasons of this preceding Paragraph is this: Fires and all hot bodies are
very powerful attracters and drawers, and by this property it has, the
Infection will be drawn from the Center to the Circumference, as well as from
the Circumference to the Center, as is apparent by the Cities being more, and
the Suburbs less infected since this late unlucky experiment was made upon it.
The ground of which I am apt to think was from former mistaken Presidents, or,
the Observation of Aristotle's ridding the City of Athens in his time from that
Contagion by Fires; not considering whether they were placed within or without
its Walls. In and out, though but little words, yet of such great and vast
import in the case that they are like Life and Death.

I never yet by any principle of Philosophy could understand that cold was any
cause of Contagion: an Intemperies of heat, moisture, or dryness, may; and if
this Infection must proceed (quo ad hominem) from a Dyscracy of some of those
three first Qualities, especially of Dryness (as upon good grounds I am apt to
think it does) it will be hard then to find out, how fire that assists it in
its Causes should ease or help it in its Effects.

We may safely conclude, whatever relief Fires can afford in the case, is, as
it is an Element, and not from any Temperament, or Quality belonging to it: It Is
its flame does good; its heat without flame does hurt; the one by somewhat
attracting and philtrating what it attracts; the other more powerfully
attracting, and not at all rarifying what it has attracted.

These things I have purposely inserted for all persons indefinitely to
consider of, because I would not willingly have a business of this consequence,
either now, or hereafter neglected, or misimproved; Oportet enim medicum esse
Polyperistaticum.

I shall now proceed to those familiar and necessary Cautions and Directions I
intend, one of which is

(1.)
That all persons would be as careful at and after their return, and coming in,
as they were prudent in their leaving and going out of the City, the danger as
to them being still the same, or greater: for though the Contagion be not, (God
only be praised for it) so mortal to those Inhabitants that have continued in
it, and have been used to it, (Custom begetting another Constitution in them)
yet the Remainders of it are of such vast concernment to such as have been used
to a better and more benign Air, that they ought still to continue their care
in preventing the Casualties that may attend a rash running into and an
unadvised living in, such a rotten, putrid and infected Air, as London, without
controversy, now is.

Hippocrates was so great an Enemy to all sudden changes and violent mutations,
that he would not allow it in things hurtful and prejudicial to Nature, where
time and custom had gained so upon us as to make them familiar to us; and if a
gradation is to be observed in passing from things bad and hurtful to things
good and beneficial, much more ought it to be done (...), gradatim, and by
piece-meals when the mutation is from things beneficial in themselves, (as good
Air) to things bad and Inimical.

But the same reasons besides this that did oblige persons to leave London,
will serve with the addition of many more, to be as circumspect and cautious of
coming to it: as, the great increase of dead Corpse superficially buried, which
undoubtedly, but that the Sun has and will abate more and more of its power
and energy in causing Exhalations, would produce else a greater Mortality then
any yet has been, from any precedent causes of Contagion and Putrefaction: And
it highly concerns every respective Parish to raise their Churchyards with
fresh Earth and new Mold, least the next Summer prove more fatal then this.
Some have reported, that Dogs have paw'd and scrap't up Graves, and preyed upon
the dead bodies carelessly and undecently buried, and not long after disgorged
fingers, eyes, noses and ears, as the Effects of their venomous Surfeits, and
whole families have been swept away by the poison and malignity of it.

To this end it is absolutely necessary for all such as are to Return out of
the Countries, before they come so near London as to breathe in it, or take any
part or portion of its infected breath, strictly and carefully to observe for
their Preservation the Direction mentioned in the next Section, or Caution, and
in the last sheet of this Treatise. And that all persons may have timely notice
thereof, it is left to the care of such as are now in London, and have their
friends abroad.

The second Caution.
That those that come out of a serene, pure, wholesome and sound Air, would
procure some sound, wholesome and well person that has been conversant and used
to London, to enter first their Houses, whether they were or were not visited:
Infection like Air, being of a very insinuating, subtle and searching nature,
and may possibly have crept out of the windows, sinks and passages of
neighboring houses, and adjacent places, and lie lurking all the while in
their own beds, houses, garments, and hangings.

This caution I thought, totally to have omitted, for fear of possessing people
with dread and timorous fancies; but when I seriously considered, how many
have, and may miscarry by Presumption and Ignorance, and how easily they might
secure themselves (favente Deo) from all fear and danger in the case, I
resolved to let it go as it is.

And that which I advise all persons to do, if they cannot conveniently procure
others to do it for them, is to enter then the houses themselves with a Link
well lighted; (every one that goes in at first to take one in their hand) and
to carry it just before them, no higher then their mouth and nosthrils: the
flame by this means suppresseth and disperseth the Air, and keeps off the
malignacy (if there should be any) from entering their bodies; and by this
means, I, or any man that has a lawful call to it, might safely enter any
Infected or Visited House.

This being done, (still keeping the Links burning) let them make in every room
good fires, especially those they intend to lie in, smoking them well with
Cloves, Cinnamon, Benjamin, Storax, Cypress, Cedar, or Juniper Wood: But the
following Pastil may supply the defect of all domestic fumes upon all
occasions whatever; neither is there yet any thing as yet thought on, more
necessary and useful.

Next, let them air well their beds, whether they were, or were not infected,
with such things as are of a drying, mundifying, attenuating and clensing
nature; and withal, let them be appropriated to the Head, Heart, and Lungs. To
this end at Mr. Wilkinson at the Pestle and Mortar in Finch-Lane over against
the French Church, and Mr. Reeds, at the Queens Arms in Fan-Church-Street, I
have appointed a Pastill, which is to be light at the small end, with a Candle,
and to be placed in an earthen Porringer, set under the Bed, (the matteress
being taken off) that the fume may the better insinuate it self into the Bed,
all the while they are making, stirring, and throwing of it.

These Rotulae Pestilentiales or Pastils, being often thus used as a fume for
Beds, will be found not only beneficial, but convenient, in regard being
lighted at one end, they burn like a match without any flame, which may prove
hazardous under Beds.

They do not only correct the malignacy of a Contagious Air, but also refresh
the Vital and Animal Spirits, and is of great use for Consumptive, Dropical,
Astmatick persons, and such as are troubled with Catarrhs and Defluctions upon
their Lungs, being used not only as above directed, but also to fume their
night-Linnen when they go to bed.

I cannot also but highly commend the use of them in Churches, not only upon
this occasion, but at all times hereafter; and was it but once grown formal and
customary (as an Hourglass,) it would (not without cause) be contended for in
future ages, for more than a ceremony and nicety in Physic.

It is also at all times an excellent expedient in Courts of Judicature: also
for Shopkeepers to keep them constantly burning by them, it would be found a
very acceptable and rational Preservative; and in all places of common resort,
where the corrupt, putrid and tainted breaths of infirm and sickly persons,
does in process of time Intaminate others; which some do impute our frequent
Consumptions in England very much unto.

Persons of worth and quality, when they have tried them, and know the use and
benefit of them, I suppose, will keep to them, and therefore I have ordered
them at very reasonable rates to be always in a readiness, that all people may
be the more encouraged to use them. Those that are so extreme poor, that they
cannot go to the price of these, cannot (for Infected Beds only) do better then
put a spoonful or two of Saltpeter amongst five or six spoonfuls of Brimstone
to be used as aforesaid. Gunpowder also moistened with Vinegar, if it could be
safely used, is good.

This being done, they may securely, (having devoutly called upon God for
protection) go into their Peds, eating (the last thing they take) one or two of
the Lozanges hereafter mentioned: if they rub the inside of the Nostrils also
with a little Diascordium, it will be the better. And in the morning having
thankfully worshipped their Maker, (a quo omnis salus and medicina) let them
use some of the Preventives hereafter mentioned.

The third Caution.
That People would be very careful and cautious with whom they converse and
deal, not only because for some considerable time, Infected persons will be
frequent in all places with their running Sores, and venomous breaths, but
because also the Goods, Movables, Apparel, and Housholdstuff of such persons
as are deceased, and places that have been infected, do usually retain the
Infection for five or six months, or more, especially Bedding, Linen and
Woollen. Oxford was in former Sicknesses twice infected by Commodities carried
thither from London.

Those that will not allow this for an undeniable truth, may inform themselves
better, by many deplored instances too tedious to be here inserted; but above
all, it is remarkable, as upon strict enquiry has been by some observed, that
the first occasion excepting Sin) of this Pest in and about London, was by a
parcel of Skins brought out of Holland into St. Giles, which by the contiguity
and succession of second Causes mediate and immediate, has been propagated to
this extremity: neither is there any such Authentic Demonstration. that it is
so much generated by Celestial Influences, as propagated by Infection taken and
given, as is the Itch, Pox, and Smallpox amongst Men and Children, the Rot and
Murrain amongst Cattle; and as in Hospitals, Prisons and common Gaols Diseases
are often generated, continued and augmented; just so by the steams and breath
of dying and infected persons, unadvised community with Nurses, Bearers, and
Searchers, etc. the fomes of this Plague has been held up and increased: And
that gross mistake the vulgar made in promiscuous community one with another,
from the observation of the Plagues abatement in 65. has occasioned without
doubt the destruction of many Thousand persons; and had not an immediate Hand
of Mercy from Heaven stopped the Execution of us, it would surely have run on to
our utter ruin.

If it be here asked, Why then were not all persons equally surpized with the
Pestilence, that breathed in the same Air, and conversed daily with sick
people, received their breaths, attended their Cure, and dressed their Soars, as
Physicians, Surgeons, etc? It may be answered, because all men had not the
like Constitutions, and therefore suffered not the same effects: suppose for
demonstration, (sic magna cum parvis) man's body to be like Tinder, but some
more disposed to take fire then others; sometimes the Flint, sometimes the
Steel, sometimes the Tinder it self, either too dry, or too moist, is the cause
that twenty blows will not, when at another time a touch will serve to set all
on fire: So, sometimes men's bodies, with a thought, a look, a word, or sad
story, shall quickly be overcome and vanquished; whereas others like wet Tinder,
shall not take withal the Contingencies and Casualties that do attend them: So
that one great cause (besides Gods Providence) is the various accidents,
dispositions, forms, temperatures, customs and inclinations of men's minds and
bodies; or else, all as well as one, that were wet at the same time in a shower
of rain should take cold, fall sick, and die: all that were debaucht with Wine,
should fall into Fevers, and have one and the same disease, which upon the
former and diverse others considerations we see daily to the contrary. Multa
enim convenient morbo, quae non convenient Individuo.

There might be many more Cautions and Directions added; but I intend no more
then what are familiar, practical and necessary. Besides the chief business I
aim at, is the Preservatory part, which as it consists in avoiding those things
1. That occasion Infection; So, 2. In fortifying the Principal parts against
Infection.


The former we have done with, and take it for granted, as it is agreed on all
hands, that corrupt Air, whether from Celestial, or Terrestrial Causes, being
drawn into the body, is one principal cause of Infection, especially in
Pestilential times: and because this Discourse is intended for People
returning, and already returned out of a good Air into a bad, I shall only
insist upon some farther means and Remedies as relates to the correcting Air
infected, and the preserving (quo ad nos) both by inward and outward means,
Persons from Infection.

To the first sort, as general and more common, does belong the ringing of
Bells, firing and letting off great Guns: Fires and Bon-fires made severally
both with Wood and Coal, as before directed; the cutting open the Pipes in
great Streets for the running of clean and fresh Water: Allies, narrow Streets
and Lanes, to be kept sweet and clean, and free from the annoyance of Dunghils,
Jakes, and other nastery; the carcasses of Dogs, Cats and other Carrion to be
deep buried, and not to lie rotting and poisoning the Air. Where the Air is
thus corrupted, we commonly see people there die in greatest numbers: and where
these greivances are not, nor can be reformed, it is good to stay within doors
as much as possible may be, and to smoke the House well with Rosin, Tar,
Turpentine, and other materials directed in the College Books, good large
fires also in infected houses, rather then in those that are free, would be
very advantageous to neighbors that dwell next to them.

Lastly, leave no Window open to the South, to the North you may, in quiet,
pleasant and clear days; but keep them all constantly close shut after the Sun
is down, in regard they only then draw (like Cuppingglasses) bad air into the
rooms unto which they do belong: neither go out too soon in a morning,
especially fasting, or some Preventive taken (of which hereafter) nor be abroad
too late at night, not only because the Sun then has drawn off its beneficence
and blessing from the Earth, but because people will make most bold then to be
throwing out of doors and windows whatever infectious and noisome things
incumber their houses.

Thus far for Generals, and things more common against infected Air; next are
things more peculiar and special, both inward and outward; of which sort are
Antidotes, Issues, Amulets, and Odoraments, under which are comprehended Balls,
Boxes, Nosegaies, Pomanders, and all manner of Nasals.

The first of these we will reserve till the last; and as for Issues, they are,
without controversy, of great value and worth, and inferior to no Topical
application whatever. If I should write all that they may justly challenge,
there would be no end of their consideration; and I have, and do advise all my
friends, Old and Young, Fat and Lean, Weak and Strong, without any exception to
use them, this being the only (...) the world may boast of.

Amulets have not as yet gained that universal and uncontrolled repute in the
World. Galen says, as Deleteries they are inimical to Nature, especially if
the party that wears them be given to much labor, exercise, or motion; neither
can I advise such, if any, with hope of good success to use them: but suppose
they be made of Alexeteries, then Galen nor any judicious person, does, or ever
did dispute or question them. And those that have written and argued (not
without cause) against Deleterious and poisonous Amulets, made of Toads,
Arsenick, Quicksilver, etc. yet do they highly allow of such as are
Alexiterical and Cardiack. And such as shall deny their safe and effectual
operation, with this distinction, deny for want of better understanding, a
manifest truth in common practice.

The next thing to be considered, is the vulgar use of Balls, Boxes, Nosegaies,
Pomanders, etc. which (to speak impartially (and as I suppose most peoples
experience by this time may tell them) are poor, impotent, foppish, and
impertinent things, the very form, manner, and moderum of them being
insignificant; people having them to seek and grope for when the occasion may
be at hand, or while it is past: all persons are not, nor indeed can any be so
completely wise, as to know the (...), the unluckie minute, precise time and
place, when, where, and wherefore he should apply his nasal; whereas this
manner of application I now propound, viz. in rubbing the Nostrils with some
convenient Alexiterion, is remedium perpetuum, always doing good, sleeping and
waking, eating and drinking, at home and abroad; like a Watch wound up in the
morning, whether you think of it or no, still goes on, and does its work. The
greatest consideration and provision *that can be made will be little enough to
avoid the occasions of infection which may surprise you instanti, in a moment,
the twinkling of an eye, ere you can say, What Is this? and therefore there
cannot be too much done to keep the passages at which the Enemy must enter to
take us. And of Topics and outward helps, there is none extant as yet, or ever
will be thought on, more effectual (in stead of Balls, Boxes, and Nosegaies,
etc.) than the rubbing the inside of the Nostrills with a little Venice
Treacle, Mithridate, but above all Diascordium, as being more agreeable to the
Tone and temperature of the brain: or take a piece of Sponge (or Wool) cut it
fit for the occasion, dip it in Vinegar, and smear it with Venice or Common
Turpentine, that it may stick, and put it up the Nostrills. And I do solemnly
advise all persons that have any respect to their health and safety, when they
come within a mile or two of London, to keep constantly a Lozange in their
mouth, (how to use them is hereafter directed) and to put up into their
Nostrills some Diascordium (if a little Bole Armenack be mixed with it, it is the
better) The Mouth and Nostrils being secured, you are as safe as Natural helps
can make you, these being the two passages at which Infection must enter.

Continue doing this for three or four weeks at least; longer is necessary, but
people grow weary of welldoing: by this means there will be little or no danger
in your coming to, and living in the City. And having made this provision, I
can confidently advise all persons, Cito and Tuto, speedily and safely
according as their lawful and necessary affairs shall permit, to return to
their former habitations.

But here a grand Query and Objection of the Times is to be taken notice of,
and that is, Whether sweet or foetid scents are best against Infection? That
which occasions the scruple by all that I can observe, is a supposition that
sweet scents attract and draw, and stinks repel and drive back; whereas the
contrary may be thought rather the truth. This the surmising Vulgar are very
prone to call in question, from that common mistaken experiment they take from
Hysteric distempers; where they say sweet smells draw up the vapor, and
stinks drive it down; and so taking non causa pro causa, the Controversy is
occasioned. Whereas the Hysterical vapors ascent nor descent is simply from
the odoriferous or foetid fume, but because its (..) Receptacle being delighted
and pleased with delicious and grateful odours, and as much offended by noisome
and unpleasant savours, it greedily rises up (though in its own wrong) to
enjoy the one, and as hastily flies as an Enemy the other; which is as great a
proof as any need be produced, of natures detesting and abhorring, as
prejudicial and hurtful to it self, all foetid, stinking, and unsavory scents,
and that is the common and received opinion of Physicians. Though I am inclined
to think that the heart (the (...) of all motion and vital spirits) by its
Systole and Diastole, is the efficient and material cause of those vapors
assention and declination: the heart by the heat of the Arterial blood,
dilates, lifts up, and moves the lungs, by which motion they attract Air, and
suck in such thin, subtle, and aereal bodies, as scents and odours; which being
communicated by the lungs to the heart, the heart (as in a Throne) by its
Prerogative Royal, and Legislative Power, acts Rex, and truly examines and
determines, approves and disallows whatever is Homogeneal and Heterogeneal to
it self; and when it apprehends any inimical blood, scent, or vapor, contained
and lodged in (its Kingdom) the Body, to approach its presence by the
communication of inferior parts, it speedily throws off, and expells it by the
coercive power of its Systole: for as is the motion of the Heart and Arteries,
so is the Venal blood, Vapor, and Natural Spirit, which are fluxil parts, and
in any part of the body: neither is it more absurd for perfect and imperfect
blood to be mingled in this motion, then for the excrementitious humors to be
mingled with the pure Alimentary blood: and as the muscles of the Abdomen and
the Peristatick motion of the Intestines expel the foeces, so the Heart by its
transverse Fibers, labors to expel such homonymous blood, spirits, and noxious
vapors, as are proffered to it, or may assault it in Circulation, or by the
communication of parts.

But this I leave as too Problematical and difficult to be made evident by a
Transient discourse: and that the Question may not render the practice dubious
or insecure, I shall have recourse to Authority (discentem enim credere
oportet) and resolve all into the opinion and judgment of the most able and
learned Physicians, who unanimously agree that fragrant, sweet, and pleasant
fumes, and odoriferious exhalations tend much to the prolongation of life, and
prevention of very many great diseases and infirmities.

The Jewish Doctors, if credible Historians are to be believed, used them
frequently in their Synagogues, and the Primitive Christians in their Churches;
however, did they, or did they not, yet so far as the reasonableness of an act
and custom, or Physical use may oblige, I think there is not a more necessary
and useful thing to be thought on. And though I will not be so arrogant (ne
agyrtarum vocibus uti videar) as to pronounce this Pastil or Fume I have
appointed to be the only, and most absolute that can be thought on or produced,
yet I may boldly say, that I never saw, or was the Author of a more acceptable,
safe, and profitable Topic, both for the preventing diseases, and preservation
of health.

Galen who lived 140 years, lib. 5. cap. 10. De sanit. Tuend* makes them his
(...), the solace and support of his life; and one of the three Principles he
left to Posterity for the prolongation of long life, was to be careful not only
to avoid all noisome, stinking, and infectious smells, as things hurtful to
nature; but also to be very mindful to remain among sweet savours, wholesome
scents and odours that were agreeable to the temper and constitution of the
body, and did constantly keep to them himself, to prevent the mischief that
might happen by the want of them.

Limorleus also, an Author more obscure than questionable, accounts them the
(...), the averters and drivers back of all Evils; and in his Treatise De
Odoramentis, has these words, Partim ad voluptatem, partim ad sanitatem,
maxim ver a ad graves odores, fugandos, ad auram venenatam and pestilentem, ad
cordis etiam vires and spiritus, vapore odorato per nares in fauces una cum
acre deinde in cor effuso; the means is, that those things we now treat on, are
not only sauce for the senses, but are also for the banishing pestilent and
venomous blasts, by a fragrant odor, received by the Nostrils, and from thence
transmitted with air into the Heart and Lungs.

What an influence they have upon the principal parts of life, might (did I
intend a Volume) be plainly demonstrated by their great and manifest effects,
per nates and fauces, in the cure of Consumptions, and most distempers incident
to the Brain and Lungs; but I am mindful of my intended brevity, and shall only
advise all such as are troubled with bad Lungs, or would secure themselves from
such distempers to apply themselves as much as may be to the use of these or
such like specific odours, not only now, but hereafter; the Lungs, Vital,
Animal, and Natural Faculties being much injured, and Consumptions much
increased by the noisome smells as are at the best of times in such populous
places as this City.

Thus far for outward Helps and Applications; the next thing to be considered
and treated on, is, Inward Antidotes: and they consist of such things as do
resist Malignancie, and strengthen the Heart and Vital parts inwardly, as the
other things we have spoken of, do the animal and natural faculties outwardly.
This venomous vapor which breeds the Pestilence, is conveyed together with
the air or breath first to the Lungs, then to the heart; from thence it is
dispersed by the Veins and Arteries into all parts of the body. And first it
surpriseth the Spirits, next the Humors, and at length tota substantia, and
firm substance of the body; and then commonly within three or four days it
grows to extremity. Now the best armor against this Enemy, that I know of in
all Art and Nature, for outward means, is what I have already advised; and for
inward helps they are almost infinite, some are for one thing, some for
another: never was more variety to cure Corns and the Toothache, so that I may
say with the Poet, -- Inopem me Copia fecit.
However, to make good and short work of it, I shall give you a practical
draught of what I do my self, and advise my best Relations and Friends unto.
And first and above all things, when I awake in the morn. I humbly worship, and
devoutly thank God for preserving me the night past; then I frequently gargle
my throat, wash my Mouth, Hands Nostrils, Temples, Ears, and forehead with
Vinegar and Water; wherein if Nutmegs, Orris, Angelica, Ruc, Rosemary, Balm,
Lavender, Mint, Masterwort, Sage, Setival, Zedoary, Orange Pill, these or any
of these are kept continually steept for use, it is the better.

When in my Chamber and about the house, I burn the Pastil or Fume before
mentioned. When I go abroad, outwardly I use Diascordium to my Nostrils, and
inwardly I take two or three Lozanges, letting them dissolve in my mouth, and
so swallow them as they melt, which by fixing humors, and contracting the
orifice of the stomach, and passages that lead to it, hinder thereby malignant
air from entering into the inward parts, and wonderfully strengthen the heart to
resist sudden death. They are necessary upon this occasion for all persons at
all times and places, but chiefly in Churches, and all places of public
resort. This Lozange I have given an account of in a former printed paper, and
it has been used with as much success as any one Remedy about London, all
along this sickness: in the main I own Galen to be the Author of it, who with
little variation made use of it himself in the great and dreadful Plague at
Rome, and tells us that none miscarried that made use of it (peradventure he
means none that ever he knew of) and yet for a Preventive they have and will do
as much as God and Nature will permit. And so far was I from concealing them
for private ends and interest, that I then published the composition of them
for public use and benefit; and not only my own, but many Apothecaties about
London prepared them, though not so exactly and truly as I could have wished,
which has made me since often repent their publishing.

There is two or three Diseases more that this Lozange is eminently good for,
as well as this we have mentioned, viz. Worms, and Convulsions in children, two
or three of them being beaten to powder, and given in any convenient Vehicle:
also Vertigo or giddiness, Hysterical vapors, or Fits of the Mother,
Consumptive Coughs and Catarrhs, caused by a thin distillation of hot, acid,
and salt humors falling upon the Lungs from the head; if the Rhume be hot,
it is sharp and thin, and in this case you will find them of excellent use and
great worth, using also the outward helps of fumes and scents as formerly
directed.

By this means, or rather Gods Mercies, a quo omnis salus and medicina, I am
still alive, though I daily conversed with the dangers of the times, and
refused none (that I might encourage all to use the means) which I were capable
of serving; not that I do wish any so absolutely to reply upon these, as to
expose themselves by the use thereof, or any other means; to more dangers than
are unavoidable; because Gods Protection is the best Preventive, which men
justly forfeit in being too careless, or too confident; neither can a good
event be expected, upon any bold, rash, and unreasonable adventures, or wilful
contempt and neglect of the means; which has occasioned the destruction of
thousands in this Infection.

The Conclusion
ANd sum of all reduced to practice, is that all such persons as are now in
the Countries, and are to return to the City, would (in the fear of God) make
use of such necessary and reasonable helps as are propounded for their
preservation in the foregoing Treatise. Unum e majoribus, or one of the chief
of which indeed that first occasioned this discourse, is, that before they come
so near London as to receive its infection, they would put up into their
Nostrils a bit of Sponge dipped in Venice Turpentine and Vinegar of Roses; as in
page 15. and keep a Lozange constantly in their mouth, swallowing it down as it
dissolves; and before they enter their houses, either to get them well aired by
others, or else to do it themselves, as is directed in the second Caution, and
in the 6 page of this Treatise.

The Terebinth for their Nostrils may be had at any Apothecaries in every
Country Town; the Lozange and Pastil requiring nine or ten days at least to
prepare and complete it, could not be otherwise or more conveniently ordered,
and therefore I have taken care that they shall be in a readiness (at better
and easier rates than people can provide them) at Mr. Reads an Apothecary, etc.
and at those places where they are directed in the Title page for to have the
Books.

And to this end it is necessary, and concerns such as are in London, and have
their friends in the Country, to give them timely notice of it, and to take
care they may have one of the Books to peruse at their leisure, for their
preservation and health, which undoubtedly God permits the sons of men, as the
reward and recompense of their prudence, care, and virtues.

(...)

The POSTSCRIPT To the READER.
THis public Calamity (like a great and common fire) has occasioned all men,
though more immediately some Physicians, to bestir themselves, and cast about
for water (as it were) to quench and put it out. But as this is one of Gods
Jura Regalia, and not to be undertaken but with great reverence,
circumspection, awe, and subordination to his will, yet natural helps upon Gods
terms; which (because not better to be improved) I choose in the very words of
Sirach to his son Jesus, thus to express: In thy sickness be not negligent, but
pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole: Leave off from sin, and order
thy ways aright, and cleanse thy heart from all wickedness: Then give place to
the Physician, for the Lord has created him; let not him go from thee, for
thou have need of him: The hour may come that their endeavors may have good
success; for they also shall pray unto the Lord that he would prosper that
which is given for the prolonging of life: for the Lord has created Medicines
out of the Earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them: and he has given
men skill, that he might be honored in his mavelous works, for of the MOST
HIGH comes healing.

Upon these considerations I have brought forth my two Water-pots, one
formerly, relating to the Curative, this to the Preventive part of Physic: if
any one drop of either has, or shall do good* let God be glorified.

This Treatise (and that only diminute) is in relation to the Preservative part
of Physic, or Conservation of health which all people safely may, and ought to
know and consider of to the utmost. The other parts of Physic, which I have
omitted (like School Divinity) is better let alone and concealed, than meddled
with; the difficulties of Physic being as dangerous as doubtful disputations;
and in both, nihil plus periculi quam imperfecta scientia. And therefore (it
not properly depending upon that part I have treated on, and also that people
might have all helps that are necessary) I thought good to give notice that it
will be requisite, so soon as time and opportunity will permit, to advise with
some able Physician that may help and assist you in the Therapeutick and
Pharmaleutick part of Physic; a work too difficult, and not to be ventured on,
without personal and good advice, Curatur Socrates, non homo, and therefore
though I cannot but advise the use of some purging medicines, either before or
after your return, (but rather before) yet the Remedii genus, or what Specific
purge (not knowing for whom) I leave^ the consideration of such judicious
Practitioners you can best consult with; only take notice of these General
Rules.

(1)
If you find a decay of Appetite, an indisposedness to action, an unaccustomed
dullness or drowsiness, horrid, troubled, and disquiet dreams, flushing in the
face, pain in the shoulders or other parts, thick urine, obstructions, or
shortness of breath; if these, or any of these grow upon you, then, in the
Spring bleed, and at the fall (or against this Infection at any time) purge.

(2)
Let them be gentle, easy, and familiar, and not churlish or violent: also let
them have a stiptick or adstringent quality in them, unless the humor be tough
or viscous, and then use Preparatives.

(3)
If you Purge produce vehement headache, dizziness, swoundings, convulsions, or
excoriation of the guts, you may conclude it either works too violently, or was
not proper for your Disease and constitution.

(4)
Take no sweet things that day you take your Purge, nor go abroad though it be
but Pills, or gentle Physic (as they call it) infection being then, or when
your body is loose and open, most apt to seize upon you.

(5)
If your body be costive take a Glyster before your Purge, and if your Purge
chance not to work at all, which may be known in five or six hours time, then
take a Glyster or Suppositor to fetch it away.

(6)
If you take Pills over night, then take a draught of warm Posset Drink or
Broth in the morning; but if you take your Purge in the morning, take nothing
for three hours after; eat a good dinner, but little or no supper, and when you
go to rest, take a little Diascordium.

(7)
Lastly, keep the appointed Pastil or Fume burning in the Chamber while your
Physic is working, which will support and cheer the spirits, and make nature
the more able and better to undergo Purging.

FINIS.
This Treatise being printed in great haste for present use, occasioned the
following ERRATA'S.
Page 7. line 8. read their house. p. 7. l. 29, 30, 31. is to be left out Mr.
Wilkinson at the Pestle and Mortar in Finch-lane over against the French
Church, and; the party having since left his trade. p. 10. l. 24. for 65. ^.
25. p. 17. l. 8. r. peristaltick, p. 18. l. 23. r. meaning is. p. 19. l. 20. r.
the tota, etc. p. 20. l. 6. r. Setwell. p. 21. l. 16, 17. dele a quo omnis,
etc. p. 22. l. 7. dele indeed. p. 23. l. 4. r. at Mr. Reads an Apothecarie at
the Queens Arms in Fanchurch street. p. 23. l ult. for (...) r. (...) in the
second page of the Postscript l. 23. r. Pharmacutick.


