THE DECLARATIONS AND OTHER PLEADINGS, Contained in the eleven PARTS of THE
REPORTS OF Sir EDWARD COKE Knight, SOMETIME Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND; and
one of his Majestes Council of ESTATE.

Rendered into English, By W. HUGHES of Grayes-Inne, Esquire. For the benefit of
all Students, and Practizers of the Common Law.

With a Perfect TABLE of the Principal Matters thereunto Annexed.

woodcut, Tudor rose with crowned heart.

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, to be sold at their
Shops in Fleet Street. 1659.

ACTIONS upon the CASE.
Easter Term, Anno 43. in the Kings Bench, Rott. 569. 1 Lutterels Case, Co. 4.
part. fol. 84. b.
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say, Somer. ss.
in the Term of St. Michael last past, before our Lady the Queen at
Westminster, came Edward Cottel Gent. by John Nightingale his Attorney, and
brought here in the Court of the said Lady the Queen, then and there, his Bill
against George Lutterell, Esquire. Robert Norcome, and John Quick in the Custody of
the Marshal, etc. of a Plea of Trespass upon the Case: And are Pledges of
suit, John Do, and Richa^d Roo, which Bill follows in these Words: ss.
Somerset. ss. Edward Cottell, Gent. complaneth of George Lutterell, Esquire. Robert
Norcome, and John Quick, in the Custody of the Marshall of the Marshalsey of
the said Lady the Queen, before the Queen being, for that, viz. That whereas
the said Edward, the 4th. day of May in the 41th. year of the Reign of the said
Lady Elizabeth, now Queen of England, and before, he was seized of and in Two
ancient and ruinous Fulling Mills with the appurtenances in Dunster, in the
County aforesaid, in his Demesne as of Fee, To which Fulling Mills, a great part
of the Water of the River in Dunster aforesaid, from a certain place called the
Headwear of the said River in Dunster aforesaid, the said 4th. day of May, the
41. year aforesaid did run; and also before, time out of memory of Men
continually accustomed and used to run; And whereas also, the said 4th. day of
May, in the 41. year aforesaid, and before, time out of the memory of Men, for
the preservation, direction, and continuing of the right course of the said
great part of the Water of the River aforesaid, to run to the Fulling Mills
aforesaid, A certain thick bank was made of Timber and Earth near and above the
Mills aforesaid, on the West part of the Course of the said great part of the
said Water of the River aforesaid, and was near adjoining to a certain Street,
commonly called West-street, in Dunster aforesaid: And also whereas, the said
Edward, of the aforesaid Fulling Mills, with the appurtenances in the form
aforesaid being seized, Afterward, that is to say, the 28th. day of October,
in the 41. year of the said Lady the Queen that now is, The said two Fulling
Mills, (as before is said) being ruinous, did totally pull down, and
afterward, that is to say, The 20th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 42. at Dunster aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, in the places of them, and where the aforesaid Two Fulling
Mills before were made and built, upon the aforesaid great part of the said
Water of the River aforesaid, Two Corn Mills for the grinding of Corn newly had
builded, erected, and perfected, By reason whereof the said Edward then was
seized, and as yet is seized of the said two Corn Mills (so as before is said)
new built, erected, and perfected, in his Demesne as of Fee, and the aforesaid
great part of the Water of the River aforesaid, in Dunster aforesaid, from the
the said place called the Headwear, of the said River in Dunster aforesaid,
from the time of the new building, erecting and perfecting of the aforesaid his
Corn Mills, until the 10th. day of September then next following did run: By
pretense of which, The said Edward, after the building of the said Two Corn
Mills, until the said 10th. day of September, diverse gains and profits of the
said people of the Lady the Queen that now is, for the grinding of their Corn
at the said Corn Mills had gotten; Yet the said George, Robert, and John not
ignorant of the premises, maliciously devising, and intending, the said ^dward
un justly to molest, and him altogether to hinder and deprive of the profits of
the grinding of their Corn Mills aforesaid, the said 10th. day of September, in
the 43. year aforesaid, The said thick bank aforesaid, did dig and break, And
the whole aforesaid great part of the aforesaid Water of the River aforesaid,
which to the aforesaid Corn Mills of the said Edward from the said place called
the Headwear, did run, and ought and used to run, from his ancient and used
course, That is to say, in the said Sreet, commonly called the West-street, in
Dunster aforesaid, did divert and withdraw, whereby the said Edward, of the
grinding of the whole profit of their Corn Mills before, for a great time, That
is to say, from the aforesaid 10th. day of September, in the 42. year
aforesaid, until the bringing of this Bill, viz. that is to say, the 20th. day
of November, in the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 43.
wholly lost, to the damage of the said Edward 200 l. And therefore he brings
his Suit. And now at this day, that is to say, Wednesday next after 15. days
of Easter this Term, until which day the said George, Robert, and John, had
license to imparl, and then to answer, etc. before the said Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come as well the said Edward by his Attorney aforesaid, as the
said George, Robert, and John Quick, by Stephen Brodrippe their Attorney, and
the said George, Robert, and John, defend the force and injury, when, etc. And
say, that they are thereof no ways guilty, And of this put themselves upon the
Country; And the said Edward likewise, etc. Wherefore, a Jury was to come
before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, upon Thursday, in 15. days of
the Holy Trinity, and who neither, etc. And because as well, etc. The same day
is given to the parties aforesaid, here, etc. Afterward process was continued
between the parties aforesaid, of the plea aforesaid, by Juries thereof
respited between them before the said Lady the Queen, at Westminster, until
Friday next after 8. days of St. Michael then next following, Unless the
Justice^ of the Lady the Queen assigned to take Assizes in the County
aforesaid, First, upon Thursday the 6th. day of August, at the Castle of
Taunton in the County aforesaid, by the form of the Statute, etc. shall come
for default of Jurors, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneyes aforesaid, And the
aforesaid Justices of the Assizes, before whom, etc. sent hither their Record
had before them in these words. 1 ss. Afterward the day and place within
contained, before William Periam Knt. Chief Baron of the Queens Exchequer, and
Edward Fennier, one of the Justices of the said Lady the Queen, of Pleas holden
before the said Queen, Assigned Justices of the said Lady the Queen, Assigned
to take Assizes in the said County of Somerset, by the form of the Statute,
etc. come as well the said David Cottell Gent. by Adrian Street his Attorney,
As the within written George Lutterell, Rob. Norcome, and John Quick, by Henry
Collier their Attorney: And the Jury whereof mention is within made, being
likewise called, came, who being chosen, tried, and sworn to say the truth of
the matter within contained, Say, upon their Oathe, That the said George,
Robert, and John are guilty of the premises within put unto them. As the said
Edward Cottell within against them complains; And they do assess the damages
of the said Edward, for the occasion within written, besides Costs and Charges
by him about his suit in his part expended set to 40. s. and for Charges and
Costs of suit 10 5. s. Therefore it is granted, That the said Edward, shall
recover against the said George, Robert, and John, his damages aforesaid by the
Jury, in form aforesaid assessed; As also 6. l. for his Costs to the said
Edward, by the Court of the Lady the Queen, here with his assent of increase
adjudged; which damages in the whole, do amount to 8. l. and 5. s. And the said
George, Robert, and John, in mercy, etc.

Hillary Term, 38. Eliz. Anno 305. in the Kings Bench, Slades Case, Co. 4.
part. Fol. 91. a.
MEmorandum, At another time, That is to say, The Term of St. Michael Devon. ss
last past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came John Slade, by
Nicholas Wear his Attorney, and brought there in the Court of the said Lady
the Queen then there, a certain Bill against Humphrey Morley, in the Custody of
the Marshal, etc. Of a Plea of Trespass upon the Case: And are Pledges of suit,
John Do, and Richard Roo, which Bill follows in these Words: ss. Devon. ss.
John Slade complains of Humphrey Morley, in the Custody of the Marshal of the
Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self being, for that,
that is to say, That whereas the said John, the 10th. day of November, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady Elizabeth, now Queen of England the 36th.
was possessed for the Term of diverse years then and yet to come, of, and in one
Close of Land with the appurtenances in Halberton, in the County aforesaid,
called Rack Park, containing by estimation 8. Acres, and so hereof being
possessed, The said John afterward, That is to say, the said 10th. day of
November, in the 36th. year aforesaid, had sowed the said Close with Wheat and
Rye, which Wheat and Rye in the Close aforesaid, by the said John (so as before
is said) sowed, afterward, That is to say, the 8th. day of May, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen, that now is, the 37th. were grown into
ears. The said Humphrey, the aforesaid 8th. day of May in the said 37.
aforesaid, The said Wheat and Rye in ears upon the Close aforesaid (as before
is said) then growing, at Halberton aforesaid, in consideration that the said
John then and there at the special instance and request of the said Humphry had
bargained and sold unto the said Humphry to the use and behoof of the said
Humphry, All the ears of Wheat and Co^n which then did grow upon the said
Close called the Rack Park (the Tithes thereof to the Rector of the Church of
Halberton aforesaid due only excepted) did assume and then and there faithfully
promised, That he the said Humphry sixteen pounds of lawful Money of England, to
the aforesaid John, in the Feast of St. John the Baptist, then next following,
would well and truly content and pay: Yet the said Humphery, his assumption and
promise aforesaid little regarding, but endeavoring and intending the said
John of the aforesaid 16. l. in that part subtly and craftily to deceive and
defraud, the said 16. l. to the said John according to his assuming and promise
has not yet paid, nor any way for the same contented him, although the said
Humphry thereunto afterward, That is to say, the last day of September, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 37. aforesaid, at
Halberton aforesaid, by the said John was oftentimes thereunto required, but to
pay him, or content to pay him altogether refused, and does yet refuse;
Whereupon the said John says he is the worse, and has damage to the value of
40. pounds and thereof he brings suit, etc. And now at this day, That is to
say, Friday next after the 8. day of St. Hillary, the self same Term, until
which day aforesaid, the said Humphry had license to imparl to the Bill
aforesaid, and then to answer, etc. before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
comes* well the said John by his Attorney aforesaid, as the said Humphery by
John Halstaff his Attorney; and he the said Humphry does defend the force and
Injury when, etc. And says, That he did not take upon him in manner and form,
as the said John Slade has compl^ined against him; And upon that puts
himself upon the Country; and the said John Slade likewise, etc. Therefore a
Jury was to come before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, upon Thursday
next after 8. days of the Purification of the blessed Mary, etc. and who
neither, etc. And because as well, etc. The same day is given to the parties
aforesaid there, etc. Afterward process was continued between the parties
aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid, by Juries thereof respited between them
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Wednesday next after the
fifteenth day of Easter the next, etc. following, Unless the Justices of the
Lady the Queen to take Assizes, first upon Monday the second Week of Lent, at
the Castle at Exeter, in the County aforesaid, by the form of the Satute, etc.
shall come, for default of Jurors, etc. At which Wednesday, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster aforesaid, came the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And the before said Justices of Assizes, before whom, etc. sent
hither their Record before them had in these words. ss. Afterward the day and
place within mentioned, before Thomas Walmesley, one o^ the Justices of the
Queen o^ the Common Pleas, and Edward Fenner one of the Justice o^ the said
Lady and Queen, assigned to hold plea before the Queen her sell, Justices o^ the
said Lady the Queen assigned to take Assizes in the County a o^oesaid, by form
of the Statute, etc. come as well he was named John Slade by Thomas Clayton his
Attorney, as the within written Humphry Morley by Henry Collier his Attorney, and
the Jurors sworn, whereof mention is within made likewise, being called came,
who to say the truth of the matters within contained, being chosen, tried, and
sworn; say upon their Oath, That the said Humphry Morley did buy of the said
John Slade the within written Wheat and Rye, in ears upon the within written
Close (as is said before) growing being, for 16. pound of good and lawful money
of England, To be paid to the said John Slade in the Feast of St. John the
Baptist, then next following, as in the Declaration within written is within
specified; And further, The said Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That
betwixt the said John Slade, and the said Humphry Morley, There was no promise
or taking upon him, besides the bargain aforesaid: But whether upon the whole
matter aforesaid, by the said Jurors in form aforesaid found, The said Humphry
Morley did take upon him in manner and form, as in the Declaration within
written, within specified, or no, the said Jurors are altogether ignorant, and
thereof they ask the Advice and Consideration of the Court here, etc. And if
upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the said Jurors in form aforesaid found. It
shall seem to the Justices of the Court here, That the said Humphry Morley, did
take upon him in manner and form, in the Declaration within specified, Then the
said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Humphry Morley,
did take upon him in manner and form, as the aforesaid John Slade within
against him complains; And then they do assesse the damages of the said John
Slade, by occasion of not performance of his promise, and taking upon him
within written, besides his charges and his costs by him, in the suit aforesaid
by him expended to Sixteen pounds: And for those charges and costs by Twenty
Shillings: And if upon the whole matter by the said Jurors, in form aforesaid
found, It shall seem to the said Justices and Court here, That the said Humphry
Morley, did not take upon him in manner and form, in the Declaration within
specified, Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the said Humphry did
not take upon him in manner and form, as the said Humphry has within alleged:
And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of their judgment of, and
upon the premises to be given, is not yet avised; Day is given to the parties
aforesaid, in State as now it is before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Monday next after 15. days of the Holy Trinity, to hear their judgment
of and upon the premises: Because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof
not yet, etc. And so from Term to Term, until Saturday next after 8. days of
St. Michael to hear their judgment of and upon the premises: Because the Court
of the Lady the Queen, here not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster aforesaid, came the parties aforesaid in their proper
persons: Upon which seen, and by the Court of the Lady the Queen, all and
singular the premises fully understood, and mature deliberation being thereupon
had, For that it seems to the Court of the said Lady the Queen now here, That
the said Humphry did take upon him in manner and form, in the Declaration
aforesaid above specified: It is granted, That the aforesaid John Slade shall
recover against the said Humphry Morley, his damages and costs aforesaid, by
the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed: As also Nine pounds for his
charges and costs aforesaid to the said John Slade, by the Court of the said
Lady the Queen, here by his assent of encease adjudged, which damages in the
whole do amount to Twenty and six pounds. And the said Humphry Morley in mercy,
etc.

Hillary Term. 8. Jacobi, Rott. 1112. William Banes Case, C. 9. part fol. 91. a.
M^morandum, That at another time, that is to say, In the Term of St. Michael
last past, before the King at Westminster, comes William Banes, by Thomas
Ferrer his Attorney, and brought here in the Court before the said Lord the King
that now is, his Bill against Edward Pain, and Mary his Wife, in the Custody
of the Marshal, of a Plea of Trespass upon the Case, And are Pledges of Suit,
that is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo, Which Bill follows in these words.
ss. Willam Banes complains of Edward Pain, and Mary his Wife, in the Custody
of the Marshall of the Marshalsey of the Lord the King, before the King himself
being, for that is to say, That whereas one William Havert, in his life time,
the late Husband of the aforesaid Mary, That is to say, the first day of March,
in the year of the Reign of the Lord James, that now is King of England, the
6th. at London, that is to say, in the Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow in the
Ward of Cheap London, was indebted to the said William Banes in 77. pounds of
lawful Money of England, for diverse sums of Money to him the said William
Havert by the aforesaid William Banes, give to loan and lent; And so being
endebted, the said William Havert afterward, that is to say, the 6th. day of
April, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is of England,
the 7th. at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, lying sick, earnestly
required the said Mary then his Wife, to pay to the said William Banes, after
the death of the said William Havert, the said 77. pounds; And then and there
the said William Havert made his Testament and last Will, and made and
constituted the said Mary Executrix of his said last Will, and then there dyed;
After whose death, the said Mary took opon her the burden of Execution of the
Testament aforesaid; And whereas, the aforesaid Mary, after the death of the
said William Havert, by color of the last Will aforesaid, was possessed of the
interest of a Term for diverse years, then and yet to come, Of and in certain
Gardens, and a Bowling-Ally, situate and being in Morefield, that is to say,
in the Parish of St. Leonard in Shordich, in the County of Midd. And the said
Mary when she was single, perceiving that the aforesaid William Banes, intented
to trouble and sue the said Mary for the aforesaid 77. pounds, (because that
the said Mary, the said 77. pounds to the said William Banes, after the death
of the a^oresaid William Havert her Husband deceased had not paid,) the said
Mary whilst she was single, afterward, that is to say, 25th. day of June, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is of Engl. the 7th.
aforesaid, At London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid. In
consideration that the said William Banes, at the instance and especial request
of the said Mary, should not trouble, or sue the said Mary, for the said 77.
pounds, but would forbear the payment thereof until the next Quarter, that is
to say, until the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel then next following,
Promised unto the said William Banes then and there faithfully, That she the
said Mary, the aforesaid 77. pounds to the said William Banes then at that next
Quarter, that is to say, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, then next
following the promise aforesaid, in the 7th. year aforesaid, well and truly
would pay and content, Or otherwise the said Mary, then and there would assign
to the said William Banes for his security in that behalf, for the payment of
the aforesaid 77. pounds. All the Interest of the Term of years, which she the
said Mary then had to come of and in the Gardens, and Bowling-Ally aforesaid,
if the said Mary the said 77. pounds to the said William Banes, according to
her assumption and promise aforesaid had not paid. And the said William Banes
further says, That he the said William Banes giving Faith to the promise and
undertaking of the said Mary, did not trouble or sue the said Mary for the said
77. pounds, but did forbear the payment thereof, from the time of the promise
aforesaid, until the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next following the
promise aforesaid, in the year aforesaid; And the said William Banes further
says, That after the premises aforesaid, in form aforesaid, that is to say,
the 10th. day of November, in the 4th year aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the said Mary took to Husband the aforesaid
Edward Pain: Yet the aforesaid Mary, whilst she was single, or the said
Edward and Mary after the Marriage between them solemnized, the undertaking and
promise of the said Mary whilst she was single little regarding, but
threating, and fraudulently intending the said William Banes, of the aforesaid
77. pounds, craftily and subtly to deceive, and defraud of the said 77.
pounds, nor the said Mary, whilst she her self was single to the said William
Banes at the aforesaid Quarter, that is to say, at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel next following the promise aforesaid, in the 7th. year aforesaid,
according to the promise and undertaking aforesaid, in this behalf paid, or any
was for the same contented, or otherwise, then and there at that Feast did not
assign to the said William Banes, All the Interest of the Term of years which
she the said Mary then had to come of and in the Gardens and Bowling-Alley
aforesaid, Nor the said Edward and Mary, the Marriage betwixt them being
celebrated, at any time after he his the aforesaid 77. pounds, to the said
William Banes, according to the promise and undertaking of the said Mary
aforesaid, have paid, or any ways for the same have contented him, Or all the
Interest aforesaid of the Term of years, of the said Edward and Mary, of and in
the Gardens and Bowling-Ally aforesaid, according to the promise and
undertaking of the said Mary to the said William Banes for his security in that
behalf hitherto have assigned, although this to do by the said William Banes,
the said Mary whilst she was single, and the said Edward and Mary after the
Marriage betwixt them celebrated, that is to say, the last day of September, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King, that now is of England, the
8th. at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, often were
required. By which, the said William Banes, all the gain, commodity, and
profit, which he with the aforesaid 77. pounds, in buying, selling, and
lawfully bargaining, could have had or gained, if the said Mary her promise and
undertaking aforesaid, in form aforesaid had performed, utterly lost,
whereupon, the said William Banes says, That he is the worse, and has damage
to the value of one 100. pound, And hereof brings suit, etc. And now, at this
day, that is to say, Wednesday next after 8. days of St. Hillary this same
Term, until which day the said Edward and Mary had License to the Bill
aforesaid to imparl, and then to Answer, etc. before the Lord the King at.
Westminster, comes as well the aforesaid William Banes by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the said Edward and Mary by Isham Novell their Attorney; and the
said Edward and Mary, defend the force and injury when, etc. And say, That the
said Mary did not take upon her in manner and form, as the aforesaid William
Banes above against them has declared, And of this put themselves upon the
Country, and the aforesaid William Banes likewise, etc.

Therefore a Jury thereof was to come before the Lord the King at Westminster,
upon Monday next after 15. days of St. Hillary; and who neither, etc. Because
as well, etc. The same day is given to the parties aforesaid here, etc.
Afterward the Prosess was continued between the parties aforesaid, of the Plea
aforesaid, by Jurors thereof put between them, in respite before the Lord the
King at Westminster until Tuesday next, after 8. days of the Purification of
the blessed Lady then next following, unless the beloved and faithful of the
Lord the King, Thomas Flending Knight, Chief Justice of the Lord the King of
Pleas, in the Court of the said Lord the King, before the King himself to be
holden, assigned, first upon Monday next, after the aforesaid 8. days of
Purification of the blessed Lady, at the Guild Hall London, by form of the
Statute, etc. comes, for default of Jurours, etc. At which day, before the
Lord the King at Westminster, comes the aforesaid William Banes by his
Attorney aforesaid, and the aforesaid Chief Justice, before whom, etc. Sent
here, his Record before him had in these words. Afterward, the day, and place
within contained before the beloved and faithful of the said Lord the King,
Thomas Flending Knight Chief Justice within written, associating to himself,
William Price according to the form of the Statute, came as well the within
named William Banes, as the within written Edward Pain, and Mary his wife by
their Attorneys within written, and the Jurours of the Jury, whereof within is
made mention likewise came; and to speak the truth of the matter within
contained, elected, tried, and sworn; say upon his Oath, That the within named,
Mary took upon her in manner and form, as the within written, William Banes
within against them has declared, and they assesse the damages of the said
William, by occasion of not performing the promise, and undertakings within
written, besides the Charges and Costs by him about his suit in his behalf
expended to 80. pounds, and for his charges and costs, to 53. shillings, and 4.
pence. Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid William Banes, shall recover
against the said Edward Pain, and Mary his wife, the damages aforesaid, in
form aforesaid assessed, as also 5. pounds, 6. shillings, 8. pence for his
charges and costs aforesaid, to the said William, by the Court of the said Lord
the King here with his assert, of increase adjudged. Which damages in the
whole, do amount to 88. pound; and the said Edward Pain, and Mary his wife in
mercy, etc.

Assise.
Trinity Term, Ao 6to. of King James, Calvin's Case, Co. 7. part. Fol. 1. a.
James by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, Erance, and Ireland King,
defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Sheriff of Middlesex Greetings.
Robert Calvin Gent. has complained to us, That Richard Smith, and Nicholas
Smith unjustly, and without Judgment, have disseized him of his Freehold in
Haggord, otherwise Haggerston, otherwise Aggerston, in the Parish of St.
Leonard in Shorditch, within 30. years now last past, and therefore we command
you, That if the said Robert shall secure you to prosecute his claim, Then that
you cause the said Tenement, to be reseised of the Chattels, which within it
were taken, and the said Tenement with the Chattels, to be in Peace until
Thursday next after 15. days of Saint Martin next coming; and in the mean
time, cause 12. free and legal men of that venew, to see the said Tenement,
and the names of them to be unbrevicted, and summon them by good summonors,
that they be before us where ever we be in England, ready thereof to make
Recognition, and put by suerties, and pledges, the aforesaid Richard, and
Nicholas, that then they be there, to hear the Recognition, and have there the
summons, the names of the Pledges, and this Writ,

Witness my self at Westminster, the 3. day of November, in the year of our
Reign of England, France, and Ireland the 5th. and of Scotland, the one and
fortieth. For 40. s. paid in the Hamper, KINDESLEY.

THe Assise comes to Recognize, If Richard Smith, and Nicholas Smith unjustly
and without Judgment, did disseise Robert Calvin Gent. of his Freehold in
Haggard, otherwise Haggerston, otherwise Aggerston, in the Parish of St.
Leonard in Shorditch, within 30. years now last past: And whereupon, The said
Robert, who is within the age of 21. years, by John Parkinson, and William
Parkinson his Guardians, which the Court of the said King hereto this have
jointly, and severally, specially are admitted, Complains, That they
disseised him of the Message with the Appurtenances, etc. And the said
Richard, and Nicholas, by William Edwards their Attorney, come, and say, That
the said Robert, ought not to be Answered to his Writ aforesaid, because they
say, That the said Robert is an Alien born, the 4th. day of November, in the
Reign of the King that now is, of England, France, and Ireland the third, and
of Scotland the 34th. At Edenborough within his Kingdom of Scotland aforesaid,
and within the Alleagiance of the said Lord the King, of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, and without the Alleagiance of the said Lord the King, of his Kingdom
of England; and at the time of the birth of the said Robert Calvin, and long
before, and continually after the aforesaid Kingdom of Scotland, by the proper
Rights, Laws, and Statutes of the same Kingdom, and not by the Rights, Laws,
and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, was Ruled and Governed, and yet is.
And this he is ready to aver, and thereupon prays Judgment, If the said
Robert, to his said Writ aforesaid, ought to be answered, etc. And the
aforesaid Robert Calvin says, That the aforesaid Plea, by the aforesaid
Richard, and Nicholas above pleaded, is in sufficient in Law, to him the said
Robert to Answer, and to Bar him to have his Writ aforesaid; and that the
said Robert, to the said Plea in manner and form pleaded needs not, nor by
the Law of the Land is holden to Answer, and this he is ready to aver, and
hereof prays Judgment; and that the said Kichard, and Nicholas, to the
aforesaid Writ of the said Robert do Answer. And the said Richard, and
Nicholas, for as much as they sufficient in matter in Law to him the said
Robert to Answer, have to his Writ aforesaid in Bar above have alleged, which
they are ready to aver which matter, the aforesaid Robert does not gainsay, nor
to the same does in any ways Answer, but the said Averment altogether to admit,
refuses as at first, demands Judgment, if the aforesaid Robert to his Writ
aforesaid ought to be admitted, etc. And because, the Court of the Lord the
King, here are not yet avised of giving her Judgment of and upon the premises,
day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lord the King at
Westminster until Monday next, after 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear there
Judgment thereof, because the Court of the Lord the King here thereof are not
yet, etc. And the Assise aforesaid, remain to be taken before the said Lord the
King, until the same Monday there, etc. And the Sheriff to distrein the
Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid: And before to make view, etc. At which
day, before the Lord the King at Westminster, comes as well the aforesaid
Robert Calvin by his Guardians aforesaid, as the aforesaid Richard Smith, and
Nicholas Smith by their Attorney aforesaid, and because, the Court of the Lord
the King hereof giving their Judgment of, and upon the premises is not yet
avised, day hereof is given to the parties aforesaid before the Lord the King
at Westminster, until Monday next, the morrow of the Assension of our Lord,
to hear their Judgment, because the Court of the Lord the King here are not
yet, etc. And the Assise aforesaid, remain further to be taken, until the same
Monday there, etc. At which day before the Lord the King at Westminster,
comes as well the aforesaid Robert Calvin by his Guardians aforesaid, as the
aforesaid Richard Smith, and Nicholas Smith by their Attorney aforesaid, etc.
And because the Court, etc. Upon which Seen, and by the Court of the Lord the
King, here all and singular the prepremises fully understood, and diligently
looked into and examined, and mature deliberation hereof being had, because it
seems to the Court of the Lord the King that now is here, that the Plea
aforesaid, of the said Richard Smith, and Nicholas Smith above pleaded, is not
sufficient in Law, to the aforesaid Robert Calvin, to have Answer to his Writ
aforesaid to Bar, Therefore it is considered, by the Court of the Lord the
King that now is here, That the aforesaid Richard Smith, and Nicholas Smith, to
the Writ of the said Robert further Answer, etc.

Michael 25. and 26. of Queen Elizabeth. Rott. 144. Assise.
Dowmans Case, C. 9th. part. Fol. 1. a.
THe Assise came to Recognize if Edward Vavasor Esquire, George Vavasor Gent.
Richard Coats, John Lawson, William Musgrave, Robert Thissylwood, and Robert
Ward unjustly, etc. Disseised Thomas Dowman Esquire. and Elizabeth his wife, of
their Freehold in Spaldington, VVillitoft, and Southcate, within 30. years now
last past, etc. And whereupon, the said Thomas, and Elizabeth, by Henry
Cressey, Their Attorney complain, That they disseised them of 6. Messuages,
300. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, and 200. Acres of pasture with their
appurtenances, etc. And the aforesaid Edward, George, Richard, John, Robort
Thyssylwood, and Robert Ward by Edward Latimer, their Attorney come, etc. And
upon this, for certain causes to the Justices here specialty moving, day is
given before the same Justices, to the aforesaid Edward, George, Richard, John,
Will, Robert, and Robert to plead here until Tuesday next following, etc. The
same day is given to the aforesaid Thomas and Elizabeth here, etc. At which day
come, as well the aforesaid Thomas and Elizabeth, as the aforesaid Edward,
George, Richard, John, William, Robert, and Robert, by their Attorneys
aforesaid: And upon this, and certain causes to the Justices here sperially
moving, The Assise aforesaid, is farther adjorned before the same Justices,
unto the Justices Inn, in Chancery Lane London, until the morrow of Saint
Martin next coming, at which day, at the aforesaid Inn of the Justices,
before the aforesaid Justices, come as well the aforesaid Thomas, and
Elizabeth, as the aforesaid Edward, George, Richard, John, William, Robert,
and Robert by their Attorneys aforesaid, and upon this, the aforesaid George,
Richard, John, William, Robert, and Robert say, that they have nothing in the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances in the view of the Recognitors of
the Assise aforesaid put, and in the plaint aforesaid specified, nor had at the
day of the Original Writ of Assise aforesaid brought, nor ever after, nor any
injury, nor disseisin to the aforesaid Thomas, and Elizabeth thereof did: and
of this they put themselves upon the Assise; and the aforesaid Thomas, and
Elizabeth likewise, etc. Therefore let the Assise be taken between them, etc.
And the aforesaid Edward, defend and Tenement of the Freehold of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in view of the Recognitors of the Assise
aforesaid put, and in the plaint abovesaid specified; he says, That the Assise
thereof between him the said Edward, and the aforesaid Thomas, and Elizabeth,
ought not to be, because he says, That one Peter Vavasor Esquire, was seized
of the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances, in the view of the
Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid put, and in the plaint aforesaid specified,
amongst other things in his demesne as of Fee; and he hereof so being seized,
One Andrew Windsor Esquire, William Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the younger, and
John Laundree Gent. at another time, That is to say, The second day of January,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 15th. out
of the Court of Chancery of the said Lady the Queen, the said Court of Chancery
then being at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, sued forth a certain
Writ of the said Lady the Queen of Entry upon Disseisin in the Post, against
the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire, of the aforesaid Tenements with the
appurtenances, in the view of the Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid put, and
in the plaint aforesaid specified, with the appurtenances, amongst other, the
same Peter Vavasor Esquire. then being Tenant of the Freehold, of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the then Sheriff of the County of York
directed, (and so plead a Common Recovery) which Recovery in form aforesaid
had, was had, and was to the use of the aforesaid Peter Vavasor, for the Term
of his nataral life, without impeachment of any wast, and after his decease,
then to the use of the Eldest Son, lawfully begotten of the said Peter Vavasor
Esquire. and the Heirs Males of the body of the same Eldest Son lawfully begotten.
And for default of such issue male of the body of the same Eldest Son, then to
the use of the second Son, of the body of the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire
lawfully begotten, and the heirs males of the body of the same second Son
lawfully begotten, (and so unto the 9th. Son,) and for default of such issue
male of the body of the said 9th. Son, Then to the use of the said Edward
Vavasor now deceased Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, for the Term of
his natural life, without impeachment of any wast; and after his decease, then
to the use of the Eldest Son law^ully begotten: and for default of such issue
male of the body of such eldest son, then to the use of the second Son, of the
body of the said Edward lawfully begotten, and the heirs males of the body of
the aforesaid second Son lawfully begotten. (And so to the 9th. Son of the said
Edward) and for want of such issue male of the body of the said 9th. Son, Then
to the use of George Vavasor, another Brother of the aforesaid Peter Vavasor
Esquire, for the Term of his natural life, without impeachment of any wast, and
after his decease, then to the use of the Eldest Son lawfully begotten of the
body of the said George, and the Heirs males of the body of the same Eldest Son
lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue male of the body of such
Eldest Son, then to the use of the second Son, of the body of the aforesaid
George lawfully begotten, and the heirs males of the body of the same second
Son lawfully begotten, (and so to the 9th. Son of the said George,) and for
default of such issue male of the body of the said 9th. Son, Then to the use of
one Ra. Vavasor, another Brother of the said Peter Vavasor, for the Term of his
natural life, without impeachment of any wast, and after his decease, Then to
the use of the Eldest Son lawfully begotten of the body of the said Ralph, and
the heirs males of the body of the same Eldest Son lawfully begotten, and for
default of such issue male of the body of the said Eldest Son, Then to the use
of the second Son, of the body of the aforesaid Ralph lawfully begotten, and
the heirs males of the body of the same second Son lawfully begotten, (and so
to the 9th. Son of the aforesaid Ralph) and for default of such issue male, of
the body of the said 9th. Son, Then to the use of one Marmaduke Vavasor,
another of the Brothers of the aforesaid Peter Vavasor, for the Term of his
natural life, without impeachment of any wast, and after his decease, Then to
the use of the Eldest Son, lawfully begotten of the body of the aforesaid
Marmaduke, and the heirs males of the body of such Eldest Son lawfully
begotten; and for default of such issue male, of the body of the same Eldest
Son, Then to the use of the second Son of the body of the aforesaid Marmaduke
lawfully begotten, and the heirs males of the body of the same second Son
lawfully begotten, (And so to the 9th. Son of the said Marmaduke;) And for
default of such issue male of the body of the same 9th. Son, Then to the use of
one Robert Vavasor, another Brother of the aforesaid Peter Vavasor, for the
Term of his natural life, without impeachment of any wast, and after his
decease, then to the use of the Eldest Son lawfully begotten of the body of the
said Robert Vavasor, and the heirs males of the body of the same Eldest Son
lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue male, of the body of the same
Eldest Son, Then to the use of the second Son, of the body of the aforesaid
Robert Vavasor; and the heirs males of the body of the same second Son lawfully
begotten, (and so to the 9th. Son of the said Robert;) and for default of such
issue male of the 9th. Son, Then to the use of Thomas Vavasor, another Brother
of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, for the Term of his natural life, without
impeachment of any wast, and after his decease, Then to the use of the Elest
Son of the body of the aforesaid Thomas Vavasor, lawfully begotten, and the
heirs males of the body of the said Eldest Son, lawfully begotten; and for
default of such issue male, of the body of the same Eldest Son, Then to the use
of the second Son, of the aforesaid Thomas Vavasor lawfully begotten; and the
heirs males of the body of the same second Son lawfully begotten; (And so to
the 9th. Son of the aforesaid Thomas;) And for default of such issue male, of
the body of such 9th. Son, Then to the use of Richard Vavasor, another Brother
of the said peter Vavasor, for the Term of his natural life, without
impeachment of any wast, and after his decease, Then to the use of the Eldest
Son, of the body of the said Richard Vavasor lawfully begotten, and the heirs
males of the body of the same Eldest Son lawfully begotten; and for default of
such issue male, of the body of the same Eldest Son lawfully begotten, Then to
the use of the second Son, of the body of the said Richard lawfully begotten,
(and so to the 9th. Son of the aforesaid Richard;) and for default of such
issue male of the body of the said 9th. Son, Then to the use of the heirs
males, of the body of Peter Vavasor of Spaldington Knight lawfully begotten;
and for default of such issue male, Then to the use of the right heirs of the
said Richard Vavasor for ever. By virtue of which Recovery, and seisin in
manner and form aforesaid had, and by fo^ce of a certain Act of Parliament of
the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. the 4th. day of February, in the
year of his Reign the 27th. of Transferring of uses into possession, at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex holden, made, The aforesaid Peter
Vavasor Esquire, was seized of the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances,
in the view of the Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid put in his demesne as of
Freehold for the Term of his life, without impeachment of any wast, the
remainder thereof after his decease farther as abovesaid expectant; and the
said Peter so thereof being seized, the said Peter at Spaldington aforesaid,
dyed without any issue male of his body lawfully begotten; after whose decease,
the said Edward into the aforesaid Tenements, with their appurtenances, in the
view of the Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid put, and in complaint aforesaid
specified (amongst other) as in his Remainder thereof, entered, and was, and yet
is seized, in his demesne, as of Freehold for the Term of his life, without
impeachment of any wast. And the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth
claiming, etc. And gave color to the party.) And the aforesaid Thomas Dowman,
and Elizabeth, as to the aforesaid Plea of the said Edward, above in Bar of
the Assise aforesaid pleaded, Say, That they for any thing in the said Plea
before alleged, from the Assise aforesaid, of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to have, ought not to be Barred, because they say, That well and
true it is, That the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire, was seized of the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee; and he the
said Peter being so thereof seized, The aforesaid Recovery of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, was had by the aforesaid Andrew Windsor,
William Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the younger, and John Laundree against the
aforesaid, Peter Vavasor Esquire, in manner and form, as the said Edward above
has alleged; But the said Thomas Dowman, and Elizabeth farther say, That the
Recovery aforesaid, in form aforesaid by the aforesaid Andrew, William Vavasor,
Peter Vavasor the younger, and John Laundree, against the aforesaid Peter
Vavasor Esquire of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in form
aforesaid had, and the seisin of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances thereupon in form aforesaid had, were to the only use and behoof
of the aforesaid Perer Vavasor Esquire, and his heirs for ever. By color
whereof, and by force of the aforesaid Act of transferring of Acts in
possession, etc. The aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire. was seized of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being
seized, The said Peter Vavasor, Esquire. at Spaldington aforesaid, of such his
estate dyed hereof seized, without issue of his body lawfully begotten. After
whose death, the said Tenements, with the appurtenances descended to the said
Elizabeth then being the wife of the said Thomas Dowman, as Sister and heir of
the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire. By which, the said Thomas Dowman, and
Elizabeth in the said Tenements with the appurtenances entered, and were thereof
seized in their demesne as of Fee, in the Right of the said Elizabeth, until
the aforesaid Edward Vavasor, and the aforesaid George, Richard, John Lowson,
William Musgrave, Robert Thisylwood, and Robert Ward, them the said Thomas
Dowman, and Elizabeth thereof unjustly, and without Judgment did disseise, as
they above against them complained, without that that the aforesaid Recovery of
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances by the aforesaid Andrew
Windsor, William Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the younger, and John Laundree against
the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire in form aforesaid had, was to the uses in
the Bar of the said Edward above specified, as, etc. And thereupon the parties
are at issue.) And the Jurours say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid Peter
Vavasor Esquire, was seized of the Tenements aforesaid in their view put, and
in the plaint aforesaid specified with the appurtenances in his demesne as of
Fee, and he the said Peter being thereof so seized, the aforesaid Recovery was
had, by the aforesaid Andrew Windsor, William Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the
younger, and John Laundree in form aforesaid, as the aforesaid Edward above in
pleading has alleged; and further the Recognitors of the Assise aforesaid, say
upon their Oath. That a certain Indenture was made between the aforesaid Peter
Vavasor Esquire. of the one party, and the aforesaid Addrew Windsor, William
Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the younger, and John Laundree of the other party,
bearing date the first day of February in the 15th. year abovesaid, The Tenor
of which Indenture follows in these words.

THis Indenture made the first day of February in the 15th year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lady Elizab. by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between Peter Vavasor of the Middle Temple
in London Esquire. of the one party, And Andrew Windsor of the same house, Esquire,
William Vavsor of Linton in the County of York Gent. Peter Vavasor the younger
of Spallington in the County of York Gent. and John Laundere of Staple Inn near
London Gent. on the other party, witnesses that it is Covenanted, concluded,
condescended, declared and fully agreed, betwixt the said parties, and either
of the said parties for him and his Heirs, and their Executors and
Administrators, do Covenant, condescend, declare and agree by these presents to
and with the other, his and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, in
manner and form following. That is to say, Whereas the said Andrew, Peter,
William and John, have this present Term of Saint Hillary recovered to them and
to their Heirs for ever, by writ of Entry of disseisin in the Post had, and
prosecuted against the said Peter Vavasor Esquire before Sir James Dyer Knight.
Richard Harper, Roger Manwood, and Robert Mounson Justices of our said Lady the
Queens Majesty, of her Court of Common Pleas at Westminster according to the
usual Order and form of Common recoveries heretofore used, The manor of
Spaldington, with the appurtenances, and diverse other Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments siituating and being in the Towns, Parishes, Hamlets, and Fields
of Spaldington, Willytost, Cripthorpe, Bubarch, Brighton, Southcave and
Replingham, in the said County of York at the time of the said recovery had,
being the Inheritance of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, other than such
Messuages, Lands Tenements, and Hereditaments, as the said Peter Vavasor
Esquire lately purchased of one Henry Johnson Esquire, by the names of the
Manor of Spaldington, 40 Messuages, 30 Tofts, 30 Gardens, 3 Dovehouses, 1
Windmill, 2000 Acres Land, 500 Acers of Meadow, 2000 Acres of Pasture, 500
Acres of Wood, 2000 Acres of Moor, with the appurtenances in Spaldington,
Bubarch, Brighton, Willitost, Gripthorp, Southcave and Replingham: That the
intent and true meanning of all the said parties now is and at the time of the
said Recoverie so had and suffered was, That the said Andrew, William, Peter
the younger, and John and their Heirs, and his Heirs, or every of them
immediately from and after the said Recoverie so had and executed, should and
shall stand and be seized of the said Manor and of all other the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in the said Recovery meant and intended to be
comprised, that is to say, of and in the said Manor of Spaldington with the
appurtenances, and also of and in the Messuages, Tofts, Gardens, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in Spaldington, Willytost,
Gripthorp, Bubarch, Brighton, Southcave, and Replingham, at the time of the
said Recoverie had, being the Inheritance of the said Peter Vavasor, the Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, lately purchased by the said Peteer Vavasor of Henry
Johnson only excepted as is aforesaid, To the only uses, intents, hereafter by
these presents set forth and declared, and to none other uses intents or
purposes, That is to say, To the use of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, for
term of his natural life, without impeachment of any manner of wast, and after
the decease of the said Peter Vavasar Esquire, then to the use and behoof of
the eldest Son lawfully begotten of the said Peter Vavasor of the Heirs males
of the Body of the said Eldest Son Lawfully begotten: And for default of such
Issue male of the body of such eldest Son, to the use of the second Son of the
body of the said Peter Vavasor Lawfully begotten, and the Heirs males of the
body of the said second Son Lawfully begotten, etc. (And so to the 9th Son of
the said Peter) and for default of such Issue male of the body of such 9th Son,
To the use of Edward Vavasor Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, for the
term of his natural life, without impeachment of any wast, and after his
decease, to the use of the eldest Son Lawfully begotten of the Body of the said
Edward, and of the Heirs males of the Body of the said Eldest Son Lawfully
begotten: And for default of such issue male of such Eldest Son, To the use of
the second Son of the body of the said second Son Lawfully begotten, (etc. And
so to the 9th Son of the said Edward) and for default of such issue male of the
body of such 9th Son, to the use of George Vavasor Brother of the said Peter
Vavasor Esquire, for term of his natural life, without impeachment of wast, and
after his decease, to the use of the eldest Son Lawfully begotten of the body
of the said George Vavasor, and of the Heirs males of the body of the said
Eldest Son Lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue male of the body of
the said eldest Son, To the use of the second Son of the body of the said
George Vavasor Lawfully begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of second
Son Lawfully begotten, etc. And so to the 9th Son of the said George) And for
default of such issue male of the body of such 9th Son to the use of Ralph
Vavasor Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire for term of his natural life,
without impeachment of wast, and after his decease, to the use of the Eldest
Son Lawfully begotten of the body of the said Ralph Vavasor and the Heirs males
of the body of the said Eldest Son Lawfully begotten, and for default of such
issue male of the body of such Eldest Son To the use of the second Son of the
body of the said Ralph Vavasor Lawfully begotten, and the Heirs males of the
body of the said second Son Lawfully begotten, etc. (And so to the ninh Son of
the said Ralph) and for default of such issue male of the Body of such ninth
Son, To the use of Marmaduke Vavasor Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire
for the term of his natural life, without impeachment of waste, and after his
decease to the use of the Eldest Son Lawfully begotten of the Body of the said
Marmaduke Vavasor and of the Heirs males of the body of the said Eldest Son
Lawfully begotten, etc. (And so to the ninth Son of the said Marmaduke) And for
default of such issue male of the Body of such ninth Son, To the use of Robert
Vavasor Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire, for the term of his natural
life, without impeachment of any waste, and after his decease, To the use of
the Eldest Son Lawfully begotten of the Body of the said Robert Vavasor, and of
the heirs males of the Body of the said Eldest son Lawfully begotten (and so to
the ninth Son of the said Robert) and for default of such issue male of the
Body of such ninth Son, To the use of Thomas Vavasor Brother of the said Peter
Vavasor Esquire, for term of his natural life, without impeachment of any
waste, and after his decease to the use of the Eldest Son Lawfully begotten of
the Body of the said Thomas Vavasor, and of the Heirs males of the Body of the
said Eldest Son Lawfully begotten, etc. (and so to the ninth Son of the said
Thomas,) and for default of such issue male of the Body of such ninth Son, To
the use of Rich. Vavasor Brother of the said Peter Vavasor Esquire. for term of his
natural life without impeachment of any wast, and after his decease, to the use
of the Eldest son Lawfully begotten of the body of the the said Richard Vavasor
and of the Heirs males of the Body of the said Eldest Son Lawfully begotten,
etc. (and so to the ninth Son of the said Richard) and for default of such
issue male of such ninth Son, to the use of the Heirs males of the Body of Sir
Peter Vavasor of Spaldington Knight, Lawfully begotten: And for default of such
issue male, To the use of the right Heirs of the said Richard Vavasor for ever,
etc. Provided, etc. And farther the Recognitors aforesaid say upon their Oath,
aforesaid, That the aforesaid Teneme^ts, with the appurtenances, in their view
put, and in the plaint aforesaid specified, and in the recovery aforesaid
comprised, are parcel of the Manors, Lands and Tenements in the Indenture
aforesaid specified, and not other, nor diverse: But whether the Indenture
aforesaid after the recovery aforesaid by the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire,
in form aforesaid made and had, bearing date the aforesaid first day of
February, and first delivered the aforesaid 15th day of February, in the 15th.
year abovesaid, after the recovery aforesaid, being to the uses in the same
specified, be good and sufficient in Law, to have and declare the uses of the
aforesaid recovery of the aforesaid Tenements in the view of the Recogniters
put and in the plaint aforesaid specified with the appurtenances, or not, The
said Recognitors are altogether ignorant, and thereof pray the advice of the
Justices aforesaid, and of the Court here, etc. And if to the same Justices and
to the Court here, It shall seem, That the Indenture aforesaid, by the
aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire, after the aforesaid Recovery in form aforesaid
had and made, bearing date the aforesaid first day of February, and first
delivered the 15th day abovesaid after the recovery aforesaid To the uses in
the said Indenture specified, be good and sufficient in Law, to read and
declare the uses of the recovery aforesaid of the tenements aforesaid in the
view of the Recognitors aforesaid put with the appurtenances and in the plaint
aforesaid specified, Then the said Recognitors say upon their Oath aforesaid,
that the said Recovery of the Tenements aforesaid in view of the Recognitors,
aforesaid put with the appurtenances, and in the plaint aforesaid specified,
was to the uses in the said Bar of the said Edward specified in manner and
form as the said Edward in his Bar aforesaid above alleged: And that the
aforesaid George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert Thissilwood, and Robert
Ward did not disseise the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth of the
Tenements aforesaid in their view put and in the plaint aforesaid specified
with the appurtenances, as the said George, Richard Coats, John, William,
Robert and Robart, above have alleged; And if it shall seem to the same
Justices, and to the Court here, that the Indenture aforesaid by the aforesaid
Peter Vavasor Esquire, after the Recovery aforesaid, in form aforesaid made and
had, bearing date the aforesaid first day of February, in the 15th. year
aforesaid after the aforesaid Recovery is insufficient in Law, to lead and
declare the uses of the Recovery aforesaid of the Tenements aforesaid in view
of the Recognitors put and in the plaint aforesaid specified, Then the said
Recognitors say, upon their Oath aforesaid that the said recovery of the
Tenements aforesaid was not to the uses in the said Bar of the said Edward
specified in manner and form as the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth,
above have alleged, and that the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, were
seized of the Tenements aforesaid, in the view of the same Recognitors put, and
in the plaint aforesaid specified, with the appurtenances in their demesne as of
Fee, in the right of the said Elizabeth, until the aforesaid Edward Vavasor,
George Vavasor, Richard Coats, John Lawson, William Musgrave, Kobert
Thissilwood, and Robert ward, them the said Thomas and Elizabeth thereof
unjustly and without Judgment, but not with force and Arms disseised them, and
then they assesse the Damages of the said Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, by
occasion of the disseisin aforesaid, besides their costs and charges by them
about their suit in this behalf expended to 20 shillings, and for their costs
and charges to 10 shillings. And because the Justices here will avise
themselves of and upon the premises before that they give their Judgment
thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid before the Justices here
aforesaid at the Inn of the Justices in Chancery Lane London until Satturday
next after a month of St. Michael next following, etc. to hear their Judgment
thereof because the said Just ^s here are not yet, etc. and diverse other
meetings, until Saturday, nex after the morrow of All Souls, etc. Until
Saturday next after the morrow of Martin, etc. And until Wednesday next after
8. days of the Holy Trinity, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Robert
Shute, and John Glench, then Justices, etc. At the aforesaid Inn of the
Justices, As well the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, as the aforesaid
Edward, George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert by their
Attorneys come. And because the Justices aforesaid here, etc Further day is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen,
to take Assizes in the aforesaid County of York, assigned at the aforesaid
Castle of York, until Monday the 6th. day of August, next coming, etc. Before
which day, the said Lady the Queen that now is, By other her Letters Patents,
whose date is at Westminster in the year of her Reign, the 24th. the Tenor of
which follows in these words, etc. Elizabeth, etc. To our Beloved and
Faithful John Clench, Baron, and Francis Gaudy, one of her Serjants at Law,
Greeting, Know ye, etc. (And then follow the Letters Patents) etc. And because
the same Justices here will farther avise themselves of and upon the premises,
before they give their Judgment thereof, day, etc. Before them the said John
Clench, and Francis Gaudy, then Justices, etc. At the aforesaid Inn until
Saturday next after the morrow of All Souls, etc. At which day, the aforesaid
John Clench, and Francis Gaudy, then Justices of the Lady the Queen to Assizes
in the aforesaid County of York at the Inn aforesaid came not, but withdrew
themselves from the said Inn, because before the said day for the infection of
the Air, and of the Plague of Men in the City of London, and the Suburbs
thereof, as also in the City of Westminster, being the Term of St. Michael,
which then at Westminster in the County of Midd. was holden at Westminster
aforesaid, unto the Castle of the Lady the Queen, etc. is adjorned, etc. and
their holden, etc. Afterward the said Lady the Queen, By other Letters
Patents, Constituted John Clench, and Francis Rodes one of her Serjants at Law,
Justices to Assizes in the aaforesaid County of York, etc. And the said
Justices, by virtue of the said Let. Patents, Afterward, that is to say,
Monday in the 4th. week of Lent, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, the 25th. At the Castle of York came, before whom then and
there come, the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, by their Attorney
aforesaid, and pray a Writ of Reattachment, to the aforesaid Edward, George,
Richard Coats, etc. that they be before the Justices of the Lady the Queen at
the next Assizes, in her County of York, to be taken assigned, to be holde^ at
the afores. Castle of York, to hear the Record, and their Judgment of the
Assize aforesaid, whc was in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
at the Castle aforesaid, so that that Assize then be here in the State, as it
was in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is, before the aforesaid
John Clench, and Francis Gaudy, Justices to Assizes, etc. At the aforesaid
Castle of York, the aforesaid, Monday the 6th. day of August, in the year of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 24th. in which day, the Assize
aforesaid was adjorned, before the said John Clench, and Francis Gaudy, then
Justices, etc. from the aforesaid Castle of York, unto the aforesaid Inn of the
Justices in Chancery Lane London, until the aforesaid Saturday next, after the
aforesaid morrow of All Souls, then next following, etc. At which next Assizes,
holden at the Castle of York aforesaid, Monday the 29th. day of July, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 25th. before the
aforesaid John Clench, and Francis Gaudy, then Justices to Assizes, etc. came
as well the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, by their Attorney aforesaid,
as the aforesaid Edward, George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and
Robert, by the aforesaid Thomas Hill their Attorney; And the Sheriff, that is to
say, Thomas Wentworth, Esquire. now sent, That the aforesaid Edward Vavasor,
George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert, etc. And upon this,
day is given to them before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen that now is
of the Bench, in the Bench at Westminster, in the morrow of All Souls next
coming, to hear and receive what to the said Justices should seem in this
behalf, because the said John Clench, and Francis Rodes, Justices to Assizes,
etc. thereof not yet, etc. And the Assize aforesaid, with all touching the
same, to the said Justices of the Bench is sent, etc. (The Warrant of Attorney
follows, and the Writ of Resummons in the Roll; and the Tenor of the Writ of
Reattachment and Retorn of the said Writ) Elizabeth, etc. To the Sherriffs of
York, greeting, Reattach, Edward Vavasor, Esquire. George, Richard Coats, John,
William, Robert, and Robert, or their Bailiffs, if they shall not be found
before our Justices to Assizes, in your County to be taken assigned at the
Castle of York, in your County, upon Monday the 22d. day of July, then next to
come, to hear the Record, and Judgment of the Assize of Novel disseisin which
was in our Court, at the Castle aforesaid, which Assize, Thomas Dowman Esquire. and
Elizabeth his Wife, there arraigned against them of 6. Messuages, 300. Acres of
Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, and 200. Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances
in Spaldington, VVillytoft, and Southcone, So as they that Assize then be there
in the same state as it was in our Court, before John Clench, third Baron of
our Exchequer, and Francis Gaudy, one of our Serjants at Law, our Justices to
Assizes in your County to be taken assigned, At the aforesaid Castle of York,
Monday the 6th. day of August last past, which day the assize aforesaid for
certain causes, was from thence adjorned before the same our Justices unto the
Inn of the Justices in Chancery Lane London, Until Saturday next after the
morrow of All Souls, then next following, And have here the names of the
Pledges, and this Writ, John Clench, at the Castle of York, the 11th. day of
March, in the year of our Reign, the 25th. Frankland Cresly. The within named
Edward Vavasor, George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert, has
not any thing, nor any of them have any thing in my Baliwick, by which they can
be attached, or any of them can be attached, nor have they, nor any of them
has a Bailiff, or Bailiffs, nor are they, or any of them to be found in the
same, Thomas Wentworth, Esquire. Sheriff: And now here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid at this day, that is to say, at the aforesaid morrow of
All Souls, came as well the aforesaid Thomas Dowman, and Elizabeth, by the
aforesaid Henry Cressy their Attorney, as the aforesaid Edward Vavasor, George,
Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert, by Tho. Algar their Attony:
And because the Justices of the Bench here will avise themselves of and upon
the premses, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the
parties here until 8. days of St. Hillary (and so it is continued in 8. days
of St. Hillary the year following) At which day, here come as well the
aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, as the aforesaid Edward Vavasor, George,
Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and upon this, The premises being seen, and by the Justices here
fully understood, It seems to the said Justices here, That the aforesaid
Indenture by the aforesaid Peter Vavasor Esquire. after the aforesaid Recovery, in
form aforesaid made and had, was good and sufficient in the Law to lead the
uses of the Recovery aforesaid, of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenunces, so that the same Recovery of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances in the view of the Recognitors of the Assize aforesaid put, and
in the Plaint aforesaid, specified by the aforesaid Andrew Windsor, William
Vavasor, Peter Vavasor the younger, and John Laundere against the aforesaid
Peter Vavasor Esquire. in form aforesaid had, was to those uses in the aforesaid
bar of the aforesaid Edward above specified, in manner and form, as the said
Edward, in his bar aforesaid above alleged, Therefore it is considered, That
the aforesaid Thomas Dowman and Elizabeth, take nothing by their Writ
aforesaid, but in mercy for their false clamor, etc. And the aforesaid Edward
Vavasor, George, Richard Coats, John, William, Robert, and Robert, go thereof
without day, etc.

Audita Querela.
Easter Term, Anno 80. of King JAMES, Doctor Druries Case, C. 8. part Fol. 139.
a.
AT another time as appears, in the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the year of
the Reign of the Lord the King that now is of England, France, and Ireland, the
7th. and of Scotland, the 42d. Rott. 3642. It is contained thus: Summers. ss. It
was commanded to the Sherriff. Whereas, of the grievous Complaint of Owen Bray
of Cobham, in the County aforesaid Gent. to the Lord the King grievously
complaining, It was showed, That whereas John Drury, Doctor of Law, in the
Court of the Lord the King of the Bench here, That is to say, In the Term of
St. Michael, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King of England the
5th. before the Justices of the said Lord the King, of the Bench aforesaid
here, that is to say, at Westminster, by Judgment of the said Court had
recovered against the said Owen, as well a certain debt of 200. pounds, as 33.
shillings, 4. pence, which to the said John in the Court aforesaid, of the said
Lord the King here were adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of
the detaining of the said debt, whereof he is convicted, And whereas also the
said Owen, for that that he did not come unto the said Court of the Lord the
King, here to satisfy the aforesaid John of the debt and damages aforesaid, was
put in ex^gent in the County of the Lord the King of Sussex, to Outlawry, and
for that occasion afterward, that is to say, the 19th. day of May, in the year
of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, was Outlawed; And
notwithstanding the said Owen, in execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
by virtue of a certain Writ of the said Lord the King of Capias utlagatum
thereof to the late Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Surry, by Herbert Morley
Esquire. then Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Surry, at the Suit of the said
John was taken, and imprisoned: And after he was so taken and imprisoned, was
by the said Sheriff out of the same Prison at large, where he would freely and
voluntarily suffered to go, and from the execution aforesaid was delivered, as
the said Owen by ways and means convenient, was ready to show; Yet the
aforesaid John sueth forth Execution of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, against
him the said Owen, by reason of the Recovery aforesaid, and endeavors, and
threatens unjustly, him the said Owen, to be taken and imprisoned, to his no
small Damage; Whereupon he had supplicated the Lord the Kings cong^uous remedy
for him to be provided. The said Lord the King, Willing, what is just to be
done to the said Owen in this behalf, sent to the Justices here, That the
Complaint of the said Owen in this part being heard, and calling before the^
the Parties aforesaid, and other which in this behalf they shall see to be
called, and their reasons thereof here being heard; To the said Owen full and
speedy Justice they should cause to be done in this behalf, which of right, and
according to the Law and custom of the Kingdom of the Lord the King of England
should be done. And that they cause to come here at this day, that is to say,
from the Holy Trinity in 15. days, the aforesaid John, to answer, of and upon
the premises, and further to do and receive, what the Court, the said Lord the
King here shall consider in that behalf; And now here, at this day, come as
well the aforesaid Owen, by Otho Gayer his Attorney, as the aforesaid John, by
John Nigh his Attorney; And upon this, the said Owen says, That whereas the
aforesaid John in the Court of the said Lord the King that now is here, that is
to say, in the Term of St. Michael, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the
King that now is of England, etc. the 5th. before Edward Coke Kut. and his
Companions then Justices of the said Lord the King of the same Bench here, that
is to say, at Westminster, by the consideration of the said Court, recovered
against the said Owen, as well the aforesaid Debt of 200. pounds, as the
aforesaid 33. shillings and 4. pence, which to the said John, in the same
Court, of the said Lord the King here was adjudged for his Damages, which he
had by occasion of detaining the same Debt whereof he is convicted; And whereas
also the said Owen, for that he did not come into the same Court of the said
Lord the King here, to satisfy the said John of his Debt and Damages, he was
put in Exigent in the aforesaid County of Sussex to be Outlawed, and for that
occasion afterward, that is to say, the 9th. day of May, in the year of the
Reign of the Lord the King that now is, the 6th. was Outlawed, upon the said
Outlawry, the aforesaid John Drury, afterward, that is to say, in the Term of
the Holy Trinity, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is,
the 6th. abovesaid, sued forth out of the Court of the Lord the King of the
Bench here, a certain Writ of the said Lord the King of Capias utlagatum
against him the said Owen, then to the Sherriff of the aforesaid County of S.
directed, By which Writ the said Lord the King then commanded the said Sherriff
of S. that he do not omit for any Liberty within his County, but that he take
the said Owen Outlawed, in the said County of Sussex, the said 19th. day of
May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is, the 6th.
abovesaid, At the Suit of the said John Drury, of the plea of Debt, whereof he
is convicted of, etc. And him safely keep, etc. So as he have his body before
the Justices of the said Lord the King here in the morrow of All Souls then
next coming, to do and receive, what the Court of the said Lord the King
thereof should consider in that behalf; By virtue of which Writ, the said Owen
afterward, that is to say, the 7th. day of October, in the 6th. year
aforesaid, at Guildford, in the aforesaid County of Surry by the aforesaid Rob.
Morley then being Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Surry, was taken and
imprisoned, And after he was so taken and imprisoned, the said Owen by the said
Sherriff the same day and year, etc. At Guildford aforesaid, out of that Prison
at large, where he would freely and voluntarily to go was suffered, and from
the execution aforesaid was delivered: And this he is ready to aver, Whereupon
he prays Judgment, And that the aforesaid John from having his execution
aforesaid by color of the Judgment aforesaid be barred, and that the said
Owen thereof be discharged, etc. And the aforesaid John prays license thereof
to imparl here, until 8. days of St. Michael, etc. And has it, etc. And the
same day is given to the aforesaid Owen here, etc. At which day, the plea
aforesaid was adjorned, by Writ of the Lord the King of Common adjornment here,
until from the day of St. Michael, in one Month then next following; At which
day, here comes as well the said Owen, as the said John by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and upon this, further prays liecnce thereof to imparl here, etc.
Until from Easter day in 15. days, and has it, etc. And the same day is given
to the said Owen here, etc. At which day of 14. days of Easter, came as well
the aforesaid Owen, as the aforesaid John by their Attorneys aforesaid, and
upon this, The said Owen prays that the aforesaid John, to his Writ and
Declaration aforesaid, answer: And the said John Drury says, That he for any
thing before alleged from having execution of his Debt and Damages against him
the said Owen, ought not to be barred or delayed; Because he says, That after
the aforesaid time, in which it is supposed the aforesaid Owen out of the
custody of the aforesaid Sheriff of Surry, to have escaped, and before any
further execution against the aforesaid Owen, by him the said John, by Color
of the Judgment aforesaid, was sued forth and had, that is to say, in the Term
of St. Michael, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is,
the 6th. abovesaid, out of the aforesaid Court of the said Lord the King that
now is, of the Bench here, upon the Outlawry (as is before said) pronounced,
Issued forth a certain Writ of the said Lord the King, of Capias utlagatum,
against him the said Owen, At the Suit of the said John then to the Sheriff of
the County of Midd. directed; By which Writ, The Lord the King commanded the
aforesaid Sheriff of Midd. That he should not omit for any Liberty of his
County, but that he take the aforesaid Owen, by the name of Owen Bray, late of
Cobham, in the County of Surry, Gent. Outlawed in the aforesaid County of
Sussex, the aforesaid 19th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the Lord
the King that now is, the 6th. abovesaid, at the Suit of him the said John, by
the name of John Drury, Doctor of Law, Of a Plea of Debt whereof he was
convicted, if he should be found in his Baliwick; and him should safe keep,
etc. So as, he have his Body here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, in
the aforesaid morrow of All Souls, the self same Term of St. Michael, in the
year aforesaid, to do and to receive what to the Court of the said Lord the
King, thereof should consider in that behalf: At which morrow of All Souls
here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Owen, by
William Brown then his Attorney; And the Sheriffs, that is to say, George
Bolles, and Richard Farrington, then Sheriffs of the aforesaid County of Midd.
then here sent, That the aforesaid Owen was not found, etc. And upon this the
said Owen, then prayed the hearing of the Writ of Exigent, upon which the said
Owen, at the Suit of the said John Drury aforesaid, in form aforesaid stood
Outlawed. And it was then read to him in these words: JAMES by the grace of
God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King defender, of the Faith,
etc. To the Sherifs of Sussex, greeting, We command you that you put in
Exigent, Owen Bray, late of Cobham, in the County of Surry, Gent. from County
in County, until according to the Law and Custom of our Kingdom of England he
be Outlawed, if he shall not appear, And if he shall appear, then that you him
take, and cause safely to be kept so as you have his body before our Justices
at West. in the morrow of the Holy Trinity, to satisfy to John Drury Doctor of
Law, as well of a certain debt of 200. pounds, which the said John in the said
our Court, before our Justices at Westminster Recovered against him, as of 33.
shillings and 4. pence, which to the said John, in the same our Court were
adjudged for his Damages, which he had by occasion of the detaining the same
Debt, whereof he is Convicted. And sent to our Justices at Westminster, in 8.
days of St. Hillary, That the aforesaid Owen is not found in your Baliwick.
And have here this Writ, witness Edward Coke at Westminster, the 25th. day of
January, in the year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, the 5th. and
of Scotland, the 41. Which being read and heard, The said Owen said, That he of
the Outlawry aforesaid, ought not to have him charged, because the said Writ of
Exigent had not any certain day of Retorn, these words (Saint) between the
word, morrow and Trinity, not having any signification as by the Writ aforesaid
then it appeared, And for the same Cause the said Owen then prayed Judgment,
and that the Outlawrie, aforesaid in form aforesaid pronounced and had, be
annulled, made void, and altogether holden for naught. Upon which, the Writ
aforesaid then being seen, And by the Justices here then fully understood, To
the same Justices, it then appeared, That the Allegation of the aforesaid
William Brown in discharge of the aforesaid Owen of the Outlawry aforesaid was
true. Therefore then it was considered in the said Court here, that the said
Owen by occasion of the Outlawry aforesaid should not be be molested, or
troubled, but should go thereof acquitted, etc. as by the Record thereof in the
said Court here remaining fully appears: And so, the said John Drury says,
That there is not any such Record of the Outlawry aforesaid, as the said Owen
by his Writ and Declaration aforesaid above supposes. And this he is ready to
aver, whereupon, he prays Judgment, if he from execution of his Debt
aforesaid and damages aforesaid against the aforesaid Owen ought to be barred,
etc. and the aforesaid Owin says, that the aforesaid plea of the aforesaid
John in form aforesaid above pleaded is not sufficient in Law to the said John
his execution by Color of the Judgment aforesaid to have, and maintain, and
that he to that plea in manner and form aforesaid above pleaded, needs not, nor
by the Law of the Land is bound to answer; and this he is ready to aver,
wherefore for default of sufficient plea of the aforesaid John in this behalf,
the said Owen, as at first prays Judgment; and that the said John from his
execution by color of the Judgment aforesaid be barred; and that the said Owen
be thereof charged, etc. and the aforesaid John in as much as he sufficient
matter in Law to him the said John his execution by color of the Judgment
aforesaid against the said Owen to have, and maintain above has alleged, which
he is ready to aver, which matter the said Owen does not deny nor to the same
any ways answers, but the said averrant altogether refuses, as before,
prays ludgement, and execution of his Debt and damages aforesaid against the
said Owyn to him to be adjuged, etc. and because the Justices here will avise
themselves of and upon the premises before that they give their Judgment
thereof, Day is given to the parties aforesaid until the morrow of the Holy
Trynity to hear their Judgment, because the same Justices here, thereof are
not yet, etc.

Actions of Debt.
Trinity, Anno. 70. of King JAMES. Vineors Case. Rot. 2629 C. 8. part fo. 80. a
WIlliam Wild late of Themilthorp in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, Norff.
otherwise called William Wild of Themilthorp in the County aforesaid Yeoman,
was summoned to answer to Robert Vineor of a plea, that he renders unto him 20
pounds which to him he owes, and unjustly detayneth, etc. And whereupon, the
said Robert by Thomas Vynior his Attorney says, that whereas the said William
the 15th. day of July, in the year of the reign of the Lord the King, that now
is of England, France and Ireland, the 6th. at Themilthorp by his certain
writing Obligatory granted him to be bound unto the said Robert in the
aforesaid 20 pound to be paid to the said Robert when he was thereof required,
yet the said William, although often required, the aforesaid 20 pound to the
said Robert not yet has rendered, but the same to him hitherto has denied, and
as yet does deny, whereupon he says that he is the worse and has damage to
the value of 10 pound, and thereof hebringeth suit, and he brings here in Court
the writing aforesaid which the debt aforesaid in form aforesaid does testify,
whose date is the day and year aforesaid, etc. And the aforesaid William, by
John Bussel his Attorney comes and defends the force and injury when, etc,
and prays the hearing of the writing aforesaid, and it is read unto him, he
also prays the hearing of the Condition of the said writings, and it is read
unto him in these words, The Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the
above bounden William Wild do and shall from time to time and at all times
hereafter, stand to, abide, observe, perform, fulfill and keep, the Rule,
Order, Judgment, Arbitrament, Sentence, and final Determination of William
Rugge Esquire, Arbitrator indifferently named elected and chosen as well of the
part and behalf of the said William Wild, as of the part and behalf of the
abovenamed Rober Vynior, to Rule, order, adjudge, arbitrate, and finally
determine, all matters, suits, Controversies, debates, griefs, and
contentions, heretofore moved and stirred, or now depending between the said
parties, touching or concerning the sum of 22 pence heretofore taxed upon the
said William Wild for diverse kind of Parish business within the said Parish
of Themilthorp, so as the said A ward be made, and set down in writing under
the hand and seal of the said William Rugge at or before the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel next ensuing, after the date of these presents, that then
this present obligation to be void and of none effect, or else the same to
stand abide and remain in full power strength and virtue. Which being read and
heard, the said William Wild says, that the aforesaid Robert his action
aforesad against him ought not to have, because he says, that the Arbitrator
aforesaid after the making of the writings, and before the aforesaid Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel in the condition aforesaid above specified, did not
make any Arbitrament in writing under the hand and seal of the same Arbitrator
between him the said William and the aforesaid Robert of and upon the premises
aforesaid in the condition aforesaid above specified according to the form and
effect of that condition, and this etc. he is ready to aver, whereupon he
prays judgment if the aforesaid Robert his action aforesaid against him
ought to have: And the aforesaid Robert says, That he by any thing before
alleged from having his action aforesaid, ought not to be barred, because he
says that the said William Wild after the making of the writing aforesaid,
and before the aforesaid Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel then next
following, that is to say the 22 day of August in the year of the Reign of the
Lord the King that now is of England, etc. the 6th. aforesaid, at Themilthorpe
aforesaid by a certain writing which the said Robert with the Seal of the said
William Sealed in Court brings whose date is the same day and year, reciting
that whereas he the said William then stood bounden to the aforesaid Robert by
the name of Robert Vinyor in one writing Obligatorie in the sum of 20 pound,
which condition in the said writing for the performance and fulfilling of the
Arbitrament, Rule, Order, Judgment, Sentence, and final determination of
William Rugge Esquire Arbitrator chosen as well on the part of the said William
Wild as on the part of the above named Robert Vinyor as in the said writing
Obligatory more fully is appeared, or might appear, then the said William
intending the revocation thereof, by the said writing of Revocation, revoked
and did call back all the authority whatsoever which the said William Wild by
the said writing Obligatory had given and commtited to the aforesaid William
Rugge his Arbitrator, and then altogether dissallowed and held void, all and
whatsoever the aforesaid William Rugge after the delivery of the same writings
of revocation should do to him in and about the said Arbitrament, Rule, Order,
Judgment, Arbitrament, Sentence and Determination of all matters, suits,
controversies, debates, griefs, and contentions, then before moved, and
stirred, or then after depending between the said parties touching or
concerning the sum of 22 pence taxed upon the said William Wild according to
the aforesaid writing Obligatory as it was in the same mentioned and declared,
as by the said writing of Revocation more fully appears, and this he is ready
to aver, whereupon in as much as the aforesaid William Wild after the making
of the writings aforesaid before, etc. the said Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel then next following in form aforesaid discharged and dissallowed the
Arbitrator aforesaid, of all authority of arbitrating of and upon the premises
in the condition aforesaid above specified, contrary to the form and effect of
his condition and submission in the same mentioned the said Robert prays
Judgment and his debt aforesaid together with his damages by occasion of
detayning of the same debt to be adjudged unto him, etc. and with that the said
Robert will aver that the aforesaid writing obligatory here in Court brought,
and the aforesaid writing in the aforesaid writing of revocation specified is
one and the same writing, and not other, nor diverse. And the said William
Wild says that the plea of the said Robert above by repplication pleaded is
not sufficient in Law to bar him the said Robert his action aforesaid against
the said William to have, and maintain, and that he to that plea in manner and
form aforesaid pleaded needs not, nor by the Law of the Land is bounden to
answer, and this he is ready to aver, whereupon, and for want of a sufficient
replication on his part, the said William prays Judgment, and that the said
Robert from his action aforesaid against him to have, be barred, and the said
Robert in as much as he sufficient matter in Law to him the said Robert his
action aforesaid against the said William to have, and maintain above by
replying has alleged, which he is ready to aver, which matter the aforesaid
William does not deny, nor to the same in any ways answers, but the averment
aforesaid to admit does altogether refuse, as at first, prays Judgment, and
his debt aforesaid together with his damages by occasion of detayning his debt,
to be adjudged unto him etc. And because the Justices here will avise
themselves of and upon the premises before they give their Judgment thereof,
Day is given to the parties aforesaid here on 8 days of Saint Michael to ^ear
their Judgment thereof, because the Justices here, thereof not yet, etc.

Debt.
Trinity Term. Anno 10. of King James, Rott. 2413. In Brownlow.
the Common Pleas. The Case of the Mayor and Burgesses of Kings Lynne,
Concerning Misnaming of Corporations. C. 10. part fol. 120. a.
John Pain, late of Catton in the County aforesaid Gent. Executor of Norff.
the Testament of John Pain, late called John Pain of Kings Linne, in the
County of Norffolk Esquire. was summoned to Answer to the Mayor, and Burgesses of
Kings Lynne, in the County of Norfolk, of a Plea, that he render to them 3000.
pound, which he unjustly deteineth from them, etc. And whereupon the said Mayor
and Burgesses, by Henry Bastard their Attorney say, That whereas, the aforesaid
John Pain the Testator in his life, the 27th. day of January, in the year of
the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, etc. The 6th. at Gaywood by his
writing Obligatory, had granted himself to be bounden to the said Mayor and
Burgesses, in the aforesaid 3000. pound, to be paid to the said Mayor and
Burgesses, when thereof he was required, yet the said John Pain the Testator
in his life time, and the aforesaid John Pain the Executor, after the death of
him, the Testator John Pain, although often required, the aforesaid 3000.
pound, to the said Mayor and Burgesses rendered not, but the same denied to them
to render, and the aforesaid John Pain the Executor, does deny the same yet to
render to them, and unjustly deteineth the same, whereupon they say, that they
are the worse, and have damage to the value of 100. pound, and thereof bring
Suit; and bring here into Court the writing aforesaid, which the debt
aforesaid, in form aforesaid, testifies, etc. whose date is the same day and
year aforesaid, etc. And the aforesaid John Pain Executor, by Thomas Blofield
his Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. And says, that
he of the debt aforesaid, by virtue of the writing aforesaid, ought not to be
charged, Because he says, That it is not the Deed of the said John Pain the
Testator, and upon this puts himself upon the Country; and the aforesaid Mayor
and Burgesses likewise, Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he cause
to come here, from the day of Holy Trinity in 3. weeks, ^2. etc. By whom, etc.
And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. At which day the
Jurors between the parties aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid, were put between
them in respite here until this day, that is to say, in 8. days of Saint
Michael then next following, unless the Justices of the Lord the King to
Assizes in the County aforesaid, to be taken assigned, by the form of the
Statute, etc. upon Monday the 27th. of day July next following, at the Castle
at Norwich, in the County aforesaid first shall come, And now at this day
comes, as well the aforesaid Mayor and Burgesses, as the aforesaid John Pain
the Executor, by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the aforesaid Justices to
Assizes, before whom, etc. Send here, their Record, in these words. Afterward
the day and place within contained, before Edward Coke Knight, Chief Justice of
the Lord the King of the Bench, and John Croke Knight, one of the Justices of
the said Lord the King to Pleas, before the King himself to be holden, assigned
Justices of the said Lord the King to Assizes, in the County aforesaid to be
taken, assigned by the form of the Statute, etc. come as well the within named
Mayor and Burgesses, as the within written John Pain the Executor by their
Attorneys within written; and the Jurors of the Jury, wherefore within is made
mention, being called likewise come, who to say the truth of the within
contained, chosen, tried, and sworn, say, upon their Oath, That long before the
making of the writing Obligatory, within written, The Lord Henry, late King of
England the 8th. the 7th. day of July, in the year of his Reign the 29th. By
his Letters Patents, under his Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster, the same day and year, and to the Jurors aforesaid in evidence
showed, Reciting by the said Letters Patents, That whereas the said late King,
by his Letters Patents, whose date was the 27th. day of June, in the 16th. year
of his Reign, of his special grace, and of his mere motion, late had granted,
and by the said his Letters Patents, confirmed for him his Heirs, and
Successors, to the Mayor, and Burgesses, and Inhabitants of his Borough of Lynn
Bishop, in his County of Norfolk, that they for ever, should be one body
Corporate, and one Cominalty, perpetually in thing and name, and that they
should have perpetual succession, and the name of the Mayor, and Burgesses of
the Borough of aforesaid Bishops Lynne, in the County of Norfolk, should have
and bear, and by the same name, should be persons able, and capable in Law, to
have and, purchase Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and other possessions
whatsoever, and to plead, and to be impleaded, answer, and answered defend, and
might and could defend, before any Justices whatsoever, whether spiritual
Judges, or temporal, in whatsoever Courts, and in all and singular Actions,
Causes, Matters, Plaints, and Demands of whatsoever kind they should be or
nature, in the same manner, as the other the Liege people of the said late
King, persons able, and capable in Law to plead, and be impleaded to answer,
and to be answered, defend, or might defend; and that the said Mayor, and
Burgesses, and their Successors should have, or might have one Common Seal for
their businesses, and others to be done within the Borough aforesaid,
happening, or arising, with diverse other Liberties, Franchisles, Grants,
Articles, and immunities in the said Letters Patents contained and specified,
as in the said Letters Patents more fully and manifestly is appeared: And
whereas afterward by a certain Statute late in Parliament, of the said late
King at London, holden the third day of November, in the 21th. year of his
Reign, and from thence adjorned to Westminster and there holden, and from that
time continued by diverse prorogations, until the 4th. day of February, in the
year of his Reign the 27th. and then and there holden, amongst other things, it
was enacted, That the said late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs and Successors,
Kings of England, should have hold and enjoy, to him for ever, the Lordships,
or Manor of Bishops Lynne, and Gaywood, amongst other with all and singular
their Appur^enances, As also all Liberties, Franchises, Goods and Chattels,
Waifes, and Strays, Views of Frankpledge, Courts, profits of Courts, and all
and singular other Temporal possessions, and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances in Bishops Lynne, and Gaywood aforesaid, which late before then,
belonged to the late Bishop of Norwich, as in the said Act of Parliament more
fully appeared; The said late King Hen. the 8th. For that by the said Act, the
same Manors and Possessions to him and his Heirs Kings of England, were
enacted, and were, willed and Ordained, and by the same his Letters Patents
declared, for him and his Heirs, That the said Town of Bishops Lynne from
thenceforth for ever, should be named and called Kings Lynne, and not by any
other name; and that the same name of Bishops Lynne from henceforth, should be
destroyed and deprived. And further the said late King Henry, out of his
special grace, and mere motion, and for the love which he bore to the aforesaid
his beloved and faithful Subjects, The Mayor, and Burgesses, of his Borough of
Lynne aforesaid, in his County of Norfolk aforesaid, and the said Borough, and
the Inhabitants of the same he had and bore, desiring further peace, quiet, and
tranquillity, in the said Borough, continually to be had, and from time to time
to be increased, from whence all prosperity, utility, and their accommodations
undoubted take beginning, had condescended, and by the same his Letters
Patents, had granted for him, his Heirs, and Successors, to the aforesaid
Mayor, and Burgesles, and Inhabitants, of his Borough aforesaid, That they for
ever after, The name of Mayor, and Burgesses of his Borough of Lynne Regis,
commonly called Kings Lynne, in his County of Norfolk, should have and enjoy,
and by the same name should be called and named, and not by any other name, And
that by the same name, they should be persons able and capable in Law, to have
and purchase Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and other possessions
whatsoever, and to plead, and be impleaded, answer, and to be answered, defend,
and might be defended, before whatsoever Justices, either Judges Temporal, or
Spiritual in what Court soever, and in all and singular Actions, ^^uses,
Matters, Plaints, and Demands, of what kind soever they should be, or nature,
in the same manner, as the other Liege people, of the said late King were able
and capable in Law to plead, and be impleaded, answer, and be answered, defend,
or might be defended, as by the said Letters Patents, to the Jurors aforesaid
in evidence showed amongst other things more fully appears. And farther the
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That after the making of the said Letters
Patents aforesaid, that is to say, the aforesaid 27th. day of January, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, the 6th. within written,
The aforesaid John Pain the Testator in his life, The writing Obligatory, in
the Declaration above specified, made, sealed, and as his Deed delivered to the
aforesaid Mayor, and Burgesses, of the Borough of the Lord the King of Lynne
Regis, commonly called Kings Lynne, in his County of Norfolk, in the aforesaid
Letters Patents named, By the name of the Mayor, and Burgesses of Kings Lynne
in the County of Norfolk, But whether upon the whole matter aforesaid, by them
the said Jurors in form aforesaid found, the writing Obligatory aforesaid, in
the Declaration within written, be the Deed of the said John Pain, or not, the
same Jurors are altogether ignorant, and pray thereof the advice of the
Justices, and Court here, etc. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by them
the said Jurors in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices here,
That the writing aforesaid, in the Declaration within written specified, be the
Deed of the aforesaid, John Pain the Testator, Then the said Jurours say, upon
their Oath aforesaid, That the writing aforesaid, is the Deed of the said John
Pain the Testator, and then they assess the damages of the said Mayor, and
Burgesses, by occasion of deteining of the debt within written, above their
Costs and Charges, by them in their suit in this behalf, expended to 12. pence,
and for their Costs and Charges to 12. pence. And if upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by them the Jurors in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the
Justices here, That the writing aforesaid, be not the Deed of the aforesaid
John Pain the Testator, Then the said Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid,
That the writing aforesaid, is not the Deed of the aforesaid John Pain the
Testator, a^ the aforesaid John Pain the Executor above in pleading has
alleged: And because the Justices here will avise themselves of, and upon the
premises, before that they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the
parties aforesaid, until, etc. To hear their Judgment thereof, because the
said Justices here thereof are not yet, etc.

Dower.
Trinity Term, Anno 80. Of King JAMES, Edward Althams Case. Co. 8. part, fol.
14. a.
THomas Lawrence, and Marcy his Wife, by Charles Cardinal their Attorney, demand
against Edward Altham Gent. and Margaret his Wife, the Third part of 100. Acres
of Land, 10. Acres of Meadow, and 60. Acres of Pasture, with their
Appurtenances in Gosfield, as the Dower of the said Marcy, of the Endowment of
Thomas Nash the Elder, sometimes her Husband, etc. And the aforesaid Edward and
Margaret, by John Rowley their Attorney, come and say, That the aforesaid Thomas
and Marcy, the Dower of the said Marcy, of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. Of the Endowment of the said Thomas Nash, sometimes
Husband, etc. Against them ought not to have, because they say, That the said
Thomas Nash sometimes the Husand, etc. Was seized of the Tenements aforesaid,
whereof, etc. In his Demesne as of Fee, and held the same of John Wentworth,
Esquire. as of his Manor of Gosfield, with the Appurtenances in the County
aforesaid, in Free Socage, that is to say, by Fealty only for all manner of
Services and Demands; And the said Thomas, so of the Appurtenances whereof,
etc. being seized, The 10th. day of April, in the year 1592. at Gosfield
aforesaid made his Testament, and last Will in writing, And by the same his
last Will, willed and bequeathed the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances whereof, to one Zachary Nash Younger Son of the same Thomas Nash,
To have and to hold to the said Zachary for term of his life, And afterward
there dyed of such estate thereof seized; After whose death, the said Zachary
into the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. entered and
was thereof seized, in his demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of his life, by
virtue of the bequest aforesaid, and the Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid,
with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. after the death of the said Thomas did
descend to one Thomas Nash, as Son and Heir of the aforesaid Thomas Nash,
sometimes Husband, etc. By which the said Thomas the Son, was seized of the
said Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc.
as of Fee and Right; And the said Thomas, so thereof being seized, and the
aforesaid Zachary of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, whereof,
etc. So (as before is said being seized) The aforesaid Marcy, after the death
of the said Thomas Nash, sometimes her Husband, etc. in the Widdowhood of the
said Marcy, whilst she was single, that is to say, The 27th. day of April, in
the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England, the 35th.
at Gosfield aforesaid, by her writing of Release, which the said Edward and
Margaret, with the seal of the said Marcy sealed here in Court, bring, whose
date is the same day and year, by the name of Marcy Nash, the Widow of Thomas
Nash, late of Feringe, in the County of Essex deceased, remised, released, and
altogether for her, her Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, for ever quit
claimed, to the aforesaid Thomas Nash, Son and Heir of the aforesaid Thomas
Nash, sometimes the Husband of the said Marcy, by the name of Thomas Nash, of
Wetherfield in the County aforesaid Yeoman, Son and Heir of the said Thomas
Nash late her Husband, All, and all manner of Actions, as well Real, as
Personal, all Suits, Quarrels, and Demands whatsoever, which she the said
Marcy, or her Executors, against the said Thomas Nash, Son and Heir, Executors,
ever have or had, then had or ought to have, or any ways then might or would
have by reason of any thing, cause or deed whatsoever, from the beginning of
the world, unto the day of the date of the same Writing of Release; After which
Writing of Release, to the aforesaid Thom. the Son, as before is said, made,
The aforesaid Thomas the Son, of the Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid, with
the Appurtenance whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, At Gosfield
aforesaid, dyed of such his estate thereof seized; After whose death, the said
Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. did
descend, to the aforesaid Margaret, as Daughter and Heir of the aforesaid
Thomas the Son; By which the said Margaret was seized of the said Reversion of
the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. as of Fee and
Right, and she the said Margaret so of the same Reversion, as before is said,
being seized, And the aforesaid Zachary, of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, The said Zachary,
afterward, at Gosfield aforesaid dyed of such his estate thereof seized. After
whose death the said Margaret, into the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof seized in their Demesne as
of Fee and Right, and so thereof being seized, The said Margaret afterward,
and before the day of bringing the Original Writ as aforesaid, of the said
Thomas and Lawrence, and Marcy, at Gosfield aforesaid, took to Husband the
aforesaid Edward Altham, By which the said Edward and Margaret were and yet are
seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof in their
Demesne as of Fee in the Right of the said Margaret: And this they are ready to
aver, and demand Judgment if the aforesaid Thomas Lawrence, and Marcy, Dower
of the said Marcy, of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof,
etc. Of the Endowment of the said Thomas Nash, sometimes the Husband, etc.
against them ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid, Thomas Lawrence and Marcy
demand the hearing of the aforesaid Writing of Release, And it is read unto
them in these words. To All Faithful People to whom this present Writing shall
come, Marcy Nash, the Widow of Thomas Nash, late of Feringe, in the County of
Essex, greeting in our Lord God everlasting, Know, Me the aforesaid Marcy being
in my pure Widowhood, and ^ull power, to have Remised, Released, and altogether
for Me, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, for ever quit claimed, to
Thomas Nash of Wetherfield, in the County aforesaid Yeoman, All and all manner
of Actions, as well real as personal Suits, Quarrels and Demands whatsoever, As
also all my Dower, and Title and Action of Dower, to me appertaining, by the
death of the said Thomas, my Husband, of any of his Lands and Tenements in
Wetherfield aforesaid, what or which, I the said Marcy, or my Executors against
him the said Thomas Nash, the Son, or his Executors, I ever had, have, or any
ways hereafter may have, we have or may have, by reason of any thing, cause or
deed whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, unto the day of the Date of
this present Writing of Release. And further know ye, Me the aforesaid Marcy,
to have given and Remised to the said Thomas Nash the Son, All the Goods late
of the said Thomas my Husband, which were in the possession of the said Thomas
the Son, or his Assigns, at the time of the making of this deed of Release; In
Witness whereof to this my present Writing, I have set my Seal, Dated the
27th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, by the
Grace of God of England, France, and Ireland Queen defendor of the Faith, etc.
the 35th. Which being read and heard, The said Thomas Lawrence, and Marcy say,
That they for any thing before alleged, for having the Dower of the said Marcy,
ought not to be barred, because they say, That the aforesaid Thomas Nash
sometimes Husband, etc. in his life time, and at the time of his death, was
seized as well of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc.
in Gosfield aforesaid, As of Two Messuages, and 200. Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Wetherfield aforesaid, in his Demesne as of Fee, And so thereof
being seized, at Gosfield aforesaid, by his Last Will and Testament in Writing
devised, the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in
Gosfield aforesaid, to the aforesaid Zachary Nash, younger Son of the said
Thomas Nash, sometimes Husband, etc. And afterward, at Gosfield aforesaid
dyed, After whose death the said Thomas Nash the younger, as Son and Heir of
the said Thomas Nash, sometimes Husband, etc. into the Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances in VVetherfield aforesaid entered, and was thereof seized in
his Demesne as of Fee and Right, And the said Zachary into the Tenements
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in Gosfield aforesaid entered,
and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Freehold for the Term of his life,
And the said Thomas Lawrence and Marcy further say, That at the time of the
death of the aforesaid Thomas Nash, sometimes Husband, etc. the aforesaid
Zachary was within the Age of 21. years, that is to say of three years, by
which the said Marcy whilst she was single, as Guardian and for nurture of the
said Zachary, into the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof,
etc. in Gosfield aforesaid, entered, and was thereof possessed, the aforesaid
Thomas Nash, the Son of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances in
Wetherfiald aforesaid being seized, and that the said Zachary of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in Gosfield aforesaid, in form
aforesaid, being seized, And the said Marcy in form aforesaid being possessed,
Afterward, and before the making of the aforesaid Writing of Release here in
Court brought, at Gosfield aforesaid, It was concluded and agreed between the,
said Marcy whilst she was single and the aforesaid Thomas Nash the Son that
the said Marcy should release to the said Thomas Nash the Son all her Dower,
happening to her after the death of the aforesaid Thomas Nash sometimes the
husband, etc. in all Lands, and Tenements of the said Thomas in Wetherfield
aforesaid, And that the said Thomas Nash the Son should enfeoff, John Tiler the
elder, and John Tiler the younger, and their heirs of the Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in Gosfield aforesaid to the use of the
said Zachary and the heirs of his body Lawfully begotten: and the said Thomas
Lawrance and Marcy farther say, that the aforesaid Thomas Nash the Son of the
Tenements aforesaid in Wethersfield aforesaid, in the form aforesaid being
seized, and the aforesaid Marcy of the Tenements with the appurtenances
whereof, etc. in Gosfield aforesaid being possessed, the said Marcy afterward,
that is to say the aforesaid 27th day of April in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England the 35th. abovesaid whilst she the
said Marcy was single at Gosfield aforesaid the aforesaid writing of Release to
the aforesaid Thomas the Son sealed and delivered: And the aforesaid Thomas
Nash the Son the 28th. day of April in the year of the Reign of the said late
Queen the 35th. aforesaid at Gosfield aforesaid enfeoffed the aforesaid John
Tiler the elder and John Tiler the younger, and their heirs of the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in Gosfield aforesaid, To the
use of the aforesaid Zachary and the heirs of his body Lawfully begotten; and
this they are ready to aver, whereupon, they demand Judgment and seisin of the
third part of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in
Gosfield aforesaid, to be adjudged to the said Thomas Lawrance in manner and
form aforesaid, and that the matters above in the replication aforesaid are not
sufficient in Law, them the said Thomas and Marcy the Dower of the said Marcy
in the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. against the
said Edward and Margaret to have and maintain, and that they need not, nor by
the Law of the Land are bound to answer, and this they are ready to aver,
wherefore for default of sufficient Replication of the aforesaid Thomas and
Marcy in this part, the said Edward and Margaret as at first demand Judgment:
And that the said Thomas Lawrence, and Marcy from the Dower of the said Marcy
of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. against them
to have be barred, And the said Thomas and Marcy, for as much as they
sufficient matter in Law, the said Thomas and Marcy, to have and maintain their
Action aforesaid, against the said Edward and Margaret, above by Replication
have alleged, which they are ready to aver, Which matter the said Edward and
Margaret do not deny, nor to the same any ways Answer, but the Averment
aforesaid altogether Refuse to admit, as before, demand Judgment, and seisin
of the third part aforesaid, to be adjudged unto them: And because the Justices
here will avise themselves of and upon the premises before that they give their
Judgment thereof, Day is given to the parties aforesaid here until, in 8.
days of St. Michael to hear their Judgment thereof, because the said Justices
here thereof not yet, etc.

Debt.
Ester Term, 26. of Queen Elizabeth Rott. 1608.
RIchard Mauser late of London yeoman (otherwise called Richard Mauser) of
Gillingham in the County of Kent Yeoman, was summoned to Answer to William
Painter Esquire. of a Plea, that he render to him 40. pound, whicb he owes him,
and unjustly deteineth, etc. And whereupon the said William, by Thomas Antrobas
his Attorney says, That the said Richard the 6th. day of April, in the year of
the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 12th. at London, in the Parish
of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, by a certain writing
Obligatory, granted himself to be bounden to the said William, in the said 40.
pound, to be paid to the said William, in the Feast of the Ascension of our
Lord, then next following: Yet the aforesaid Richard although often required,
the aforesaid 40 pound, to the said William, has not yet rendered, but the same
to him hitherto has denied, and yet does deny, whereupon he says, he is the
worse, And has damage to the value of 10. pound, and thereof he brings suit,
And he brings here in Court the writing aforesaid, which the debt aforesaid, in
form aforesaid does testify, the date of which, is the day and year aforesaid,
etc. And the said Richard by John Cook his Attorney comes, and defends the
force and injury when, etc. And prays the hearing of the writing aforesaid,
and it is read unto him in these words, The Condition of this Obligation is
such, That whereas the within bounden Richard Mauser, and John Mouser his Son,
by their deed of ^eoffment, bearing date, the date of this Obligation, have
given, granted, and confirmed unto the within named, William Paynter and his
Heirs, all that parcel of Wood-land, called South-wood, containing by
estimation 10. Acres, be it more or less, lying together in the Parish of
Gillingham within said, and Bedherst in the County within said, to the Lands of
one Thomas Remsby, toward the East, West, and North, and to the Kings way,
toward the South, as the same do more at large it appear, If the said William
Paynter, and his Heirs shall and may at all times hereafter have, hold, and
enjoy all the aforesaid parcel of Wood-land with the appurtenances, and
charged or saved harmless, of and from all and every former Bargain, Sale,
Gift, Grant, Lease, Right, Copihold, Dower, Rent, Charge, and all other things,
and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or suffered to be done, by the said
Richard Mauser, or his Heirs or Assigns, and also if the said Richard Mauser,
and John Mauser his Son, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of either of them, do
at all times hereafter upon request to them, or any of them made, at the costs
and charges of the said William Paynter, his Heirs, and Assigns, make, seal,
deliver, acknowledge, and do all and every such further reasonable Act, and
Acts, thing, and things, devise, and devises in Law, as shall be reasonably
devised, or required to be done by the said William Paynter, his Heirs, or
Assigns, or his or their Counsel learned in the Law, for the further assurance,
surety, and sure-making of the aforesaid parcel of Woodland, with the
appurtenances, unto the said William Paynter, his Heirs, and Assigns: That then
this present Obligation to be void, or otherwise to remain in his force and
virtue. Which being read and heard, The said Richard says, That the said
William ought not to have his Action against him, because he says, That the
aforesaid William, from the time of the making of the writing aforesaid, until
the day of the bringing of the Original Writ, of the said William, that is to
say, the 16th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now
is, the 24th. had, held, and enjoyed, all the said parcel of Wood, with the
appurtenances, called Southwood, in the Condition aforesaid above specified,
kept free of and from all and singular former Bargains, sales, gifts, grants,
demises, rights, joyntures, dowers, rent, charges, and from all other charges,
and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, or suffered to be made, by the said
Richard Mauser his Heirs, or Assigns, according to the form and effect of the
Endorsment thereof, And the said Richard Mauser further says. That after the
making of the writing aforesaid, and before the day of the bringing of the
Original Writ aforesaid, That is to say, The 10th. day of April, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 24th. The aforesaid
William Paynter at Gillingham in the County of Kent, devised in writing, a
certain writing of Release, between the said William Paynter, and him the said
Richard Mauser, and the before said John Mauser, and then and there required
the said Richard, and the said John, that they would deliver the said writing
as their Deed, whereupon the said Richard, the said writing at Gillingham
aforesaid, sealed and delivered as the Deed of the said Richard, to the
aforesaid William. And further the said Richard says, That the said John, Son
of the said Richard, in the condition aforesaid named, upon the request of the
said William, made to the said John, to Seal and deliver that writing as his
Deed, upon the showing of the said writing of Release so devised, because the
said John was not lettered, and could not read, nor discern the contents, or
matter of the said writing at Gillingham aforesaid, then required of the said
William Paynter, the writing aforesaid, to be delivered unto him, to show the
same to a man learned, who could read the said writing to him: so that he upon
the reading of the contents of the writing aforesaid, might inform himself,
whether that writing were made according to the Tenor of the Condition
aforesaid, or not; and the said John, said then and there, That he would Seal
and deliver that writing, if that writing were according to the Tenor of the
Condition aforesaid, But the said William, then and there refused to deliver to
the said John the writing aforesaid, to show to a man learned in the Law, who
could read the same to the said John: By reason of which, The said John did not
seal, nor deliver the writing aforesaid to the said William, upon the request
of the said William, in manner and form aforesaid made: And the aforesaid
Richard Mauser says, That from the time of the making of the writing
aforesaid, until the day of the bringing of the Writ aforesaid, there were not
any other farther Act or Acts, devise or devises by the said William, or his
Counsel learned, devised, and required to be done to the aforesaid William
Paynter, for the further assurance, security, and sure making of the aforesaid
parcel of Wood with the appurtenances, by the said Richard Mauser, and John
Mauser, or any of them, to the aforesaid William Paynter, his Heirs and
Assigns, according to the form and effect of the Condition aforesaid to be
done, And this he is ready to averr, whereupon he prays Judgment, if the
said William his Action aforesaid against him, ought to have, And the said
William says, That the Plea of the said Richard, in manner and form above
pleaded, is not sufficient in Law to Bar the said William, to have his Action
aforesaid against the said Richard, and that he to that Plea in manner and form
aforesaid pleaded, needs not by the Law of the Land to Answer, and this he is
ready to averr, Whereupon for default of a sufficient Plea in this party, The
said William demands Judgment, and his debt, aforesaid, together with his
damages, by occasion of deteining his debt to be adjudged unto him, etc. And
the said Richard, for as much as he sufficient matter in Law, to bar the
aforesaid William of having the Action aforesaid, against the said Richard
above has alleged, which he is ready to averr, And which matter the said
William does not deny, nor to the same in any manner Answer, but the same
averment to admit, does altogether refuse, as before, he demands Judgment,
and that the said William from his action aforesaid, having against him the
said Richard be barred, etc. And because the Justices here will advise of, and
upon the premises before they give Judgment, day is given to the parties
aforesaid until the day after the Holy Trinity to hear their Judgment, etc.
Because, the said Justices hereof not yet, etc. At which day here come, as well
the said William Paynter, as the said Richard Mauser by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further advise of, and upon the
premises before they give Judgment, further day is given to the parties
aforesaid until in 8. days of St. Michael, to hear their Judgment, because
the said Justices here hereof not yet, etc. At which day come as well the said
William Paynter, as the said Richard Mauser by their Attorneys aforesaid; and
upon this the premises considered, and by the Justices here fully understood,
It seemed to the Justices here, That the aforesaid Plea of the said Rich.
Mauser above in Bar pleaded, is not sufficient in Law, the said Rich. as to
bar the said Will. to have his Actio^ aforesaid against the said William
Paynter above has alleged: Therefore it is granted, that the said William
Paynter, recover against the said Richard Mauser his debt aforesaid, and his
damages by occasion of deteining of his debt to 20. pounds to the said William,
with his assent by the Court here adjudged, and the aforesaid Richard in mercy,
etc. Afterward, that is to say, the 10th. day of June in the year of the Reign
of the Queen that now is the 28t^. came into Court the said William Paynter, by
the aforesaid Thomas Antrobas his Attorney, by a special Warrant to him made in
this behalf, and acknowledged, That he is satisfied of the debt and damages
aforesaid, Therefore the said Richard of the debt and those damages be
acquitted, etc.

Trinity 27o. Eliz. Rott, 1354. in the Common Pleas. Wisemans Case. Co. 1.
part. Fol. 1. a.
AT another time, as it appears Easter Term in the year of the Reign of the
Lady the Queen that now is, the 27th. Rott. 1056. it is contained, thus: Essex.
ss. Richard Bernard of great Braxsted, in the County aforesaid Yeoman, was
summoned to Answer to John Wiseman of a Plea, that he render to him 18. pound
which he owes him, and unjustly deteineth, etc. And whereupon the said John by
Apollo Plain his Attorney says, That whereas one Thomas Wiseman was seized
of, and in the Island of Osee with the appurtenances in great Totham, in the
County aforesaid in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, The said
Island with the appurtenances, held of the Lady the Queen that now is, as of
her Manor of East Greenwich, in the County of Kent in free Socage, that is to
say, by Fealty only, The said Thomas so thereof being seized, the 15th. day of
October, in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now is, the 19th. at Great
Totham aforesaid demised, the one moiety of the said Island to the aforesaid
Richard, To have and hold the said moiety with the appurtenances to the said
Richard, from the feast of St. Michael the Archangel then last past, until the
end and Term of 21. years from thence next following fully to be completed,
Yielding and paying therefore yearly to the aforesaid Thomas his Heirs and
Assigns, 36. pound of Lawful Money of England at two Terms of the year, That is
to say, at the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, and the Birth
of our Lord, by equal portions to be paid, By virtue of which demise, the
aforesaid Richard, in the moiety aforesaid with the appurtenances did enter,
and was, and yet is thereof possessed, and so being thereof possessed, and the
said Thomas of the reversion of the said moiety as of Fee and Right, and of the
other moiety of the Island aforesaid, being seized in his demesne as of Fee, the
said Thomas had issue William his Son and Heir apparent, and the said William
had issue John his Son and Hei^ apparent; and afterward the said William at
Great Totham aforesaid dyed, and the aforesaid Thomas of the Reversion of the
one Moiety of the Island aforesaid, and of the other Moiety of the said Island
with the appurtenances, in form foresaid being seized, The said Thomas so
thereof seized, the 20th. day of November, in the 23th. year of the Reign of
the Queen that now is, at Great Totham aforesaid, made his Testament and last
Will in writing, and by the same, willed and bequeathed to one Thomas Wiseman
his Son, the said Reversion of the aforesaid Moiety of the Island aforesaid;
and the other Moyty of the said Island, To have to him and the Heirs males of
his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, the remainder to the
right Heirs of the said Thomas Wiseman the Father for ever. And afterward, The
said Thomas Wiseman the Father at Great Totham aforesaid dyed of such Estates
of the aforesaid reversion of the one Moiety of the Island aforesaid, and of
and in the aforesaid other Moiety of the said Island with the appurtenances
seized. After whose death the aforesaid Thomas Wiseman the Son into one Moiety
of the Island aforesaid entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as of
Fee-tail, and seized of the aforesaid Reversion of the other Moiety of the said
Island as of Fee-tail, that is to say to him, and the Heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten, the reversion thereof to the said. John, as Cousin and Heir
of the said Thomas Wiseman the Father belonging, that is to say, as Son and
Heir of William Wiseman deceased, Son and Heir of Thomas Wiseman the Father:
And the aforesaid Thomas Wiseman the Son so thereof being seized, and the said
John, Cousin and Heir of the aforesaid Thomas, the Father, of the Reversi^n
thereof, as of Fee and Right being seized, The said John the 16th. day of May,
in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now is, the 24th. at great Totham
aforesaid, By his Indenture baring date the same day and year, made between him
the said John Wise Man, by the name of John Wise Man, of the Inner Temple
London Gent. Cousin and next Heir of Thomas Wise Man late of Norhead, within the
Parish of Muchwaltham in the County of Essex Esquire. deceased of the one party,
and Anthony Everard, John Mead, and John Sorrel, by the name of Anthony
Everard, of the Inner Temple London Gent. John Meade of Great Easton, in the
County of Essex Gent. and John Sorrel of Stylsted in the aforesaid County of
Essex Gent. of the other party, and in the Court of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, of Pleas holden before the Queen her self, within 6 Months then
next following, according to the form of the Statute in such case late had and
provided in due manner of Record enrolled, and of which one part, with the
seals of the said Anthony, John Meade, and John Sorrel Sealed, the said John
Wise Man here in Court, brings whose date is the said 6th. day of May, in the
24th. year aforesaid, testifying, That the aforesaid Thomas Wise Man, as well
in consideration and to the intent, That all, and all manner, the Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with all and singular their
appurtenances, should and might for ever after continue, remain, and be at the
will and good pleasure of God in the Stock, Name, or Blood of the said John
Wise Man, as for diverse other good causes, and considerations, him the said
John Wise Man then especially moving, had Covenanted, and Granted for himself,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, To and with the said Anthony
Everard, John Meade, and John Sorrel, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and the Heirs, Executors, and Administrators of every of them
by the said Indenture, That he the said John Wise Man his Heirs and Assigns,
should and would immediately from henceforth stand and be seized of and in the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, of all and singular the
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments before mentioned, To the use of the
said John Wise Man, and the Heirs males of his body lawfully to be begotten,
and for default of such issue, To the use of William Wise Man, Brother of the
said John Wise Man lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, To the use
of Thomas Wise Man, another Brother of the said John Wise Man, and the Heirs
males of the body of the said Thomas lawfully to be begotten. And for default
of such issue, To the use of the Heirs of the body of William Wise Man, Father
of the said John Wise Man, and the Heirs of their bodies lawfully to be
begotten, and for default of such issue, To the use of the Heirs of the body of
the aforesaid Thomas Wise Man deceased, and the Heirs of their bodies lawfully
to be begotten, and for default such issue, To the use of the Lady the Queen
that now is, and the Heirs and Successors of the said Lady the Queen, Kings and
Queens of this Realm of England for ever as by the said Indenture amongst other
things it more fully, manifest and does appear. By virtue of which Indenture,
and by force of a certain Act in Parliament of the late King Henry 8. at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the 4th. day of February, in the year
of his Reign the 27th. of transferring of uses in possession then holden, set
forth, The said John Wise Man was seized of the Reversion of the whole Island
aforesaid, as of Fee tail and right, and for default of such issue, the
remainder to the aforesaid William Wise Man, Brother of the said John
Wise Man, and the heirs males of the Body of the said William lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such issue, To the use of the said Thomas
Wise Man, another Brother of the said John Wise Man, and the heirs males of the
Body of the said Thomas lawfully to be begotten, And for default of such issue,
the remainder thereof to of the heirs of the body of the aforesaid Will
Wise Man the Father, and the heirs of their bodies lawfully to be begotten; And
for default of such issue, the Remainder thereof to the heirs males of the
Body of the said Thomas Wise Man desceased, and the heirs males of their Body
lawfully to be begotten; And for default of such issue, The remainder there to
the said Lady the Queen that now is, her Heirs and Successors, Kings and
Queens of this Kingdom of England belonging; And the beforesaid John of the
aforesaid Reversion of the whole Island aforesaid as of Fee tail and right in
form aforesaid being seized, the remainder thereof further in the form
aforesaid belonging; The said Thomas Wise Man the Son afterward, that is to
say, the 15th. day of July, in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
the 26th. at great Totham aforesaid, dyed without heir male of his body
lawfully begotten, After whose death the said John, into one Moiety of the
Island aforesaid with the Appurtenances entered, and was and yet is thereof
seized in his Demesne as of Fee tail; And likewise the said John was and yet is
seized of the aforesaid Reversion of the other Moiety of the said Island, as of
the Fee tail and of right, And thereof being seized; And the said Richard, of
the said other Moiety of the aforesaid Island, with the Appurtenances in form
aforesaid being possessed, The aforesaid 18. pounds of the Rent aforesaid, for
half a year, ended at the Feast of the Birth of our Lord, in the year of the
Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 27th. to the said John was behind,
and do yet remain unpaid, For which Action accrued to the said John to require
and have of the said Richard the aforesaid 18. pounds: Yet he the said Richard,
although he was often required the said 18. pounds, to the said John has not
yet rendered, but hitherto to render to the same to him has denied, and yet
does deny; Whereupon he says he is the worse, and has damage to the value of
20. pounds. And thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the said Richard Barnard, by
John Cook his Attorney, comes and does defend the force and injury when, etc.
And says, That the aforesaid John Wiseman, his Action aforesaid against him
ought not to have, because he says, That well and true it is, That the
aforesaid Thomas Wiseman, the Father was seized of the Island aforesaid, in his
Demesne as of Fee, And that the said Thomas demised unto the said Richard
Barnard the Moiety of the Island aforesaid with the Appurtenances, And that the
said Thomas Wiseman the Father, by his aforesaid Testament and last Will,
willed and bequeathed to the abovesaid Thomas Wiseman, the Son the aforesaid
Reversion, of the said aforesaid one Moiety of the said Island aforesaid, and
the other Moiety of the said Island in form aforesaid, And that the said Thomas
Wiseman the Son, By virtue of the bequest aforesaid, was seized of the one
Moiety of the Island aforesaid, in his Demesne as of Fee tail, and of the
Reversion of the other Moiety thereof in Demesne as of Fee tail and Right, that
is to say, to him and the heirs males of his Body lawfully begotten, as the
aforesaid John Wiseman by his Declaration aforesaid above supposes: But the
said Richard Barnard further says, That the said Thomas Wiseman the Son, of
the one Moiety of the Island aforesaid, and of the Reversion of the other
Moiety in ^orm aforesaid being seized, One John Godfrey the 9th. day of June,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 26th. sued
forth out of the Court of the Chancery, of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
in the said Court of Chancery at Westminster aforesaid, then being, a certain
writ of the said Lady the Queen, of Entry upon Disseisin in the Post against
the said Thomas Wiseman, by the name of Thomas Wise Man Gent. of the Island
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, amongst other things, to the Sheriff of the
County of Essex directed, by which Writ, the said Lady the Queen that now is,
then commanded the said Sheriff, that the said Sheriff should command the said
Thomas Wise Man the Son, that truly and without delay, he should render to the
said John Godfrey the Island aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, amongst other
things, by the name of the Manor of Mockinghall, with the Appurtenances, and
22. Messuages, 3. Dove-houses, 23. Gardens, 430. Acres of Land, 162. Acres of
Meadow, 460. Acres of Pasture, 22. Acres of Wood, 110. Acres of Furrs and
Heath, 400. Acres of Marsh, as of 50. shillings of Rent, with the Appurtenances
in Barlinge the great, Staubrigge great, Wakeringe, little Wakeringe, Leigh,
Shopland, Rochford, Prt^lewell, Benfl^^t, Foulnes, Althorpe, Thundersley,
Hadley, Great Baddowe, Great Totham, and Gouldhanger, which he claimed to be
his Right and his inheritance, And into which the said Thomas Wiseman, then had
not entry, but after the Disseisin, which Hugh Hunt unjustly, and without
Judgment, did to the said John Godfrey, within 30. years then last past, as he
then said, And whereof he then Complained, That the said Thomas Wise Man the
Son, him then did deforce, And unless he should do it, and the aforesaid John
Godfrey should then make the said Sheriff secure his clamor to prosecute, then
he summon by good summons the aforesaid Thomas Wiseman the Son, that he be
before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here at Westminster aforesaid,
from the day of Holy Trinity, in 15. days then next following, to show wholly
he did not, etc. And that the said Sheriff should have here the summons, and
the said Writ: At which 15. days of Holy Trinity, before Edmond Anderson Knight.
and his Companions then Justices of the said Lady the Queen that now is of the
Bench, here come as well the said John Godfrey, as the said Thomas Wise Man the
Son, in their proper persons, And Thomas Lucas Knight. then Sheriff of the County
of Essex aforesaid, returned then here the Writ aforesaid, to him in form
aforesaid directed, in all things served and executed, That is to say, That the
said John Godfrey found to the said Sheriff pledges to prosecute his Writ
aforesaid, that is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo, And that the said Thomas
Wise Man the Son, was summoned by John Den, and Richard Fen: Whereupon the said
John Godfrey, in his proper person in the said Court, here declaring upon his
Writ aforesaid, then demanded against the said Thomas Wise Man the Son, the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the Appurtenances as his right
and his inheritance; And into which the said Thomas had not entry, but after
Disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without Judgment did to the
said John, within 30. years then last past, And whereupon then he said, That he
himself was seized of the Manors, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances as of Fee and Right, in the time o^ Peace, in the time of the
Lady the Queen that now is, taking the Profits to the value, etc. And into which
etc. And thereupon he then brought Suit, etc. And the said Thomas Wise Man the
Son, in his proper person then did defend his Right when, etc. And thereof
vouched to Warranty David Howel, who then was present in Court in his own
person, and freely the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances to him did then warrant, upon which the said John Godfrey then
demanded against the said David, then Tenant by his Warranty, the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the Appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc.
And whereupon he then said, That he himself was seized of the Manor, Tenements
and Rents aforesaid, with the Appurtenances in his Demesne as of Fee and Right
in time of peace, in the time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the
Profits to the value, etc. and in which, etc. and thereupon he brought his
Suit, etc. And the said David Howel, Tenant by his Warranty, then defended his
Right when, etc. And then said, That the aforesaid Hugh did not disseise the
said John Godfrey, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances, as the said John by his Writ and Declaration aforesaid above
supposed; And upon that then put themselves upon the Country: And the said John
Godfrey, then demanded license thereof to imparle. And he then had it, etc. And
the said John returned back unto the same Court, in the said Term in his proper
person. And the said David, although solemnly demanded then came not again, but
in contempt of the said Court, departed and made default; Wherefore it was
granted in the same Court* That the said John Godfrey, should recover his
seisin against the said Thomas Wiseman the Son, of the Manor, Tenements, and
Rent aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and that the said Thomas should have of
the Land of the said David to the value, etc. And that the said David should
then be in mercy, etc. And thereupon the aforesaid John Godfrey, then
demand-the Writ of the said Lady the Queen, to the said Sheriff of the County
aforesaid to be directed, to gve him full seisin of the Manors, Tenements, and
Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, And which was to him then granted
retornable here without delay, etc: And afterward that is to say, The 8th. day
of July, the self same Term came unto the said Court, the aforesaid John
Godfrey in his proper person; And the said Thomas Lucas then Sheriff of the
County of Essex, then here sent, That he by virtue of the said Writ to him
directed, The 4th. day of July, then last past, delivered to the said J.
Godfrey full seisin of the Ma^nor, Tenements and Rents aforesaid with the
appurtenances, as by the said Writ he was commanded; Which Recovery and
Execution thereupon in form aforesaid prosecuted and had, was to the use of the
said Thomas Wiseman the Son, and his Heirs for ever. By virtue of which, and
of the said Statute in Parliament, of the said Henry late King of England the
8th. at Westminster aforesaid, the 4th. day of February, in the year of his
Reign the 27th. of transferring of uses into possessions held, published, and
provided, The said Thomas Wise Man the Son, was seized of the said Reversion of
one Moiety of the Island aforesaid, with the appurtenances amongst other
things, in his Demesne as of Fee and Right, and so being thereof seized, at
great Totham aforesaid, dyed of such his estate so thereof seized, after whose
death, The aforesaid Reversion of the one Moiety of Island aforesaid with the
appurtenances, amongst other things to Elizabeth, now the Wife of Richard
Jeunius, and Dorathy Wise Man, as Sisters and Heirs of the said Thomas
Wise Man the Son, which Elizabeth and Dorathy are yet above and in full life,
that is to say, at great Totham aforesaid, and this he is ready to aver,
whereupon he demands Judgment, If the said John Wise Man his Action
aforesaid, against him ought to have, etc. And upon this, The said John
Wise Man prays license to imparle here until the next day after the Holy
Trinity, and has it, etc. And the same day is given to the said Richard here,
etc. And the said John Wise Man says, That he by any thing before alleged, to
have his Action aforesaid ought not to to be barred, because he says, That
long before the Recovery aforesaid, of the Tenments aforesaid, with the
appurtenances in form aforesaid had, By a certain Act of Parliament of the Lord
Henry late King of England, the 8th. the most Dear Father of the Lady the Queen
that now is at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the 22d. day of
January, in the year of his Reign the 34th. begun and there then holden, and
afterward by diverse progations continued until the 12th. day of May, in the
year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the 8th. the 35th. held, amongst
other Kings. It was enacted by authority of the said Parliament, That whereas
diverse of the Noble Progenitors of the said late King Henry the 8th. and
especially the said late King chiefly liberally above all others had given,
granted, or otherwise had provided to his and their loving and good Servants
and Subjects, as well Nobles as others, Manors, Meases, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Services, and Hereditaments, to them and to their Heirs males of their
bodies, or to the Heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, minding at the time
of such gifts, not only to prefer and advance presently the donees, but also
their Heirs in blood of their bodies according to the limitatio^ of the said
gifts, to the intent that the Recompense for the service of such donees, should
not only be a benefit for their own persons, but a continual profit and
commodity to and for their Heirs coming of their bodies, whereby such Heirs
should have in special memory, and daily remembrance the profit that they have
and take by the service of their Ancestors, done to the Kings of this Realm of
England, and thereby be the better encouraged to do the like service to their
Sovereign Lords, as to their duty and Allegiance appertains; And because
diverse such Donees in tail, and their Heirs daily before the making of the Act
aforesaid, have suffered by their assent false and feigned Recoveries to be had
against them, with common Voucher, or otherwise, of Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, so given or provided in tail, by the aforesaid
Lord the King, or his Noble Progenitors as is aforesaid, to the intent by
fraud, loin, and undue means, not only to bind and defraud their Heirs
inheritable, by the limitation of such gifts, but also the said Lord the King
of his prerogative, Wardship, primer seisin, and other his rights, whereby
Questions, and diversity of opinions have risen, and yet be, Whether such false
and feigned Recoveries against such Tenants in tail by their own consents, of
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, of which the Reversion or the Remainder
were in the King at the time, of such Recovery or Recoveries had, should after
the death of Tenant in tail, bind the Heirs in tail or not, For full
Declaration thereof, and to avoid and extinct from henceforth diversities of
opinions in the like Cases. It was enacted by the said Act, That no such
feigned recovery from henceforth after to be had, by assent of parties against
such Tenant or Tenants in tail, of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
whereof the reversion or remainder at the time of such recovery, should be in
the Lord the King, should bind or conclude the Heirs in tail, whether any
Condition or Voucher should be, in any such feigned recovery or not, but that
after the death of every such Tenant in tail against whom any such recovery
should be had, the Heirs in tail might enter, have, and enjoy, the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, so recovered according to the form of the gift in
tail, the said Recovery or any other thing or things hereafter to be had and
suffered, by or against any such Tenant in tail to the contrary
notwithstanding. And further by the said Act, by authority of the said
Parliament, It was enacted, That the Heirs of every such Tenant in tail against
whom any such feigned Recovery should be had, should take no advantage for any
Recompense in value against the Voucheenor his Heirs, as by the said Act
amongst other things, more fully it appears: And the said John further says,
That the said Thomas so of the aforesaid one Moiety of the Island aforesaid,
and of the R^version of the other Moiety thereof in form aforesaid being
seized, The Recovery aforesaid, in form aforesaid, by the said John Godfrey,
against the beforesaid Thomas Wiseman the Son, was had and executed contrary to
the form of the Statute aforesaid, and this he is ready to aver; Wherefore he
demands Judgment and his Debt aforesaid, together with his Damages by occasion
of the detaining of the said Debt to be ajudged unto him, etc. And the said
Richard Barnerd says, That the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid John Wiseman,
above by Replication pleaded, and the matter in the same contained, are not
sufficient in Law to maintain the said John to have his aforesaid Action against
the said Richard, and that he unto the Plea aforesaid, in manner and form
aforesaid, pleaded, needs not to answer by the Law of the Land. And this he
is ready to aver, wherefore for default of sufficient Replication of the said
John in this part, The said Richard demands Judgment, and that the said John
from having his Action aforesaid against him be Barred, etc. And the said John
Wiseman for as much as he sufficient matter to have his Action against the said
Richard by the Replication aforesaid has alleged, which he is ready to aver,
which matter the aforesaid Richard does not deny, nor to the same does any
ways answer, but does altogether refuse to admit the averment aforesaid, As
before he demands Judgment and his debt aforesaid, together with his damages
for the deteining of his debt to be adjudged unto him, etc. And because the
Justices here will advise of, and upon the premises before they give Judgment
thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here in 8bis. of Saint Michael,
to hear their Judgment, because the Justices here are not yet, etc. at which
day here come as well the said John Wiseman, as the said Richard Barnard by
their Attorneys aforesaid, upon which the Plea of the said John Wise Man upon
the Replication pleaded being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood.
It seems to the Justices here, that the said Plea, and the matter in the same
contained, are not sufficient in Law for the said John to have and maintain his
Action aforesaid against the said Richard, Therefore, it is granted, That the
said John take nothing by his Writ aforesaid, but that he be in mercy for his
false clamor: And that the said Richard go thereof without day, etc.

Debt.
Hillary Term, 34. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Rott. 169. Westbies Case, Co. 3.
part.
MEmorandum, that at another time, that is to say, the Term of Saint Land. ss.
Michael last past, before the Lady and Queen at Westminster, came Titus
VVestby by Thomas Cook his Attorney, and brought here in the Court of the said
Lady the Queen then here his Bill against Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher late
Sheriffs of London, in the Custody of the Marshal, etc. of a Plea of Debt. And
are Pledges of Suit, John Do, and Richard Roo: Which Bill follows in these
words, ss. London, ss. Titus VVestby complains of Thomas Skinner, and John
Catcher late Sheriffs of London, in the Custody of the Marshal of the
Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self being, of a Plea,
that they render to him 440. pound of lawful Money of England, which they owe
him, and unjustly do detein, for that. That is to say, That whereas one Thomas
Smith Gent: Edward VVinter Gent. Anthony Bastard Gent. by the names of Thomas
Smith, of Camden, in the County of Gloucester Gent. Of Edward VVinter of
VVorthington, in the County of Leicester Cent. and Anthony Bastard of
Alderbury, in the County of Oxford Gent. the 20th. day of January, in the year
of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 29th. day at Westminster,
in the County of Middlesex, before Christopher Wray Knight, then Chief Justice
of the said Lady the Queen of Pleas, before the said Queen holden Assigned, by
their certain writing Obligatory, Sealed with their Seals, had granted
themselves to be bounden, and did acknowledge themselves to owe to the
aforesaid Titus, by the name of Titus VVestbie, Citizen and Merchant Tailor of
London, or to his certain Attorney, showing the said writing his Heirs, or
Executors, in the feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin then
next following, and if they should make default in the payment of the debt
aforesaid, Then the said Thomas Smith, Edward VVinter, and Anthony Bastard,
they willed, and granted, that then there should run upon the said Thomas,
Edward, and Anthony, and every of them their Heirs and Executors, the penalty
in the Statute staple of debts for Merchandises in the same bought to be
recovered, ordained, and provided; and whereas also the said Thomas, Edward,
and Anthony, the said 440. pound by them, in the form aforesaid acknowledged in
the Feast aforesaid, to the aforesaid Titus had not paid, nor any of them had
paid, By which afterward, that is to say, the Eleventh day of April, in the
year of the Reign of the said Queen that now is, the 30th. One John Chomley
Esquir, the Clark of then said Lady the Queen that now is, the Recognisance for
debts, to be recovered according to the form of the Satute in the like case
provided deputed by his writing, Sealed with his Seal, the Recognisance
aforesaid, in the Chancery of the said Queen that now is at Westminster
aforesaid then being, at the request of the said Titus did Certify, And the
said Titus thereupon afterward, that is to say, the 31th. day of August, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 30th.
aforesaid, sued forth out of the said Court of Chancery at Westminster
aforesaid then being, a certain Writ of the said Lady the Queen, to the then
Sheriffs of London directed, By which Writ reciting, Because the aforesaid
Thomas Smith, Edward VVinter, and Anthony Bastard, the 20th. day of January, in
the year of the Reign of the said-Lady the Queen that now is, the 29th. before
Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of the said Lady the Queen, of Pleas
before the said Queen to be holden assigned, did acknowledge themselves, to owe
to the abovesaid Titus 440. pound, which he the same Titus, they ought to have
paid, in the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin then next
following, and the same day of issuing out of this Writ had not paid, nor any
of them then had paid as was said, The said Lady the Queen by the said Writ,
the then Sheriffs of London commanded, That the bodies of the said Thomas
Smith, Edward VVinter, and Anthony Bastard, if they were Laymen, to take, and
in the prison of the said Lady the Queen that now is, until the said Thomas
VVestbie of the debt aforesaid, of the debt aforesaid safely to be kept, and
all the Lands and Chattels of the said Thomas, Edward, and Anthony in the
Bailywick of the said Sheriffs, by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of their
Bailywick, they should diligently extend and apprize, and seize into the Lands
of the said Lady the Queen, that the same to the beforesaid Titus, until to
him of his debt aforesaid, he should be fully satisfied, they should make
delivery, according to the form of the Statute at Westminster, for the like
debts to be recovered thereof made and unprovided, and how the said Sheriffs
aforesaid should execute the same they should make known to the said Lady the
Queen in her Chancery, in 15. days of Saint Martin then next coming
wheresoever it should then be by their Letters Sealed, and that they should
have there the said Writ, which said Writ the said Thomas VVestbie afterward,
and before the said 15. day of Saint Martin, that is to say, the 8th. day of
September, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
30th. aforesaid at London, that is to say, in the Parish of Christ-Church, in
the Ward of Farrington within delivered, to the said Themas Skinner, and John
Catcher then being Sheriffs of London in form of Law to be executed: And the
said Titus further says, That the said Anthony Bastard at the same time of the
delivery of the said Writ to the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher as
before is said made, was a Layman, and yet is a Layman, And that by virtue of
the said Writ after and before the Retorn thereof, that is to say, The said
8th. day of September, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, the 30th. aforesaid, the aforesaid Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher
then being Sheriffs of London, the aforesaid Anthony Bastard at London, in the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, by virtue of the Writ aforesaid took and arrested,
and the said Anthony in Execution for the said aforesaid 440. pound, then and
there had according to the exigencie of the said Writ; and the said Anthony,
under the Custody of the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher Sheriffs, in
execution in the form aforesaid being, The said Thomas Skinner, and John
Catcher Sheriffs, The said Anthony Bastard, afterward, that is to say, the
20th. day of October, in the 30th. year aforesaid at London, in the Parish and
Ward aforesaid from the Custody of the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher
Sheriffs at large, where he would go did suffer, the said Titus of the
aforesaid 440. pound, not being satisfied, Be which Action acrued to the said
Titus, to require and have of the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher the
aforesaid 440. pound for his debt aforesaid, by the said Anthony in form
aforesaid acknowledged; yet the said Thomas Skinner, and John Gatcher, although
often requested, etc. the aforesaid 440. pound to the said Titus have not yet
rendered, but have hitherto denied to render the same unto him, and do yet deny
so to do, Whereupon the said Titus, says that he is the worse, and has Damage
to the value of 400. pounds, and thereof he brings his Suit, etc. And now at
this day, that is to say, Monday next after 8bh. of St. Hillary, the self same
Term, until which day, the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, had license
to imparle to the said Bill, and then to answer, etc. before the Lady the Queen
at Westminster, come as well the said Titus Westbie, by his Attorney aforesaid,
as the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, by Christopher Rust their
Attorney; And the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher defend the force and
injury when, etc. And say, That they do not owe to the aforesaid Titus the
aforesaid 440. pounds, or any penny thereof in manner and form, as the said
Titus above against them delareth: And of this they put themselves upon the
Country; And the said Titus likewise, etc. Therefore a Jury came before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, upon Saturday next after 15. days of Easter.
And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is
given to the parties aforesaid here, etc. Afterward the proceeding thereof was
continued between the parties aforesaid, of the plea aforesaid, by Jurors put
thereof between them in Respite, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Monday next after three Weeks of Holy Trinity then next following,
Unless the Beloved and Faithful of the said Lady the Queen, John Popham K^
Chief Justice of the Lady of Pleas, in the Court of the said Lady the Queen to
be holden assigned, first, upon Saturday next after 15. days of Holy Trinity,
at Guildhall London, by form of the Statute, etc. comes for default of Jurors,
etc. At which Monday next after three Weeks of Holy Trinity before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and the before said Chief Justice before whom, etc. sent here his
record before him had in these words, That is to say; Afterward the day and
place within contained, before John Popham K^. Chief Justice, within written
associating to him Thomas Povey, by the form of the Statute, etc. came as well
the within named Titus VVestbie, as the within written Thomas Skinner, and John
Catcher by their Attorneys within contained, and the Jurors sworn, whereof
within is made mention, some of them came, and some of them did not come, as it
appears in the Panel, and some of the said Jurors now appeared, that is to
say, John Sly, Thomas Worship, Arthur Parkins, William Tegoe, and John
VViggenton, appeared, and were sworn in the Jury aforesaid, and because that
the rest of the Jurors of the said Jury did not appear. Therefore others of the
Standers by, chosen by the Sheriffs of London, at the request of the said Titus
VVestbie, and by the command of the Chief Justice aforesaid were new put, whose
names are fyled to the Panel within written, according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided, Which Jurors so a new put appeared,
that is to say, John Patson, George Clarke, Alexander Sharp, Edward Flory,
Thomas Chapman, Emanuel Trambel, and Henry Field appeared, who being sworn to
the Truth of the matters, which is contained with the other Jurors, chosen,
tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That the within written Thomas Smith,
Edward Winter, and Anthony Bastard, the within written 21th. day of January,
the 29th. year within written, at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex,
within written before the within named Christopher Wray K^. then chief Justice
of the Lady within written of Pleas, before the Queen holden assigned, by their
writing Obligatory within written, sealed with their Seals, granted themselves
to be bounden and acknowledged that they did owe to the aforesaid Titus the
within written 440. pounds, To be paid to the same Titus or his certain
Attorney, showing that writing, their Heirs, or Executors, in the within
written Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin then next
following, and if they should make default in payment of the said Debt, That
then the said Thomas Smith, Edward Winter, and Anthony Bastard, willed and
granted that then should run upon them the said Thomas, Edward, and Anthony,
and every of them, their Heirs and Executors, the penalty in the Statute of
Debts for Merchandises in the same bought to be recovered, ordained, or
provided, in manner and form, as the said Titus likewise within against them
declared; And that the said Statute by the said Thomas, sueth Edward Winter,
and Anthony Bustard in form aforesaid acknowledged, Afterward, that is to say,
the within written 11th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, the 30th. within written, by the within named John
Chomley, Esquire. then Clark of the said Lady the Queen that now is of
Recognizances of Debts to be recovered, according to the form of the Statute in
the like case provided, deputed, by his Writing within written, sealed with his
seal, into the Chancery. of the said Lady the Queen within written, it was
certified in manner and form, as the said Titus within likewise, against the
said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher alleged: And that thereupon the said
Titus afterward, that is to say, the within written, the 31th. day of August
the 30th. year within written, sued forth out of the said Court of Chancery,
within written, the Writ aforesaid within specified, of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, to the Sheriffs of London directed, By which Writ, the said Lady
the Queen that now is, then commanded the Sheriffs of Land. That the bodies of
the within named Thomas Smith, Edward Winter, and Anthony Bastard, if they were
Laymen, to be taken, and in the Prison of the said Lady the Queen, until the
said Titus Westbie of the Debt aforesaid, fully satisfied, they should cause
safely to be kept, And all the Lands and Chattels of the said Thomas, Edward,
and Anthony, in the Balywick of of the said Sheriffs, by the oath of honest and
lawful men of their said Balywick, by whom the truth of the matter may best be
known, according to the true value thereof, they diligently cause to be
extended and apprized, and into the hands of the said Lady the Queen, they make
to be seized, that the same to the aforesaid Titus, until he should be fully
satisfied of the Debt aforesaid, they might be delivered according to the form
of the Statute at Westminster for the like Debts to be recovered, thereof made
and provided; And how the said Sheriffs have executed the said Command, that
they make known to the said Lady the Queen in the Chancery, within 15. days of
St. Martin then next, wheresoever it should then be by their Letters sealed,
and that they should have here that Writ which said Writ, the said Jurors say
upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Titus Westbie, afterward, that is to
say, the within written 8th. day of September, in the 30th. year aforesaid, at
London aforesaid, that is to say, in the within written Parish of Christ
Church, in the Ward of Farrington within, delivered to the said Thomas Skinner,
and John Catcher, then being Sheriffs of London in form of Law, to be executed
in manner and form, as the aforesaid Titus within likewise against them
declared: And further the Jurors aforesaid say upon their oath aforesaid, That
the said Anthony Bastard then, that is to say, the aforesaid 8th. day of
September, in the 30th. year aforesaid, was in the Goal of the said Lady the
Queen that now is of Newgate, under the Custody of the said Tho. Skinner, and
J. Catcher, then Sheriffs of London aforesaid, in Execution at the suit of one
Robert Dighton, for the Debt of 240. pounds, and the said Anthony Bastard so
there in Execution being, The said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, then being
Sheriffs of London within written, the 8th. day of September, the 30th. year
aforesaid, by virtue of the Writ aforesaid, at London aforesaid, took and
arrested the within named Anthony Bastard, in manner and form as the said Titus
within likewise, against the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher declared;
And that the said Anthony Bastard so taken and arrested, under the custody of
the said Thomas Skinner, and John Cacther, then Sheriffs of London aforesaid,
in form aforesaid being, The said then Sheriffs of London, the said Anthony
Bastard, in Execution for the aforesaid 440. pounds, then and there had,
according to the Command of the said Writ: And moreover, the Jurors aforesaid,
say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Anthony Bastard, so in custody of
the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, for the aforesaid 440. pounds, for
the aforesaid other Debt of 240. pounds, to the said Robert Dighton, in form
aforesaid being, The said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, afterward, that is
to say, the within written 20th. day of October, in the 30th. year aforesaid,
in the going out of their Office aforesaid, the said Anthony Bastard, by
Indenture delivered to Hugh Offley, and Richard Saltonstall, in Execution for
the aforesaid Debt of the said Robert Dighton, without any other mention of the
said Execution of 440. pounds, made to the aforesaid Hugh Offley, and Richard
Saltonstall, or to any of them given or notified. And fu^ther, the said Jurors
say upon their Oath aforesaid, That then, That is to say, The 20th. day of
October, in the 30th. year aforesaid, The said Thomas Skinner, and John
Catcher, from their Office aforesaid were discharged. And further, the said
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That after that the said Thomas Skinner,
and John Catcher, from their Office aforesaid, in form aforesaid, were
discharged, That the said Anthony Bastard, without payment of any of the
aforesaid Debts, in the Custody of the aforesaid Hugh Offley, and Richard
Saltonstall, in form aforesaid, being for the said 240. pounds, the said Hugh
Offley, and Richard Saltonstall, the said Anthony Bastard having none, nor any
of them ever having any Notice to them or either of them given of the said
Execution of the aforesaid 440. pounds, at London aforesaid, out of the Prison
aforesaid, suffered to go at large where he would; But whether upon the whole
matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, The said Thomas Skinner and John
Catcher, ought to be charged for the aforesaid said Debt of 440. pounds in Law,
or not, the Jurors aforesaid are altogether ignorant. And they pray the Advice
of the Court of the said Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self being. And
if it shall seem to the said Court, That the said Thomas Skinner, and John
Catcher, ought not to be charged for the said 440. pounds in Law, upon the
whole matter above found, The said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That
the said Thomas Skinner, and John Cacther, do owe to the said Titus VVestbie,
the said 440. pounds, in manner and form as the said Titus within against them
declared: And they do also assesse the damages of the said Titus Westbie, by
occasion of detaining of the said Debt, besides his charges and costs by him
about his Suit in this part expended to 20. pounds, and for his charges and
costs to 53. shillings, and 4. pence. And if it shall seem to the Court
aforesaid, That the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, do not owe to the
said Titus Westbie, the said 440. pounds, in manner and form, as the said
Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, within pleading have alleged, etc. And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen that now is, here of their Judgment of
and upon the premises to be given, are not yet avised; Day is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Tuesday next
after 8. days of St. Michael, for to hear their Judgment thereof, etc.
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. Before which
day, the Plaint aforesaid was Adjorned, by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of
Common Adjornment, before the Queen at Westminster, until the day of St.
Michael in a month; At which day, the Plaint aforesaid, was further adjorned
by another Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before the Queen,
until the next of All Souls then next following, at the Castle of Hartford, in
the County of Hartford. At which day, before the Lady the Queen, at the Castle
of Hartford, came the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady here, of their giving of their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid,
before the Lady the Queen, at the Castle of Hartford aforesaid, until Tuesday
next after 8th. of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. And so from Term to Term
until Thursday next after 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment,
etc. cause the Court of the Lady the Queen here, etc. At which day bebefore the
Queen at Westminster, came the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid,
Upon which, Seen, and by the Court of the Lady the Queen, here all and singular
the premises looked into and understood, and mature deliberation be thereof
had, because that it seems to the Court of the Lady the Queen that now is
here, That the said Tho. Skinner, and John Catcher, ought to be charged for the
said 440. pound. It is granted, That the said Titus Westbie, shall recover
against the aforesaid Tho. Skinner, and John Catcher, his debt aforesaid and
his damages aforesaid by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed, as
also 10. pound, 13. shill. and 4. pence, for his charges and costs aforesaid,
to the said Titus, by the Court of the said Lady the Queen here, with his
assent of increase, adjudged, Which damages in the whole do amount to 33.
pounds, 6. shillings, 8. pence, and the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher,
in mercy, etc. Afterward, that is to say, Upon Monday the 10th. day of
February, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
37th. The Transcript of the Record, and proceedings between in the parties
aforesaid, with all things touching the same, by a certain Writ of the Lady the
Queen of Errors correcting by the said Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, in the
premises, was brought to the Justices of the Lady of the Queen of the Common
Pleas, and the Barons of the Exchequer, of the Lady the Queen, In the Chamber
of the Exchequer aforesaid, according to the form of a Statute in the
Parliament of the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, the 23th. day of
November, in the year of her Reign the 27th. holden and made in the same Court
of the said Lady the Queen, here before the Queen her self were sent, The
aforesaid Thomas Skinner, and John Catcher, in the Court of the Exchequer
aforesaid, diverse matters for Errors, in the Record and Proceedings aforesaid,
for the revoking and annulling of the Judgment aforesaid assigned: To which
the said Titus, in the said Court appearing pleaded, That neither in the
Record, nor in the Proceedings aforesaid, for the revoking and annulling of the
Judgment aforesaid, in any thing was there Error: After which, that is to say,
Monday the 20th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now
is, the 37th. the premises seen, And by the Court of the said Lady the Queen
there diligently examined and fully understood, as well the Record and
proceedings aforesaid, and the Judgment upon the same given, as the Cause
aforesaid, for Error by the said Thomas and John above assigned and alleged, It
seemed to the Court here, That the Record aforesaid, was in nothing vicious or
defective, and that in the Record aforesaid, is Error in nothing, Therefore
then and there in the same Court, it was granted, That the Judgment aforesaid
should be affirmed in all things, and stand in all his force and effect, the
said Causes for Error here assigned in any thing notwithstanding. And further,
It was granted, That the said Titus should reover against the said Thomas, and
John, 80. shilings, to the said Titus by his Assent, by said Court of the Lady
the Queen there adjudged, according to the form of the Statute, late made and
provided for his costs and charges, which he had by reason of delay of the
Execution of the Judgment aforesaid, by Color of prosecuting the said Writ of
Error, etc. And thereupon the Record aforesaid, as also the proceedings
thereupon before the Justices of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the
Exchequer aforesaid, in the premises had before the Queen wheresoever, etc. by
the Justices and Barons aforesaid, were sent back, according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid, etc. And in the same Court of the said Lady, now here before
the Queen, they remain, etc.

Ejectione Firm.
Mich. 30. and 31. Eliz. in the Exchequer, Sir William Pethams Case, co. 1.
part.
MEmorandum, That at another time, that is to say, in the Term of Land. ss.
St. Hillary, in the year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth that now is, the
30th. Henry Page, Debtor of the Lady the Queen that now is, before the Barons
of the Exchequer, of the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, by John Hawkesworth his Attorney, and brought then and there his
Bill against Edward Griffin, of a plea of Trespass, and Ejectment out of his
Farm, The Tenor of which Bill follows in these words: ss. London ss. Henry
Page Debtor of the Lady Elizabeth the Queen that now is, comes before the
Barons of the Exchequer, the 27th day of January, this Term, by John
Hawkesworth his Attorney, and complains against Edward Griffin present here in
Court, the same day by Richard Hatton his Attorney, of a Plea of Trespass and
Ejectment of him out of his Farm, for that, viz. That whereas one Thomas Bows,
Mr. of Arts, the 10th. day of January, in the year of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, the 29th. at London, in the Parish of St. Mary Wolnoth, in the
Ward of Langborn London, had demised, granted, and to farm letten, to the said
Henry Page, one Capital Message, then or late in the tenure or occupation of
Edward Griffin of London Haberdasher, situate lying and being in Lomberstreet,
in the Parish of St. Mary Wolnoth, in the Ward aforesaid, within the City of
London, commonly called and known by the name of the White Lion, together with
all Shops, Sellers, Chambers, Places, Easements, Advantages, Profits, and
Commodities, with their appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, To have and to hold the said Message,
and all other the premises with their appurtenances, to the said Henry Page,
his Executors, Adminstrators, and Assigns, from the Feast of the Birth of our
Lord then last past, until the end and Term of 6. years, from thence next and
immediately following to be complete and ended; By virtue of which Demise, the
said Henry Page into the Message aforesaid with the appurtenances entered and
was thereof Possessed, and so being thereof Possessed, The said Edward Griffin
afterward, that is to say, the 11th. day of January, in the year of the Reign
of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 29th. aforesaid, with Force and
Arms, etc. into the Message aforesaid, which the said Thomas Bows to the
said Henry in form aforesaid demised, for the Term aforesaid which is not
ended, entered, and the said Henry from his Farm aforesaid thereof (his Term
aforesaid not ended) did eject, expel, and amove, and other wrongs did unto
him, to the great damage of the said Henry, and against the peace of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, Whereupon the said Henry says, that he is the
worse, and has damage to the value of 20. Marks: So as the less, the aforesaid
Henry cannot satisfy the Queen that now is, the Debts which to the said Queen
he owes at her Exchequer, And thereupon he brings Suit, etc. Pledges of
Suit, John Do, and Richard Roo. And now this day, that is to say, in 8^^ of
St. Michael, this Term, that is to say, the 30th. year, Until which day, the
said Edward Griffin prayed license to imparle, and then to answer, come here as
well the said Henry Page, as the said Edward Griffin by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and the said Henry demands that the said Edward Griffin answer him
in the premises, etc. And upon this, The said Edward Griffin, by his aforesaid
Attorney comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. And says, That he
of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, is no way thereof guilty: And of
that, he puts himself upon the Country, and the said Henry Page likewise,
Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriffs of London, that they make come here,
from the day of St. Michael, in one Month 12. etc. of the Neighborhood of the
Parish of St. Mary Wolnoth, in the Ward of ^augborn, within the City of Land.
whereof every one, etc. by whom, and who never, etc. And the same day is given
to the parties aforesaid here, etc. At which day, come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the Sheriffs of London, That is to say, Hugh
Offley, and Richard Saltonstall, send here the Writ of Venire Facias, of the
Jurors aforesaid, with the Panel of the names of the Jurors to the said Writ
annexed, and the said Jurors being called, did not appear, Therefore it was
commanded to the Sheriffs of London, that they destrein the Jurors aforesaid,
by their Lands, etc. So, etc. upon Wednesday the 6th. of November next to come,
Unless Roger Manwood Knight. Chief Baron of the Exchequer, of the said Lady the
Queen, upon Tuesday the 4th. day of November next following, at the Guild Hall
of the City of London, by force of the Statute thereof provided, shall first
come: So that inquiry thereof before the said Chief Baron, then here distinctly
and openly taken, be had here at the aforesaid Wednesday, And it is said to the
parties aforesaid, that they be before the said Chief Baron at the Guild Hall
aforesaid the said Tuesday, and that they be here the said Wednesday, to hear
Judgment upon the vredict of the inquisition aforesaid, if, etc. At which day
come the said Parties by their Attorneys aforesaid; And the said Chief Baron
delivered here the tenor of this Plea, together with the Writ of Distringas, of
the Jurors aforesaid, with the Panel of the names of the Jurors, to the said
Writ annexed, and to the said Tenor fyled: Which Tenor is indorsed thus:
Afterward the day and place within contained, before Roger Manwood, Knight. Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, of the Lady the Queen, associating to him Walter
Morley, Gent. by the form of the Statute, etc. came as well the within named
Henry Page, as the within written Edward Griffin by their Attorneys within
mentioned. And the Jurors whereof mention is within made, being called, some of
them, that is to say, John Palmer, Thomas James, Thomas Thomas, George
Maunsell, Thomas Bagnill, and Robert Bilborough, and in Jury aforesaid were
sworn, and because that the rest of the Jurors of the said Jury did not appear,
Therefore other of the standers by, by the Sheriffs chosen at the request of
the said Henry Page, by the Command of the said Chief Baron, were anew put,
whose names are fyled to the Panel within written, according to the form of
the Statute in the such case made and provided, and the Jurors so anew chosen
and put, that is to say George Clarke, John Barnes, George Ganbie, Thomas
Staubauke, William Sutton, and George Roberts, being called, likewise came, who
being together with the other Jurors aforesaid, first impannelled, sworn to say
the truth of the premises within contained, chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon
their Oath; That the City of London is an ancient City, and that all Lands, and
Temenents, within the said City are, and time whereof the memory of Men is not
to the contr^ry, were deviseable and bequeathable by Testament in Writing, And
that long before the time within written, when it is supposed the Trespass and
Ejectment to be done, That one Martin Bows, Knight. was seized of the Message
within mentioned, with the Appurtenances amongst other things in his Demesne as
of Fee, and that the said Martin Bows had issue of his body lawfully Begotten,
one Thomas Bows, and that the said Thomas, had issue of his body lawfully
begotten, Martin Bows, and the within named Thomas Bows, and one George
Bows; And also the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Martin Bows Knight. before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 29th. day
of July, in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now is, the 8th. made his
Testament and last Will in writing, and by the same amongst other things,
Willed and Bequeathed to the said Thomas Bows his Son, the Message aforesaid,
with the Appurtenances amongst other things, for the Term of the life of the
said Thomas, without impeachment of Waste, and after his decease, then the said
Martin Bows K^. by his Testament aforesaid, Willed that the said Message
aforesaid, amongst other things, should remain to the said Martin Bows, the
Son of the said Thomas Bows, To have and to hold to the said Martin, Son of
the aforesaid Thomas, and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, And
for default of any issue, That then the Message aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things, should wholly remain to the said Thomas
Bows, second Son of the said Thomas Bows, Son and Heir of the said Martin
Bows Knight, and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, And for
default of such issue, that then the Message aforesaid with the Appurtenances
amongst other things, should wholly remain to the said George Bows third So^
of the said Thomas Bows, Son and Heir of the said Martin Bows Knight. and the
Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, And for default of such issue, that
then the Message aforesaid, amongst other things, with the Appurtetenances,
should wholly remain to the Heirs males of the body of the said Thomas Bows,
Son and Heir apparent of the said Martin Bows Knight. lawfully begotten. And for
to default of such issue, That then the Message aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things, should wholly remain to one Martin Bows,
Son and Heir apparent of one Martin Bows, of Jenkins, in the Parish of Barking
in the County of Essex, Esquire. and the Heirs males of his body lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such issue, That the Message aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things, should wholly remain to the Heirs males of
the body of the said Martin Bows of Jenkins lawfully begotten, And for default
of such issue, That then the Message aforesaid, with the Appurtenances,
amongst other things, should wholly remain to one Will. Bows, son of the
aforesaid Martin Bows, Knight, and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue, that then the said Message with the
Appurtenances amongst other things, should remain to the right Heirs of the said
George Bows for ever. And the aforesaid Martin Bows Knight. of the Message
aforesaid, with the Appurtena^ces, amongst other things in his Demesne as of
Fee, in form aforesaid being seized, afterward and before the time in which,
etc. that is to say, the first day of October, in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, the 8th. dyed of the Message aforesaid, with
the Appurtenances, amongst other things, in form aforesaid seized, After whose
death, The said Thomas Bows, Son and Heir of the said Martin Bows Knight. into
the Message aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, did enter, and was thereof,
amongst other things seized in his Demesne as of Free hold, for the Term of his
life, without Impeachment of Waste, according to the form and effect of the
Testament aforesaid, with the remainder thereof in form aforesaid expecting:
And the said Thomas Bows so being thereof seized, before the time in which,
etc. that is to say, the 19th. day of December, in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, the 14th. by a certain Indenture between the
said Thomas Bows, of the one party, and one William Peltham Esquire. of the other
party made, bearing date the same day and year, and in the Court of Chancery of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, at Westminster in the County of Middlesex,
then being with in 6. Months then next following, in due manner of Record
enrolled, according to the form of the Statute in such case made and provided,
One part whereof sealed with the seal of the said Thomas Bows, to the Jurors
aforesaid was showed in Evidence, For and in consideration of a certain sum of
Money to the said Thomas, by the aforesaid William Petham Esquire. before hand
paid, bargained, and sold to the said William Petham, The Message aforesaid,
with the Appurtenances, amongst other things, To have, to him and his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, The Tenor of which Indenture follows in these words. This
Indenture made the 19th. day of December, 1571. And in the 14th. year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Between Thomas Bows Esquire. Son
and Heir of Sir. Martin Bows Knight. late Citizen and Alderman of the City of
London deceased, of the one party, And William Petham of London Esquire. and
Lieutenant General of the Queens Majesty's Ordnance of the other party,
Witnesses, That the said Thomas Bows, for and in consideration of the sum of
1000. pounds, of good and lawful Money of England, to him the said Thomas
Bows, by the said William Pelham, at and before the sealing of these presents,
well and truly contented and paid, whereof, and wherewith, the said Thomas
Bows, acknowledges himself fully contented, satisfied, and paid, And thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, does by these presents clearly acquit,
ex^nerate, and discharge the said William Pelham, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them for ever, by these presents,
Has bargained, sold, given, and granted, and by these presents, does fully and
absolutely bargain, sell, give, and grant, unto the said William Pelham, his
Heirs and Assigns forever, All those 8. Messuages, or Tenements, with the
Appurtenances, situate lying and being in the Parish of St. Mary VVoolnoth,
within the City of London, now or late in the several Tennures or Occupations
of Francis Barnard Cook, Thomas Atkinson Scrivener, John Allen, Thomas Giles
Haberdasher, John Heath Scrivener, Thomas Ryding Cloathworker, Citizens of
London, Ellin Witten, and Elizabeth Banester of London Widows, or their
several Assigns, together with all and singular Shops, Sellers, Yards,
Back-sides, void Ground^, Easements, Ways, Profits, Commodities and
Appurtenances, to the same Tenements, or any of them belonging or appertaining,
or at any time had, taken, reputed, known, used, or occupied, as part, parcel,
or member of them or any of them, with the Advowson or Patronage, and gift of
the Benefice of the said Parish Church of St. Mary Woolnoth, Together with all
the Right, Title, Interest, Claim, Demand, and Reversion, with Rents reserved,
which the said Thomas Bows has, or of right ought to have, of in or to the
said 8. Messuages, and other the premises, or any part or parcel of them, or
any of them: And also the said Thomas Bows for the Consideration aforesaid,
Has bargained, and sold, given, and granted, and by these presents does fully
and absolutely bargain, and sell, give, and grant, unto the said William
Pelham, his He is and Assigns for ever: As well the several Counterpaines, of
the Indentures o^ leases, made, demised, and granted, of the aforesaid several
Messuages, or Tenements, As also all and every the Deeds, Evidences, Charters,
Court-Rolls, Rentalls, Escripts, Miniments, and Writings, touching, or in any
wise concerning the premises, or any part or parcel thereof. All which said
several Counterpaines, of the said several Indentures of Lease, and the said
Deeds, Evidences, Court-Rolls, Charters, and Miniments, before mentioned, to be
bargained and sold, or as many thereof as be in the hands, custody, or
possession of the said Thomas Bows, or of any other to his use; The said
Thomas Bows, does covenant, grant, and agree, for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, and every of them, to and with the said
William Pelham, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them
by these presents, to deliver or cause to be delivered to the said William
Pelham, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, At or before the
Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist next ensuing, after the Date of
this Indenture, Together with the true Copies of all such other Deeds,
Evidences, Charters, Court Rolls, Rentalls, Miniments, and Writings, as concern
the said mentioned premises, and other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, not
bargained by these presents, To have and to hold all and singular the aforesaid
Messuages and other the premises with the Appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof by these presents, bargained and sold unto the said William
Pelham his Heirs and Assigns forever, to the proper use and behoof of the said
William Pelham, his Heirs, and Assigns for ever: And further the said Thomas
Bows, does by these presents covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, and
Executors, to and with the said William Pelham, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, by these presents, That all and singular the said
8. Messuages, and other the premises with their Appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, by these presents bargained and sold, now remain and be,
and at all and every time and times hereafter shall remain and continue unto
the said William Pelham, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, clearly acquitted,
discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved harmless, by the said Thomas
Bows, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, of and from all
Bargains, Sales, Joyntures, Dowers, Judgments, Executions, Intrusions, Fines,
Alienations, and all other charges, duties, and incombrances whatsoever,
heretofore had, made, done, or suffered by the said Thomas Bows, or his
Assigns, or by any other person or persons, the several Leases heretofore made
and granted of the premises, now standing in their full force, only excepted
and foreprised, during which several Terms, in the said several Indentures of
Lease mentioned, the said Thomas Bows does covenant and grant for Him, his
Heirs, and Assigns, to and with the said William Pelham, his Heirs,
Executors, and Assigns, That the several Rents thereupon reserved, shall and
may have continuance, and be payable to the said William Pelham, his Heirs and
Assigns, during the said several Terms, All manner of chief Rents and services
heretofore to be due for the same, to the chief Lord and Lords, of the Fee and
Fees only excepted And farther the said Thomas Bows does by these presents for
himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them,
covenant, grant, and agree, with the said William Petham, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, That he the
said Thomas Bows, at the making thereof stands, and is lawful and rightful
owner of all and singular the aforesaid 8. Messuages, and other the premises,
with their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, And that he is
sole lawfully and rightfully seized of a good and perfect estate in Fee simple
or Fee tail, in his own right, and to his own use only, and without condition
or other defeasance, of all the said 8. Messuages, and other the premises by
these presents bargained and sold. And that he has full power and perfect
lawful and good authority to bargain, fell, and assure the same in manner and
form aforesaid; And further, that he the said Thomas Bows, and the Heirs of
the said Thomas Bows, and all and every other person and persons, and their
Heirs, having, or lawfully claiming any lawful estate or interest, of or in the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, shall and will at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said Will. Petham, his Heirs and Assigns, at all
and every time and times hereafter, during the Term of Four years next ensuing
the date thereof, at the reasonable request of the said William Pelham, his
Heirs or Assigns, do cause, procure, and suffer to be done, All and every such
reasonable and further act or acts, thing or things, devise, or devises,
assurance, and assurances whatsoever, for the further and better assurance and
sure making, and for the clear and absolute having, and enjoying of all and
singular the aforesaid premises with their Appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof to be enjoyed, conveyed, and assured to the said William
Pelham, his Heirs and Assigns, be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, Deed, or
Deeds, Enrolled, Inrolement of these presents, Recovery with single or double
Vouchers, and with warranty against all men or without warranty or otherwise,
as shall be reasonably devised or avised by the said William Pelham, or by the
Council learned in the Laws of this Realm of the said William Pelham his
Heirs or Assigns: And that the said 8. Messuages and other the premises by
these presents, bargained and sold, now are of the clear yearly value of 67.
pounds, 13. shillings, and 8. pence, of lawful money, over and above all
charges and reprises. And after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1688. of the clear yearly value of 71.
pounds, 13. shillings, and 4. pence, of lawful Money of England, over and above
all charges and reprises. In witness whereof the parties aforesaid to these
Indentures sunderly have set their seals. Given the day and year first above
written. Memorandum, that afterward that is to say, the 21. day of December,
in the year abovesaid, came the aforesaid Thomas Bows, before the said Lady
the Queen in her Chancery, at Westminster in his proper person, And did
acknowledge there the Indenture aforesaid, and all and singular in the same
contained and specified in the former above written. By Color of which
bargain, sail, and Inrollment aforesaid, as also by force of a certain Act of
transferring of uses into possession, in the Parliament of the Lord Henry, late
King of England the 8th. at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex. the 4th.
day of February in the 27th. year of his Reign, holden, made, and provided, The
said William Pelham was seized of the Message aforesaid with the Appurtenances
amongst other things, in which, etc. as the Law requires: And the said
William so being thereof seized, before the time in which, etc. A certain
Recoverie was had in the Court of Husting^, of Pleas, of Lands, holden in the
Guild Hall London, before the Mayor and Sheriffs of the same City, according to
the custom of the aforesaid City, by Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke,
demandants against the said Willi. Pelham, then Tenant of the said Message,
with the Appurtenances amongst other things, in which, etc. in and upon a Writ
of the Lady the Queen of Right Patent by the aforesaid Nicholas, and Simon,
brought out of the Court of Chancery, of the said Lady the Queen, and in the
said Court of Hustings, and according to the custom of the City before said
prosecuted, The Tenors of which Writ, and the return and the proceedngs
thereof, as also of the Recovery aforesaid, with all things touching the same,
follow in these words. ss. Pleas of Lands, holden in the Hustings in the Guild
hall London. Monday next, the feast Perpetue and feliatatis: In the year of the
Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and
Ireland, Queen defender of the faith, the 14th. At this Hastings came here in
their proper persons, Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patrick, and brought here in
Court a Writ of the Lady the Queen of Right Patent, to the Mayor and Sheriffs
of London, directed in these words. ss. Elizabeth by the grace of God, of
England, France, and Ireland, Queen, defender of the faith, etc. To the Mayor
and Sherifs of London greeting, We command you full Right, you do to Nicholas
Parker, and Simon Patricke, of 8. Messuages, with the Appurtenances in London,
which they claim to hold of us by the free service of 1. penny by the year, for
all service which William Pelham Esquire, deforced them, that no more clamor
thereof we hear for defect of Right. Witness my self at Westminster, the last
day of February, in the year of our Reign the 14th. And they found Pledges to
prosecute the said Writ, that is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo, And then
and there the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patrick, put in their place
William Dalby, their Attorney against the aforesaid William Pelham, and by the
said their Attorney then and there demanded Process, etc. according to the
Custom of the City aforesaid, and it is granted unto them, etc. Upon which,
then it was Commanded then and there by the said Court, to the Sheriffs of
London according to the Custom of the said City, That they summon by good
summoners the said William Pelham, that he be here at the next Hastings,
London of Pleas of Lands, in the Guildhall of the City aforesaid, according to
the Custom of the said City to be holden, to Answer to the said Nicholas
Parker, and Simon Patricke, in the same plea here, etc. At which day, that is
to say, at the Hastings London, of Pleas of Lands, holden in the Guid-hall
London, Monday next before the Feast of St. Edward, King, and Martyr, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady Elizabeth, etc. the 14th. aforesaid, The
said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patrick, by the said William Dalby their
Attorney, came and appeared here, etc. And the Sheriffs of London, that is to
say, Henry Mills, and John Branch, now sent and returned here upon the Precept
aforesaid to them directed, That they by virtue of the said Precept sommoned
the said William Pelham to be here at this Hastings, to Answer to the said
Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke in the plea aforesaid, as to them, etc. by
John Do, and Richard Roo, summoners, etc. Which VVilliham at this Hastings,
put in his place Roger Coys, and Robert Hogeson, their Attorneys, jointly and
severally, against the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, in the Plea
aforesaid, etc. by William Fleetwood, Esquire, Recorder of the City aforesaid,
etc. And upon this the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, by the said
William Dalby, their Attorney, demand against the said William Pelham, 8.
Messuages with the Appurtenances, situate lying and being in the Parish of St.
Mary Woolnotb in the Ward of Langborn, London, as their Right, etc. By the Writ
of the said Lady the Queen that now is, of Right Patent, etc. And to hold of
the said Lady the Queen, by the free service of 1. penny by the year for all
service, etc. And whereupon they say, That they themselves were seized of the
aforesaid 8. Messuages, with the Appurtenances, etc. in their Demesne as of Fee
and Right, etc. in time of peace, in the time of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, etc. taking the Profits thereof to the value, etc. And that such is
their Right they offer, etc: And the said William Pelham by his Attorney
aforesaid cameth and defends, the right of the said Nicholas Parker, and
Simon Patricke when, etc. And the seisin of the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon
Patricke, of which seisin, etc. and all, etc. and whatsoever, etc. as of Fee
and Right, etc. and especially of the said 8. Messuages, with the
Appurtenances, etc and vouch thereof to warranty, Thomas Bows of London
Esquire, And demand summons in London, by the aid of this Court, to warrant to
the said Wiliam Pelham, the said 8. Messuages with the Appurtenances, which the
said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke claim against the said William
Pelham, as their Right, etc. And the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke,
by their Attorney aforesaid willingly grant, That the said William Pelham have
his voucher aforesaid: Whereupon upon the Petition of the said Nicho. Parker,
and Sim. Patricke, It was commanded by the Court to the Sheriffs of London,
that they summon by good summons, the said Thomas Bows, that he be here at the
next Hustings London, of Pleas of Lands at the Guild Hall, of the City
aforesaid to be held, etc. to warrant to the said William Pelham the said 8.
Messuages with the Appurtenances, etc. against the said Nicholas Parker, and
Simon Patricke, etc. And the same day was then and there given, as well to the
said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, as to the said William Pelham in the
Plea aforesaid here, etc. At which day, that is to say, at the Hustings London,
of Pleas of Lands, in the Guild Hall of the City of London, upon Monday next
before the Feast of St. Alphege Bishop, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen, etc. the 14th. come as well the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon
Patricke, by the said William Dalby their Attorney, as the said William Pelham
by his Attorney aforesaid; And the Sheriffs of London that is to say, Henry
Mills, and John Branch, now sent and returned here upon the Precept to them
directed, that they by virtue of the said Precept, summoned the said Thomas
Bows, to be here at this Hustings,, to warrant to the said William Pelham the
said 8. Messuages with the Appurtenances, etc. as to them, etc. by John Do,
and Richard Roo Summoners. And upon this, The aforesaid Thomas Bows, whom the
said William Pelham vouched to warranty, etc. at this Hastings put in his place
Roger Coys, and Robert Hogeson his Attorneys, jointly and severally against the
said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, in the Plea aforesaid, etc. By
William Fleetwood Esquire. Recorder of the City aforesaid, etc. And now here at
this Hustings, The said Thomas Bows by the aforesaid Roger Coys, and Robert
Hogeson came, and freely the aforesaid Messuages with the Appurtenances etc. To
the said Willi. Pelham against the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patrick did
warrant, etc. And thereupon the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, by
the said William Dalby, their Attorney, demanded against the said Thomas Bows
Tenant, by his warranty aforesaid, the said 8. Messuages with the
Appurtenances, etc. as their Right, etc. by the Writ aforesaid, etc. in form
aforesaid, etc. And whereupon they said, That they were seized of the Messuages
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, etc. in their Demesne as of Fee and Right,
etc. in the time of Peace, in the time of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
etc. taking the profits thereof to the value, etc. And that such is their Right
they offer, etc. And the said Thomas Bows Tenant by his warrantty aforesaid,
by the said Roger Coys, and Robert Hogeson their Attorneys came, and denied the
Right of the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke when, etc. And the seisin
of the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke of which deseisin, etc. and
all, etc. and whatsoever, etc. as of Fee and Right, etc. and chiefly of the
said 8. Messuages with the Appurtenance, etc. And vouched thereof to warranty,
Richard Horsted of London Iremonger, who now is present here in Court in his
proper person, and freely the said 8. Messuages with the Appurtentnces, etc. to
the said Thomas Bows did warrant, etc. And upon this, at the Hustings
aforesaid, The said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patricke, by the said William
Dalby their Atterny, demanded against the said Richard Horsted Tenant, by his
warranty then and there being in his proper person, the said 8. Messuages with
the Appurtenances, etc. by the Writ aforesaid, etc. in form aforesaid, etc. as
their Right, etc. And whereupon they say, That they were seized of the
aforesaid 8. Messuages with the Appurtenances, etc. in their Demesne as of Fee
and Right, etc. in time of peace, in the time of said Lady the Queen that now
is, taking thereof the Profits to the value, etc. and that such is their right
offer, etc. and the said Richard Horsted Tenant by his warranty aforesaid, in
his proper person comes and resendeth the right of the said Nicholas Parker,
and Simon Patricke, when, etc. and the seisin of the said Nicholas Parker, and
Simon Patricke, of which seisin, etc. and all, etc. and whatsoever etc. and
chiefly of the said 8 Messuages with the appurtenances, etc. as of fee and
right, and says, that he has more right to hold the said 8 Messuages with the
appurtenances as Tenant thereof by his warranty aforesaid to him and his heirs
as he now holds, then the said Nicholas Parker and Simon Patrick have to
demand the said 8 Messuages with the appurtenances, etc. as they above demand,
etc. and demand Recognition to him hereupon to be done according to the custom
of the City aforesaid, etc. and hereupon the said Nicholas Parker and Simon
Patrick by their Attorney aforesaid prays License thereof to imparle, and they
have it, etc. and afterward the said Nicholas Parker and Simon Patrick by
their Attorney aforesaid, come again at the self same Court of Hastings ready to
the plea of the said Richard Horsted Tenant by his warrant aforesaid in form
aforesaid pleaded to reply, etc. and the said Richard Horsted Tenant by h^s
warranty aforesaid although sollemnly called, came not again but in contempt of
the Court departed and made default. Therefore, It is considered by the said
Court, That the said Nicholas Parker and Simon Patrick shall recover seisin
against the said William Pelham of the aforesaid 8 Messuages with the
appurtenances, etc. to hold to the said Nicholas Parker, and Simon Patrick and
their heirs, acquitted from the said William Pelham and his heirs, and also
from the said Thomas Bows and his heirs, as also from the said Richard Horsted
and his heirs for ever: and that the said William Pelam have of the Lands and
Tenements of the said Thomas Bows to the value etc. and that the said Thomas
Bows have of the Lands and Tenements of the aforesaid Richard Horsted to the
value, etc. and that the said Richard Horsted be in mercy, etc. and hereupon at
the self same Hastings at the petition of the said Nicholas Parker and Simon
Patrick, it was commanded to the Sheriffs of London, that they to the said
Nicholas Parker and Simon Patrick and their heirs for ever, of the Messuages
aforesaid with the appurtenances give full and peaceable seisin, and how the
said Command and was executed that they make known unto the Court here at the
next Hastings of London of pleas of Lands in the guildhall of the City
aforesaid to be holden, etc. at which day, that is to say, ^t the Hustings of
pleas of Lands holden in the Guild Hall London, Monday next before the feast of
Saint Philip, and James in the year of the said Lady the Queen the 14th.
aforesaid, the Sheriff, of London, that is to say, Henry Mils, and John Branch
returned, and certified to the Court here, etc. That they by virtue of the
precept to them directed full and peaceable seisin to the said Nicholas Parker
and Simon Patrick, of the 8 Messuages with the appurtenances, etc. made to have
according to the effect of the precept aforesaid, as it was above commanded
unto them, etc. as by the said recovery aforesaid under the seal of the office
of the Mayraltie of the City aforesaid, to the Jurors aforesaid, showed in
evidence fully appeacheth. And farther the Jurors aforesaid say upon their oath
aforesaid, that the said William Pelham in the Indenture aforesaid named, and
the said William Pelham against whom the said Nicholas Parker and Simon Patrick
sued forth the writ of Right aforesaid, is one and the same person, and not
another nor diverse. And that the said Thomas Bows Son and heir of the said
Martin Bows Knight, and the said Thomas Bows in the recovery aforesaid
specified whom the said William Pelham vouched thereto warranty, and the said
Thomas Bows above named, is one and the same person, and not another, nor
diverse. By color whereof the said Nicholas, and Simon, afterward and before
the 8th. day of May in the year of the reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, the 14th., that is to say, the first day of May in the 14th. year
aforesaid in the Message aforesaid, with the appurtenances amongst other
things entered, and were thereof amongst other things seized. And farther the
said Jurors say upon their oath aforesaid, that the recovery aforesaid, of the
aforesaid Message with the appurtenances amongst other things in form
aforesaid had, was had with the assent and agreement of the said Nicholas and
Simon, William Pelham, Thomas Bows, Son of the aforesaid, Martin Bows Knight,
and Richard Horsted, and without any just title of the said Nicholas and Simon,
to the use of the said William Pelham, his heirs and assigns for the farther
his assurance of and in the aforesaid Message with the appurtenances amongst
other things according to the form and effect of the Covenants and agreements
of the said indenture of bargain and sale specified by the said Thomas Bows
Son of the said Martin Bows Knight, to the said William Pelham, as before is
said, made by color of which recovery as also by force of the aforesaid Act of
Parliament of transferring of uses into possession, the said William Pelham was
seized of the aforesaid Message, with the appurtenances amongst other things
as the Law requires: and that afterward, that is to say, the first day of
December in the year of the reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
16th. the said Martin Bows Son of the said Thomas Bows, Son of the said
Martin Bows Knight, then being within the age of 21 years, that is to say of
17 years, dyed without issue of his Body Lawfully begotten. And that the
aforesaid William Pelham of the said Message with the appurtenances, amongst
other things as before is said, recovered in form aforesaid being seized before
the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the 10th. day of September in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 27th. demysed
the said Message with the appurtenances in the declaration aforesaid above
specified to the aforesaid Edward Griffin, to have to him and his assigns from
the feast of Saint Michael the Archangel then next ensuing until the end and
Term of 21 years then next following, By virtue of which demyse, the said
Edward Griffin was of the said Message with the appurtenances possessed; and
that afterward that is to say, the 10th. day of January in the year of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 29th. the aforesaid Thomas Bows, Son of
the said Thomas Bows Son and heir of the said Martin Bows Knight, into the
Message aforesaid with the appurtenances in the declaration aforesaid above
specified, upon the possession of the said Edward Griffin thereof entered, and
then and there demysed, granted, and to farm let to the said Henry Page the
said Message with the appurtenances to have to him his executors and assigns
from the within written feast of the birth of our Lord then last past unto the
end and Term of the within written Six years, and that the said Edward Griffin
afterward, that is to say, the within written 11th. day of January in the
29th. year abovesaid, into the Message aforesaid, with the appurtenances upon
the possession of the said Henry Page thereof, did reenter, and the said Henry
from the possession of the Message aforesaid did expel and amove: and that the
said Thomas Bows Son of the said Martin Bows Knight, and Father of the said
Thomas Bows Master of Arts, yet living and being in full life, that is to say
at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid: But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, the entry of the said Thomas Bows Master
of Arts, Son of the said Thomas Bows, Son of the said Martin Bows Knight,
into the message aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the declaration
aforesaid specified upon the possession of the aforesaid Edward Griffin, be,
and in Law ought to be adjudged, a lawful entry in to the said Message or
not, the Jurors aforesaid are altogether ignorant and pray the advice of the
Court here, etc. and if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, It shall seem to the Court here, that the aforesaid entry of the said
Thomas Bows Master of Arts, Son of the said Thomas Bows, Son of the aforesaid
Martin Bows Knight, be a lawful entry, then the Jurors aforesaid say upon
their oath aforesaid, That the said Edward Griffin is guilty of the trespass,
and ejectment aforesaid, as the said Henry within against him complayneth, and
assess the damages of the said Henry, by the occasion of the trespass, and
ejectment aforesaid, besides charges, and costs by him about his suit in this
behalf; to 12 pence, and for his charges and costs, to 5 shillings and 4 pence,
and if to the Court of the said Lady the Queen here, it shall seem that the
aforesaid entry of the aforesaid Thomas Bows Master of Arts, Son of the said
Thomas Bows, Son of the said Martin Bows Knight, be not a lawful entry, Then
the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their oath aforesaid, That the said Edward
Griffin is not guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, as the said
Henry Page within has alleged. And because the Barons here will advise of, and
upon the premises before they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the
parties aforesaid here until 8 days of Saint Michael next coming to hear
their Judgment, because the Barons here, thereof not yet, etc. at which day,
come the paries aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Barons
are not yet avised of giving their Judgment of, and upon the premises, further
day is given to the parties aforesaid here until from Ester day in 15. days
next coming to hear their Judgment because the Barons thereof are not yet,
etc. at which day came the said parties by their Attorneys aforesaid: And upon
this the premises by the Barons here seen, and mature deliberation thereof had
betwixt themselves, because it seems to the said Barons, that the aforesaid
entry of the said Thomas Bows Master of Arts, Son of the said Thomas Bows,
Son of the said Martin Bows Knight is a Lawful entry. Therefore it is granted
that the said Henry Page, recover against the said Edward Griffin his
possession of his term aforesaid then to come of, and in the Message aforesaid
with the appurtenances in the declaration aforesaid above specified, and his
damages by the occasion of the trespass and ejectment aforesaid to 54 shillings
and 4 pence by the Jurors aforesaid in form aforesaid asseised, as also further
8 pound and 10 shillings to the said Henry Page, at his request, for his
charges and costs aforesaid by the Court here of increase adjudged, which
damages in the whole do amount to 11. pound 4. shillings 4. pence and that the
said Edward Griffin be taken, etc. And hereupon, by a writ of the said Lady the
Queen here issuing forth at at the request of the aforesaid Henry Page, it is
commanded to the sheriffs of London, that to the aforesaid Henry, they his full
possession of his term yet to come of, and in the Message aforesaid with the
appurtenances in the declaration above specified without delay to him they
give, and how the said precept is executed that the said sheriff make it appear
to the Barons of the Exchequer of the said Lady the Queen here the morrow of
the Holy Trinity next to come; and also it is commanded to the said Sheriffs
that of the goods and chattels of the said Edward Griffin in their Balywick the
said 11. pound 4. shillings and 4 pence, for the damages aforesaid, in form
aforesaid recovered they do execution; and that the said money when they have
so levied they have before the Barons here at the aforesaid Term to the said
Henry Page, or to his Attorney in this behalf then here to be paid, etc. And
that afterward the said Lady the Queen that now is s^nt her writ under her
great seal ou^ of her Chancery, to the Treasurors and her Barons of the
Exchequer ^ere directed, which is enrolled in the remembrance of this Exchequer
of the 31th. year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth that now is, that is to say,
amongst the Records of Esther Term remaining with the remembrancer of the said
Lady the Queen here; The tenor of of which writ follows in these words ss.
Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England France and Ireland Queen, defender
of the faith, etc. To the Treasuror and her Barons of the Exchequer, greeting
because that in the Record and process and also of giving of Judgment of a
plea which was in our Court before you the aforesaid Barons in our Exchequer
aforesaid by bill, between Henry Page our debtor, and Edward Griffin of a
certain trespass and Ejectment of his Farm, to the said Henry by the said
Edward done as is said Error manifest has intervened to the grevious damage of
the said Edward as of his complaint we have received. And whereas in a statute
in Parliament of the Lord Edward late King of England the third, our
Progenitors at Westminster, in the year of his Reign the 31th holden, made
amongst other things, it was agreed and established, That in all cases touching
us and other persons, where one complains of Error done in the Exchequer, the
Chancellor and Treasurer shall do to come before them in some Chamber near unto
the Exchequor, the Record and Process out of the Exchequor, and taking to them
Justices, and other sage persons, such as shall seem fit to them to be taken,
and also calling before them the Barons of the Exchequor aforesaid, to hear
their informations and causes of their Judgments and hereupon shall duly
examine the business, and if any Error shall be found to correct the same and
to amend the Rolls, and after to send the same into the said Exchequor to make
thereof execution, as in the statute aforesaid more fully is contained, we
therefore willing, Error if any be according to the form of the aforesaid
statute to be corrected, and to the parties aforesaid full and speedy Justice
in the premises to be done Command you that if Judgment thereupon be given,
That then the Record and process aforesaid with all things touching the same
before our Chancellor of England, and you the aforesaid Treasurer in the
Chamber next unto the Exchequer aforesaid called the Council Chamber, the third
day of June next to come, you cause to come that the said Chancellor and you
the aforesaid Treasurer, seeing, and examining the Record and process aforesaid
and your informations being heard, you the said Barons farther in this behalf
with the Council of the Justices and other sages, do that which of right and
according to the form of the statute aforesaid is to be done. Witness my self
at Westminster the 6th. day of May in the year of our Reign the 31th. and that
afterward, the said Lady the Queen that now is, sent here another writ under
her great seal out of the Chancery to the Treasurer and her Barons of this
Exchequor directed which is enrolled in the Remembrancers of the said Exchequer
of the 31 year of the now Queen Elizabeth, that is to say, amongst the Records
of Trinity Term Rot. Remaining with the Remembrancer of the said Lady the Queen
here, the Tenor of which writ follows in these words ss. Elizabeth by the
grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. To
the Treasurer and Barons of her Exchequer, greeting, Because in the Record and
process, and also in giving of Judgment of a plea which was in our Court,
before you the aforesaid Barons of our Exchequor aforesaid in Easter Term last
past by Bill between Henry Page our Debtor, and Edward Griffin of a certain
trespass and Ejectment out of his Farm, to the said Henry by the said Edward
done as is said manifest Error intervened To the grevious damage of the said
Edward as by his complaint we have received, and whereas in a statute in
Parliament of the Lord Edward late King of England the third our Progenitor at
Westminster in the year of his Reign the 13th. made amongst other things it was
agreed unto and established that in all cases the King and other persons
touching where any complains of Error done in the Exchequor the Chancellor
and Treasurer shall cause to come before them in some Chamber of Council nigh
unto the Exchequor, the Record and process out of the said Exchequor, and
taking to them the Justices and other sages, whom they shall think fit to be
taken, and also to be called before them the Barons of the Exchequor aforesaid,
to hear their informations and the causes of their Judgment, and thereupon
shall cause the business duly to be examined, and if any Error shall be found
that they correct the same, and the rolls to be amended. We therefore willing
Error if any were according to the form of the statute aforesaid to be amended
and full and speedy Justice to be done to the parties in his behalf we command
you that if Judgment thereof be given that then the Record and process
aforesaid with all concerning the same before our Chancellor of Engla^ and you
the aforesaid Treasurer in the Council Chamber near unto the Exchequer
aforesaid, 10th. day of this Instant month of June, your cause to come, That
the same Chancellor and you the said Treasurer the Record and Process aforesaid
being seen, and hearing your informations, you the said Barons further in this
behalf of the Council of the Justices and the other sages do that which of
right and a^^ording of the form of the statute aforesaid is to be done. Witness
my se^^ at Westminster, the third day of June in the year of our Reign the 31.
At which day the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer into the Chamber aforesaid
did not come, and that a^terwards, the said Lady the Queen that now is, sent
another writ under her great Seal out of her Chancery To the Treasurer and
Barons of this Exchequer, directed, which is enrolled in the Remembrancers of
the said Exchequer of 31th. year of Queen ^lizabeth, that now is, that is to
say, amongst the Records of Trinity Term Rot. Remaining with the Remembrancer
of the said Lady the Queen, the Tenor of which writ follows in these words:
ss Elizabeth by the grace of God of England France and Ireland Queen, defendor
of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer greeting,
Because that in the Record and process, and also in giving of Judgment which
was in our Court before you the aforesaid Barons of our Exchequer aforesaid in
Easiher Term last past by Bill, between Henry Page our debtor and Edward
Griffin of a certain Trespass and Ejectment of him out of his Farm to the said
Henry by the aforesaid Edward Griffin done as is said, Error manifest
intervened, to the grievous damage of the said Edward, as by his Complaint we
have received. And whereas in a statute in Parliament of the Lord Edward late
King of England the third our Progenitor at Westminster in the year of his
Reign the 31th. holden, it was amongst other things agreed unto and
established, that in all cases the King and other persons touching where any
complains of Error done in process in the Exchequer, the Chancellor and
Treasurer shall cause to come before them in some Chamber of Council nigh unto
the Exchequor the said Record and process out of the said Exchequer, and taking
to them the Justices and other sages as to them they shall seem good to be
taken, and also to be called before them the Barons of the Exchequer aforesaid
to hear their informations and the causes of their Judgment, and thereupon the
business aforesaid duly to be examined; and if any Error shall be sound, the
same to be corrected, and the Rolls to be amended, and afterward to send them
into the said Exchequer to do execution thereof as belongs, as in the said
statute is contained. We therefore willing Error if any such shall be according
to the form of the statute aforesaid to be corrected, and to the parties
aforesaid full and speedy Justice to be done in that behalf, Command you, that
if Judgment be thereof given, Then the Record and process with all touching the
same before our Chancellor of England and you the said Treasurer in the Chamber
of Council near unto the Exchequer aforesaid called the Council Chamber the
14th. day of October then ollowing, you cause to come, that the said Chancellor
and you the said Treasurer seeing, and examining the Record and process
aforesaid, and your informations being heard, you the said Barons further in
this behalf with the Council of the Justices and other sages cause to be done
what of right and according to the form of the statute aforesaid is to be done
Witness my self at Westminster the 13th. day of June in the year of our Reign
the 31th. At which 14th day of October before Christopher Hatton Knight
Chancellor of England, and William Cecil Knight, Lord Burghley Treasurer of the
Exchequer aforesaid in the said Chamber near the Exchequer aforesaid at
Westminster, came the said Edward Griffin by Richard Hatton his Attorney, and
the aforesaid Traesurer and Barons the Rec^^d and process aforesaid with all
things touching the same then and there caused to come, and upon that the said
Edward said, That in the Record and process aforesaid and also in the giving of
the Judgment aforesaid, It is manifestly Erred, First in this, that is to say,
because it does not appear in the Record aforesaid that the aforesaid Thomas
Bows Master of Arts in the Record aforesaid above named was seized of the
remaynder of the Message aforesaid with the appurtenances in the declaration
aforesaid above specified at the time of the said recovery in the aforesaid
Court of Hustings in the Guild Hall of London in form aforesaid had, for which
cause, the entry of the said Thomas Bows Master of Arts into the Message
aforesaid with the appurtenances in the said Declaration aforesaid specified
was not lawful. Item, in this also it is Erred, for that the aforesaid
recovery was had in the said Court of Hustings before the 8th. day of May in
the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 14th. and that the
said Thomas Bows, who before was Tenant for Term of life was vouched in the
said Court by the aforesaid William Pelham in the said Recovery named to
warrant the Message aforesaid with the appurtenances, amongst other things,
which Thomas afterward by Summons by his Attorney, appeared in Court, and
freely the Message aforesaid, to the said William did warrant: and farther
vouched to warrant, the aforesaid Richard Horsted, who present in the same
Court, the Message aforesaid with the appurtenances, farther warranted, and
afterward made default, by which Judgment against the said William Pelham in
the said Recovery was given, and execution thereof in the form aforesaid was
had, so as the said Thomas Bows Master of Arts, of the remainder without any
demand in the Messuages aforesaid, with the appurtenances to have stood utterly
excluded, and for that cause the aforesaid entry of the aforesaid Thomas Bows
Master of Arts, into the said Message with the appurtenances after the said
Recovery in form aforesaid had, and executed, was unlawful. 1. Item, in this
also it is erred, because it was found, that before any entry of the said Thmas
Bows Master of Arts, the Judgment aforesaid was fully and in due manner
executed, after which Execution so had, although the said Thomas Bows Master
of Arts, before the Execution aforesaid, had had title of Entry; Yet the said
Thomas by the Law of the Land, into the Message aforesaid after the Eexcution
aforesaid so had, could not enter: Item, in this further it is erred, because
it is found by the Jurors aforesaid, That the said Thomas Bows the Father,
etc. who was Tenant for Term of his life, of the Message aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, is yet living, and is in full life; And so the aforesaid Entry
of the said Thomas Bows, Master of Arts, in the Message aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, in form aforesaid, during the life of the said Tho. Bows his
Father made, ought not to be adjudged lawful: And for these causes the
Judgment aforesaid for ^he said Henry Page, against the said Edward Griffin,
and all thereupon depending, upon the Bill aforesaid against the said Edward in
form aforesaid spoken and exibited, is not sufficient in Law, and he prays,
That the said Judgment aforesaid, for the Errors aforesaid, and others in the
Record and process aforesaid being, be revised, annulled, and utterly holden
for none, and that he unto all which by the occasion of the Judgment aforesaid
given, he lost he be restored. And further the said Edward Griffin, the Writ of
the Queen to warn the said Henry Page, that he should be before the said
Chancellor and Treasurer in the Court aforesaid at Westminster, to hear the
Record and process aforesaid, and also the Errors aforesaid, and further to do
and receive what should be just in the premises, etc. And it was granted to him
retornable, upon Tuesday the 28th. day of Octo. next following, etc. At which
day, before the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer, in the Court aforesaid, at
Westminster, came the said Henry Page, by his Attorney aforesaid: And the
Sheriffs of London, that is to say, Richard Gourney, and Stephen Soame, now
sent by Thomas Bickliff, and Humphry Walsingham, good and lawful Men of their
Baliwick, That they did warn the said Henry Page, that he should be before the
Chancellor and Treasurer aforesaid, in the aforesaid Chamber at the day and
place aforesaid, to do and receive as the said Writ commanded and required; And
thereupon the said Edward, by John Hawkesworth his Attorney came likewise, and
demanded the hearing of the Record and Process, as also of the Errors
aforesaid. And they are read unto him, etc. which being read and heard, The
said Henry Page said, That in the Record and Process aforesaid, made in the
giving of the Judgment aforesaid, it is in nothing erred, and prayed that the
Court here proceed as well to the Examination of the Record, and the Process
aforesaid, as the causes aforesaid for Errors alleged; And that the Judgment
aforesaid in all things might be affirmed. And because the aforesaid Chancellor
and Treasurer would advise of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, that is to say, in the
Chamber aforesaid, until Tuseday the 11th. day of November next following, to
hear their Judgment, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Chancellor and
Treasurer in the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid: And because the aforesaid Chancellor and
Treasurer, are not yet avised of giving their Judgment of and upon the
premises, further day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the aforesaid
Chancellor or Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuseday the 18th. day
of November, then next following, to hear their Judgment, etc. At which day
before the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer in the Chamber aforesaid, at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer are not yet avised of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises, further day is given to the parties
aforesaid, until Tuesday the 25th. day of November following, to hear their
Judgment, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer in
the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer are not
yet avised of giving their Judgment of and upon the Premises, further day is
given to the parties aforesaid, here before the aforesaid Chancellor and
Treasurer in the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday the 27th. day of January
next following, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Chancellor and Treasurer in the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster
aforesaid, come as well the said Henry Page, by John Hawkesworth his Attorney
aforesaid, as the aforesaid Edward Griffin by Rich. Hatton his Attorney
aforesaid, and thereupon the said Henry said, That the said Edward his Writ
aforesaid, for correcting of Errors, against the said Henry in this case,
further to prosecute or maintain ought not, because he says, That after the
last continuance of the Plea aforesaid, that is to say, after the aforesaid
Tuesday, that is to say, the 25th. day of November, from which day the Plea
aforesaid was last continued, until this day, that is to say, the aforesaid
Tuesday, that is to say, the 27th. day of January, and before this day, That is
to say, the 15th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 32d. The said Edward, by the name of Edward Griffin, of
London Haberdasher, At London, in the Parish of St. Mary of Bow, in the Ward of
Cheap London, by his certain Writing of Release, which the said Henry with the
seal of the said Edward sealed here into Court brought, whose date is the said
15th. day of January, in 32d. year aforesaid, released and quit claimed to the
said Henry Page, by the name of Henry Page of London Merchant-Taylor, All
manner of Actions, Suits, Errors, Writs of Error, Quarrels, Plaints and Demands
whatsoever, which the aforesaid Edward against the said Henry then had
depending, or which at any time then after he might or ought to have against
the said Henry, his Executors, or Administrators, for any matter or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world unto the day of the date of the
said Writing of Release, as by the said Writing here in Court showed, plainly
appears; And this, the said Henry is ready to aver, Whereupon he demands
Judgment if the said Edward, his aforesaid Writ for correcting of Errors
against the said Writing of Release of the said Edward, further against the
said Henry, he ought to maintain or prosecute.

A Tenant for Life, the Remainder in Tail, the Remainder in Fee, Bargains and
sels the Land in Fee to one who before the Statute of 14. Eliz. suffers a
Recovery, in which A. is vouched, and voucheth over, and he in the Remainder
enters, and the Entry adjudged Lawful, and a Writ upon that is sued, and the
Plaintiff does release the Errors.

Michaelmass Term, 38. and 39. Elizabeth, in the KINGS BENCH, Rot. 551.
Ejectione Firm, The Rector of Chedingtons Case, C. 1. part. fol. 148. b.
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say, in Easter Term last Buck. ss.
past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came David Loyd Clerk, by
Stephen Worley his Attorney, And brought here in the Court of the said Lady the
Queen then and there his Bill against William Wilkinson, in the custody of the
Marshal, etc. of a Plea of Trespass and Ejectment of him out of his Farm: And
are Pledges of Suit, John Do, and Richard Roo, which Bill follows in these
words. ss. Buck. ss. David Loyd Clerk, complains of Will. Wilkinson, in the
custody of the Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen before the Queen her self
being, for that, that is to say, That whereas David Roberts Clerk, Rector of
the Parish Church of Chedington in the County aforesaid, the 26th day of March,
in the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England the 38th.
at Chedington aforesaid, by his Indenture sealed with his Seal, and to the
Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is showed, bearing date the same day
and year, demised, granted, and to Farm Let to the aforesaid David Loyd, The
Rectory of the Parish Church of Chedington aforesaid, and 60. Acres of Lands
with the Appurtenances in Chedington aforesaid; To have and to hold the Rectory
and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances to the said David Loyd, and his
Assigns, from the day of the date of the Indenture aforesaid, unto the end and
Term of 3. years, then next following, and fully to be completed; By virtue of
which demise, The said David Loyd into the Rectory and Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances aforesaid, did enter and was thereof possessed, until the
said William afterward, that is to say, the 10th. day of April, in the year
abovesaid, at Chedington aforesaid, with force and arms, etc. into the Rectory
and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, upon the possession of the said
David Loyd, thereof did enter, and the said David Loyd from his Farm aforesaid
thereof (his Term aforesaid not yet ended) ejected, expelled, and amoved, and
him the said David Loyd from his possession aforesaid held out, and does yet
hold out, and other wrongs did unto him, against the peace of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, to the damage of the said David Loyd of 20. pounds, and
thereof he produces suit, etc. With this, that the said David Loyd will aver,
That the aforesaid David Roberts, then Rector of the Parish Church aforesaid,
is living, and is in full life, etc. at Chedington aforesaid, etc. And now at
this day, Saturday next after 8. days of St. Michael this same Term, until
which day the said William had license to the Bill aforesaid to imparle, and
then to answer, etc. before the Lady the Queen at Westminster comes as well
the aforesaid David Loyd by his Attorney aforesaid, as the said William by
Richard Bedfield his Attorney, And the said William defends the force and
injury when, etc. And says that he is not thereof guilty, and of this he
puts himself upon the Country, And the said David likewise, etc. Therefore
a Jury before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, Saturday next after 1. month
of St. Michael, and who, etc. And because, etc. the same day is given to the
parties aforesaid there, etc. Of which day, The Jury aforesaid, between the
parties aforesaid, was put between them in respite, before the Lady the Queen
at Westminster, unto Thursday next after the month of Ester then next
following, for want of Jurors, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come as well the said David Loyd, as the said William Wilkinson
by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the Jurors of the said Jury being called,
also appeared, Who to say the truth of the premises being chosen, tried, and
sworn, As to the said 60. Acres of Lands, above in the Declaration aforesaid
specified, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said William Wilkinson is
not thereof of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid guilty, as the said
William above in pleading has alleged; And as to the Rectory aforesaid, with
the Appurtenances in the Declaration aforesaid likewise specified, The Jurors
aforesaid likewise say upon their Oath aforesaid, That long before the time in
which it was supposed the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid to be done, That is
to say, The second day of March, in the Reign of the Lord Edward late King of
England the 6th. the second, One Nicholas Fitz-williams Clerk, was Rector of
the Parish Church of Chedington, otherwise Chettington foresaid, And that the
said Nicholas being Rector of the said Church before the time in which, etc.
that is to say, the second day of March, in the second year aforesaid, at
Chedington aforesaid, by his Indenture made at Chedington aforesaid, between
the said Nicholas, by the name of Nich. Fitz-williams, Rector of the Parish
Church of Chedington, in the County of Buck. of the one party, and Elizabeth
Elderker Widow, Ralph Elderker, William Elderker, and Thomas Elderker, by the
name of Elizabeth Elderker Widow, late Wife of William Elderker, Gent.
deceased, Ralph Elderker, William Elderker, and Thomas Elderker, Sons of the
Body of the first named William and Elizabeth lawfully begotten, of the other
part, which part, with the Seal of the said Nicholas, sealed to the Jurors
aforesaid here was showed in Evidence, gave, granted, and to Farm had letten to
the said Elizabeth Elderker, the Rectory and glebe Lands of the Church
aforesaid, To have and to hold the said Rectory and glebe Lands, with all
Fruits, Oblations, Obversions, Tithes, Rights, with the Appurtenances and
Commodities whatsoever, to the said Rectory in any manner belonging or
appertaining to the said Elizabeth, from the aforesaid second day of March, in
the second year aforesaid, until the end, and during the Term of 80. years,
from thence, and immediately following the date of the said Indenture, if the
aforesaid Elizabeth should so long live, and should not allien, grant, or give
the said Demise or Term; And if it should happen the aforesaid Elizabeth,
within the said Term of 80. years to dye, or to alien give or grant the
Premises, That then the Estate of the said Elizabeth should cease, And then the
said Nicholas by his Indenture aforesaid gave, granted, and demised, all and
singular the premises for so many years, as then should remain unexpired after
the death of the said Elizabeth, or the alienation of the said Elzabeth, to the
aforesaid Ralph, for and during the residue of the said Term of the said 80.
years, (if he should so long live) without making any alienation, grant, or
gift, of the said Term, And if it should happen he to dye, or to alien the
premises within the Term aforesaid, that then his Estate should cease, And then
the said Nicholas by his Indenture aforesaid, gave and granted all and singular
the premises to the aforesaid VVil. for and during so many years of the said
Term of 80. that then should remain, if he should live so long, and should not
alien the said Term, and if it should happen the said William to dye, or to
alien the Premises within the aforesaid Term, that then his Estate should
cease, And then the said Nicholas, by his Indenture aforesaid, gave and granted
all and singular the premises, for and during so many years of the aforesaid
80. years, as then should continue and remain unexpired, to the aforesaid
Thomas, his Executors and Assigns, as by the said Indenture showed to the
Jurors aforesaid, in Evidence amongst other things it more plainly appears.
And further, the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesad, say, That the
aforesaid Lord Edward, late King of England, afterward and before the time in
which, etc. That is to say, the 12th day of September, in the 3d. year of his
Reign, the aforesaid Nicholas then being Rector of the Church aforesaid, by his
Leters Patents under his great Seal of England, and in due manner made, bearing
date at Westminster, the said 12th. day of September, in the 3d. year of his
Reign aforesaid, (the aforesaid Lord the King then being true Patron of the
said Rectory) Seeing, Reading, and Examining, the Indenture aforesaid, of his
special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere mention, as also with the Advice and
Consent of the Beloved Uncle of the aforesaid Lord the King, the Duke of
Somerset, Governor of the person of the King, and Protector of the Kingdoms,
Dominions, and Subjects of the said King, and of other of the Council of the
said King before, and especially in Consideration of the most excellent present
service then to the King in his Wars, then and sole in the beating back of the
Scots, which then late happened at Naseborough, in which War, the aforesaid
William Elderker, of forethought Malice was slain, the said Indenture, and all
in the same specified, and all the Right, Title, and Interest of the same,
Elizabeth Elderker, Ralph Elderker, William Elderker, and Thomas Elderker, in
the said Rectory, Gleable Lands, Fruits and other things, in the same Indenture
expressed, with the Appurtenances, To have and to hold the said Rectory to the
said Elizabeth, Ralph, William, and Thomas, and their Assigns, had confirmed,
and ratified, and in all things as much as in him was, had approved for him and
his Successors: And further, the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath
aforesaid, that afterward, that is to say, the 21 day of January, in the Reign
of the said Lord Edward the 3d. aforesaid, the said Nicholas being then Rector
of the Church aforesaid, One Henry, by Divine Providence, Bishop of Lincoln,
and of the Rectory and Church aforesaid, of Chedington aforesaid, Ordinary, the
Demyse or Grant aforesaid, by the said Nichol^^ as before is said, made, and
all and singular in the same contained, for him and his Successors, confirmed,
ratified, and as much as in him was approved, To have, hold, and enjoy to the
aforesaid Eliz. Ralph, Will. Elderker, and Th. Elderker, during the Term
aforesaid, as by the said several Confirmations in due manner made, and to the
Jurors aforesaid showed, more fully appeared, By color of which Demyse, and
several Confirmations aforesaid, in form aforesaid made, the aforesaid
Elizabeth Elderker into the Rectory aforesaid, and the Glebe Lands aforesaid,
with the Appurtenances did enter, and was thereof possessed; And she thereof
being so possessed, The said Nicholas Fitz-williams afterward and before the
time in which, etc. that is to say, the 10th. day of January, in the year of
the Reign of the Lady Mary, late Queen of England the first, at Chedington
aforesaid, then being Rector of the Parish Church of Chedington aforesaid,
dyed: And the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said
Thomas Elderker afterward, that is to say, the 10th. day of June, in the year
of the Reign of the said Lady Elizabeth, now Queen of England the 16th. at
Greenwich, in the County of Kent, dyed intestate, the said Elizabeth of the
Rectory aforesaid and of the Glebe Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
form aforesaid being possessed; And the said Elizabeth being thereof so
possessed, the aforesaid William Elderker afterward, that is to say, the 8th.
day of July, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
the 17th. likewise dyed: And the aforesaid Elizabeth Elderker, so of the
Rectory and Glebe Lands, aforesaid possessed as is said, afterward, That is to
say, The 20th. day of July, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is the 17th. aforesaid, at Chedington aforesaid, the said Eliz.
Elderker likewise dyed and the said Ralph Elderker did over-live her, and into
the Rectory aforesaid, and the Glebe Lands aforesaid, with the Appurtenances,
By virtue of the Demyse aforesaid, likewise entered and was thereof possessed,
and so being thereof possessed, the said Ralph Elderker afterward, that is to
say, the 10th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is the 18th. at Chedington aforesaid, dyed intestate: And the Jurors
aforesaid say, upon their Oath aforesaid, that after and before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 19th. day of January, 1576. Administration of
all and singular the goods, Chattels, Rights and Credits, which were of the
aforesaid Thomas at the time of his death by William South Doctor of Law,
Commissary and Official of the Arch of Buckingham, to one Anne Hethrington then
wife of Ralph Hethrington and then the late Widow of the said Ralph Elderker at
Chedington aforesaid was committed, By virtue of which committing of the
Administration aforesaid, the aforesaid Ralph Hethrington and Ann his wife into
the Rectory aforesaid, and the glebe Lands aforesaid, with their appurtenances,
did enter and were thereof possessed, and the said Ralph Hethrington and Anne
his wife, so thereof possessed, the said Ralph Hethrington and Anne afterward,
that is to say, the 28 day of March in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 19. at Chedington aforesaid, by a certain Indenture
made between the aforesaid Ralph Hethrington, and Anne his wife, by the names
of Ralph Hethrington of Sheale in the County Lecester Gentleman, and Anne his
wife late wife of Ralph Elderker, deceased, of the one part, and one Ralph
Celey by the name of Ralph Celey of London Mercer, of the other part, one
part whereof sealed with the Sea^s of the said Ralph Hetherington, and Anne,
sealed to the Jurors aforesaid, in evidence likewise showed, for the
Consideration in the said Indenture specified, had, bargained, sold ^ssigned
and set over, to the said Ralph Celey, his Executors, Administrators, and
assigns, all the Interest, Title, Estate and Term of years then to come and
unexpired, in and to the Rectory aforesaid, and the gleabe Lands aforesaid with
the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the only and proper behoof, and use
of the said Ralph Celey, his Executors and assigns for ever; By virtue of
which Assignement the said Ralph Celey into the Rectory aforesaid and the glebe
Lands aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed: And
the Juros aforesaid farther say upon their Oath aforesaid, that after, and
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 16th. day of May in the year
of our Lord 1577 for that the said Thomas Elderker while he lived, and at the
time of his death had diverse goods, and Chattels, rights and Credits, in
diverse Diocesses, or Jurisdictions, administration of all and singular the
goods Chattels, rights and Credits, which were of the said Thomas at the time
of his death by Edmund by divine providence Arch Bishop of Canterbury of all
England Primat and Metropolitan aforesaid to the said Ann Hethrington then the
wife of the said Ralph Hethrington, and then late late the widow of the said
Ralph Elderker deceased, late natural and lawful Brother of the said Thomas
Elderker, at London, that is to say, in the Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow,
in the Ward of Cheap London, was committed: And the Jurors aforesaid farther
say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Ralph Celey, so being possessed,
the said Ralph Hethrington, Ann his wife, and the said Ralph Celey, afterward,
that is to say the 20th. day of May in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 19th. at Chedington aforesaid, by their certain
Indenture with the Seal of the said Ralph Celey sealed, and to the Jury
aforesaid given and showed in evidence, bearing date the said 20 day of May in
the 19 year aforesaid, for the Considerations in the said Indenture specified,
gave, granted, bargained and aliened to one John Eden, all the Interest, Title,
Estate and their Term of years, then of and in the aforesaid Rectorie and
gleabe Lands with the appurtenances to come and unexpired, to have and to hold
to the said John Eden his executors and assigns during the residue of the
aforesaid Term, of the aforesaid 80 years, as before is said, granted: By
virtue of which assignment, the said John Eden, into the Rectory aforesaid, and
the gleabe Lands aforesaid, with the appurtenances, entered and was thereof
possessed; and the Jurors aforesaid, further upon their Oath aforesaid say,
that the said John Eden being so seized of the Rectorie aforesaid, and of the
gleabe Land aforesaid with the appurtenances, afterward, that is to say, the
12 day of May in the year of the Reign of the said Queen that now is the 29 at
Chedington aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, by his Indenture, Sealed with
his Seal and to the Jurors aforesaid likewise showed in evidence, whose date is
the same 12 day of May in the 29 year aforesaid, bargained, sold, and assigned
to one Thomas Tarsburgh Esquire, all his Interest and Term of years then to
come and unexpired, of and in the Rectorie aforesaid, and the gleabe Lands
aforesaid with the appurtenances: by reason of which, the said Thomas Tarsburgh
into the Rectorie aforesaid with the appurtenances entered and was thereof
possessed: And the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the
said Thomas Tarsburgh being thereof so possessed, afterward and before the
time in which, etc. that is to say, the 23 day of November in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 36, at Chedington aforesaid,
in the County aforesaid, by his Indenture with the Seal of the said Tarsburgh
Sealed, and to the Jurors aforesaid in evidence likewise showed, granted,
bargayned, alliened and assigned, all his Right, Title, Interest, and Term of
years then to come of and in the Rectory aforesaid and the glebe Lands
aforesaid with the appurtenances to one John Agmondesham Esquire; By virtue of
which the said John Agmondesham into the Rectory aforesaid and the gleabe lands
aforesaid with the appurtenances entered and was thereof possessed: And the
Jurors aforesaid farther say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said John
Agmondesham so being thereof possessed, afterward and before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 27 day of November in the year of the Reign of
the said Queen that now is the 36th. at Chedington aforesaid by his Indenture
Sealed with the Seal of the said John Agmondesham, and to the Jurors aforesaid
here in Evidence likewise showed,, demysed the Rectorie aforesaid and the glebe
Lands aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Thomas Tarsburgh
Esquire, to have to the said Thomas and his assigns, from the said 27th. day
of November, in the 36th. year aforesaid, until the 26th. day of March which
then should be in the year of our Lord 1595. By virtue of which demise the
aforesaid Thomas Tarsburgh into the Rectorie aforesaid, and glebe Lands
aforesaid with the appurtenance, entered, and was thereof possessed; And the
said Thomas Tasburgs thereof being so possessed, and the said John Agmondesham
so as is said of the residue of the said Term of 80 years then to come being
possessed, The said John Agmondesham afterward, that is to say, the 17th. day
of February in the 36th. year aforesaid, at Chedington aforesaid, demised,
granted and to Farm let, the Rectorie aforesaid, and the glebe Lands aforesaid
with the appurtenances, to one Michael Weston, To have and to hold, unto the
said Michael and his assigns from and immediately after the end, expiration and
determination of the said demise, to the said Thomas Tasburgs by the aforesaid
John Agmondesham as is said, made until the end and Term of 21 years from
thence next following fully to be completed, if the said Michael Weston, and
one Margaret Bromley, or any of them should so long live: By virtue of which
demise the said Michael Weston afterward and before the time in which, etc.
that is to say the 26 day of March in the year of our Lord 1595 at Chedington
aforesaid, into the Rectory aforesaid, and glebe Lands aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, entered and was thereof possessed: and so being thereof
possessed, the said Michael afterward and before the time in which, etc. that
is to say, the 22 day of May in the year of the Reign of the Queen that now is
the 37 at Chedington aforesaid, by his Indenture with the seal of the said
Michael sealed, and to the Jurors aforesaid in evidence showed, Granted and
assigned all his Interest Estate, Term of years and demand then to come and
unexpited of and in the Rectorie aforesaid, and gleabe Lands aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, to the said William Wilkinson now defendant, By virtue of
which grant, the said William into the Rectorie aforesaid and the glebe Lands
aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed: and the
said William, so being possessed, the said David Roberts Clerk, afterward and
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 11 day of January in the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 38th. to the Rectory of
Chedington aforesaid, was lawfully presented, admitted, instituted, and
Inducted; By virtue of which the said David Roberts, into the Rectory aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, entered, and was thereof possessed in his Demesne as of
Fee in the right of his Church of Chedington aforesaid, And so being seized,
afterward and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 26th. day of
March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
38th. aforesaid, by Indenture in the Declaration aforesaid specified, Demised
the Rectory aforesaid, with the Appurtenances in the Declaration likewise
mentioned, to the aforesaid David Loyd, To have and to hold, to the aforesaid
David Loyd, from the day of the date of the same Indenture, unto the end and
Term of three years, then next following, and fully to be complete and ended.
By virtue of which Demise, the said Dav. Loyd afterward, that is to say, the
27th. day of March, in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
38th. into the Rectory aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, entered, and was
thereof possessed, until the said William Wilkinson afterward, that is to
say, the said 10th. day of April, in the 38th. year aforesaid, into the Rectory
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, upon the possession of the said David
thereof entered, and him the said David, from thence, his Term aforesaid not yet
ended, did eject, expel, andamove, as the said David Loyd above against him
complains: And further, the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid,
That as well the said David Roberts, as the said Michael Weston, are yet alive,
and in full life, that is to say, at Chedington aforesaid: But whether upon the
whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, the re-entry of the said
William Wilkinson, into the Rectory aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in the
Declaration aforesaid above specified, upon the possion of the said David Loyd,
thereof in manner aforesaid made, be, or in Law ought to be adjudged a good and
lawful re-entry in Law or not, the Jurors aforesaid are utterly ignorant;
Whereupon they pray thereof the advice and discretion of the Court of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, before the said Lady the Queen her self being: And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the said Court of the said Lady the Queen, That the aforesaid re-entry of the
aforesaid VVil. Wilkinson, into the said Rectory aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, in which, etc. upon the possession of the said David Loyd, be
not a good and lawful re-entry in Law, then the Jurors aforesaid, say upon
their oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid William Wilkinson, the said David
Loyd, from his Farm aforesaid, of the Rectory aforesaid, with the appurtenances
in which, etc. unjustly did eject. And that the Ejectment aforesaid, and the
Trespass in the Declaration aforesaid specified, as unto the Rectory aforesaid
with the appurtenances, the said VVil. Wilkinson is guilty in manner and form,
as the said David Loyd above declaring has alleged. And then they assesse the
damages of the said David, by the occasion of the Ejectment and Trespass in the
Rectory aforesaid, with the appurtenances, besides his charges and costs, by
him in the Suit aforesaid in this behalf expended, to 3. shillings, and 4.
pence, and for his costs and charges to 12. pence. And if upon the whole matter
aforesaid, It shall seem to the said Court of the said Lady the Queen here,
that the said entry of the said William Wilkinson into the Rectory aforesaid
with the appurtenances, upon the possession of the said David thereof, in the
from aforesaid made, be a good and lawful re-entry in Law, Then the aforesaid
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said William Wilkinson is not
guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment of the Farm aforesaid, as to the Rectory
aforesaid with the appurtenances, as the aforesaid William Wilkinson above in
pleading has alleged. And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, here of their Judgment of and upon the premises to be given, are not
yet avised, day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the said Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Friday next after the morrow of the Holy Trinity,
to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. because the Court of the said Lady the
Queen here are not yet, etc. At which day, before the said Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Court of the said Lady the Queen, here of their Judgment of and
upon the premises to be given is not yet avised, Further day is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Monday
next after 8. days of St. Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc.
because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here thereof yet, etc. At which
day, before the said Lady the Queen at VVestminst. come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court o^ the said Lady the Queen
that now is, of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises are not yet
avised, Further day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the said Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Monday next after 8. days of St. Hillary, to
hear their Judgment, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is
here thereof are not yet, etc. At which day, before the said Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises are not yet avised, Further day
is given to the parties aforesaid, before the said Lady the Queen at
Westminster, until Wednesday next after 15. days of Easter, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here thereof
not as yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come
the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, of giving their Judgment of and upon the
premises are not yet avised, Further day is given to the parties aforesaid,
before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Friday next after the
morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court
of the said Lady the Queen that now is thereof not yet, etc. At which day,
before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by
their Attorneys aforesaid, And because this Court of the said Lady the Queen
that now is here, of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises are not
yet avised, Further day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the said Lady
the Queen at Westminster, until Monday next after 8. days of St. Michael, to
hear their Judgment, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here thereof
not yet, etc. At which day, before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster,
come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, Upon which seen, and
by the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is here, diligently looked
into, and fully understood all and singular the premises, and mature
deliberation being thereupon had; Because it seems to the Court of the said
Lady the Queen now is here, That the aforesaid re-entry, of the aforesaid
William Wilkinson, into the said Rectory, with the Appurtenances in which,
etc. upon the possession of the said David Loyd, is not good and a lawful
re-entry in Law, It is granted that the said David Loyd, shall recover against
the said William Wilkinson his Term aforesaid, of and in the Rectory
aforesaid, with the appurtenances yet to come, And his damages by the Jurors in
form aforesaid assessed: And that the said William Wilkinson be taken, etc.
And likewise the said David in mercy, to the residue of the Trespass and
Ejectment aforesaid, whereof the said William VVikinson in form aforesaid
stands acquitted; And the said William Wilkinson thereof be acquitted, etc.

Michelmas Term, 41. and 43. Elizabeth, Rott. 144. in the KINGS BENCH, Bingams
Case, C. 2. part fol. 82.
MEmorandum, That at another time, that is to say, Easter Term last Dors. ss.
past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came George Stroud Esquire,
by Simon Spatchard his Attorney, And brought here in Court of the said Lady the
Queen, his Bill against Ralph Horsey Knight, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor
Gent. in the Custody of the Marshall, etc. of a Plea of Trespass and Ejectment
of him out his Farm: And are Pledges of Suit, that is to say, John Do, and
Richard Roo, Which Bill follows in these words. ss. Dorset. George Stroud
Esquire, complains of Ralph Horsey Knight. Rich. Veal, and Edw. Goor, For that,
That is to say, That whereas one William Albert the 7th. day of April in the
year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, 41. at Melcum in the
County aforesaid, had demised granted and to Farm letten to the aforesaid
George one message, 120. acres of Lands, 40 Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of
Pasture, and 100. Acres of Furze and Heath, with the Appurtenances, in Melcum
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid; To have and to hold the Tenements aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, unto the said George, and his Assigns, from the Feast
of the ANNVNCIATION of the blessed Lady the Virgin MARY, then last past, until
the end and Term of 6. years and a half of a year, from thence next ensuing
fully to be complete and ended: By virtue of which demise the said George into
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof
possessed, until the aforesaid Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor,
after, that is to say, the 11th. day of April in the 41 year aforesaid, with
force and arms, etc: into the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, upon
the possession of the said George, thereof did enter, and the said George from
his Farm aforesaid, thereof (his term aforesaid not being ended) did eject,
expel, and amove, and the said George from his possessiion thereof, did hold
out, and do yet hold out, and other harms did unto him against the peace of the
said Lady the Queen, to his damage of 100 pound, and thereof he brings suit,
etc. And now at this day, that is to say, Tuseday next, after 8 days of Saint
Michael, this Term, until which day the aforesaid Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal,
and Edward Goor, had License to imparl to the said Bill, and then to Answer,
etc. before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come as well the said George
Stroud, by his Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal,
and Edward Goor, by James Hyde their Attorney, and the said Ralph, Richard, and
Edward defend the force and injury, when, etc. and say, that they are not
thereof guilty: and upon that put themselves upon the County, and the aforesaid
George Stroud likewise, etc. Therefore a Jury thereof before the said Lady the
Queen at Westminster, upon wednesday next, after 8 days of Saint Hillary, and
who neither, etc. to know, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to
the parties here, etc. ss. Afterward process continued between the parties
aforesaid, of the plea aforesaid, by Juries put between the parties aforesaid,
in respit, before the said Lady the Queen, at Westminster, until wednesday next
after 18 days of Easter, unless first the Justices of the Lady the Queen to
take assizes in the County first upon Monday the 3 weak of Lent at Dorchester
in the County aforesaid, by the form of the statute, etc. come for default of
Jurors, etc. At which Wednesday, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster came
the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the aforesaid Justices
of Assise, before whom, etc. sent thither their Record before them, had in
these words ss. Afterward, the day and place within contained before Thomas
Walmsley one of the Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Bench, and Edward
Fennes one of the Justices of the said Lady the Queen of pleas before the Queen
her self holden assigned, Justices of the said Lady the Queen to take Assizes
in the County of Dorset assigned by the form of the statute, etc. came as well
the within named George Stroud Esquire by Thomas Clayton his Attorney, as the
within named Ralph Horsey Knight, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor by Henry
Collier their Attorney, and the Jurors of the Jury whereof within mention is
made some of them appeared, and some of them did not appear as it appears in
the panel, etc. and some of the Jurors now appearing, that is to say, Richard
Ham, Thomas Tooner, John Burt, Henry H^rbyn Gentleman, John Young Gentleman,
John Butler Gentleman, William Withington, John Pain, and Christorher Dolling
in the Jury aforesaid are sworn: and some of the said Jurors now appearing,
that is to say, Thomas Heal, Edward Carter, Robert Chippe, Henry Squib, and
George From, because they between the parties aforesaid are found to be
suspicious, from the panel aforesaid they were utterly drawn out, and because
the rest of the Jurors of the said Jury did not appear, therefore others of the
standers by, by the Sheriff aforesaid, to that being chosen at the request of
the said George Stroud, and by the Command of the Justices aforesaid, were of
new put, whose names to the panel within written are fyled according to the
form of the statute in such case thereof late made and is provided, and the
Jurors so n^w put, that is to say, Clement Jay, Nicholas Brown, and Thomas
Eyres being called likewise appeared, who to say the truth of the matters
within contained together with the other Jurors aforesaid first impanelled,
Chosen, tried and sworn, say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the Tenement
within written in which it is supposed the Trespass and Ejectment within
written to be, are and time whereof the memory of men is not to the Contrary,
were parcel of the Manor of Nether Melcum, otherwise called Melcum Bingham,
with the appurtenances, and that the said Manor of Neither Melcum otherwise
Melcum Biugham, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. lies within the Parish of
Melcum in the County aforesaid, and that before the time within written in
which the Trespass and Ejectment within written was supposed to be done, one
Robert Bingham the elder was seized for the aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum,
otherwise Melcum Bingham with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in his demesne as
of Fee, and so thereof seized, held the said Manor with the appurtenances of
one John Hrosey Knight as of his Manor of Melcam otherwise Horseys Melcum,
otherwise Starges Melcum, in the County aforesaid by Knight service, that is to
say, by Homage and Fealty, and Escuage to the Lady the Queen of 40. shillings
when it should happen 2. shillings, and for more more, and less less, etc. and
the said Robert Bingham being so seized, before the time within written in
which, etc. that is to say, the morrow of the Holy Trinity, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 12, a sine was levied in the
Court of the said Lady the Queen at Westminster in the County of Middlesex,
before James Dyer, Richard Weston, Richard Harper then Justices of the said
Lady the Queen of the Bench, and other the Queens faithful people then
present, between Thomas Buckley and Henry Gawen Gentlemen plaintifs, and the
said Robert Bingham the Elder Deforceant Of the Manor of Neither Melcum
otherwise Melcum Bingham aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. by the
names of the Manor of Nether Melcum otherwise Melcum Bingham aforesaid with
the appurtenances, and 5 Messuages 4 Tofts, 4 Barns, 5 Gardens, 2 Orchards, 120
Acres of Land, 30 Acres of Meadow, 300 Acres of pasture, 8 Acres of Wood, and
20 Acres of Furze and Heath with the appurtenances in Nether Melcum other wise
Binghams Melcum, whereupon a plea of Covenant was between them in the said
Court, that is to say, that the said Robert Bingham did acknowledge the said
Manor and Tenements with the appurtenances to be the right of the said Thomas
Buckley as that with the said Thomas Buckley and Henry Gawen, had of the gift
of the said Robert Bingham, and then released and quit claimed from him and his
heirs to the said Thomas Buckley and Henry Gawen, and the heirs of the said
Thomas for ever: And afterward the said Robert Bingham granted for him and his
heirs that they would warrant to the said Thomas Buckley and Henry Gawen, and
to the heirs of the said Thomas, the aforesaid Manor and Tenements with the
appurtenances against all men for ever, the Tenor of which Fine follows in
these: ss. Dorset: ss. This is a final concord made in the Court of the Lady
the Queen at Westminster in the morrow of the holy Trinity, in the year of the
Reign of Elizabeth by the grace of God of England France and Ireland Queen
defender of the faith, etc. from the Conquest the 12th. before James Dyer,
Richard Weston, and Richard Harper Justices, and other the Queens faithful
people there present, Between Thomas Buckley and Henry Gawen Gentlemen,
plaintifs, and Robert Bingham Esquire, Deforceant of the Manor of Neither
Melcum otherwise Binghams Melcum, with the appurtenances, and of 5 Messuages, 4
Tofts, 4 Barns, 5 Gardens, 2 Orchards, 12^ Acres of Land, 30 Acres of Meadow,
100 Acres of pasture, 8 Acres of wood, and 20 Acres of Furz and Heath in Nether
Melcum, otherwise Binghams Melcum, whereupon a plea of Covenant was between
them in the said Court, that is to say that the said Robert acknowledged the
aforesaid Manor and Tenements with the appurtenances to be the right of the
said Thomas, and those which the said Thomas and Henry had of the gift of the
aforesaid Robert, and the same released and quit claimed from him and his
heirs, to the said Thomas and Henry, and the heirs of the said Thomas for ever,
And farther the said Robert grants for him and his heirs, that they warrant
to the aforesaid Thomas and Henry, and to the heirs of the said Thomas, the
aforesaid Manor and Tenements with the appurtenances against all men for ever;
and for this Recognition remission and quit claym, warranty and Concord the
said Thomas and Henry give to the said Robert 150 pound sterling, which said
Fine of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid
Levied, was had and Levied, to the use of the said Robert Bingham the Elder and
Jane his wife, and the heirs of the said Robert for ever, by virtue whereof,
and by force of a certain Act of Parliament of transferring of uses into
possession, made at Westminster in the year of the Reign of the late King
Henry, the 8th. of England the 27th. made and provided, the said Robert Bingham
the elder and Jane were seized of the Manor of Nether Melcum otherwise
Binghams Melcum aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. that is to say,
to the said Robert and Jane, and the heirs of the aforesaid Robert for ever,
And the said Jurors farther say, upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said
Robert Bingham the Elder then was seized in his Demesne as of Fee of and in the
Manor Lands and Tenements called Melcum Binghams situate in Tollor Porcoram in
the said County of Dorset, and the said Robert so of the Manor and the said
Tenements, and of the aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum otherwise Melcum
Binghams with the appurtenances whereof, etc. being seized, A Fine was Levied
in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is, at Westminster aforesaid,
before the within written time in which, etc. that is to say, in the morrow of
the holy Trinity in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now
is the 20th. before James Dyer, Roger Manwood, and Robert Mounson, and Thomas
Mead then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench, and other of the
said Lady the Queens faithful people then present, Between Richard Rogers
Knight, Nicholas Furbervile, and John Williams Esquires then plaintifs, and the
aforesaid Robert Bingham the Elder Esquire then deforceant of the said Manor
of Nether Melcum otherwise Melcum Binghams, whereof, etc. and of the said
Manor of Melcum Binghams with the appurtenances, by the names of the Manor of
Melcam Bingham and Melcum Bingham with the appurtenances, as also of 6
Messuages, 2 Tofts, 1300 Acres of Lands, 300 Acres of Meadow, 50 Acres of
Pasture, 20 Acres of Wood, and 1000 Acres of Furz and Heath with the
appurtenances in Neither Melcam, Toller Porcoram, Magouder, and Haselberry
Brion in the County of Dorset, and of 3 Messuages, 6 Gardens, 1000 Acres of
Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 300 Acres Pasture, 300 Acres of Furz and Heath with
the appurtenances in Codford, Mary Codford, Peter Ashton, Geffery Bardchalk,
Alderbery, East Grimsted and West Grimsted in the County of Wilts, whereupon a
plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the said Court, That is to say,
that the said Robert Bingham the Elder acknowleged the said Manors and
Tenements, with the appurtenances to be the right of the said Richard Rogers as
those which the said Richard Rogers Nicholas Turbervile and John Williams, had
of the gift of the said Robert Bingham, and released and quit claymed from him
and his heirs to the said Richard Rogers, Nicholas Turbervile and John
williams, and the heirs of the said Richard Rogers for ever. And further the
said Robert Bingham granted for him and his heirs that the warrant to the
aforesaid Richard Rogers, Nicholas Turbervile and John Williams, and to the
heirs of the said Richard Robers, the aforesaid Manors and Tenements with the
appurtenances against the said Roqert Bingham and his heirs for ever, the Tenor
of which fine follows in these words, This is the final Concord made in the
Court of the Lady the Queen at Westminster in the morrow of the holy Trinity,
in the year of the Reign of Eliz: by the grace of God of England, France, and
Ireland Queen defender of the Faith, etc. from the Conquest the 20th. before
James Dyer, Roger Manwood, Robert Mounson, and Thomas Meade Justices, and other
of the Lady the Queens faithful people then and there present, between Richard
Rogers Knight, Nicholas Turburvile Esquire, and John Williams Esquire,
Complai^ants, and Rober Bingham the elder Esquire, deforceant of the Manors of
Melcam Bingham, and Wolcomb Bingham, with the appurtenances, as also of 6
Messuages, 2 Tofts, 1300 Acres of Land, 300 Acres of Meadow, 50 Acres of
pasture, 20 Acres of wood, and 1000 Acres of Furz and Heath, with the
appurtenances, in Nether Melcum, Toller Porcorum, Mapowder, and Haseberry
Bayan, in the County of Dorset, and of 8 Messuages, 3 Tofts, 6 Gardens, 1000
Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 300 Acres of Pasture, and 300 Acres of Furz
and Heath, with the appurtenances, in Codford, Mary Codford, Peter Ashton,
Gyfford Burdchalke, Alderbury, East Grimsted, and West Grimsted, in the County
of Wilts, whereof a plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the said
Court, that is to say, That the said Robert acknowleged the Manors and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said
Richard, as those which the same Richard, Nicholas, and John, had of the gift
of the said Robert, and those released, and quit claymed from him and his heirs
to the said Richard, Nicholas, and John, and to the heirs of the said Richard
the aforesaid Manors and Tenements, with the appurtenances against the said
Robert and his heirs; And further the said Robert granted for him and his
heirs that they warrant to the said Richard, Nicholas, and John, and to the
heirs of the said Richard the aforesaid Manors and Tenements with the
appurtenances against the said Robert and his heirs for ever. And for this
Recognition, release, quit claym, warranty, fine and Concord, the same Richard,
Nicholas and John, gave to the said Robert 826 pound Sterling: Which fine
aforesaid levied and had, was levied of the aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum
otherwise Melcum Bingham with the appurtenances whereof, etc. to the use of the
said Robert Bingham the Elder, for the Term of his life, and after his decease,
then to the use of the aforesaid Robert Bingham than Son and heir apparent of
the said Robert Bingham the Elder, and the heirs of his body, upon the Body of
Ann then wife of the said Robert Bingham the Son to be begotten: and for
default of such issue, to the use of the right heirs of the aforesaid Robert
Bingham the Elder for ever: And of the aforesaid Manor and Tenements called
Wolcumb Binghams with the appurtenances, to the use of the said Robert Bingham
the Son, and the aforesaid Ann and the heirs of the body of the said Robert
Bingham the Son upon the body of the aforesaid Ann Lawfully to be begotten, and
for default of such issue, to the use of the right heirs of the aforesaid
Robert Bingham the Elder for ever; By virtue of which Fine, and by force of the
aforesaid Act of Parliament, of transferring uses into possession, made and
provided, the aforesaid Robert bingham the Elder, was seized of the aforesaid
Manor of Nether Melcum otherwise Melcum Binghams with the appurtenances
whereof, etc. in his demesne as of freehold for the Term of his life, the
remainder thereof to the said Robert Bingham the Younger in Fee tail, that is
to say, to him and to the heirs of his body to be begotten upon the Body of the
said Ann, the remainder to the right heirs of the said Robert Bingham the Elder
for ever: And besides, the said Robert Bingham the Younger, and Ann his wife,
were seized of the said Manor Land and Tenements, called Wolcum Binghams with
the appurtenances, that is to say, to the aforesaid Robert Bingham the Younger,
in his demesne, as of Feetail, that is to say, to him and the heirs of his body
upon the body of the said Ann his wise Lawfully to be begotren, and the
aforesaid Ann in her demesne as of Freehold for the Term of her life, the
remainder thereof to the right heirs of the said Robert Bingham the Elder for
ever: And the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, that at the time
of the Levying of the said last recited Fine, by the said Robert Bingham the
Elder, in form aforesaid had, the said John Horsey was seized of the aforesaid
Manor of Over Melcum, otherwise Horseys Melcum, otherwise Sturges Melcum, with
the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee, and the said John Horsey so thereof
being seized, a Fine was Levied in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that
now is at the Castle of Hartford, in the County of Hartford, after and before
the within written time in which, etc. that is to say, in the morrow of All
Souls, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
24th. before Edmund Anderson, Thomas Meade, Francis Windham, and William
Periam, then Justices of the said lady the Queen of the Bench, and other of the
said Lady the Queens faithful people then there present, between Henry Viscount
Bindon, Sichard Rogers Knight. Henry Ashley Knight, Thomas Hayward, George
Trenchard, John Strange-waies, John Williams, Richard Watkins, Thomas Muttens
Henry Collier, Edward St. Karke, John Fitz-Williams, and George Gilbert,
Fsquires, then plaintiffs, and the said John Horsey Knight then defendant of
the said Manor of Over Melcum otherwise Horseys Melcum, otherwise Sturges
Melcum, with the appurtenances, by the names of the Manors of Clyfton,
Malarke, Thorneford, Nether Crompton, Bradford, Sherborne, Wyke, Horseys
Melcum, otherwise Sturges Melcum, with the appurtenances, and 250 Messuages,
100 To^ts, 10 Mills, 10 Dovehouses, 3000 Acres of Lands, 2000 Acres of Meadow,
5000 Acres of Pasture, 1000. Acres of Wood, 3000. Acres of Furz and Heath, and
10. pound Rent, with the Appurtenances in Yettmister, Ryme intrinseca,
Thorneford, Bradford, Beere-Hacket, Shirborn, Lillington, Nether-Crompton,
Over-Crompton, Long Barton, Oburne, Heyden, Vpmelcum, Nether Melcombe,
Cheselborn, Buckland, Plushe, Mapowder, Mylton, other Midleton, and Helton, And
the Rectory of Bradford, with the appurtenances, As also of the Advowson of the
Churches of Melcombe, Nether-Melcombe, Clyfton, Malank, Thorneford,
Nether-Crompton, and Bradford, in the County of Dorset. And of the Manors of
Horsey, and Peignes with the Appurtenances, and 20. Messuages, 6. Tofts, 2.
Mills, 2. Dovehouses, 1000. Acres of Lands, 60. Acres of Meadow, 1200. Acres of
Pasture, 40. Acres of Wood, 1000. Acres of Furz and Heath, and 40. shillings
Rent, with the appurtenances in Bridgwater, Chilton, Beugh, Stafford, Berwick,
Weston, Bondrip, Peryson, Chedsey, Wembdon, and Cannington, in the County of
Somerset. Whereupon a plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same
Court, That is to say, That the said John Horsey acknowledge the aforesaid
Manors, Rectories, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, and
the Advowsons aforesaid, to be the right of the said Viscount, as those, which
the said Viscount, Richard Rogers, Henry shley, Thomas Howard, George
Trenchard, John Strange-wayes, John William^, Richard Watkings, Thomas Muttens,
Henry Coker, Edward St. Kerke, John Fitz James, and George Gilbert, had of the
gift of the said John Horsey, and those realesed and quit claimed for him and
his Heirs, to the said Viscount, Richard Rogers, Henry Ashley, Thomas Howard,
George Trenchard, John Strangewayes, John Williams, Richard Wak^ns, Thomas
Muttens, Henry Coker, Edward St. Kerke, John Fitz-James, and George Gilbert,
and to the Heirs of the said Viscount for ever. And further, the said John
Horsey granted for him and his Heirs, that they warrant to the aforesaid
Viscount, Richard Rogers, Henry Ashley, Thomas Howard, George Trenchard, John
Stangewayes, John Williams, Richard Watkins, Thomas Muttens, Henry Coker,
Edward St. Kerke, John Fiz-James, and George Gilbert, and to the Heirs of the
said Viscount, the aforesaid Manors, Rectories, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
with the appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid against all men for ever;
The Tenor of which Fine follows in these words. This is a final Concord, made
in the Court of the Lady the Queen, at the Castle of Hartford, in the morrow of
All Souls, in the year of the Reign of Elizabeth by the grace of God of
England, France, and Ireland Queen, defender of the Faith, etc. from the
Conquest the 24th. before Edmond Anderson, Knight. Thomas Mead, Francis Windham,
and William ^eriam Justices, and other of the Queens faithful people then here
present. Between Henry Viscount Byndon, Richard Rogers Knight. Henry Ashley Knight.
Thomas Howard Esquire. George Trenchard Esquire. John Strangewayes Esquire. John Williams
Esquire. Richard Watkins Esquire. Thomas Muttens Esquire. Henry Coker Esquire. Edward. St.
Karke Esquire. John Fiz-James Esquire. and George Gilbert Esquire. Plantifs, and John
Horsey Knight. Deforciant, of the Manors of Clyfton, Malanke, Thorneford,
Nether-Compton, Bradford, Sherborn, Wyke, Horseys Melcomb, otherwise Sturges
Melcomb, with the appurtenances, and of 250. Messuages, 100. Tofts, 10. Mills,
10. Dove houses, 3000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Meadow, 5000. Acres of
Furz and Heath, and 10. pound Rent, with the appurtenances in Yettmister, Ryme
intrinseca, Thorneford, Bradford, Beer-Hacket, Sherborn, Lillington,
Nether-Compton, Over-Compton, Long-Burton, Oburne, Hayden, Vxnelcombe,
Nether-Melcombe, Chaselborne, Bucklaud, Plashe, Mapowder, Mylton, otherwise
Midleton, and Helton. And of the Rectory of Bradford, with the appurtenances,
as also of the Advowsons of the churches of Melcombe, Nether-Melcombe, Clyfton,
Malanke, Thorneford, Nether-Compton, and Bradford in the County of Dorset: And
of the Manor of Horsey and P^egnes with the appurtenances: And of 20.
Messuages, 6. Tofts, 2. Mills, 2. Dove-houses, 1000. Acres of Lands, 60. Acres
of Meadow, 1200. Acres of Pasture, 40. Acres of Wood, 1000. Acres of Furz and
Heath, and 40. shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Bridgwater, Chitton,
Bough, Styford, Barwick, Weston, Baudrip, Peryson, Chedsey, Wembdon, and
Cannington, in the County of Somerset, Whereupon a Plea of Covenant was
summoned between them in the said Court, That is to say, That the said John
Horsey, acknowledge the aforesaid Manors Rectories, Tenements, and Rents, with
the Appurtenances, and the Advowsons aforesaid, to be the right of the said
Viscount, as those which he the said Viscount, Rich. Hen. Tho. George, Joh.
Strange-wayes, John Williams, Rich. Tho. Henry, Edward, John, Fitz James, and
George, have of the guilt of the aforesaid John Horsey, and then released and
quit claimed from him and his Heirs, to the aforesaid Viscount, Richard, Henry,
Thomas, George, John Strange-wayes John Williams, Richard, Thomas, Henry,
Edward, John, Fitz-Williams and George, and to the Heirs of the said Viscount,
for ever. And besides the said John Horsey grants for him and his Heirs, That
they warrant to the said Viscount, Richard, Henry, Thomas, George, John
Strange-wayes, John Williams, Richard, Thomas, Henry, Edward, John Fitz-Iames,
and George, and to the Heirs of the said Viscount, the aforesaid Manors,
Rectory, Tenements, and Rents with the appurtenances, and the Advowson
aforesaid against all Men for Ever. And for this Recognitition, release, quit
claim Warranty, Fine, and Concord, the said Viscount, Richard, Henry, Thomas,
George, John Strange-wayes, John Williams, Richard, Thomas, Henry, John
Fitz-James, and George gave to the aforesaid John Horsey 2680. pounds Sterling:
Which Fine aforesaid, in form aforesaid levied and had, was levied of the
Manor and Tenements called Over-Melcomb, otherwise Horseys-Melcomb, otherwise
Sturges-Melcomb, with the Appurtenances, To the use of the said John Horsey,
and the Heirs males of the body of the said John Horsey lawfully begotten, and
for default of such issue, To the use of Edith, now Wife of the said Ralph
Horsey, for the Term of her life, And after the decease of the said Edith, To
the use of the aforesaid Ralrh Horsey and his heirs males of his body Lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue, To the use of Jasper Horsey, Brother
of the said Ralph Horsey, and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten,
and for default of such issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the aforesaid
John Horsey for ever; By virtue of which, and of the aforesaid Act of
Parliament of Transferring of uses into possession made and provided, The
aforesaid John Horsey was seized of the aforesaid Manor and Tenements, called
Over-Melcombe, otherwise Horseys-Melcumb, otherwise Sturges-Melcomb, with the
appurtenances in his Demesne as of Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the
Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to the
aforesaid Edith, for the Term of her life, the remainder thereof to the
aforesaid Ralph Horsey in Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs males
of his body lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to the aforesaid Jasper
Horsey in Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten, the remainder over to the right Heirs of the said John
Horsey for ever. And the Jurors aforesaid say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That
afterward and before the within written time, in which, etc. that is to say,
the 20th day of January, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, the 29th. The aforesaid Robert Bingham the younger, and Ann at
Melcumb aforesaid, had issue between them lawfully begotten, Richard Bingham
Son and Heir apparent of the said Rob Bingham the younger: And that the
aforesaid Robert Bingham and Ann, of the said Manors, Lands, and Tenements,
called Wolcomb Binghams, so as before is said being so seized, the remainder
thereof in form aforesaid expectant; And the said Robert Bingham the Elder, and
Jane his Wife, so as before is said, of the aforesaid Manor of Nether-melcum,
otherwise Melcum Bingham, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. being seized, of
the Manor thereof to the aforesaid Robert Bingham the younger, and the Heirs
of his body, upon the body of the said Ann lawfully begotten, the remainder
thereof to the right Heirs of the said Robert Bingham the elder expectant, The
said Robert Bingham the younger, afterward and before the time within written,
in which, etc. that is to say, the 11th. day of November, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 30th. at Melcomb aforesaid,
dyed of such estate of and in the premises as is said, seized. And the said Ann
did survive him, and held her self in the Manor aforesaid, and Tenements
called Wolcombe Binghams, and was thereof sole seized in her Demesne as of
freehold for the Term of her life by right of survivor, and that after the
death of the said Robert Bingham the young the remaynder of the aforesaid
Manor of Neither Melcum otherwise Melcum Bingham with the appurtenances
whereof, etc. in fee tail descended to the said Richard Bingham as Son and Heir
of the body of the said Robert Bingham the Younger, upon the body of the said
Ann begotten, the said Richard Bingham at the time of the death of the
aforesaid Robert Bingham the younger his Father, being within age, that is to
say, of the age of one year and 9. months, and no more; And that the said Ann
of the aforesaid Manor and Tenements, called Wolcombe Binghams in form
aforesaid being seized, And the said Robert Bingham the elder, and Jane his
Wife, of the aforesaid Manor of Nether-Melcum, otherwise Melcombe Binghams,
with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, the
remainder thereof in form aforesaid expectant, The said Ann afterward and
before the within written time in which, etc. at Melcombe aforesaid, took to
Husband one John Sroud Esquire: And the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath
aforesaid, That at the time of the death of the said Robert Bingham the
younger, and before the within written time in which, etc. The aforesaid John
Horsey was seized of the said Manor, of Over-Melcum, otherwise,
Horseys-Melcum, otherwise Sturges-Melcum with the appurtenances in his Demesne
as of Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, the Remainder thereof over, in form aforesaid expecting. And the said
John Horsey so thereof being seized, one John Popham Knight, Chief Justice of
the said Lady the Queen of Plea, before the Queen her self to be held assigned,
by the name of John Popham Esquire, George Trenchard Esquire, and Edward Gorge
Esquire, before the within written time, in which, etc. that is to say, the
26th. day of March, in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
31.th. Out of the Court of Chancery of the said Lady the Queen at Westminster
in the County of Middlesex then being, sued forth a certain Writ of the said
Lady the Queen of Entry, in the Disseisin in the Post against the said John
Horsey, then Tenant of the Freehold of the said Manor, of Over Melcum,
otherwise Sturges-Melcum, with the appurtenances of the said Manor, by the
name of the Manor of Horseys-Melcum otherwise Sturges Melcum with the
Appurtenances; And 10. Messuages, 300. Acres of Land, 200. Acres of Meadow,
5000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of Wood, and 300. Acres of Furz and Heath,
with the Appurtenances in Horseys-Melcum, otherwise Sturgis-Melcum, to the then
Sherifs of the aforesaid County of Dorset directed, By which Writ, the said
Lady the Queen that now is, to the then Sherif of Dorset commanded, that the
said then Sherif should command the said John Horsey, that justly and without
delay, he should render to the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward
Gorge, the said Manor of Horseys-Melcum, with the appurtenances, and 10.
Messuages, 300. Acres of Land, 200. Acres of Meadow, 5000. Acres of Pasture,
300. Acres of Wood, and 300. Acres of Furz and Heath, with the appurtenances in
Horseys-Melcum, otherwise Sturges-Melcum, which the said George Popham, George
Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, claimed to be their Right and Inheritance, And in
which the said John Horsey had not entry, but after the Disseisin which Hugh
Hunt thereof unjustly, and without Judgment made to the said John Popham,
George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, within 30. years then last past, as they
said, And whereupon they complained that the aforesaid John Horsey did them
deforce, and if he should not do, And the said John Popham, George Trenchard,
and Edward Gorge, did secure the said Sherif for the prosecution of his
clamor, That then the said Sherif summon the aforesaid John Horsey, that he be
before the then Justices of the said Lady the Queen, of the Bench at
Westminster aforesaid, from Easter Day in 15. days then next following, to
show why he had not done it; At which 15. day of Easter, before Edward Anderson
Knight, and his Companions then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the
Bench at Westminster aforesaid, came as well the aforesaid John Popham, George
Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, by John Willis their Attorney, and Robert Frampton
Esquire, then Sherif of the County of Dorset aforesaid, then and there returned
the Writ aforesaid to him, in form aforesaid directed, in all things served and
executed, that is to say, that the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and
Edward Gorge, had found to the said Sherif Pledges to prosecute the said Writ;
that is is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo: And that the said John Horsey,
was summoned by John Den, and Richard Fen, And thereupon the said John Popham,
George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, declaring against the said John Horsey,
upon the Writ aforesaid, in their proper persons, And demanded against the said
John Horsey, the Manors and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, as
their Right and Inheritance, And into which the said John Horsey had not entry,
but after the Disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without
Judgment did to the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge,
within 30. years then last past, etc. And whereupon they then said, That they
themselves were seized of the Manor, and those Tenements with the
Appurtenances in their Demesne as of Fee in Right in time of peace, in the time
of the said Lady the Queen that now is, taking thereof the profits to the
value, etc. And in which, etc. And thereof they bring suit, etc. And the said
John Horsey then and there defends the force and injury when, etc. And
voucheth thereof to warranty, David Howel, who was then present in the same
Court in his proper person, and freely the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances, then to him did warrant. And upon this, the aforesaid John
Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, then demanded against him the said
David, Tenant by his warranty, the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon they said, that they they
themselves were seized of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right in time of peace, in the
time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the profits thereof to the value,
etc. And in which etc. And thereof then brought Suit, and. And the aforesaid
David, then tenant by his warranty, defends the force and injury when, etc.
And said, That the aforesaid Hugh Hunt did not Disseise the said John Popham,
George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances, as the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge,
by their Writ and Declaration aforesaid above supposed. And of this put himself
upon the Country, And the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge,
then prayed license thereof to imparl, and had it. And afterward the said John
Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, came back in the same Court the
same Term in their proper persons, And the said David although he was solemnly
called, did not come back, but departed in contempt of the said Court, and made
default. Therefore then by the same Court, it was granted, That the aforesaid
John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge, should recover their seisin
against the said John Horsey, of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, And that the said John Horsey should have of the Tenements of
the said David, to the value, etc. And the said David should be in mercy, etc.
And upon this, the aforesaid John Popham, George Trenchard and Edward Gorge,
then prayed a Writ of the Lady the Queen, to the Sherif of Dorset aforesaid to
be directed, to give them full seisin and possession of the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, and it was then granted unto them
retornable there from the day of Easter, in 5. Weeks then next following, etc.
At which day, before Edmond Anderson Knight, and his Companions then Justices
of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench, that is to say, at Westminster
aforesaid, came the aforesaid John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward Gorge,
in their proper persons. And the aforesaid Robert Frampton Esquire. then Sherif of
the aforesaid County of Dorset, then sent, that he by virtue of the said Writ
to him directed, made to the said John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward
Gorge, full seisin of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, as by the said Writ he was commanded, the Tenor of which
Recovery follows in these words, ss. Dorset. ss. John Popham Esquire, George
Trenchard Esquire, and Edward Gorge Esquire, in their proper persons demand
against John Horsey Knight, the Manor of Horseys-Melcumb, otherwise
Sturges-Melcumb, with the appurtenances, and 10. Messuages, 300. Acres of Land,
200. Acres of Meadow, 5000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of Wood, and 300.
Acres of Furz and Heath, with the appurtenances in Horseys-Melcumb, otherwise
Sturges-Melcumb, as their Right and Inheritance. And in which the said John
Horsey had not entry, but after Disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly and
without Judgment, did to the said John Popham, George and Edward, within 30.
years now last past, etc. And whereupon they say, That they themselves were
seized of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in their
Demesne as of Fee in Right in the time of Peace, in the time of the Lady the
Queen that now is, taking the profits to the value, etc. And in which, etc. And
thereof bring suit, etc. And the aforesaid John Horsey, by John Willis his
Attorney, comes and defends his right when, etc. And voucheth thereof to
warranty David Howel, who is present here in Court in his proper person, and
freely the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to him does
warrant, and upon this, the aforesaid John Popham, George Trenchard, and Edward
Gorge demand against the said David Tenant by his warranty, the Ma^nor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc. And
whereupon they say, That they themselves were seized of the Ma^nor and
Teneme^ts aforesaid with the appurtena^ces in their demesne, as of Fe and Right,
in the time of peace, in the time the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the
profits thereof to the value, etc. and in which, etc. and thereof they bring
suit, etc. and the said David Tenant, by his warranty defends his right when,
etc. and says, that the said Hugh did not dissess the aforesaid John Popham
George, and Edward, of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances as the said John, George and Edward, by their writ and
declaration aforesaid, above suppose, and of this puts himself upon the
Country, etc. and the aforesaid John Popham, George and Edward, pray License
thereof to imparle, and have it, etc. and afterward the said John George and
Edward return here into Court the same Term in their proper persons, and the
said David, although solemnly called, does not come, but departed in despite
of the Court, and made default, Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid
John Popham George and Edward, recover their seisin against the aforesaid John
Horsey of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and that
the said John have of the Lands of the said David to the value, etc. and the
said David in mercy, etc. and upon this the aforesaid John Popham George and
Edward pray a writ of the Lady the Queen, to the Sherif of the County
aforesaid, to be directed, to give them full seisin of the Manor and Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and it is granted unto them retorneable here
from Easter day in 5 weeks, etc. At which day here came the aforesaid John
Popham, George, and Edward, in their proper persons, and the Sheriff, that is
to say, Robert Frampton Esquire now sent, that he by virtue of the said writ to
him directed, the 29th. day of April last past gave to the said John Popham
George and Edward, full seisin of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, as by the said writ to him it was Commanded, etc. Which
recoverie, in form aforesaid had, was had to the use of the said John Horsey,
and Dorothie then his wife, and to the heirs males of the body of the said John
lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue to the use of the aforesaid
Jasper Horsey, and the heirs males of the said Jasper Lawfully begotten, and
for default of such issue, to the use of the right heirs of the said John
Horsey for ever; by virtue whereof, and force of the said Act of Parliament of
transferring uses into possession made, the aforesaid John Horsey, and
Dorothie, were seized of that Manor, with the appurtenances, that is to say,
the said John Horsey in his demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and
the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, and the aforesaid Dorothy in her
demesne as of freehold for, and during her life, the remainder thereof in form
aforesaid expectant, and the said John and Dorothie, so thereof being seized,
the remainder thereof in form aforesaid expectant, the said John Horsey
afterward and before the within written time in which, etc. that is to say the
7th. day of September, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is the 31th. at Melcum aforesaid, of such his estate dyed thereof seized
without issue male of his body lawfully begotten, and the aforesaid Dorothie
him overlived and held her self in, in the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances, and was thereof sole seized in her demesne as of freehold for the
term of her life, by way of survivor, the remainder thereof in form aforesaid
expectant. And that Mary Arnald wife of Richard Arnald Esquire, was one Sister
and Coheir of the said John Horsey, and Reginald Moon Knight, was another
Coheir of the aforesaid John Horsey, that is to say Son and heir of William
Moon Knight, and Elizabeth his wife, other Sister of the said John Horsey: and
the Jurors aforesaid further say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Dorothie of the aforesaid Manor of Over Melcum, otherwise Horseys Melcum,
otherwise Sturges Melcum, with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid being
seized, after and before the within written time in which, etc. that is to say,
the first day of September in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
the 32th. at Melcum aforesaid, dyed of such her estate so seized; after whose
death the aforesaid Ralph Horsey, and Edith unto the aforesaid Manor of Over
Melcum otherwise Horseys Melcum, otherwise Sturges Melcum with the
appurtenances did enter, and were thereof seized as the Law requires: and the
said Jurors further say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said Robert Bingham
the Elder, and Jane, of the aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum, otherwise Melcum
Binghams with the appurtenances whereof, etc. so as is before said, for the
term of their lives being seized, the remainder thereof in form aforesaid
expectant, the said Robert Bingham the Elder, after and before the time in
which, etc. that is to say the 11th. day of January, in the year of the Reign
of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 36 at Melcum aforesaid, dyed, of
such his estate thereof seized, the said Richard Bingham being Cosen and heir
of the said Robert Bingham the Elder, that is to say, Son and heir of the
aforesaid Robert Bingham the Younger, Son and heir of the said Robert Bingham
the Elder, and within the age of 21 years, that is to say, of the age of 8
years, and no more, and that the aforesaid Richard Bingham is yet living and in
full life, that is to say at Melcum aforesaid, and that the aforesaid Jane the
aforesaid Robert Bingham the Elder overlived, and held her self in the
aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum, otherwise Melcum Binghams, with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. And was thereof sole seized in her demesne as of
freehold for the term of her life by right of survivor, the remaynder thereof
in form aforesaid, as the Law requires, and that the aforesaid Jane of the
aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum, otherwise Melcum Binghams with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. in her demesne as of Freehold for the term of her
life in form aforesaid, being seized, the aforesaid Iaue afterward, and before
the within written time in which, etc. that is to say, the second day of April
in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 41th. at
Melcum aforesaid died, of such her Estate thereof seized; after whose death,
and before the within written time in which, etc. The aforesaid Ralph Horsey,
Richard Veal, and Edward Goor, into the Tenements within written with the
appurtenances entered, and that after, and before the within written time in
which, etc. The aforesaid John Stroud and Ann his wife, and Richard Bingham,
into the aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum, otherwise Melcum Binghams with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. entered in the right of the said Richard Bingham, By
virtue of which the aforesaid Richard Bingham was of and in the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. seized, and so thereof being
seized, after and before the within written time in which, etc. that is to say,
the 7th. day of April in the Reign of said Lady the Queen that now is the 41th.
aforesaid, the aforesaid John Stroud and Ann his wife, and the said Richard
Bingham upon the Tenements within written, By their writing sealed with their
seals, bearing date the second day of April in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 41th. aforesaid, to the Jurors aforesaid,
in evidence showed at Melcum aforesaid, demised the aforesaid Manor of Nether
Melcum otherwise Melcum Binghams with the appurtenances whereof, etc. to the
within named William Albert, To have and to hold to him and his assigns from
the Feast of the Anunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, then last past,
before the date of the said writing for the Term of 7 years from thence next
and immediately ensuing fully to be complete and ended, yielding therefore
yearly during the term aforesaid, 140 pound per. An. at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, by
equal portions to be paid: By virtue of which demise the aforesaid William
Albert the aforesaid 7th. day of April in the year 41 aforesaid, into the
aforesaid Manor of Nether Melcum otherwise Melcum Binghams with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof possessed, as the Law
requires, and so being thereof possessed, after and before the within written
time in which, etc. that is to say, the aforesaid 7th. day of April in the year
41 aforesaid, the said William Albert upon the Tenements within written entered,
and demised the Tenements within written, with the appurtenances in which, etc.
to the aforesaid George Stroud, as in the declaration within written above is
specified: By virtue of which the aforesaid George Stroud the aforesaid 7th.
day of April in the 41th. year aforesaid, into the Tenements within written in
the Declaration within written mentioned in which, etc. entered, and was thereof
possessed as the Law requires, until the said Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal, and
Edward Goor, the within written 11 day of April in the 41 year aforesaid upon
the possession of the said George Stroud (his term aforesaid not yet ended) did
eject expel and amove: But whether upon the whole matter aforesaid by the
Jurors aforesaid in form aforesaid found, the entry of the said George into
the Tenements within written, with the appurtenances be lawful or not, the said
Jurors altogether do not know, and pray thereof the advice of the Court here,
etc. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall
seem to the Court here, etc. That the Entry of the said George Stroud into the
Tenements within written, with the appurtenances be lawful, Then the aforesaid
Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Ralph Horsey, Richard
Veal, and Edward Goor; are guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment within
written, as the aforesaid George Stroud within against them complains: And
then they assesse the damages of the said George, by occasion of the Trespass
and Ejectment within written, above his charges and costs by him about his Suit
in this behalf expended, to 2. shillings, and for his costs and charges to 20.
shillings. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in
form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Court here, etc. That the Entry of
the said George Stroud, into the Tenements within written with the
appurtenances be not lawful, Then the aforesaid Jurors say, upon their Oath
aforesaid, That the said Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor, are not
guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment within written, as the said Ralph Horsey
Richard Veal, and Edward Goor, thereof within alleged, And because the Court of
the said Lady the Queen of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises are
not yet avised, Day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid before the Lady
the Q. at Westminster, Until Friday next after the morrow of Holy Trinity, to
hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here
thereof not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court
of the Lady the Queen of giving her Judgment of and upon the premises are not
avised, Day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, Until Thursday next after 8. days of St. Michael, to
hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here
thereof not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Court
of the Lady the Queen of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, until Friday next after 8. days of St. Hillary, to here their
Jugement thereof, because the Court of the said Lady the Queen thereof not yet,
etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady
the Q. here of their Judgment to be given of and upon the premises is not yet
avised, Day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid, until Wednesday next
after the 18th. day of Easter, to hear their judgment thereof, because the
Court of the said Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before
the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment thereof is not yet avised, Day is given to the parties
aforesaid before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Friday next after
the morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court
of the said Lady the Queen here thereof are not yet, etc. At which day come,
the parties aforesaid before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, Upon which, seen, And by the Court of the said Lady the
Queen here all and singular the premises fully understood, and mature
deliberation being thereof had, It is granted, That the said George Stroud
shall recover against the said Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor his
Term aforesaid, of and in the Tenements aforesaid, in the Declaration aforesaid
specified yet to come, and his damages aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in
form aforesaid assessed, As also 12. pound for his charges and costs aforesaid,
to the said George Sroud by the Court of the said Lay the Queen here, with his
assent of increase adjudged: which damages in the whole do amount to 13. pound,
and two shillings, And the said Ralph Horsey, Richard Veal, and Edward Goor, be
taken, etc.

Ejectione Firm.
Hillary Term 290. Elizabeth, Rott. 790. in the KINGS BENCH, Barastons Case, C.
3. part. fol. 19. a.
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say, Michaelmass Term last past,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came Richard Hynde, by James Long his
Attorney, and brought here in the Court of the said Lady the Queen then there,
his Bill against William Ambry, in the Custody of the Marshal, etc. Of a Plea
of Trespass and Ejectment of his Farm, and are Pledges of Suit, that is to
say, John Do, and Richard Roo, Which Bill follows in these words. ss.
Hartford. Richard Hynde complains of William Ambry in the custody of the
Marshal of the Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self
being, for that, that is to say, That whereas, one Thomas Brand, and Constance
his Wife, and Milliam Davyes, and Margaret his Wife, the 4th. day of July, in
the year of Reign of the said Lady Elizabeth now Queen of England the 28th. at
Aldenhan, in the County aforesaid, Demised, and granted, and to Farm let, to
the aforesaid Richard Hynde amongst other things, 10. Acres of Land, with the
appurtenances, called the upper part of a Close named Reddings, in Aldenham
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid: To have, and to hold, the aforesaid 10.
Acres, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Richard Hynde and his Assigns,
from the Feast of St. John the Baptist then last past, until the end and Term
of 7. years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; By
virtue of which demise, The said Richard Hynde, into the aforesaid 10. Acres of
Land, with the appurtenances, the aforesaid 9th. day of July, in the 28th. year
aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. into the aforesaid 10. Acres of Lands
with the appurtenances, upon the possession of the said Richard entered, and him
the said Richard from his Farm aforesaid, the Term thereof not yet ended, did
eject, expel, and amove, and then the said Richard from his possession thereof
held out, and as yet holds out, And other harms to him did against the Peace
of the said Queen, to the damage of the said Richard of 10. pounds, and thereof
he brings Suit, etc. And now at this day, that is to say, Monday after 8.
days of St. Michael, this Term, until which day, the said William had license
to the Bill aforesaid to imparl, and then to answer, etc. before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Richard by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the said William by Richard Belfield his Attorney, and the same
William does defend the force and injury when, etc. And says, That he is not
guilty thereof, and of that he puts himself upon the Country; And that said
Richard likewise. Therefore a Jury thereof before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, Wednesday next after 15. days of Easter, who neither, etc.
Because as well, etc. the same day is given to the parties aforesaid there,
etc. Afterward the process thereof was continued between the parties
aforesaid, in the Plea aforesaid, by Juries put between them in respite, before
the said Lady the Queen, until Wednesday next after 8. days of St. Michael
then next following: Unless the Justices of the said Lady the Queen to take
Assizes in the County aforesaid assigned, First upon Friday the 12th. day of
July, at Hartford in the County aforesaid, by form of the Statute, etc. come
for default of Jurors, etc. At which Wednesday next after 8. days of St.
Michael, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came the aforesaid Richard
Hynde by his Attorney aforesaid, And the aforesaid Justices of Assizes, before
whom, etc. sent here their Record before them had in these words: ss.
Afterward, the day and place within contained, before Thomas Gaudy Knight, one
of the Justice^ of the Lady the Queen of Pleas, before the Lady the Queen her
self to be holden assigned, and Robert Clark, one of the Barons of the said
Lady the Queen of her Exchequer, Justices of the said Lady the Queen, to take
Assizes in the County of Hartford assigned, by form of the Statute, etc. came
as well the within named Richard Hynde, by Henry Brantwayte his Attorney, as the
within written William Ambry by his Attorney within mentioned, and the Jurors of
the Jury whereof within mention is made, some of them, that is to say, Richard
Penifather, Thomas Glascock, John Harmer, and Stephen Nebbes came, and in the
said Jury are sworn, And because the rest of the Jurors of the said Jury did
not appear, Therefore, other of the Standers by, chosen by the Sherif, at the
Request of the said Richard Hynde, and by the Command of the Justices aforesaid
are of new put, whose names to the Panel within written are filed, according
to the form of the Statute in such Case late, made, and provided, and some of
the Jurors so a new put, that is to say, Edward Vyall, Thomas Cooker, Thomas
Trow, Edward Asher, John Dermer, William Tiverton, Edward Jorden, and Robert
Carpenter came, who to say the truth of the matters within contained, togeether
with the Jurors aforesaid first unpannelled, and sworn, chosen, tried and
sworn, Say, upon their Oath, That long before the Trespass and Ejectment of the
Farm within supposed to be done, One Thomas Boraston was seized of and in the
within written 10. Acres of Lands, with the appurtenances, called the upper
part of a Close called Reddings, in Aldenham within written, in his demesne as
of see, and the said 10. Acres of Lands with the appurtenances held of one
Robert Stepnigh Esquire. as of his Manor of Aldenham in his free socage, And
further the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid Tho.
Boraston had issue of his body lawfully begotten, Hum Boraston his Elder Son,
and Hen. Boraston, his Younger Son: and the aforesaid Hum. Boraston had issue
of his body Lawfully begotten, Constance Boraston now the wife of the within
named Thomas Brand, and the within named Margaret wife of the within named
William Davis: and that afterward Humphrey Boraston dyed, living the said
Thomas Boraston, and that the aforesaid Constance and Margaret were and are
Daughters and Coheirs of the aforesaid Humphry Boraston: and farther the
Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid boraston, so of, and
in the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the appurtenances being seized as before
is said, afterward, that is to say, the 12th. day of the month of August in
the year of our Lord 1559 in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen,
the first, made his Testament and last Will in writing, in these English words
following, In the name of God Amen. Item, I give unto Thomas Amerie, and
Amphillis his wife, all that my upper part of my close called Redding, for the
Term of 8 years after my decease in recompense of one yearly Annuity of 46
shillings 8 pence due unto the said Thomas Amerie upon one obligation of
certain years yet during, and upon farther Condition, that the said Thomas
Amerie shall bring in the said Obligation to my Executors to be cancelled and
utterly discharged, upon this consideration, before such time as the said
Thomas Amerie shall make any entry upon the premises, and that the said Thomas
Amerie neither his assigns, shall not during the said 8 years fell any of the
Woods, Timber, nor Undrwoods, in, nor upon the said upper part, but shall
preserve the Woods, hawts, and Springs, to the behoof of the Heir in remainder,
and after the Term of the said 8 years the said upper part to remayn to my
Executors until such time as Hugh Boraston shall accomplish his age of 21
years, and the mean profits to be employed by my Executors toward the
performance of this my last will and Testament; and when the said Hugh comes
unto twenty and one years of age, then I will that he shall enjoy the said
upper part to him and his heirs for ever, Provided always, that if the said
Thomas Amerie do refuse to bring in his Obligation, or to preserve the Woods,
upon the said upper part, then my Executors to enjoy the premises during the
said Term of 8 years, paying the said Amerie his 46 shillings 8 pence during
the said Term of 8 years; as by the Tenement and last will aforesaid amongst
other things it appears: And farther the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their
Oath aforesaid That the aforesaid Thomas Boraston so of the aforesaid 10 Acres
of Land with the appurtenances being seized, afterward, that is to say, the
14th. day of the aforesaid Month of August in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the first, at Aldenham aforesaid, of such his
estate dyed seized; and farther the Jurors aforesaid say, upon their Oath, that
the aforesaid Hugh Boraston in the said Testament and last will named, was Son
and heir of the said Henry Boraston, and that the said Hugh Boraston dyed
before that he came to the age of 21 years, that is to say, about the age of 9
years. And farther the Jurors aforesaid say, upon their Oath aforesaid, that
the Interest of the premises aforesaid, in the said Testament and last will
mentioned and devised, as well to the said Thomas Amry, and Amphillis his wife,
as to the Executors of the said Testament, before the day of the bringing of
the Bill within written ended and determined: And further the Jurors aforesaid
say upon their Oath, That Philip Boraston was and is Brother and next heir of
the said Hugh Boraston, by color whereof the said Philip Boraston after the
aforesaid Interest of the premises to the said Thomas Amerie and Amphillis his
wife, and the exetors aforesaid, by the aforesaid Testament and last will given
and devised, was ended and determined, unto the aforesaid 10 Acres of Lands
with the appurtenannces as brother and next heir of the said Hugh entered, and
was thereof s^ised, as the Law requires, and so thereof seized, the said Philip
boraston afterward and before the time of the exhibitage of the Bill
aforesaid, that is to say, the 20 day of June in the year of the Reign of the
Lady the Queen that now is the 28, demised, granted, and to Farm let, to the
aforesaid William Ambry now defendant, the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances in which, etc. To have and to hold to the said William Ambry and
his assigns, for a whole year from thence next following, to be fully complete
and ended, and so from year to year as long as both parties should please; By
virtue of which ^^^ise, The aforesaid William Ambry into the aforesaid 10 Acres
of Land with the appurtenances entered and was thereof possessed, and so thereof
being possessed, the aforesaid Thomas brand and Constance his wife, William
Davis and Margaret his wife, as in the right of the said Constance, and
Margaret, afterward, that is to say, the 9 day of July in the year of the
Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 20 aforesaid, into the aforesaid
10 Acres of land with the appurtenances in and upon the possession of the said
William Ambry entered, and were thereof seized, as the Law requires: and so
thereof being seized, at Aldenham aforesaid, the said Thomas Brand and
Constance his wife, William Davis and Margaret his wife, afterward, that is to
say, the said 9th. day of July, in the year 28 aforesaid, by their Indenture
bearing date the same day and year, demised, granted and to Farm let, the
aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the appurtenances to the aforesaid Richard
Hynde, to have and to hold the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the
appurtenances unto the said Richard Hynde and his assigns from the Feast of
Saint John the Baptist then last past, until the end and term of 7 years from
thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended: By virtue of which
demise, the said Richard Hynde into the aforesaid 10. Acres of Lands with the
appurtenances, the aforesaid 9th. day of July in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 28th. aforesaid entered, and was thereof
possessed, until the aforesaid William Ambry afterward, that is to say, the
aforesaid 9th. day of July in the 28 year aforesaid, with force and Arms, etc.
into the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, upon the possession
of the said Richard Hynde, thereof, by the precept and command of the aforesaid
Philip Boraston re-entred, and him the said Richard Hynde from his possession
thereof held out, and yet hold out: But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, the re-entry of the aforesaid William Ambry
into the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the appurtenances, be, or in Law ought
to be adjudged, a good or lawful re-entry, the Jurors aforesaid are utterly
ignorant, and thereof pray the advice of the Court of the Lady the Queen; and
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the Court of the said Lady the Queen that the Re-entry of the aforesaid William
Ambry into the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the appurtenances, and upon the
possession of the said Richard Hynde, be not nor in Law ought to be adjudged a
good and Lawful Re-entry, Then the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath
aforesaid, That the aforesaid William Ambry is guilty of the Trespass and
Ejectment within specified in manner and form as the aforesaid Richard Hynde,
within against him complains, and then they Assesse the damages of the said
Richard Hynde, by occasion of the Trespass and Ejectment out of his Farm,
besides his charges and costs by him about his suit in his behalf expended, to
8. shillings, and for his Charges and Costs to 30. shillings and 4, pence: but
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the Court of the Lady the Queen, that the re-entry of the aforesaid William
Ambry into the aforesaid 10 Acres of Land with the appurtenances in and upon
the possession of the said Richard Hynde, be, or in Law ought to be adjudged a
good and Lawful re-entry, then the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath, that
the said William Ambry is not guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment of the farm
aforesaid, as he before for himself has alleged: And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here, of giving their Judgment further of and upon the premises
is not yet avised, day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid, in the state
that now it is, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster until thursday next
after 8 days of Saint Hillary to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here, thereof not yet, have avised, etc. At which
day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster come the parties aforesaid by
their Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, further day
thereof is given to the parties aforesaid in the state it now is, before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster until wednesday next after 15 days of Easter to
hear their Judgment thereof, etc. because, etc. And so from Term to Term until
the plaint aforesaid was farther adjroned by another writ of the said Lady the
Queen of Common adjournment before the Queen until the morrow of All Souls at
the Castle of Hartford in the County of Hartford, at which day before the Lady
the Queen at the Castle of Hartford, came the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Court of the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises, is not yet avised, Day thereof is farther
given to the parties aforesaid in state as it is now before the Lady the Queen
at the Castle of Hartford, until Tuesday next after 3 days of Saint Hillary,
to hear their Judgment, etc. because, etc. Before which day, the plaint
aforesaid was adjorned by a writ of the Lady the Queen of common adjornement,
before the said Lady the Queen until 8 days of Saint Hillary at Westminster,
at which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid: and because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised,
Day is further given to the parties aforesaid in state as now before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster until Wednesday next after 15 days of Easter to
hear their Judgment thereof, etc. because, etc. At which day, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys
aforesaid: Upon which, seen by the Court of the Lady the Queen here, and the
premises diligently looked into, and thereof mature deliberation being thereof
had, Because it seems to the Court of the said Lady the Queen here, that the
entry of the aforesaid VVilliliam Ambry, above specified, into the aforesaid
10 Acres of Land, with the appurtenances, in and upon the possession of the
aforesaid Richard Hynde, was a good and lawful re-entry, therefore It is
granted, that the aforesaid Richard Hynde, take nothing by his Bill aforesaid,
but that he for his false clamor be taken, etc. and the aforesaid William
Ambry be thereof without damage, etc.

Ejectione Firm.
Hillary Term. 36. Eliz. Rott. 440. in the Kings Bench. Sir George Browns
Case. C. 3. part. fo. 45.
WIlliam Spencer, late of Swindon in the County aforesaid Yeoman, and Thomas
Spencer late of Swindon in the County aforesaid Yeoman, were attached to answer
to James Linche of a plea, wherefore with force and arms one Message, one
Barn, 80 Acres of Land, 80 Acres of Meadow, and 80 Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances, in Swindon, which George Brown Knight, to the aforesaid James
demised for a Term which is not yet ended, they entered, and him from his Farm
aforesaid did eject, and other harms did unto him, to the grievous damage of
the said James, and against the peace of the Lady the Queen that now is, etc.
and whereupon the said James, by Thomas Cooper his Attourny Complains, That
whereas the aforesaid George Brown the 22th. day of October, in the year of the
Reign of the Queen that now is, the 35th. at Swindon aforesaid, had demised to
the said James, the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to have and to
hold the same Tenements with the appurtenances, to the said James and his
assigns, from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel then last past, until
the end and Term of 4 years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
completed: By virtue of which demise, the said James into the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed, and so
thereof being possessed, the aforesaid William and Thomas afterward, that is
to say the 22th. day of October aforesaid in the 35th. year aforesaid with
force and arms, etc. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, which
the said George Brown, to the said James, in form aforesaid demised for the
term aforesaid, which is not yet ended, entered, and him the said James from his
Farm aforesaid held out, and other harms, etc. To the grievous damage, etc. and
against the peace, etc. whereupon he says that he is the worse and has damage
to the value of 20 pound, and thereof brings suit, etc. And the aforesaid
William and Thomas by John Paxton their Attorney come, and defend the force and
injury when, etc. And say that they in nothing are guilty of the Trespass and
Ejectment aforesaid as the aforesaid James above against them complains: and
of this, put themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid James likewise,
etc. Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he have here in 8 days of
the Purification of the blessed Lady. 12 good and Lawful men, etc. by whom the
truth, etc. and who neither, etc. Because as well, etc. afterward the process
between the parties aforesaid was continued of the plea aforesaid, by Jurors
put between them put in respite here until this day, that is to say, in 8 days
of Saint Michael in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the
37th. Unless the Justices of the Lady the Queen for Assizes in the County
aforesaid to be taken assigned, by the form of the statute, upon Thursday the
17 day of July last past, at New Sarad in the County aforesaid first came. And
now here, at this day come as well the aforesaid James Linche, as the aforesaid
William Spencer and Thomas Spencer by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the
aforesaid Justices of Assise before whom, etc. sent here their Record in these
words; Afterward, the day and place within contained before Thomas Walmesley
one of the Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Bench, and Edward Fenner one
of the Justices of the said Lady the Queen, of pleas before the Queen her self,
to be holden assigned Justices of the Assiise of the Lady the Queen, in the
County of Wilts, to be taken, Assigned by the form of the statute, came as well
the within named James Linche as the said within written William Spencer, and
Tho. Spencer by their Attorneys within mentioned, and the Jurors of the Jury
whereof within mention is made being called, some of them, that is to say,
William Garret of Shaw Gentleman, William Bury of Crickland, Thomas Puckley of
Nether Haven Gentleman, William Marse of Haydon, John Noise of Graston, Richard
Leg of Nether Haven, Thomas Smith of Kinnett, Thomas Stoper of Moanton, and
William Gouldesborough of the same came, and are sworn of the same Jury, and
because that the rest of the Jurors of the Jury did not appear, therefore other
of the standers by chosen by the Sheriff of the County aforesaid at the request
of the said James, and by the command of the Justices aforesaid were new put,
whose names to the Pan^nel within written are filed, according to the statute
in such case lately made and provided: And the Jurors so of new put, that is to
say, Thomas Stringer, William Bundy, and William Hascal, likewise called
came, who to the truth of the matter within contained, together with the other
Jurors aforesaid first impannelled, chosen, tried and sworn, say upon their
Oath, That the aforesaid William Spencer is not guilty of the Trespass and
Ejectment within written as the said Wiliima has within alleged; and further
the said Jurors, as to all the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid within written,
besides the Trespass and Ejectment in the Message within contained and 26
Acres of the Tenements within written by the aforesaid Thomas Spencer within
supposed to be done, they say upon their Oath that the said Tho. is not thereof
guilty as the said Tho. likewise thereof within allegeth: and as to the Trespass
and Ejectment within written, into the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land
within supposed to be done, the same Jurors say upon their Oath, that long
before the within written time in which it is supposed the Trespass and
Ejectment aforesaid to be done, one Richard Bridges Knight was seized as well
of the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land with the appurtenances, as of
the other Tenements within written residue with the appurtenances in his demesne
as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, the said Richard long before the time
aforesaid in which, etc. by his certain writing of Feoffment Indented, in
Consideration of a certain Ioynture of one Iohanna the wife or Daughter of
William Spencer Kn^ght, deceased, from thence after to be had and ended, gave
and granted, and in his said writing Indented, confirmed to John VVinchcomb the
Elder, of Newberry, in the County of Berks. and John Knight of Newbery
aforesaid, the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc. amongst
other things, to have and to hold the said Message and 26 Acres of Land in
which, etc. amongst other things to the said John VVinchcomb and John Knight
their heirs and assigns for ever, under this Condition following, that is to
say, That the said John VVinchcomb and John Knight within one month next
ensuing after the date of the said writing, by their sufficient writing in Law,
as by the learned Council in the Law of the said Richard ^ridges it should be
avised, should give, grant, and deliver, the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of
Land in which, etc. amongst other things to the said Richard and the said
Johanna his wife, to have and to hold the said Message and 26 Acres of Land in
which, etc. amongst other things to the said Richard and the said Johanna, and
to the heirs of the bodies of the said Richard and the said Johanna his wife,
betwixt the said Richard and the said Johanna Lawfully begotten, and for
default of such issue, the remainder thereof to the right heirs of the
aforesaid Richard for ever, of the chief Lords of the Fee by the services
therefore due and of right occasioned, as by the said writing of Feoffment
Indented Sealed with the Seal of the said Richard Bridges and bearing date the
23th. day of January in the year of the Reign of the Lord Henry late King of
England the 8th. the 32th. to the Jurors aforesaid, in evidence showed, more
fully appeared, and that by virtue of the said Feoffment, the aforesaid John
Winchcomb and John Knight were seized of the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of
Lands in which, etc. amongst other, in their demesne as of Fee upon the
condition aforesaid: And farther the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath, That
the said John Winchcomb and John Knight being so thereof seized, long before
the aforesaid time in which, etc. and within the said one Month next ensuing,
after the date of the said writing of Feoffment Indented at Walcot aforesaid,
in performance of the condition aforesaid, and at the request of the said
Richard Bridges, by their certain writing Indented of Feoffment delivered,
enfeoffed and delivered, and by the said their writing Indented they did
confirm to the aforesaid Richard Bridges and Johanna his Wife, the aforesaid
Message and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc. amongst other things, to have and
to hold the aforesaid Message, and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc. amongst
other, to the aforesaid Richard Bridges, and Johanna his Wife, and the heirs of
the bodies of them, the said Richard and Johanna betwixt them Lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue the remaynder thereof to the right
heirs of the said Richard Bridges for ever, of the chief Lords of the Fee by
the services thereof due, and of right accustomed as by the said writing of
Feoffment Indented with the Seals of the said John Winchcomb and John Knight
Sealed, and bearing date the 6th. day of February in the year of the Reign of
the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. the 32th. aforesaid, and to the Jurors
aforesaid in Evidence showed, it more fully appears: And that by virtue of
the said Feofment, the aforesaid Richard Bridges and Johanna were seized of the
aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc. amongst other in their
demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to the said Richard and Johanna and the
heirs of their bodies between them Lawfully begotten, the remaynder thereof to
the right heirs of the said Richard as above is said: And the said Richard and
the said Johanna so thereof being, had issue of their bodies between them
Lawfully begotten, one Anthony Bridges his Son yet living and in full life
being, that is to say, at West Shefford in the County of Berks: and that
afterward, and before the time in which, etc. the aforesaid Richard Bridges
and Johanna of the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc.
amongst other, in form aforesaid being seized, the said Richard before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. at Lugarshall in the said County of Wilts. of
such his estate dyed thereof seized: and the aforesaid Johanna him over-lived,
and held her self in the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land in which, etc.
amongst other, and was thereof sole seized in her demesne as of Fee tail in form
aforesaid, the remainder thereof over as before is said: and farther the Jurors
aforesaid say upon their Oath, that the said Johanna being thereof so seized,
The aforesaid Anthony Bridges the 4 day of December in the year of the Reign of
the said Lady the Queen that now is the 32th. at Walcot aforesaid, by his
Indenture made between the aforesaid Anthony Bridges Son of the aforesaid
Richard and Johanna, and Barbara then wife of the said Anthony, and one Edward
Langford Gentleman, by the name of Anthony Bridges of West-Shefford, otherwise
great Shefford in the County of Berks. Esquire, and Barbara his wife, and
Edward Langford of Lincolnes Inn, Gentleman, of the one part, and one George
Brown Knight, by the name of George Brown Esquire, second Son of the right
Honorable Anthony, Viscount, of the most noble order of the Garter Knight, of
the other part, which other part with the Seals of the said Anthony Bridges,
Barbara, and Edward Langford Sealed, bearing date the same day and year to the
Jurors aforesaid in evidence showed, it was Covenanted, granted, condescended
unto, concluded and fully agreed by and between the said parties to the said
Indenture in manner and form following; That is to say, that the said Anthony
Bridges Son of the said Richard Bridges, and Johanna, and Edward Langford,
covenanted and granted for them their heirs and assigns, to and with the
aforesaid George Brown his Heirs and assigns, by the same Indenture, that they
the said Anthony Bridges Son of the aforesaid Richard Bridges, and Johanna and
Barbara together with the aforesaid Edward Langford before Easter Term then
next following, would levy, and acknowledge before the Justices of the said
Lady the Queen of the Bench at Westminster, one Fine or diverse Fines with the
proclamations according to the course of Fines in the said Court used to the
aforesaid George Brown of all that Manor of Kintbury with all and singular the
Rights members and appurtenances in the aforesaid County of Berks. And of all
Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, Rents, Services, Advowsons, Patronages,
Liberties, Privileges, Profits, and Hereditaments, with all and singular their
appurtenances to the said Manor belonging or appertayning, and also of the
aforesaid whole Tenements within specified, by the name of Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments with the appurtenances called or known by the name of Walcot,
lying in Swindon within written whereof the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of
Lands then were and yet are parcel: As also of all messuages, Cottages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever to the same belonging,
occupied, reputed, demised or taken as part or parcel thereof, by the name of
40 Messuages, 20 Tofts, 1 Dovehouse, 30 Gardens, 20 Orchards, 1000 Acres of
Land, 300 Acres of Meadow, 1000 Acres of Pasture, 100 Acres of Wood, 500 Acres
of Furz and Heath, and 40 shillings of free Rent, with the appurtenances in
Kintbury, Holt, Hungerford, Walcot, and Swindon, in the Counties of Berks. and
Wilts. or by whatsoever number of Acres either sole or together with any other
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments: and that the aforesaid Fine, or
the aforesaid Fines concerning the premises in the said indenture before
mentioned, and the execution of the Fine or Fines should be, and be to the use
of the said George Brown and his heirs and assigns for ever, and to no other
use intent or purpose: And the said Jurors farther say, That in performance and
accomplishment of a Covenant and agreement in the said Indenture, between the
said Anthony Bridges the Son of the said Richard and Johanna, Barbara, and
Edward Langford, and the said George Brown in form aforesaid mentioned,
afterward, and before the aforesaid ^aster Term, That is to say, in the Term
of Saint Hillary in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now
is the 32th. aforesaid, a certain Fine was Levied in the Court of the said Lady
the Queen at Westminster in the county of Middlesex, before Edmund Anderson,
Francis Windham, William Periam, and Thomas Walmesly, then Justices of the said
Lady the Queen, and other the Lady the Queens faithful people then there
present, between the aforesaid George Brown plaintiff, and the aforesaid
Anthony Bridges Son of the said Richard and Johanna, and Barbara his Wife, and
Edward Langford Gentleman deforceant, of the whole Tenements in the said
Indenture specified, whereof the said Message and 26 Acres of Lands are, and
at the time of the levying of the said Fine, were parcel amongst other by the
names of the Manors of Kintbury, and Fally, otherwise great Fally, with the
appurtenances, and 60 Messuages, 20 Tofts, 3 Dovehouses, 40 Gardens, 50
Orchards, 4000 Acres of Lands, 300 Acres of Meadow, 4000 Acres of Pasture, 300
Acres of Wood, 1000 Acres of Furz and Heath, and 6 pound 13 shillings 4 pence
of Rent with the appurtenances in Kintbury, Holt, Fally, otherwise great Fally,
Hungerford, and West Shefford, otherwise great Shefford: as also of the Rectory
of great Fally, with the appurtenances, and Free Warren and liberty of a Park
in West Shefford, otherwise great Shefford, and also of the Free Fishings
Kennet in the County of Berkss, And of the Manor of Baddesden, with the
appurtenances, and 20 Messuages, 10 Tofts, 12 Gardens, 8 Orchards, 1000 Acres
of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 1000 Acres of pasture, 200 Acres of Wood, 500
Acres of Furz and Heath, and 40 shillings Rent with the appurtenances in
Baddesden, Lugershall, Walcot, and Swindon in the County of Wilts, whereupon a
plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the said Court, that is to say.
That the said Anthony, Barbara, and Edward, acknowledge the said Manors,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Rectorie, Warren, liberty and Fishing, with the
appurtenances in the said Fine contained to be the right of the said George, as
those which the said George had of the gift of the said Anthony, and the same
remised and quit claimed, from the said Anthony, Barbara, and Edward, and their
heirs, to the aforesaid George and his heirs for ever. And besides the said
Anthony, and Barbara, granted for them and the heirs of the said Anthony, that
they warrant to the aforesaid George his Heirs and Assigns the aforesaid
Manors, Tenement^, Rents, Rectorie, Warren, and Liberties, and Fishing, with
the appurtenances, in the same Fine contained, against the said Edward and his
heirs for ever, and for this Recognition, release, quit claym, warranty, Fine
and Concord, the said George granted to the aforesaid Edward a certain yearly
Rent of 100 pound, to be going out of and in the aforesaid Manors, Tenements,
Rents, Rectorie, Warren, Liberties and Fishing, with the appurtenances in the
same contained, and the same to him did render in the same Court, to have and
to hold and perceave the said yearly Rent of 100 pound to the said Edward the
whole life of the said Johanna, by the name of the Lady Johanna Bridges, Mother
of the said Anthony, at the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the
Virgin, the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, Saint Michael the Archangel,
and the birth of our Lord, by equal portions yearly to be paid the whole life
of the said Johanna, the first payment whereof to begin at the Feast of the
Feasts aforesaid, which next after the decease of the said Anthony should
happen to be; And if it should happen the said yearly Rent of 100 pound or any
part thereof to be behind in part or in all after any of the aforesaid Feasts
in which (as before is said) it ought to be paid, not paid by the space of 30
days, That then and so often the said George and his heirs forfeit to the said
Edward 4 pound and 15 shillings, Nomine paenae, as often as the said yearly
Rent of 100 pound or any parcel thereof so to be behind should happen, and
that then and so often it should be well lawful to the said Ed. all the life
time of the said Johanna, into the aforesaid Manors, Tenements, Rents,
Rectorie, Warren, Liberty, and Fishing, with the appurtenances in the said Fine
contained, and every part and parcel thereof to enter and distreyn, and the
distressess so here taken and had, Lawfully to lead carry away and drive, and
the same to keep, until as well of the aforesaid yearly Rent of 100 pound with
the area^ages thereof, if any should be, as of the aforesaid 4 pound 15
shillings, Nomine Paenae, as before is said, he should be fully satisfied and
paid. Also the aforesaid George granted to the aforesaid Anthony and Barbara
the aforesaid Manors of Baddesden and Fally, otherwise great Fally with the
appurtenances, and 20 Messuages, 10 Tofts, 10 Gardens, 6 Orchards, 1000 Acres
of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 1000 Acres of Pasture, 100 Acres of Wood, 500
Acres of Furz and Heath, and 50 shilling Rent, with the appurtenances in
Baddesden, Lugershall, Fally, otherwise great Fally, and West Shefford, and the
Rectorie of great Fally, with the appurtenance, and Free Warren, and Liberty of
a Park in West Shefford, otherwise great Shefford aforesaid, parcel of the
Manors, Tenements and Rents aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in the said
Fine contained, and then did render in the same Court, To have and to hold, to
the said Anthony, and Barbara, of the chief Lords of the Fee by the services
which to those Manors, Tenements, Rents, Rectories, Warren, and Liberty of
Park do belong, the whole life of the said Anthony and Barbara, and to the
longest liver of them, without impeachment of any waste, the whole life of the
said Anthony: And after the decease of the said Anthony and Barbara, the same
Manor, Tenements, Rents, Rectories, Warren, and Liberties of Park with the
appurtenances, wholly to return to the said George and his heirs, To be holden
of the Lords of the Fee, by the services which to those Manors, Tenements,
Rents, Rectory, Warren and liberty of Park, belonging for ever: And the
aforesaid Jurors further say upon their Oath aforesaid, that the said Johanna
in the said Message and 26 Acres of Land amongst other with the appurtenances,
in form aforesaid being seized, the said Johanna afterward, and before the
within written time in which, etc. the 7th. day of October, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 32th. at Swindon aforesaid,
by her certain Indenture of demise, between the same Johanna by the name of
Jane Harcourt of Lugershall, in the County of Wilts. Widow, of the one party,
and Edward Bridges Esquire, William Bridges, and Anthony Bridges Sons of the
said Edmond, and their assigns, of the other party made, which Indenture is
dated the 21th. day of August in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 32th. aforesaid, as well for and in Consideration of the
surrender of one Indenture of Demise before then granted, of all and singular
the premises in the said Indenture, to the aforesaid Johanna then after demised
or to be demised of 19 years and more then to come and not expired, which the
aforesaid Edmond before that time had and enjoyed, As of a former Indenture of
Demyse, at or before the sealing and deliverie of the said Indenture now in
Evidence showed, the aforesaid Edward Bridges had surrendered and delivered unto
the hands and possession of the said Johanna, as for diverse other good causes
and considerations the same Johanna specially moving, Demised, granted and to
Farm let, to the said Edmond Bridges, William Bridges, and Anthony Bridges,
Sons of the said Edmond, the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land with the
appurtenances amongst other things, to have and to hold the aforesaid Message
and 26 Acres of Land amongst other to the aforesaid Edmond, William, and
Anthony Bridges the aforesaid 2 Sons of the said Edmond Bridges, for the Term
of their natural lives, and for the Term of the life of the longest liver, and
every of them successively to be enjoyed, Yielding and paying therefore yearly,
during the said Term, to the aforesaid Johanna, under and by the name of Jane
Harcourt her heirs and assigns 4 pound and 2 pence of good and Lawful money of
England at two usual Feasts or Terms of the year, that is to say, at the Feast
of the Annunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin 40 shillings and 1 penny,
and at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel the like sum of 40 shillings
and 1 penny, residue of the aforesaid 4 pound and 2 pence, as by the said
indenture of Demise to the said Jurors in Evidence showed, more fully appeared,
by virtue of which demise, the said Edmond Bridges, William Bridges, and
Anthony Bridges, Sons of the said Edmond, were seized of the aforesaid Message
and 26 Acres of Land within written, as the Law requires: And farther the said
Jurors say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid Message, 26 Acres within
written, and the rest of the Tenements in the said Indenture of Demise by the
said Johanna under and by the name of Jane Harecourt to the said Edmond,
William, and Anthony, Sons of the said Edmond, in form aforesaid demised, were
not usually demised for the greater part of 20 years next before the same
demise (as before is said) made for so little rent as by the aforesaid
Indenture thereof now in evidence showed, in form aforesaid was reserved: And
the aforesaid Jurors farther say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid Johanna
afterward, and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 29th. day of
September in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
35th. at Lugershall aforesaid dyed: After whose death the said George Brown
into the Tenements within written with the appurtenances in which, etc. upon
the possession of the said Edmond Bridges, William and Anthony Bridges, Sons of
the said Edmond, thereof entered, and was thereof seized, as the Law requires:
and so being thereof seized, afterward and before the aforesaid time in which,
etc. that is to say, the within written 22th. day of October in the 35 year
aforesaid, Demised to the said James the said whole Tenements within written
with the appurenances in which, etc. To have and to hold to the said James and
his assigns from the within written Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel,
until the end and Term within mentioned of 4 years from thence next ensuing and
fully to be completed; by virtue of which demise, the said James into the said
Tenements within written with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof
possessed as the Law requires, upon whose possession of the said James, the
aforesaid Thomas Spencer, as servant of the said Edmond Bridges, and by his
Commandment within written the time in which, etc. into the said Message and
26 Acres of Land entered, and the said James from his Farm aforesaid thereof did
eject: But whether upon the whole matter aforesaid by the aforesaid Jurors in
form aforesaid found, the entry of the said Thomas Spencer into the aforesaid
Message and 26 Acres of Land with the appurtenances upon the possession of the
said James thereof be a good and Lawful Entry in Law or not, the said Jurors
are altogether Ignorant, and Pray thereof the advice and discretion of the
Justices here, etc. And if upon the whole aforesaid matter, It shall seem to
the Justices, and Court here, that the aforsaid Entry of the aforesaid Thomas
Spencer upon the possession of the said James Linche be not a good and Lawful
entry in Law, then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, that the said Thomas
Spencer is guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, in the aforesaid
Message and 26 Acres of Land, as the aforesaid James against him within
complains, and then they assess the damages of the said James, by the
occasion of the said Trespass and Ejectment, above his charges and costs by him
about his suit in his behalf expended to 4 pence, and for his charges and costs
to 12 pence: and if upon the whole matter aforesaid, It shall seem to the
Justices and Court here, that the aforesaid entry of the said Thomas Spencer
upon the possession of the said James be a good and Lawful entry in Law, then
the said Jurors say upon their Oath, that the said Thomas Spencer is not guilty
of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, in the said Message within alleged:
And because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises
before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid
here, until in 8 days of Saint Hillary to hear their Judgment thereof,
because that the said Justices here thereof are not yet etc. at which day come
as well the aforesaid James as the aforesaid William and Thomas by their
Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Justices here will further advise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day farther is given to the parties aforesaid here, until from Easter in 15
days for to hear their Judgment thereof, because the said Justices here are
not thereof yet, etc. At which day here come as well the said James by George
Dancombe his Attorney, as the said William and Thomas by their Attorney
aforesaid, and because the Justices here will farther avise of and upon the
premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, further day is given to the
parties aforesaid here, until the morrow of Holy Trinity to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the said Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here
come as well the aforesaid James by the aforesaid George Dancombe his Attorney, as
the said Willam and Thomas by their Attorney aforesaid: and because the Justices
here will avise of and upon the premises before they give their Judgment
thereof, further day is given to the parties here, until in 8 days of St.
Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the said Justices here thereof
are not yet: At which day here come as well the said James Linch by the
aforesaid George Dancombe his Attorney, as the aforesaid William Spencer and
Thomas Spencer by their Attorney: And upon this the verdict aforesaid being
seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, it seems to the Justices
here, that the aforesaid entry of the aforesaid Thomas Spencer into the
aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land upon the possession of the said James
Linch, is not a good and Lawful entry in Law, Therefore It is granted, that
the aforesaid John Linch recover against the aforesaid Thomas Spencer his Term
aforesaid yet to come of and in the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land
with the appurtenances, and his damages aforesaid to 16 pence, by the Jurors
aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed, As also 26 pound 9 shillings to the said
James at his request, for his charges and costs aforesaid by the Court here of
increase adjudged, which damages in the whole do amount to 26 pound 10
shillings and 4 pence, and the aforesaid Thomas be taken, etc. And also the
said James in mercy for his false clamor against the aforesaid William Spencer
of the whole Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, and against the aforesaid Thomas
Spencer of the residue of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, thereof the
said William and Thomas and the Jurors aforesaid above be acquitted, therefore
the said William and Thomas go thereof without day, etc. and hereupon the said
James prays the writ of the Lady the Queen, to the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid to be directed, to give him possession of his Term yet to come of and
in the aforesaid Message and 26 Acres of Land with the appurtenances, and it
is granted unto him retorneable here from the day of Saint Martin in 15 days,
etc. Afterward, that is to say, the 26th. day of November in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 40th. come here into Court the
aforesaid James by the aforesaid George his Attorney, and by a special warrant
to him in that behalf made, confessed himself to be satisfied of the damages
aforesaid, therefore the aforesaid Thomas of the said damages be acquitted, etc.

Ejectione Firm.
Hillary Term 40. Elizabeth, Rott. 748. in the KINGS BENCH, Adams and Lamberts
Case, C. 4. part. fo. 96.
Buck,
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say in Michaelmass Term last
past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came Theophilus Adams Gentleman
by John Povey his Attorney, and brought here in the Court of the said Lady the
Queen then there his bill against John Lambert in the custody of the Marshal,
etc. of a plea of Trespass and Ejectment of him out of his Farm, and are
pledges of suit, John Do: and Richard Roo: which Bill follows in these
words, ss. Buck, Theophilus Adams Gentleman complayneth of John Lambert in the
custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen, before the
Queen her self being, for that, that is to say, That whereas one Robert
Snelling Gentlem^n, and Thomas Butler Gentleman, the 23th.. day of May in the
year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen Elizabeth that now is, of England the
36. at the Town of Buckingham in the County aforesaid, had demised, and to Farm
Letten to the said Theophilus, 1 Message and 10 Acres of Land to the said
Message near lying, called the Conigree, situate, lying and being in the Town
of Buckingham aforesaid in the County aforesaid, To have to the said Theophilus
and his assigns, from the aforesaid 23 day of May in the 36 year aforesaid,
until the end and Term of 10 years from thence next following and fully to be
complete and ended, by virtue of which demise the same Theophilus afterward,
that is to say the 16 day of April in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 39, into the aforesaid Tenements with the
appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed until the aforesaid John
Lambert afterward, that is to say, the same 16 day of April in the 39 year
aforesaid with force and Arms, etc. into the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances upon the possession of the said Theophilus thereof entered, and
him the said Theophilus from his Farm thereof, his Term aforesaid not yet
ended, ejected expelled and amoved, and from his possession thereof held out,
and yet holds out, and other harms to him did against the peace of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, to the damage of the said Theophilus of 20 pound,
and thereof he brings suit, etc. and now at this day, that is to say, Monday
next after 8 days of Saint Michael, this Term, until which day the aforesaid
John Lambert had license to imparl to the Bill aforesaid and then to answer,
etc. before the Lady the Queen at Westminster came as well the aforesaid
Theophilus Adams, by his Attorney aforesaid, as the said John Lambert by John
Harborn his Attorney, and the said John Lambert defends the force and Injury
when, etc. and says, that he is not there of guilty, and of this puts
himself upon the Country, and the said Theophilus likewise, etc. and therefore
a Jury thereof was to be before the Queen at Westminster upon Monday next after
the morrow of the Purification of the blessed Lady Mary by whom, etc. and who
neither, etc. Because as well, etc. Day is given to the parties aforesaid thence,
etc. of which day the Jurors aforesaid, between the parties aforesaid, of the
plea aforesaid were put in respit before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
until Monday next after the Month of Easter in the year of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 41th. for default of Jurors, etc. At which day before the
said Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid by
their Attorneys aforesaid: And the Jurors of the same Jury being called come
likewise, who to say the truth of the premises chosen, tried, and sworn, say
upon their Oath, that long before the time of the Trespass and Ejectment
aforesaid, that is to say, the 5 day of the month of June in the year of our
Lord 1431 and in the year of the Reign of King Henry the 6 after the conquest
the 9, one John Barton the Elder was seized of the aforesaid Message and of 6
Acres of Pasture parcel of the aforesaid 10 Acres of Pasture in the Declaration
aforesaid specified, in which it is supposed the Trespass and Ejectment
aforesaid to be done, amongst other, in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof,
of the Message aforesaid and of the said 6 Acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances parcel, etc. seized, etc. Enfeoffed William Brampton, to have and
to hold to him and his heirs to the behoof and use of the aforesaid John Barton
the Elder and his heirs: By virtue whereof, the aforesaid William Brampton was
seized of the Message and 6 Acres of Land parcel, etc. with the appurtenances,
in his demesne as of Fee, to the use of the aforesaid John Barton and his heirs,
and the aforesaid William Brampton so thereof being seized, the aforesaid John
Barton afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid 5 day of the Month of June in
the year of our Lord 1431 in the said year of the Reign of the said late King
Henry the 6. the 9 aforesaid, at Buckingham aforesaid made his Testament and
last will within written of the aforesaid Message and 6 Acres of pasture
parcel, etc. amongst other things in these words, etc. In the name of God Amen.
ss. The 5 day of the Month of June 1431 of the late Reign of King Henry the 6
after the Conquest of England the 9, I John Barton the Elder, being of perfect
mind and good memory, do make and ordein my present Testament Indented
containing my last will, in this manner: Imprimis, I give and recommend my soul
to God and my omnipotent Creator and Savior, and to the blessed Mary the
Virgin his Mother, and to all the Saints, and my body to be buried in the
Church of the blessed Peter the Apostle of Buckingham, that is to say, in the
Church of Saint Romwold, in the same place, wherein a Marble stone for my
burying I have ordained and appointed, and for this my burial there to be had I
give to the building of the body of the said Church 40 shillings, also I will,
and Ordain that speedily after my death there be celebrated for my soul 4000
Masses, for the celebrating of which I give 16 pound 13 shillings 4 pence, and
for his payns who about this shall imply him self, that fully faithfully and
speedily it be performed, 6 shillings 8 pence. Item I give to the religious men
under written, that they as soon as by my Executors or their deputies they be
acquainted of my death, so speedily as conveniently it may be done, every order
of them say a Placebo and Dirige by note, and the day following the Mass of
Requiem with note for my soul, the souls of my Father and Mother, my friends
and Benefactors, and for the souls of all the faithful departed, that is to
say, to the Master and Brethren of the house and Church of Saint Thomas the
Martyr of Canterbury, called of Acons London, 40 shillings, to the Master and
Brethren of the Hospital of Saint Bartholemew in west Smithfield London, 40
shillings, to the Abbot and Covent of Bethesden in the County Buckingham, 100
shillings, to the Prior and Covent of Luffeild, 40 shillings, to the Prior and
Covent of Cheitwood, 40 shillings, to the Prior and Covent of Snelsale, 20
shillings, to every order of the 4 orders of Friars Mendicants in the Town of
Northampton, 20 shilling, to every order of ^he 4 orders of Friars Medicants in
the Town of Oxford, 20 shillings, to the Covent and Friars Minors of Aplebury,
20 shillings, to every order of the 5 orders of Friars in the City of London,
20 shillings; Also I bequeath to the Brother of John Vpton 100 shillings, that
he for my Soul celebrate for one whole year next after my death; and I will
that all the religious men aforesaid by my Executors or their Deputies be
charged that they especially pray for my soul. Item I give and bequeath to John
Barton the younger my Brother, all my Tenements, together with all the
Tenements which late were Roger Plirets, which I purchased with the Rents and
Services, together with the Reversion and all their appurtenances in the Town
of Buckingham in the County of Buckingham, to have and to hold all the
Tenements aforesaid, with their appurtenances, to the aforesaid John my
Brother, for the Term of his life, upon the Conditions following, that is to
say, that the said John my Brother during his life, find one fit Chaplein and
honest to celebrate for my Soul and the Souls of my Father, Mother, Brothers,
Sisters, Benefactors, and my friends, and of all the faithful deceased, at the
Altar of Saint James in the aforesaid Church of the blessed Peter, daily; and I
will and ordain, that the aforesaid Chaplein all Festival days be present at
Matines and Vespers, in the quire of the Church aforesaid; and I will that the
said Chaplein every day within the Church aforesaid, the Mattines of Saint
Mary, and after the Matines of the day with certain hours Canonical, and these
to be ended every day, the said Chaplein before he goes to Mass, read a part
of the Psalter of David, so always that from the said Chaplein every week be
said one whole Psalter of David, and afterward daily when he is not troubled
with sickness, that he go to Mass, which Mass ended, before he go from the
Altar, he read the Psalm de profundis, with the prayer festina, and daily after
dinner, as it shall seem best to him that the said Chaplein say in the said
Church of the blessed Peter, a Placebo and Dirige with 9 Readings time of
Easter excepted, which time of Easter he say Officium mortuorum with 3 Readings
according to the use of Salisbury, and following every day of the same time of
Easter the Psalter of the blessed Mary the Virgin, and that afterward follow
the commendations of Souls, with the prayer, Tibi Domine commendamus, after
that he say vesperas de die, and before the vespers of Saint Mary, and that the
said Chaplein if not hindered with sickness, every day that he shall in the
default of saying Mass in the said Church of Saint Peter, that he give to one
of the poor of the Town of Buckingham aforesaid, 1. penny. I will also that the
said Chaplein make his abode always there, yet that the said Chaplein every
year have recreation by the space of 15 days, so always as the said Chaplein
supply his turns by another Chaplein, or every day of the said 15 days, do
give to one of the poor of Town of Buckingham a penny; And I will that the
aforesaid John my Brother yearly during his life, pay to the said Chaplein in
the aforesaid Church of Saint Peter for his mayntenance and his pains, as
before is said done and to be done, 10 Marks of Lawful money of England out of
the issues and profits of the Tenements aforesaid; so always, that the said
Chaplein of the said sum of 10 Marks for his sallery or stipend, reputed
himself contented, from no other any stipend to be received or taken: And I the
said John Barton the Elder, will and ordain in the Testament aforesaid, that
the said Chaplein and his successors to the office and service aforesaid, be
chosen, ordained, preferred, admitted and received, by the Master and Brethren
of the house or Church of Saint Thomas the Martyr of Canterbury, called of Acon
London, aforesaid, and his successors for ever, and if they do not behave
themselves well and honestly, or if they shall neglect or refuse to do or
perform the charges aforesaid, by the said Masters and Brethren and their
successors, or by their sufficient deputies, from the said office or service
they be removed and expelled, and another fit Chaplein in the place of the said
Chaplein for his faults removed, expelled, or by death failing, or otherwise
howsoever from the said office or service ceasing or departing, by the
aforesaid Masters and Brethren of the house or Church of Saint Thomas aforesaid
and his successors be chosen, ordained, preferred, admitted and received, so as
the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, who for time shall be, or the Archdeacon of the
place, or the Prebendary of the Prebend of Buckingham, or other in their name,
upon the Election, Ordination, Preferring, Admission, and remotion or amoving
of the said Chaplein, no jurisdiction or power have or claym hereafter in any
manner; therefore let the said Master and Brethren and their successors take
care upon the peril of their souls, and as they will answer the same before the
most high Judge, that neither for Favor, Love, Prayer or Price they ordain any
Chaplein into the aforesaid office or service, admit or receive, but an honest
and an approved person as much as his conversation can appear to them, and that
the aforesaid Chaplein to the said office and service to be admitted, in his
first admission the aforesaid Master and Brethren of the house and Church of
Saint Thomas aforesaid and their successors take his corporal Oath upon the
holy Gospel, all and singular the charges aforesaid without fraud or deceit, or
any dispensation upon them to the contrary notwithstanding, in the manner and
form aforesaid above declared, will and faithfully to be done and performed, as
much as humane frailty will admit. and that every Chaplein to the said office
or service to be admitted, in his first admission find and make to the Masters
and Brethren of the house and Church of Saint Thomas the Martyr of Canterbury
said of Acon London aforesaid, for the time being, sufficient security for the
Ornaments of the said Alt^r of Saint James belonging safely and securely to
keep, and in their resigning and ceasing to render back and deliver: And
moreover that the said John my Brother during his life find in the Town
aforesaid 6 poor men or women, to pray for my soul and the souls aforesaid
every day forever, and that he give every week during h^s life to every one of
the same poor 4 pence, and also to every one of them their dwelling (as by the
will of God) for them I have appointed and ordained, and also that the said
John my Brother all his life find one Lamp burning every day and night, before
Saint Romwald in the Church of the blessed Peter aforesaid, as now is found and
maintained; and that my said Brother during his life, hold or cause to be held
my Anniversary and of my Father and Mother yearly in the day of the Translation
of Saint Benedict in the Church of the blessed Peter aforesaid, in which
Anniversary the said John my Brother yearly two wax lights at the Dirige, and
the day following at the Mass, one at the head, and the other at the feet of my
Sepulcher burning, every wax light to contein 3 pounds, which Funerals of me
being completed, I will that all that which shall be remaining of the said wax
lights, be sent and remain to the Altar of Saint James aforesaid, upon the
Candlestick there being, to the Chaplain of my Chancery aforesaid, to serve
every festival day at Mass as long as it may last: and that the aforesaid John
my Brother during his life find yearly one competent torch to serve at the
Altar aforesaid: And I will that all the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and
Services, with the reversions, and all their appurtenances, after the decease
of the said John my Brother, whole remain to Margaret and Isabel my Sisters,
for the term of their lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, To be
holden of the Chief Lords of the Fee, by the Services thereof due and of right
accustomed, upon condition that the said Margaret and Isabel during their
lives, do perform and observe all and singular the charges before limited in
form aforesaid, and after the death of the said Margaret and Isabel, I will all
the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services, with the reversions, and all their
appurtenances wholly to remayn wholly to William Fowler, To be holden to him and
his heirs of his body Lawfully to be begotten, of the chief Lords of the Fee,
by the services thereof due and of right accustomed, upon condition, that he
the said William and his heirs do perform and keep all and singular the charges
above written in the form aforesaid for ever. And if it shall happen the said
William Fowler to die without heir of his body Lawfully begotten, that from
thence all the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services with the reversions, and
all their appurtenances, whole remain to John Somerton my Cosen, and the heirs
of his body Lawfuly begotten, to be holden of the chief Lords of the Fee, by
the services thereof due and of right accustomed, upon condition that he the
said John Somerton and his heirs all and singular the charges above written in
form aforesaid fulfill and keep for ever, and if it shall happen him the said
John Somerton to die without heir of his body issuing, That from thence all the
aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services with the reversions and all their
appurtenances, whole remain to William Purfrey my Cosen, and the heirs of his
body Lawfully begotten, to be holden of the Lords of the Fee, by the services
thereof due and of right accustomed, upon condition, that the same William
Purfrey and his heirs aforesaid do perform and observe all and singular the
charges above written in form aforesaid for ever; And if it shall happen the
said William Purfrey to die without heir of his body issuing, from hence I do
give and bequeath that all the aforesaid Rents and Services with the
reversions, and all their appurtenances, whole remain to the Master of the
house of Saint Thomas the martyr of Acon London aforesaid, to have and to hold
to him and his successors, Masters of the same house of Saint Thomas to the end
and Term of 40 years from thence next following, and fully to be ended: and
after the said Term to be ended, that all the Tenements aforesaid, Rents and
Services, with the reversions, and all their appurtenances remayn to the Master
of the Hospital of Saint Bartholomew in West Smithfield London aforesaid, to
have and to hold to the same Master and his successors, Masters of the said
Hospital of Saint Bartholomews to the term and end of 40 years from thence next
ensuing and fully to be completed, to every of them upon the condition
following, that is to say, that every of the said Masters and their successors,
during their Terms, do and perform all and singular the charges above limited
in form aforesaid: And if it shall happen the said John my Brother during his
life in fullfilling the charges aforesaid to make default, or not to perform
the same, or all the aforesaid Tenements during his life not sufficiently to
repair and sustain, or the same or any parcel thereof to alien or to let the
same at a lower rate in prejudice to the other persons in remainder aforesaid
named, that then it shall be Lawful to the said Margaret and Isabel into the
aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services, with the reversions, and all their
appurtenances to enter, and the same to hold as in their remainder aforesaid
without the contradiction of any one, And that from thence the estate of the
said John my Brother shall altogether cease, and be of no value; and if it
shall happen the said Margaret and Isabel during their lives in doing and
performing of all the charges aforesaid to make default, or the same not to
fulfill, or all the Tenements aforesaid during their lives not sufficiently to
sustain and repair or them to al en or demise as before is said, or be
negligent to enter, if cause as aforesaid shall happen, that then it shall be
Lawful to the aforesaid William Fowler and his heirs aforesaid, into all the
abovesaid Tenements, Rents and Services, with the reversions, and all their
appurtenances, to enter as in his remainder aforesaid, and the same to hold
without any contradiction, and that then the estate of the said Margaret and
Isabel as aforesaid, altogether to cease and be of no value: And if the
aforesaid William Fowler or his heirs aforesaid, in doing and performing to
make default, or not to fulfill, or all the aforesaid Tenements not sufficiently
to be sustained or repaired, or to be aliend or demised as before is said, or
be negligent to enter, if cause as before is said shall happen, that from
thence it be well Lawful to the abovesaid John Somerton and his heirs
abovesaid into all and singular the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services,
with the reversions and all their appurtenances, to enter as in his remainder
aforesaid, and the same to hold without any contradiction, and that from thence
the estate of the aforesaid William Fowler and his heirs aforesaid, as is
aforesaid, shall cease and be of no value: And if it happen the aforesaid John
Somerton or his heirs aforesaid in doing and performing all and singular the
charges aforesaid to make default, or the same not to fulfill, or all the
aforesaid Tenements not sufficiently to uphold and repair, or to alien or
demise the same as above is said, or that they be negligent to enter if cause
as before is said shall happen, that from thence it shall be well Lawful to
the aforesaid William Purfrey and his heirs aforesaid into all the Tenements
aforesaid, Rents and Services, with the reversions, and all their appurtenances
to enter as in his Remainder aforesaid, and the same to hold without any
contradiction, and that from thence the estate of the said John Somerton and
his Heirs aforesaid, in all the Tenements aforesaid altogether to cease, and be
of no value. And if it happen the said William Purfrey, and his Heirs
aforesaid, in fulfilling all and singular the charges aforesaid to make
default, or the same not to repair, or all the aforesaid Tenements not
sufficiently to uphold and repair, or the same to alien or demise, as above is
said, or they be negligent to enter, if cause as before is said shall happen,
That then the state of the said William Purfrey, and his Heirs altogether
cease, and be of no value; And that from thence, It be lawful to the said
Master of the House of the Holy Martyr of Acon London, and his Brethren, of the
same House, and their Successors, into all the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and
Services, with the Reversions, and all their appurtenances to enter, and in the
Remainder of their Term aforesaid, To be holden in form aforesaid; And if it
shall happen the said Master and Brethren of the House of St. Thomas aforesaid,
or their Successors aforesaid, in doing and fulfilling all and singular the
charges above specified to make default, or the same not to fulfill, Or all the
Tenements aforesaid, as above is said, not sufficiently to uphold and repair,
or they be negligent to enter, if cause shall happens as before is said, That
from thence, It shall be lawful to the Master of the Hospital of St. Bartholmew
aforesaid, and the Brethren of the said Hospital, and their Successors, into
all the aforesaid Tenements, Rents and Services, with the Reversions and all
their appurtenances, to enter as in the Remainder of their Term aforesaid, and
that then the estate of the said Master of the House of St. Thomas aforesaid to
cease: And if it happen the said Master and Brethren of the Hospital of St.
Bartholmew aforesaid, in doing and fulfilling all and singular the charges
above declared to make default, or the same not to perform, or all the
Tenements aforesaid, not sufficiently to uphold or repair, That then it shall
be lawful to my right Heirs, unto all the aforesaid Tenements, Rents, and
Services, with the Reversions, and all and singular their appurtenances to
enter, and the same to hold, without any contradiction whatsoever for ever,
supporting all the charges aforesaid, as above is said, as they will for me and
them before the most high Judge Answer. And because this my last Will was made
and ordained for the good of the Souls of my Father and Mother, and of my own
Soul, and the Souls of my Brothers and Sisters, Friends, and Benefactors; I
pray and charge the said John my Brother, as for me and himself he will answer
it, that all his life time he oversee the government of the Chauntry aforesaid,
land that the charges aforesaid in this my last Will and Testament declared, be
inviolably fulfilled and kept; And that he give notice to all those who in
manner aforesaid, shall have any estate in the said Tenements, Rents, and
Services, with the Reversions and all their appurtenances, that they know the
Tenor of this my last Will and Testament. And I will that my Feoffees of the
Tenements with the appurtenances, which my poor men now dwell in, because the
same is not dividable, that they make such estate after my death, to all those
above named, as they have of my bequest of and in Tenements in Buckingham
aforesaid, to the use of the said Poor their dwelling, upholding the
Reparations of the said Tenement of the aforesaid P^or, as often as need shall
require; And because I doubt lest the Tenements aforesaid be sufficient to
uphold all the abovesaid charges, by reason of the great charge of repairing
thereof, I will that my Feoffees presently after my death make such estate to
all those above named, of all those my Lands and Tenements in the Towns of
Barton, Moreton, Gravecase, with the Prebend of Lemburgh, Thornborough,
Hillesden, Waterstratford, Shatdeston, and Foycale, in the County of
Buckingham, And of all those Lands with the Appurtenances in the Fields of
Buckingham, As also of my Lands and Tenements in Worton, in the County of
Oxford, and of my one Tenement in the Town of Oxford, in which the Feoffees
shall have as they have of my gift of and in the Tenements of Buckingham
aforesaid, so as they may sufficiently uphold all the charges aforesaid, and
receive, and take, what is reasonable for their labor and pains. Item, I will
that my Executors, or one of them, according to their Assignment, upon the
Good-fryday next after my death, cause him who shall preach at the Cross in the
Churchyard of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul London, to the prayers there of
the people recommend my Soul to the Congregation there assembled; For which
recommendation (and that he pray for my Soul) I will that the Preacher have 40.
pence. Item, I will that the Three Preachers, who in the Churchyard of the New
Hospital of the blessed Lady without Bishops gate London, in the 3. days in
the Week of Easter, next after my death shall preach, recommend my Soul to the
Prayers of the faithful People there assembled, and that every one of the said
Three Preachers, for the same recommendation of my Soul, and that they pray for
my Soul, have 40. pence. And I will, that my Executors during one whole year
next after my decease, every Lord's Day, cause the Preacher at the Cross in the
Churchyard of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul aforesaid Preaching, specially
recommend my Soul to the prayers of the people there assembled, for which
Recommendation, every of the said Preachers have 4. pence. Item, I give to Mr.
Robert Forset, my Chaplain, of London 10. pound, That the said Robert specially
celebrate for my Soul, and pray for it for 8. years next following my decease,
taking yearly for his sallary 100. shillings, if he so long live. And if he
shall dye within the said Term of 8. years, that then the said Robert make the
residue which thereof shall remain, to be distributed unto pious uses for my
Soul, and the Soul of the said Robert. Item, I give to Margaret my Sister, 100.
shillings, and a silver Cup, with a cover belonging to it. Item, I give to
Isabel my Sister, 100. shillings, and a silver Cup, with a cover belonging to
it, that the said Margaret and Isabel pray for my Soul: And to this Testament,
containing my last Will, well and truly, and faithfully to be performed, and
inviolably to be fulfilled, I ordain and appoint my Executors, John Barton my
Brother, and Alexander Sprot, Citizen and Cloth worker of London, and the said
Robert Forset my Chaplain; Overseers of this my present Testament, I ordain and
appoint John Wakering, Master of the Hospital of St. Bartholomew aforesaid: To
which my Executors, and Overseer, above named, I give the rest of all and
singular my Goods and Chattels which shall remain by me not distributed,
disposed, nor bequeathed, in this last Will, faithfully, and speedily to be
distributed for my Soul, Willing, That the said Executors, and Overseer,
according to their discretions and Consciences, take of my goods what is
reasonable for their pains: And that my present Testament and last Will before
written, be as speedily, as conveniently it may be, by my Executors performed
and executed, as in the fearful day of the last Judgment for me and them
before the most High Judge, who is ignorant of nothing, they will answer; In
witness whereof, to this my present Testament indented, containing my last
Will, I have set my Seal: Dated the day and year aforesaid. And the Jurors
aforesaid, further say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid William
Bramptou, of the said Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. amongst
other, etc. as is before said, so being seized, The said John Barton the Elder,
afterward at Buck, aforesaid dyed, After the death of the said John Barton the
Elder, the aforesaid William Brampton was seized of the Message aforesaid, and
6. Acres of Lands aforesaid, parcel, etc. in his Demesne as of Fee, To the
several uses and intents in the aforesaid last Will of the aforesaid John
Barton the Testator above expressed: And that the said John Barton the younger,
after the death of the said John Barton the Testator, into the aforesaid
Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, parcel, etc. entered,
and the Rents and profits thereof yearly, after the death of the said John
Barton the Testator, arising, for and during the life of him the said John the
younger, took and had, and the same to the uses, intents, and appointments, in
the said Testament and last Will thereof limited and appointed, during the
life of the said John the younger, did convert, apply, and pay: And afterward,
and before the time in which, etc. The said John Barton the younger, at Buck
aforesaid dyed: After whose death of the said John Barton the younger, the
aforesaid William Brampton was seized of the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres
of Pasture aforesaid, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, in his Demesne as of
Fee, unto the uses and intents in the aforesaid last Will of the said John
Barton the Testator before expressed to be performed; And that the said
Margaret and Isabel, after the death of the said John Barton the younger, into
the aforesaid Message and 6. Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances, entered, and the Rents and Profits thereof yearly, after the
death of the said John Barton the younger, arising for and during the lives of
the said Margaret and Isabel, and the longer, liver of them, took and had, and
the same to the uses, intents, and appointments, in the said Testament and last
Will of the aforesaid John Barton the Testator, declared, limited, and
appointed, during the lives of the said Margaret and Isabel, applied,
converted, and paid, and the longest liver of them did apply, convert, and
pay; And afterward and before the time in which. etc. The aforesaid Margaret
and Isabel, at Buckingam aforesaid dyed. After the deaths of which Margaret and
Isabel, The said William Brampton was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in
the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture aforesaid, parcel, etc. with
the Appurtenances, to the uses and intents in the aforesaid last Will, of the
aforesaid John Brampton the Elder the Testator, expressed to be fulfilled: And
that the said William Fowler in the Testament aforesaid named, had issue of his
body lawfully begotten, one Richard Fowler, and the said William Fowler after
the deaths of the said Margaret and Isabel, into the aforesaid Message, and 6.
Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, entered and the Rents and
Profits thereof yearly, after the deaths of the said Margaret and Isabel,
arising, for and during the life of the said William Fowler took and had, and
the same to the uses, intents, and appointments in the said Testament and last
Will of the aforesaid John Barton the Elder the Testator expressed, during the
life of the said William Fowler, applied, converted, and paid; And afterward,
the 6th. day of July, in the year of the Reign of King Henry the 6th. the 30th.
The said William Fowler, at Buckingham aforesaid dyed, after whose death of the
said William Fowler, the aforesaid William Brampton was seized of and in the
said Message and 6. Acres of Pasture aforesaid, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee, to the uses and intents in the
aforesaid last Will of the aforesaid John Barton the Elder before expressed, to
be fulfilled: And that the said Richard Fowler had issue of his body lawfully
begotten, one Edward Fowler, and the said Richard Fowler, after the death of
the said William Fowler, into the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture,
parcel, etc. with the appurtenances entered, and the Rents and profits thereof
yearly after the death of the said William Fowler, arising, for and during the
life of the said Richard Fowler took and had, and the same to the uses,
intents, and appointments, in the said Testament and last Will of the said John
Barton the Elder the Testator, during the life of the said Richard Fowler,
applied, converted, and paid, that is to say, until the 3d. day of November,
in the year of King Edward the 4th. after the Conquest of England the 7th.
which said 3d. day of November, the aforesaid Richard Fowler, at Buckingham
aforesaid dyed: After the death of which Richard aforesaid, the aforesaid Will.
Brampton was of the Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture aforesaid, parcel, etc.
with the appurtenances seized in his Demesne as of Fee, to the uses and intents
in the Testament aforesaid of the said John Barton the Testator, limited and
declared, to be fulfilled; And that the said Edward Fowler, had issue of his
body lawfully begotten, one Gabriel Fowler, and the said Edward after the death
of the said Richard Fowler, into the aforesaid Message and 6. Acres of Lands,
parcel, etc. with the appurtenances entered, and the Rents and Profits thereof
yearly, after the death of the said Richard Fowler, arising, for and during the
life of the said Edward took and had, and the same to the uses, intents, and
appointments, in the said Testament and last Will declared and limited, Until
the 4th. day of February, in the year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th. the
27th. applied, converted, and paid, which said 4th. day of February, by virtue
of a certain Act of Parliament at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, for
transferring of uses into possession, then held, made, the aforesaid Edward
Fowler, was seized of and in the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of Pasture,
parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee Tail; And so
thereof being seized, the issues and profits thereof all his life took and had,
and the same to the uses and intents in the Testament of the said John Barton
the Elder above expressed, applied, and converted; And that the aforesaid
Edward, so thereof being seized, afterward, that is to say, the 28 th. day of
May, in the year of the Reign of the late King Henry the 8th. the 32. at
Buckingham aforesaid, of such his estate dyed thereof seized, After the death
of which Edward Fowler, The said Message and 6. Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc.
descended to the said Gabriel Fowler, as Son and Heir of the body of the said
Edward Fowler lawfully begotten, By virtue of which the aforesaid Gabriel, into
the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances, entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee tail,
that is to say, to him, and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, the
reversion in Fee simple thereof to the right Heirs of the said John Barton the
Testator expectant, unto the uses in the said last Will, of the said John
Barton the Testator expressed to be performed; and the aforesaid Gabriel
Fowler, the issues and profits thereof to the uses and intents in the said
Testament of the aforesaid John Barton the Testator to be performed, limited,
received, disposed, and converted, from the time of the death of the said
Edward Fowler, within 5. years next before the first year of the Reign of King
Edward the 6th. that is to say, until the 4th. day of May, in the year of the
Reign of the late King Henry the 8th. the 37th. By color of which aforesaid
premises, and by force of a certain Act of Parliament, of the said King Edward,
late King of England the 6th. at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the
4th day of November, in the year of his Reign the first, begun, and from thence
continued until the 24th. day of the same November then next following, and
then and there holden, concerning Colleges, Free Chapels, Chauntries,
Fraternities, Guilds, and other spiritual promotions, made and provided, The
aforesaid late King Edward the 6th. immediately after the Feast of Easter next
following, after the making of the said Act of Parliament, was seized of, and
in the aforesaid Message, and the aforesaid 6. Acres of pasture, parcel, etc.
with the appurtenances (amongst other things) in the said Testament as is
aforesaid given and appointed, in his demesne, as of Fee, in the Right of his
Crown of England, if the Law so in this case requires: and that afterward,
the said late King dyed of the said Message, and 6. Acres of pasture so
seized, if the Law of England so requires, without Heir of his body begotten:
after whose death the Message aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6. Acres of
pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances (amongst other) descended to the
Lady Mary late Queen of England, as Sister and Heir of the said late King
Edward the 6th. If the Law of England in this case requires: By which the said
late Queen Mary was seized of the Message aforesaid, and of the aforesaid 6.
Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. (amongst other) in her demesne as of Fee, in the
right of her Crown of England, if the Law this requires; and he said late
Queen Mary afterward, and before the aforesaid time, in which, etc. dyed so
hereof seized, if the Law of England in this case requires, without heir of
her body issuing, after whose death, the Message aforesaid, and the aforesaid
6. Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances (amongst other)
descended to the said Lady the Queen that now is, as Sister and Heir of the
aforesaid late Queen Mary, if the Law of England in this case requires, By
which the said Lady the Queen that now is, was of the aforesaid Message, and
6. Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances (amongst other) seized
in her demesne as of Fee, in the right of her Crown of England, if the Law of
England so thereof requires: And the Jurors aforesaid further say upon their
Oaths aforesaid, That after the aforesaid Act of Parliament aforesaid, in the
year of the Reign of the late King Edward the 6th. the first, made, The
aforesaid Gabriel Fowler, occupied the aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of
pasture, with the appurtenances, parcel, etc. contin^ed, and was thereof seized
in his demesne as of Feetail, if the Law of England in this case requires it,
having issue of his body lawfully begotten, one Richard Fowler, and so thereof
seized, continued the occupation aforesaid, if the Law of England requires it,
and afterward, and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the first
day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
the 18th. at Buck. aforesaid, of such his estate dyed thereof seized, if the
Law of England requires, By color of which, the Message aforesaid, and 6.
Acres of pasture aforesaid, with the appurtenances, parcel, etc. descended, if
the Law requires, to the aforesaid Richard Fowler, as Son and Heir of the said
Gabriel, By color of which the said Richard Fowler afterward, and before the
time in which, etc. into the Message, and 6. Acres of Lands aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, parcel, etc. entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as
of Feetail, that is to say, to him, and the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, if the Law of England this requires; and the said Richard Fowler of
the Message, and 6. Acres of pasture aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
parcel, etc. so being seized, if the Law of England this requires, The said
Richard after, and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 10th. day
of March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
33th. at Buckingham aforesaid, By his writing bearing date the same day and
year, with the Seal of the said Richard sealed, and to the Jurors aforesaid, in
Evidence showed, for a certain sum of money, in the said writing specified, if
the Law of England this requires, enfeoffed Francis Dayrell, and Edward
Dayrell Genesis of the Message, and 6. Acres aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
parcel, etc. amongst other, To have to the said Francis, and Edward, their
Heirs, and Assigns for ever, By virtue of which the said Francis, and Edward,
in the Message, and 6. Acres of pasture aforesaid, parcel, etc. entered, and
were thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee, if the Law of Engl. this
requires; and so being thereof seized, if the Law of Engl. this requires, The
said Francis, and Ed. afterward, and before the aforesaid time in which, etc.
that is to say, the 18th day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is, the 33th. aforesaid, at Buck. aforesaid, if by the Law
of England this they could do, en^eoffed the aforesaid John Lambert, of the
aforesaid Message, and 6. Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances, To have and to hold unto the said John Lambert, his Heirs, and
Assigns for ever: By color of which the said John Lambert, after and before
the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the said 18th. day of June,
in the year 33th. aforesaid, into the Message, and 6. Acres of pasture
aforesaid, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances entered, and was, and yet is
thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee, if the Law thereof requires: And the
Jurors aforesaid, further say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Lady the Queen that now is, (as before is said) seized in her demesne as of Fee
in the right of her Crown of England, of and in the aforesaid Message, and 6.
Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. if the Law of England this requires, after, and
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 27th. day of May, in the
year of her Reign the 34th. The said Lady the Queen that now is, By her Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England sealed to the Jurors aforesaid in
Evidence showed, whose date is at Westminster, the same day and year, in
Consideration of the good, true, faithful, and acceptable Service to the said
Lady the Queen that now is, before that time, by her wel-beloved Cousin, Thomas
Earl of Ormond, and Osory, done, as for diverse other causes, and
considerations, the aforesaid Lady the Queen that now is, then specially
moving, as also at the humble Petition, etc. of the said Earl, of her special
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, Gave and granted for her, her Heirs,
and Successors, to her beloved Subjects, Edmond Downing, and Roger Rant Gent.
the Message aforesaid, and the a^oresaid 6. Acres of pasture, with the
appurtenances, in which, etc. (amongst other) By the name of all that her late
Chauntry, called Bartons Chauntry, situate, and being in the Parish of St
Peter, in the Town of Buckingham, and all Lands, Tenements, Rents, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances whatsoever, situate, lying,
and being, in the said Town of Buck: in the aforesaid County of Buck to the
said late Chauntry, called Bartons Chauntry, belonging, or apperteining, or to
the maintenance of a Chaplain, or Priest, and other uses superstitious in the
Church of Saint Peter aforesaid, according to the Ordination of John Barton the
Elder, before then given, bequeathed, lie limited, or appointed, To have, hold,
and enjoy, to the said Edmond Downing, and Roger Raut, their Heirs, and
Assigns, to the only, and proper behoof and use of the said Edmond, and Roger,
their Heirs, and Assigns, for ever, Yielding, and paying to the said Lady the
Queen that now is, her Heirs, and Successors, yearly for ever, 13. pound, and
12. pence, of lawful Money of England, to the hands of the Receiver general of
the County aforesaid, for the time being, or at the Receipt of the Exchequer of
the said Lady the Queen, her Heirs, and Successors, at the Feasts of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, by
equal portions every year to be paid, for all Rents, exactions, services, and
demands whatsoever for the same, to the said Lady the Queen, and her
Successors, any ways to be rendered, paid, or done: And the said Lady the
Queen that now is, by her said Letters Patents, for her, her Heirs, and
Successors, granted unto the said Edmond Downing, and Roger Rant, that the said
her Letters Patents, or the Enrolment of them, should be of force, form,
sufficient and effectual in the Law, against the said Lady the Queen that now
is, her Heirs, and Successors, as well in all Courts, as elsewhere within her
Realm of England, without any confirmations licenses, or tollerations by the
aforesaid Lady the Queen that now is, her Heirs, or Successors, in after by the
said Edmond, and Roger, their Heirs, or Assigns, or by any of them, to be
procured, or obtained, Notwithstanding the ill naming, or ill reciting, or
non-reciting the aforesaid several Manors, Rectories, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and other, all and singular premises, or any parcel thereof; And no
withstanding the not finding of Office, and Inquisition of the premises, or of
any parcel thereof, by which the title of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
ought to be found before the making of her Letters Patents aforesaid; and
notwithstanding the not reciting, or ill reciting of any demise, or grant of
the premises, or of any parcel thereof before then made, being of Record, or
not of Record; And notwithstanding any defects of the certain composition, or
Declaration, of the yearly value of the premises, or not Declaration of the
yearly value of the premises, or any part thereof in the said Letters Patents
expressed and contained; and notwithstanding other defects in not naming, or
ill naming any Tenant, Farmor, or occupier of the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments aforesaid, or any part thereof, or not rightly naming any Town,
Hamlet, Parish, or County in which the premises or any parcel thereof be, and
also in not naming the premises or any parcel thereof in nature, kind or
quality, by color of which said Letters Patents, the aforesaid Edmond Downing
and Roger Rant, were of the aforesaid Messuages and 6 Acres of Land parcel,
etc. with their appurtenances (amongst other) seized in their demesne as of Fee,
if the Law this requires, and so thereof being seized, if the Law of England
this requires, and the aforesaid John Lambert continuing his possessions
thereof, and as before is said being seized, if the Law of England this
requires, the said Edmond Downing and Roger Rant, by their certain Indenture
made the 28 day of July in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
34 aforesaid, Between the aforesaid Edmond Downing and Roger Rant of the one
part, and one Robert Snelling of East-Horsly in the County of Surrey Gentleman,
and Thomas butler of Grays Inn in the County of Middlesex Gentleman, of the
other part, for a certain sum of good and lawful money of England to them
before hand by the aforesaid Robert Snelling and Thomas Butler well and truly
paid, gave, granted, sold, bargayned and confirmed, to the aforesaid Robert
Snelling and Thomas Butler their heirs and assigns for ever, the Message
aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6. Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances (amongst other) to have and to hold to the aforesaid Robert
Snelling and Thomas Butler, their heirs and assigns ^or ever, as by the
Indenture aforesaid, enrolled in the close roll of the Chancery of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, the 10. day of December, in the year of the Reign
of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 35, to the Jurors aforesaid in
evidence showed, amongst other things it more fully appears: By color of
which said Indenture and the inrolment thereof the aforesaid Robert Snelling
and Thomas Butler, were of the aforesaid Message and of the aforesaid 6 Acres
of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, in which, etc. amongst other,
seized in their demesne as of Fee, if the Law of England in this case requires
it; and the aforesaid Robert Snelling and Thomas Butler, so thereof being
seized, if the Law of England this requires, after and before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 23 day of May in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 36. aforesaid, into the aforesaid Message,
and the aforesaid 6 Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances,
entered and was thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee, if the Law of England
requires, and so thereof seized, the aforesaid John Lambert continuing his
possession aforesaid, if the Law of England this requires, the said Robert
Snelling and Thomas Butler the aforesaid 23 day of May at the said Town of
Buckingham demised and to Farm let the Message aforesaid and the aforesaid 6
Acres of of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances (amongst other) to the
aforesaid Theophilus Adams, to have to the said Theophilas Adams his executors
and assigns, from the aforesaid 23 day of May in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 36 aforesaid, until the end and Term
aforesaid of 10 years fully to be complete and ended: By virtue of which the
said Theophilus Adams into the Message aforesaid, and into the aforesaid 6
Acres of pasture, parcel, etc. with their appurtenances (amongst other things)
afterward, that is to say, the 16 day of April in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 39 entered and was thereof possessed, if the
Law in this case requires, upon whose possession of the said Theophilus
thereof, the aforesaid John Lambert afterward, that is to say the same 16 day
of April in the 39 year aforesaid into the Message aforesaid, and the
aforesaid 6 Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, entered, and
the same Theophilus Adams from his Farm aforesaid thereof, his Term aforesaid
thereof not yet ended, ejected, expelled and amoved, and him the said
Theophilus from his possession thereof held out, and yet holds out as the
said Theophilus before against him declared. But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid found in form aforesaid, It shall seem to the Court here, that the
aforesaid John Lambert is guilty of the trespass and ejectment of the said
Theophilus Adams, of and in the Message aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6 Acres
of Pasture, etc. with the appurtenances, or not, the Jurors aforesaid are
utterly ignorant of, and thereof they pray the advice of the Court here, etc.
and if upon the said whole matter in form aforesaid found, it shall seem to the
Court here, that the aforesaid John Lambert is guilty of the Ejectment and
Trespass to the said Theophilus of the Message aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6
Acres of Pasture, parcel etc. with. the appurtenances, then the said Jurors say,
upon their Oath aforesaid, that the aforesaid John Lambert is guilty of the
Trespass and Ejectment thereof as the aforesaid Theophilus above against him
thereof complains, and then they assess the damages of the same Thophilus by
the occasion of the Trespass and Ejectment besides his charges and Costs by him
about his suit in his behalf put unto, to 12 pence, and for his charges and
costs to 12 pence; and if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid
^ound, It shall seem to the Court here, That the aforesaid John Lambert is not
guilty of the Ejectment and Trespass aforesaid, of and in the Message
aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6 Acres of Pasture, parcel, etc. with the
appurtenances, then the aforesaid Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That
the aforesaid John Lambert is not thereof guilty as the said John for himself
above in pleading has alleged, and farther the said Jurors say upon their Oath
aforesaid, that the aforesaid John Lambert in nothing is guilty of the Trespass
and Ejectment aforesaid, in 4 Acres of Pasture of the said 10 Acres of Pasture
residue above supposed to be done, as the said John Lambert above in pleading
has alleged, etc. and because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises, are not yet avised, Day is given to
the parties aforesaid before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster, until
Friday next after the morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment of
and upon the premises, because that the Court of the said Lady the Queen here
are not yet, etc. And so from Term to Term, until Tuesday next after the
morrow of All Souls, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because
the Court of the said Lady the Queen are not yet; etc. At which day, before the
said Lady the Queen at Westminster come the parties aforesaid, in their proper
persons, upon which seen, and by the Court of the said Lady the Queen here all
and singular the premises fully understood, and mature deliberation thereupon
had, for that it seems to the Court of the said Lady the Queen here, that the
aforesaid John Lambert is guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment of the said
Theophilus Adams of and in the Message aforesaid, and the aforesaid 6 Acres of
Pasture, parcel, etc. with the appurtenances, therefore it is considered, that
the aforesaid Theophilus Adams shall recover against the aforesaid John Lambert
his Term aforesaid yet to come of and in the aforesaid Message and the
aforesaid 6 Acres of Pasture, the aforesaid 10 Acres of Pasture parcel with the
appurtenances, and his damages aforesaid by the Jurors aforesaid, in form
aforesaid assessed, as also 25 pound for his charges and costs aforesaid, to
the said Theophilus Adams by the Court of the said Lady the Queen here with his
assent of increase adjuged: which said damages in the whole do amount to 25
pound 2 shillings, and the said John Lambert be taken, etc. and likewise the
aforesaid Theophilas Adams in mercy for his false clamor against the aforesaid
John Lambert for the rest of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid whereof the
said John Lambert is acquitted; therefore the said John Lambert as to the rest
of the said Trespass and Ejectment, go thereof without day, etc.

Ejectione Firm.
Mich. 10. of King James: It begun Easter Term: 1 of King James Rott. 1639 in
the Common pleas: Arthur Legates Case, C. 10. part, fol. 109. a. Norff.

EDward Cockel late of Wimondham in the County aforesaid Husbandman, was
attached to answer to Arthur Legate Gent. of a plea, wherefore with force and
Arms, 6 Acres of Pasture and 6 Acres of Wood with the appurtenances in
Wimondham, which John Smith Gentleman to the aforesaid Arthur demised, for a
Term which is not yet past, he entered, and him from his Farm aforesaid did
Eject, and other harms did to him, to the great damage of the said Arthur, and
against the peace of the Lord the King that now is, etc. and whereupon, the
said Arthur by Robert Love his Attorney complains, that whereas, the aforesaid
John, the 19th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the King
that now is the 8th. at Wimondham, had demised to the said Arthur the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the said Arthur his
Executors and Administrators from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel then
last past, for and during the Term of 3 years from thence next following to be
complete and ended, by virtu of which demise, the said Arthur into the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed,
until the aforesaid Edward, afterward, that is to say, the 10th. day of April
in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is of England the
9th. with force and arms, etc. the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances
which the aforesaid John to the said Arthur in form aforesaid demised for the
aforesaid Term which is not yet past, entered, and him from his Farm aforesaid
did Eject, and other harms, etc. and against the peace, etc. whereupon he
says, that he is the worse, and has damage, to the value of 20 pound, And
thereof he brings suit, etc. And the said Edward, by Thomas Blofield his
Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. And says, he is
not guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment aforesaid, as the said Arthur against
him complains, and of this puts himself upon the Country; And the aforesaid
Arthur likewise. Therefore it is commanded to the Sherif, that he cause to come
here, from the day of Holy Trinity, in three Weeks, 12. by whom, etc. And who
neither, etc. Because as well, etc. At which day, the Jurors between the parties
aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid put was between them in respite here until
this day, that is to say, in 8 days of St. Michael then next following,
unless, The Justices of the Lord the King to Assizes, in the County aforesaid
to be taken assigned by the form of the Statute, etc. Monday the 15th. day of
July next, At the Castle of Norwich, in the County aforesaid first should come;
And now at this day comes, as well the aforesaid Arthur, as the aforesaid
Edward, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the aforesaid Justices to Assizes,
before whom, etc. send here their Record in these words; Afterward the day and
place within contained, before Edward Coke Knight. Chief Justice of the Lord the
King of the Bench, and John Crook Knight. one of the Justices of the said Lord the
King to Pleas, before the King himself to be holden assigned Justices of the
said Lord the King to Assizes, in the County aforesaid to be holden assigned by
form of the Statute, etc. came as well the within named Arthur, as the within
written Edward Cockle, by their Attorneys within written; And the Jurors of the
Jury, whereof within is made mention, being called, likewise came, whereof 12.
that is to say, Robert Seaman, Adam Bale, Bartholmew Harison, Thomas Reynolds,
William Bidwel, Henry Howlet, Thomas Crook, Richard Russel, Thomas Filney,
John Freeman, John Jewel, and Edmond Johnson, in the Jury aforesaid are sworn;
After which, one of the Jurors aforesaid, that is to say, Robert Seaman, with
the assent of both parties aforesaid, and by the Command of the Justices
aforesaid, from the Panel aforesaid, was utterly drawn, etc. Therefore with
the assent of the parties aforesaid, the Jury aforesaid was further put in
respite here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary. Therefore that the Sherif have
the Bodies, etc. And appoint, December Tales, At which day here comes, as well the
aforesaid Arthur, as the aforesaid Edward, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
the Sherif now sends, That as to the distreyning of Bartholmew Stone, that
the Writ was so late delivered to him, that for the shortness of the time he
could not execute it, but as to the putting of the December Tales, whereof in the
said Writ was made mention, the said Sherif now sends, That execution thereof
does appear in a Schedule to the said Writ annexed, in which Schedule is
contained, the Panel of the names of Ten Jurors, whereof none, etc. Therefore
the Jury aforesaid, again is put in respite here, until from Easter Day, in 15.
days, unless the Justices of the King, To the Assizes in the County aforesaid
to be taken assigned, by the form of the Statute, etc. Wednesday in the first
Week of Lent, at Thetford, in the County aforesaid first shall come; for
default of Jurors, etc. Therefore that the Sherif distrein the Jurors
aforesaid, by all their Lands, etc. And that the issues, etc. So that they be
here, unless, etc. to make the Jury aforesaid, etc. Norff. ss. Afterward the
day and place within contained, before Edward Coke Knight. Chief Justice of the
Lord the King of the Bench, and John Crook Knight. one of the Justices of the said
Lord the King, to Assizes in the County aforesaid to be taken assigned by the
form of the statute, etc. comes as well the within named Arthur Legate, as the
within written Edward Cockle, by their Attorneys within contained, And the
Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, whereof within is made mention, being called
likewise come, who to say the truth of the within contained, chosen, tried, and
sworn, say upon their Oath, That the late King and Queen, Philip and Mary, the
9th. day of July, in the year of the Reigns of the same King and Queen, Philip
and Mary, the 4th. and 6th. were seized of and in the Manor of VVimondam^, in
the County aforesaid, in their Demesne as of Fee, in the Right of h^s Crown of
England, whereof the Lands and Tenements in the Declaration within written,
then were parcel, and the aforesaid late King and Queen, Philip and Mary, so as
before is said, of and in the Manor aforesaid, whereof, etc. being seized, The
said King and Queen, the said 9th. day of July, in the year of the Reigns of
the said late King and Queen, Philip and Mary, the 4th. and 6th. made their
Letters Patents under the great Seal of Eng. to one George Howard Knight. of the
aforesaid Lands and Tenements, in the Declaration within written named amongst
other, By the names of 2 pieces of Lands, called Nettlehamsted, and VVikemans,
containing by estimation 15. Acres, lying and VVyndmondham aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, then or late in the tenure or occupation of Joh. Coleman, and
late to the Monastery of VVyndmondham, sometimes belonging and appertaining,
and parcel of the possessions thereof then being; The Tenor of which Letters
Patents follows in these words: The King and Queen, to all to whom, etc.
greeting, Know ye, That we, in Consideration of the good, true, and faithful
service of our Beloved and Faithful Servant, George Howard Knight. before this time
to us done, and for diverse other causes and Considerations us specially
moving, Of special grace, and of our certain Knowledge and mere motion, have
given, and granted, and by these presents do give, and grant, for us, the Heirs
and Successors of us the aforesaid Queen, to the aforesaid George Howard, All
those two Acres of our Lands, lying and being in Ashwynen, in our County of
Norfolk, etc. We also give, and grant, by these presents, to the aforesaid
George Howard Knight. Two pieces of our Lands, called Nettlehamsted, and VVikemans,
containing by estimation 15. Acres, lying and being in VVymondhom aforesaid, in
the County aforesaid, now or late in the tenure or occupation of John Coleman,
and late to the Monastery of VVyndmondham, sometimes belonging and
appertaining, and being parcel of the possessions thereof, etc. We also give
for the Consideration aforesaid, by these presents, for us, the Heirs and
Successors of us the aforesaid Queen, grant to the aforesaid George Howard Knight.
all and all manner of Woods, and Underwoods, and our Trees whatsoever, of, in,
and upon the premises, growing and being, and all the Land, Ground, or Soil of
the same Woods, Underwoods, and Trees, and the Reversion and Reversions
whatsoever, of all and singular the premises above expressed and specified, and
to every parcel thereof, as also the yearly Rents and profits whatsoever,
reserved upon whatsoever Demises, and Grants of the premises, or any parcel
thereof, any wise made, as fully, and wholly, and in as ample manner and form,
as any Abbots, Priors, of the said late Abbey, or Priory, or any of them, or any
Guardians, or any Chapleins, Chaunters, or Incombents, or any Chaplein,
Chaunter, or Incumbent, of Chauntry, Guilds, Lamps, Obits, and Lights
aforesaid, or any other, or others, the premises, or any parcel thereof,
having, possessing, ever had, held, or enjoyed, or ought to have, hold, use, or
enjoy, as fully, freely, and wholly, and in as ample manner and form, as all
and singular the premises, to our hands, or to the hands of the most dear
Father of us the said Queen, Henry the 8th. late King of England, Or unto the
Hands of our most dear Brother of us the said Queen, Edward the 6th. late King
of England, by reason or color of the several Dissolutions of the said late
Monastery, Priory, Chauntry, Guild, Lamps, Obits and Lights aforesaid, or by
reason of any Act of Parliament, or any Acts of Parliament, or any other lawful
means, Right or Title, ought to come, and in our Hands now of right by reason
of the dissolutions of the said late Monastery, Priory, Chauntry, Guild, Lamps,
Obits and Lights, are or ought to be; All which singular premises with the
appurtenances, from us, and from the Father and Brother of us the said Queen,
were concealed and detayned, and the Rents and Revenews thereof, nor of any
parcel thereof, to us before this time were answered, And all which and
singular premises with the appurtenances, now in the whole do amount to the
clear yearly value of 22. pounds, 8. shillings, and 6. pence, and not above;
that is to say, etc. the aforesaid Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, and
other the premises in Possewicke, Kerringham, Massingham, Great ^erlingham,
Gist, Girston, Holm, Hunstonston, Alderford, Duckleborough, Boyton, in the
Parish of St. George, in the City of the County of Norwich, Buckenham, New
Winondham, Plamsted, Tylenham, Southelingham, Dinham, and Estlyham aforesaid,
in the said County of Norfolk, to the clear yearly value of 56. shillings, and
4. pence; And if it shall happen the aforesaid Lands ands Tenements above
expressed, or any parcel thereof, at the time of the making of these our
Letters Patents, to be of greater yearly value, old Rent, than in those present
Letters Patents is particularly specified, That then it shall be lawful for
us, the said King and Queen, and the Heirs and Successors of us the aforesaid
Queen, from time time, during the Term of 10. years, after the date of these
Letters Patents, into all the aforesaid Lands, Tenements, and other the
premises, and every parcel thereof so being of greater yearly value, to enter,
and the same to seize and have in our hands, and our possession, to keep, until
we the said King and Queen, the Heirs and Successors of us the aforesaid Queen,
of so many sums of good and lawful money of England, to how much the said
greater and yearly value of the premises, or any parcel thereof, according to
the rate of purchase of 21. years do amount unto, we be thereof satisfied and
paid, To have, and to hold, and enjoy the aforesaid Messuages, Houses,
Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Underwoods,
Rents, Services, and other Hereditaments whatsoever with the appurtenances, And
all and singular the premises with all their appurtenances, to the aforesaid
George Howard Knight. his Heirs and Assigns, to the proper use and behoof of him
the said George and his Heirs and Assigns for ever, To hold the aforesaid
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and all and singular other the premises with their
appurtenances, of us, and of the Heirs and Successors of us the aforesaid
Queen, as of our Manor of East Greenewich, by Fealty only in free Socage, and
not in Capite, for all Rents, Services, and demands whatsoever, for the same to
us, the Heirs and Successors of us the aforesaid Queen, for the same to be any
way rendered, paid, or to be done, And further, of our further special grace, We
have given, and granted, and by these presents for us, the Heirs and Successors
of us the aforesaid Queen, We give and grant to the aforesaid George Howard Knight.
from henceforth, All and singular the Rents, Reversions, and profits, of all
and singular the premises, from the Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed
Mary the Virgin last past, hitherto coming or arising, To have the same of our
gift, without account, or any other thing to us, the Heirs and Successors of us
the aforesaid Queen, in any manner to be rendered, paid, or done; We Will also,
and by these presents grant to the aforesaid George Howard, that he have, and
shall have these our Leters Patents, in due manner made and sealed, Without any
Fine or Fee, great or small, to us in our Hamper, or elsewhere to our use for
the same, any ways to be rendered, paid, or done, because express mention,
etc. In Witness, etc. T. R. and R. at Westminster. the 9th. day of July, in the
years the 4th. and 6th. of Philip and Mary. And further, the Jurors aforesaid
say upon their Oath, That at the aforesaid time of the making of the said
Letters Patents, so as before is said, to the aforesaid George Howard, The
Manor aforesaid from the aforesaid late King and Queen was not yet concealed
nor detained, but the Rents and the Reversions thereof to the said Lord the
King, and Lady the Queen then were answered, And that Manor was in charge and
account of Record, and the Rents and the Reversions thereof to the said late
King and Queen, Philip and Mary, were answered: But whether the Lands and
Tenements in the Declaration above mentioned, by the said Letters Patents, to
the aforesaid George Howard Knight. passed or not, the Jurors aforesaid are
ignorant, and thereof pray the Advice and Consideration of the Court in the
premises; And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in
form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices of the Court, That the
aforesaid Lands, and Tenements, in the Declaration aforesaid mentioned, by the
aforesaid Letters Patents of the Lord Philip and Mary, late King and Queen of
England, to the aforesaid George Howard did pass, Then the Jurors aforesaid,
say that the aforesaid Edward Cockle is not guilty of the Trespass and
Ejectment, as he before in pleading has alleged: And if upon the whole matter,
by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices
and Court, That the Lands, and Tenements, in the Declaration within written, by
the aforesaid Letters Patents, of the Lord Philip and Mary, King and Queen of
England, to the said George Howard, passed not, etc.

False Imprisonment.
Michaelmass Term, in the 6th. year of King JAMES, in the COMMMON-PLEAS, Doctor
Bonhams Case, Co. 8. part. London.

HEnry Atkins of London Doctor of Physic, George Turner of London Doctor of
Physic, Thomas Moundford of London Doctor of Physic, John Argent of London
Doctor of Physic, John Tailor of London Yeoman, And William Bowden of London
Yeoman, were Attached to answer to Thomas Bonham of London, Doctor in
Philosophy, and of Physic, of a Plea, wherefore they, together with William
Dun of London Doctor of Physic, and Richard Ware of London Skinner, with force
and Arms him the said Thomas Bonham took, imprisoned, and evil handled, and him
in Prison against the Law and Custom of the Kingdom of England did long detain,
and other harms to him did, to the great damage of the said Thomas Bonham, and
against the Peace of the Lord the King that now is, etc: And whereupon the same
Thomas Bonham, by Richard Coke his Attorney, complains, That the aforesaid
Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden,
together, etc. the 10th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lord the King that now is, the 4th. with force and Arms, him the said John in
the Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, took and
imprisoned, and evilly handled, and him there so in Prison a long time, that is
to say, by the space of 7. days, against the Law and Custom of this Kingdom of
England detained, and other harms, etc. to the great damage, etc. and against
the Peace, etc. whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has damage to
the value of 300. pounds, and thereof brings suit, etc. And the aforesaid
Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden,
by Francis Barker their Attorney, come and defend the force and injury when,
etc. And as to the coming with force and Arms, say, That they are not thereof
guilty, And of that put themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid Thomas
Bonham likewise, And as to the rest of the Trespass and Imprisonment aforesaid,
above supposed to be done, The said Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John
Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden say, That the aforesaid Thomas Bonham,
his Action aforesaid against them ought not to have, because they say, That
before the aforesaid time, in which it is supposed the aforesaid Trespass and
Imprisonment to be done, The Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. the 23d.
day of September, in the year of his Reign (...) by his Letters Patents, which
the said Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William
Bowden, with his great Seal of England sealed, bearing date at Westminster,
the same day and year here in Court brought, Reciting, Wherereas he thought it
the duty of his Kingly Office, in all reason to provide for the good and
welfare of his People, That would first of all be done, if he might in due
season meet with the enterprises of wicked men, first therefore ye held it
necessary to restrain the boldness of wicked men, who professed Physic more
for avarice, than out of confidence of a good Conscience; Whereupon, very many
incommodities did arise, to the rude and credulous Co^mon-people, Therefore,
partly imitating the example of the well-governed Cities, and other Nations
inclined thereunto, at the request of the grave Men and Doctors, John Chamber,
Thomas Linacre, Ferdinand de Victoria, his Physicians, of Nicholas Hatswel,
John Francisco, and Robert Yoxley Physicians, and chiefly of the right Reverend
Father in Christ, and Lord, Thomas, titled of the Holy Church beyond Tyber,
Priest of the most Holy Church of Rome, Cardinal of York, Archbishop, and our
Well beloved Chancellor of our Kingdom of England; A College perpetual of
Doctors and Grave Men, who Physic in his City of London, and the Suburbs, and
within 7. Miles from the said City every way, might publicly exercise, he
Willed and commanded to be instituted, to whom, for his honor, and in the name
of the public good, and care, (as he hoped) the ignorance and rashness of the
malicious, which he remembered, as well by their example and gravity to deterr,
as by his Laws late made, and and by Constitution to be made by the same
College to punish; Which that they might more easily well accomplish, to the
remembered Doctors, John Chambers, Thomas Linacre, Ferdinand de Victoria, his
Physicians, Nicholas Hatswel, John Francisco, and Robert Yoxley Physicians, he
granted, that they, and all Men of the same faculty, of and in the City
aforesaid, should be in deed and Name, one Body and Comminalty perpetual, or
College perpetual, and that the said Comminalty or College every year for ever,
might chose and make of that Co^minaltie, any diligent man, and skilful in the
faculty of Physic, to be President of the said College or Comminalty, to
oversee, rule, and govern, for that year the College or Comminalty aforesaid,
and all men of the said faculty, and their businesses; And that the said
President and College or Comminalty should have perpetual succession, and a
Common Seal, to serve for the businesses of the said Comminalty and President
for ever, And that they and their Successors for ever, should be persons able
and capable to purchase and possess in Fee, and for ever, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, and other possessions whatsoever; He also granted to them and their
Successors, for him and his Heirs, That they and their Successors, might
purchase to them and their Successors, as well in the said City, as out of it,
Lands, and Tenements whatsover, not exceeding the yearly value of 12. pound,
notwithstanding the Statute of Alienation in Mortmain, And that they by the
name of President of the College or Co^minalty of the faculty of Physicians
Land. might plead, or might be impleaded, before whatsoever Judges in all
Courts and Actions whatsoever, And that the aforesaid President and College, or
Comminalty, and their Successors, lawful assemblies, and honest of themselves,
and Statutes and Ordinances for the wholesome Government, Oversight, and
Correction of the College or Comminalty aforesaid, and of all Men the same
faculty in the same City, or within 7. Miles circuit of the said City
exercising, according to the exigence or necessity (as often, and when need
was) might lawfully, and without peril make, without the hindrance of the said
late King, his Heirs, or Successors whatsoever, his Justices, Escheators,
Sherifs, and other his Bailiffs and Ministers, his Heirs and Successor
whatsoever; He also granted to the said President, College, or Comminalty, and
their Successors, That none in the said City, or 7. Miles in Circuit thereof,
do exercise the said faculty, unless to this, by the said President or
Comminalty, or their Successors, who for the time should be, he be admitted by
the Letters of the said President and College, with their Common Seal sealed,
upon the penalty of 100. shillings for every Month, that not being admitted,
he should exercise the same faculty, half thereof to the Lord the King, and his
Successors, and half thereof to the said President and College to be applied;
He besides, willed and granted, for him and his Successors (as much as in him
was) That by the President and College of the aforesaid Comminalty, for the
time being, and their Successors for ever, Four every year by them should be
chosen, should have the Overseeing, searching, Correction, and Government, of
all and singular the Physicians of the said City, exercising the faculty of
Physic within the said City, and so of other Physicians foreign whomsoever, the
said faculty of Physic any wise frequenting and using within the said City,
and the Suburbs thereof, or within 7 miles in Circuit of the said City and the
punishment of them for their offenses in not well exercising doing and using
the same, as also the oversight and searching of all Medicines and the
reception of them by the said Physicions or any of them to the Liege people of
the said late King, for curing and healing their infirmities, to be given, put,
and used, as often, and when need shall be, for the Commodity and profit of the
said Liege people of the said late King, So as the punishments of the said
Physicians, using the said faculty of Physic, in the Premises offending, by
Fines, Amercement, and Imprisonment of their Bodies, and by other ways
reasonable and fitting be executed; He also willed, and granted, for him, and
his Heirs, and Successors, (as much as in him was) That neither the President,
nor any of the College aforesaid of Physicinas nor their successors nor any of
them exercising the same faculty any way in future within the City aforesaid,
and the suburbs thereof, or elce-where, should be summoned or put, nor any of
them should be summoned or put in any Assizes, Juries, Inquisitions,
Attachments, and other Recognitions, within the said City, and the Suburbs
thereof for ever, before the Mayor, or Sherifs, or Coroners of the said City,
or by any Officer, or Minister, or Officers, or Ministers, although the said
Juries, Inquisitions, or Recognitions, were summoned upon the Writ or Writs of
the said late King, or his Heirs, of Record, But that the said Masters or
Governors, and Comminalty of the faculty aforesaid, and their Successors, and
every of them the said faculty exercising, against the said late King, his
Heirs and Successors, and against the Mayor and Sherifs of the said City
aforesaid, for the time being, and whatsoever their Officers or Ministers,
should be thereof acquitted and discharged for ever, as by the said Letters
Patents, amongst other things more fully appears. And the said Henry, George,
Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William, further say, That by
virtue of the Letters Patents aforesaid, the aforesaid John Chamber, Thomas
Linacre, Ferdinand de Victoria, Nicholas Hatswell, John Francisc^s, and Robert
Yaxley Physicians, and all men of the said faculty, in the City aforesaid, were
one body and Comminalty perpetual, or College perpetual; And that afterward,
by a certain Act of Parliament, of the said late King Henry the 8th. holden at
London, the 15th. day of April, in the year of his Reign the 14th. and from
thence adjourned unto Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the last day of
July, in the year of the said late King, the 15th. and then there holden,
amongst other things, It was Enacted by Authority of the same Parliament, That
for that, that the making of the said Corporation of Physicians, was
meritorious, and very good for the Commonwealth of this Kingdom of England,
and besides it was expedient and necessary to provide, That no person of the
said body politic and Comminalty aforesaid, should be suffered to exercise and
to practice Physic, but only such persons as should be profound, sad, and
discreet, groundedly learned, and deeply studied in Physic, In Consideration
whereof, and for the further authorizing of the said Letters Patents, and also
for the enlarging and amplifying of further Articles for the aforesaid
Commonwealth, to be had and made by the said late King, with the consent of
the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Comminalty in the said Parliament
assembled, It is Enacted, amongst other things, That the aforesaid Corporation
of the Comminalty and fellowship of the faculty of the Art of Physic
aforesaid, and all and every Grant, Article, and other things contained and
specified in the said Letters Patents should be approved, granted, ratified and
confirmed, in the aforesaid Act, and should clearly be authorized and admitted
by the same good, lawful, and available, to the aforesaid body corporate and
their Successors for ever, in as ample and large manner as it might be taken,
thought, and construed by the said Letters Patents: And further, It is enacted,
ordained, and established by the said Act, That the aforesaid 8. persons, in
the aforesaid Letters Patents named as principal, and first named of the
aforesaid Cominalty and Fellowship, should choose to them two other of the said
Comminalty, who from thenceforth should be called and named Elects, and the
aforesaid Elects, yearly should choose one of them to be President of the said
Comminalty, and as often as any of the Rooms and place of the said Elects,
should happen to be void by death, or otherwise, then the Supervisors of the
said Elects, within 30. or 40. days, next after their deaths, or of any of
them, should choose, name, and admit, one, or more, as need should requite, of
the most learned and expert men of and in the aforesaid faculty in London, to
supply the place and number of 8. persons, so that he or they, who should be
chose^, be first examined strictly by the said Supervisors, according to the
form devised by the said Elects, and also by the said Supervisors approved, as
by the said Act amongst other things more fully appears. And the said Henry,
George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William, further say,
That afterward, and before the time in which, etc. By another Act of
Parliament of the Lady Mary the Queen of England, the 24th. day of October, in
the year of the Reign the first, at Westminster aforesaid, That whereas in the
Parliament holden at London, the 5th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of
the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. the 14th. and from thence
adjourned unto Westminster, the last day of June, in the year of his Reign the
15th. and there holden, It was Enacted, That a certain grant by Letters Patents
of Incorporation, made and granted by the aforesaid late King, to the
Physicians of London, and all clauses and Articles contained in the said grant,
should be approved, granted, ratified, and confirmed by the said Parliament, In
consideration whereof, It was Enacted by the Authority of the same Parliament,
That the aforesaid Statute, and Act of Parliament, in all the Articles and
clauses in the same contained, from thenceforth for ever should stand and
continue in full strength, force, and effect, any Statute, Law, Custom, or any
thing made, had, or used to the Contrary, in any thing notwithstanding: And for
the better Reformation of diverse enormities happening to the Commonwealth, by
the evil usage, and undue administration of Physic, and for the amplifying,
and enlarging of the last Articles, for the better execution of the things in
the aforesaid grants contained, it was further Enacted, That whenever the
President of the College, or Comminalty of the faculty of Physic in London for
the time being, or such as the aforesaid President, and College yearly,
according to the Tenor, and meaning of the same Act, should authorize to
search, examine, and correct, and punish all offenders, and transgressors, in
the aforesaid faculty, within the same City, and precinct, in the aforesaid Act
expressed, should send, or commit such offender, or offenders, for his or their
offenses, or disobedience, contrary to any Article, or Clause, contained in the
aforesaid grant, or Act, to any Ward, Gaol, or Prison within the aforesaid
City, and precinct aforesaid, (the Tower of London excepted) that then, and
from time to time, the Warders, Gaolers, and Keepers of the Wards, Gaols, and
Prisons, within the City, or precinct aforesaid, (the Tower of London excepted)
should receive into his, or their Prisons, all and every such person, or
persons so offending, which should be sent, or committed to him, or them as
aforesaid, and there safely should keep the person, or persons so committed
into any of their Prisons, at the proper costs, and charges of the person, or
persons so committed, without Bail, or main prise, until such offender, and
offenders, or disobedients, be discharged of the aforesaid imprisonment by the
aforesaid President, and such persons as by the aforesaid College should be
authorized, upon pain, that every such Warder, Jailer, or Keeper, doint the
contrary, should lose, and forfeit double of such fine, and amercement, as such
offender, or offenders, or disobedients should be assessed to pay by such as
the said President, and College as should be authorized as before is said, so
as the said Fine, and Amercement, should not be at any time above the sum of 20
pound, the moiety whereof to be employed to the use of the said late Queen, her
Heirs, and Successors, and the other moiety to the aforesaid President, and
College, all which forfeiture should be recovered by Action of debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, in any of the said late Queens, her heirs, or
successors, Courts of Record, against any such Warden, Jailer, or Keeper so
offending, in which no Essoin, wager of Law, nor Protection should be allowed,
nor be admitted for the defendant, And further it was Enacted, by the authority
of the said Parliament, That all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other Ministers, and Officers within the City, and precinct
aforesaid, upon request to them made, should help, aid, and assist the
President of the aforesaid College, and all persons by them from time to time
authorized, for the due execution of the said Act, or Statute, upon pain for
not giving of help to them of being in contempt of the said late Queen, her
Heirs, and Successors, as by the same Act amongst other things more fully
appears. And the said Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John
Tailor, and William, further say, That by virtue of the said Letters Patents,
and by force of the Statutes aforesaid, One Thomas Langhton Doctor of Physic,
a man diligent, and skilful in the faculty of Physic, and then one of the
Comminalty of the College of Physicians in London aforesaid, before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 30th. day of September, in the year, 1605. at
the College of Physicians, situate in London, in the Parish of Saint
Bennet-Pauls-Wharf, in the Ward of Baynards Castle, was duly chosen President
of the College aforesaid, and then and there held the said Office of President
of the College aforesaid, And the said Thomas Langton being President of the
College aforesaid, The same President and Co^minalty of the College aforesaid,
the same 30th. day of September, in the year 1606 abovesaid, at the College
aforesaid, chose Ralph Wilkinson, William Du^, Richard Palmer, and John Argent,
diligent men, and skilful in the faculty of Physic, and then being 4. Doctors
of the College aforesaid, to be the 4. Censors or Governors of the Comminalty
aforesaid, to oversee, teach, correct, and govern, all and singular Physicians
of the said City, using the faculty of Physic in the said City, and other
foreign Physicians whomsoever, frequenting to, and using the said faculty of
Physic, any ways within the said City and the Suburbs thereof, or within 7.
Miles in circuit of the same City, and to punish their defects in not well
exercising, doing, and using the same; As also to oversee, and search all
manner of Medicines, and their Receipts by the said Physicians, or any of them,
for curing of infirmities, as often as need should be, And to punish the said
Physicians, Delinquents, exercising the said faculty of Physic, by Fines,
Amercements, and Imprisonment of their Bodies, and other ways reasonable and
fitting, according to the form and effect of the said Letters Patents, and the
Statutes aforesaid: And the said Thomas Langton, being President of the College
aforesaid, and the aforesaid Ralph Wilkinson, William Dun, Richard Palmer, and
John Argent, being likewise the 4. Censors or Governors of the College
aforesaid, The aforesaid Thomas Bonham, within the aforesaid time in which,
etc. That is to say, the 10th. day of April, in the year of our Lord, 1606.
within London aforesaid, in the aforesaid Parish of the blessed Lady of Bow, in
the Ward of Cheap aforesaid, contrary to the form and effects of the Letters
Patents aforesaid, and the aforesaid Statute, made in the Parliament aforesaid,
of the said King Henry the 8th. did practice Physic, not admitted by the
Letters of the aforesaid President and College, sealed with their Common Seal,
whereas in truth, the aforesaid Thomas Bonham, was insufficient to practice
Physic; By reason whereof the said Thomas Bonham afterward, that is to say,
the 13th. day of April; in the year of our Lord, 1606. at London, in the Parish
and Ward aforesaid, was summoned by the aforesaid Censors or Governors of the
College aforesaid, to appear before the President, and Censors, or Governors,
of the College aforesaid, at the College aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, the 14th. day of April, in the year of our Lord, 1606. abovesaid,
then next following, to be examined upon the premises: At which 14th. day of
April, in the year of our Lord, 1606. aforesaid, at the College aforesaid came
the aforesaid Thomas Bonham in his proper person, and there was examined of his
science in his faculty of Physic administered, by the aforesaid Censors or
Governors of the College aforesaid, and because the said Thomas Bonham so
examined answered very insufficiently in the Art of Physic, then and there
upon his examination aforesaid, and was ^ound by the aforesaid President, and
Censors, or Governors of the College aforesaid, very insufficient, and
unskilful, to administer Physic; And for that the aforesaid Thomas Bonham,
being many times examined, and forbidden by the President, and Censors, or
Governors aforesaid, for the causes aforesaid, to adminster Physic, for a
Month or more, after such forbidding of him within London aforesaid, in the
aforesaid Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward aforesaid, without the
license of the aforesaid President and College, under their common Seal,
contrary to the form of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and the Statutes
aforesaid did practice, Then and there it was granted, by the aforesaid
President, and Censors, or Governors, of the College aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Tho. for his Dissobedience and Contempt be amerced to 100. shillings,
in the next assembly of the aforesaid President and College, at the College
aforesaid to be paid: And then and there it was commanded, to the said Thomas
Bonham, by them the President, and Censors, or Governors of the College
aforesaid, That the aforesaid Thomas Bonham, from thenceforth should forbear to
practice Physic within the aforesaid City of London, and the Suburbs thereof,
and 7. Miles circuit of the said City, until the said Thomas Bonham, were found
to be sufficient, and should be admitted to practice the said Art of Physic,
within the City and circuit aforesaid, by the President and College aforesaid,
under the pain of being cast into Prison, if in the premises, as is aforesaid,
he should offend. And the said Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent,
John Tailor, and William Bowden further say, That after and before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. That is to say, the first day of October, in the
year of our Lord, 1606. abovesaid, At the College aforesaid, in the Parish and
Ward aforesaid, The aforesaid Thomas Langton, Doctor of Physic, a man
diligent, and skilful in the faculty of Physic, and then one of the Co^minalty
of the College of Physicians in London aforesaid, and one of the Electors of
the College aforesaid, was elected and chosen into the Office of President of
the College aforesaid, for one year then next following, and the Office of
President of the College aforesaid, then and there held; And the said Thomas
Langton, being President of the College aforesaid, the same President and
Comminalty of the College aforesaid, the said first day of October, in the year
of our Lord, 1606. abovesaid, at the College aforesaid, chose the aforesaid
George Turner, Thomas Moundford, William Dun, and John Argent, Doctors, men
diligent and skilful in the faculty of Physic, and then being 4. of the
College aforesaid, to supervise, search, correct, and govern, all and singular
the Physicians of the said City, exercising the faculty of Physic in the said
City, and other foreign Physicians whomsoever, frequenting to, and exercising
the said faculty of Physic, within the same City, and the Suburbs of the same
City, or within 7. Miles circuit of the said City, And to punish their defects,
in not well exercising, doing, and using the same, As also to oversee, and
search, all manner of Medicines, and Receipts, by the said Physicians,
exercising the said faculty of Physic within the City of London aforesaid, and
the circuit aforesaid, or any of them, for the curing of diseases, as often as
need should be required, and to punish the said Physicians, exercising the
faculty of Physic in the premises, Delinquents, by Fines, Amercements, and
Imprisonments of Body, and other ways reasonable and fitting, according to the
form and effect of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and the Statutes aforesaid:
And the said Thomas Langton, being President of the College aforesaid, and the
aforesaid G. Turner, Thomas Moundford, Will. Dun, and John Argent, being
likewise the 4: Censors, or Governors of the College aforesaid, The said
Thomas Bonham, before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 20th. day of
October, in the year of our Lord 1606 abovesaid, within London aforesaid, that
is to say, in the aforesaid Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of
Cheap aforesaid, did practice Physic, contrary to the form of the aforesaid
Letters Patents, and the Statutes aforesaid, and the aforesaid Forbidding and
Command of the aforesaid President and Censors; And afterward, that is to say,
The same 20th. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1606. aforesaid, The
said Thomas Bonham, at London aforesaid, in the aforesaid Parish of the blessed
Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap aforesaid, was summoned by the aforesaid
Censors, or Governors of the College aforesaid, at the College aforesaid, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the 22d. day of the said month of October, upon
the premises to be examined, At which 22d. day of October, in the year of our
Lord, 1606. abovesaid, At the Assembly of the College aforesaid, holden at the
College aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid,
afterward, that is to say, the same 22d. day of October, in the year of our
Lord, 1606. abovesaid, before the said George Turner, Will. Dan, Thomas
Moundford, and Joh. Argent, then Censors and Governors of the College
aforesaid, because that the said Thomas Bonham, by the aforesaid Censors or
Governors of the College aforesaid, as it is said, warned to appear at the
College aforesaid, before the President, and Censors, or Governors of the
College aforesaid, the aforesaid 22d. day of October. in the same day did not
appear, Then and there it was granted, by the said Censors or Governors of the
College aforesaid, That the said Thomas Bonham, for his dissobedience and
contempts, should be amerced to 10. pound, And that the said Thomas Bonham, for
the causes aforesaid, should be arrested, and delivered into custody, And the
said Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William
Bowden, further say, That afterward and before the time in which, etc. that is
to say, the 24th. day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1606. abovesaid, The
said Thomas Langton President of the College aforesaid, at London, in the
aforesaid Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap aforesaid,
dyed; After whose death, and before the time in which, etc. That is to say, the
25th. day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1606. abovesaid, The said Henry
Atkins, a diligent man, and skilful in the faculty of Physic, and one of the
Comminalty of the College aforesaid, and one of the then 8. Electors, of the
College aforesaid then being, at the College aforesaid, within London
aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, was in due manner chosen, and into
the office of President of the College aforesaid, for one whole year then next
following, and then and there held the said Office of President, of the College
aforesaid; And the said Henry Atkins, being President of the College aforesaid,
and the aforesaid George Turner, William Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John Argent
being Censors, or Governors of the College aforesaid, at an Assembly of the
College aforesaid holden, at the College aforesaid, within London aforesaid, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the 7th. day of November, in the year of our
Lord, 1606. abovesaid, before the aforesaid Henry Atkins, then President of the
College aforesaid, and the aforesaid George Turner, William Dun, Thomas
Moundford, and John Argent, then Censors or Governors of the College
aforesaid, came the aforesaid Thomas Bonham in his proper person, Of which
Thomas Bonham when the aforesaid Henry Atkins, then President of the College,
and the aforesaid George Turner, William Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John
Argent then Censors or Governors of the College aforesaid, they asked whether
he would satisfy to the College aforesaid for his disobedience and contempts
aforesaid, and again submit himself to be examined, and to obey the Judgment
of the College aforesaid, And the aforesaid Thomas Bonham, then and there
answered, that he before that had within London aforesaid, done and practiced,
and then after within Loedo^ aforesaid, would do and practice Physic, no leave
being asked of the said College, and that he would not in any thing to the
President, and Censors, or Governors of the College aforesaid yield obedience;
And then and there affirming the aforesaid President, and Censors, or
Governors aforesaid, to have no authority over those who are made Doctors in
the University: By which, the said Censors, or Governors, for the offenses and
disobedience aforesaid, Then and there Ordained, and Decreed, That the
aforesaid Thomas Bonham, should be sent to Prison, there to remain, until from
thence by the President, and Censors, or Governors for the College aforesaid
for the time being he should be delivered, as by the said Letters Patents, and
the Statutes aforesaid, it is Ordained, and Established, and then and there
made their Warrant, with the Common Seal of the College or Comminalty sealed,
And to the Keeper of of the Prison of the Lord the King, in the Compter London
in the Poultry, in the Parish of St. Mildred directed, commanded by the said
Warrant to the Keeper of the Prison aforesaid, That the said Keeper of the
Prison aforesaid, should receive the Body of the said Thomas Bonham, and him in
the Prison aforesaid of the said Lord the King there should safely keep,
without Bail, or Main-prise, at the proper costs and charges of the aforesaid
Thomas Bonham, until the aforesaid Thomas Bonham, by the command of the
President, and Censors, or Governors aforesaid, or their Successors he should
be delivered; Which Thomas Bonham, for his offenses and disobedience aforesaid,
together with the Warrant aforesaid, in form aforesaid made, the said Henry
Atkins, then being President of the College aforesaid, and the aforesaid George
Turner, William Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John Tailor, then being Censos or
Governors of the College aforesaid, by virtue of the Letters Patents and
Statutes aforesaid, and the aforesaid William Bowden, and John Tailor, as
Servants of the said Henry Atkins President, and of George, William Dun, Thomas
Moundford, and John Argent, and by their the said President, and 4. Censors or
Governors aforesaid. Warrant, the aforesaid time in which, etc. to one Richard
Ware, then Keeper of the said Prison of the Lord the King, of the Compter
aforesaid at London, in the Parish of St. Mildred in the Poultry in the Ward of
Cheap aforesaid, as to them it was lawful to do; Which commitment of the
aforesaid Thom. Bonham, for the causes aforesaid, in form aforesaid done, is
the same Trespass and Imprisonment, whereof the aforesaid Tho. Bonham above
complains: And this they are ready to averr, and demand Judgment, if the
said Thomas Bonham, his Action aforesaid against them ought to have, etc. And
the aforesaid Thomas Bonham says, That he for any thing before alleged, to
have his Action, ought not to be barred, Because, (by protestation he says,)
That he the said Thomas Bonham, was not insufficient, not was found by the
aforesaid President, and Censors, or Governors, of the College aforesaid, to
practice Physic, nor unfitly, or insufficiently to the aforesaid President,
and Censors, or Governors, of the College aforesaid in the Art of Physic did
answer, as the (...) Henry Atkins, George Turner, John (...)dford, John Argent,
John Ta^lor, and William Bowd^n above has alleged, For Ple^, the said Thomas
Bonham says, That by the aforesaid Act in the aforesaid Parliament, of the
aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. holden at London aforesaid, the aforesaid
5th. day of April, in the year of his Reign the 14th. and from thence adjorned
to Westminster, in the aforesaid County of Middlesex, until the last day of
July, in the year of the Reign of the said King the 15th. and there then
holden, It was further Enacted by Authority of the same Parliament, That
whereas in the Diocese out of London, it was not then very like always to find
men able sufficiently to examine, according to the Statute, such as should be
admitted to exercise Physic in them, That no person then after be suffered to
exercise Physic through England, until the said person should be examined at
London, by the aforesaid President, and three of the aforesaid Electors, and
should have from the said President and Electors, Letters Testimonials, of
their Approbation and Examination, except he should be a Graduate of Oxford or
Cambridge, who had accomplished all things for his form without any Grace. And
further, the said Thomas Bonham says, That he the said Thomas, the second day
of July, in the year of our Lord 1595 in the University of Cambridge aforesaid
took the Degree and Dignity of a Doctor in Physic, and then and there, that is
to say, the said second day of July in the year of our Lord 1595 above said in
the University aforesaid at Cambridge aforesaid, in the County of Cambridge,
was duly and lawfully ordained, and made a Graduate of ^^e University
aforesaid, that is to say, Doctor in Physic, according to the Laws, Statutes,
Constitutions, and ordinances of the said University of Cambridge aforesaid,
and that he the said Thomas Bonham, then and there had accomplished all things
concerning his Degree aforesaid, by his form, without grace, from time to time,
according to the Laws, Statutes, Constitutions, and Ordinances of the said
University of Cambridge aforesaid; By color whereof, the same Thomas Bonham, a
Graduate of the University of Cambridge aforesaid, that is to say, being Doctor
in Physic in the form aforesaid, who had accomplished all things concerning
his Degree aforesaid, for his form, without any grace, The said faculty of
Physic from time to time in the said City of London, that is to say, in the
aforesaid Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap aforesaid did
exercise, as it was lawful for him to do, until the aforesaid Henry Atkins,
George Turner, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden,
together with, etc. the aforesaid 10th. day of November, in the 4th. year
abovesaid, with force and Arms him the said Thomas Bonham, at London aforesaid,
in the aforesaid Parish of the blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, took
and imprisoned, and him there in Prison long, that is to say, by the space of
7. days, against the Law and Custom of this Kingdom of England did detain, as
the aforesaid Thomas Bonham above against them complains, and this he is
ready to averr; Whereupon, in as much as the aforesaid Henry Atkins, George
Turner, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden, the
Trespass and Imprisonment aforesaid, above have acknowledged, The said Thomas
Bonham demands Judgment, and his damages by reason of the Trespass and
Imprisonment aforesaid, to be adjudged unto him, etc. And the aforesaid Henry
Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William
Bowden, say, That the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid Thomas Bonham, above by
Replication pleaded, is not sufficient in Law, to the Action of the aforesaid
Thomas Bonham, against them the said Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas
Moundford, John Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden, to maintain, and that
they to that Plea in manner and form aforesaid by Replication pleaded, need
not, nor by the Law of the Land are bound to answer, and this they are ready to
averr, whereupon they demand Judgment, and that the said Thomas Bonham, from
having his Action aforesaid against them to be barred; And the aforesaid Thomas
Bonham, for as much as he sufficient matter in Law, to maintain his Action
aforesaid, against the said Henry Atkins, George, Thomas Moundford, John
Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden, above has alleged, which he is ready
to aver, which matter the aforesaid Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John
Argent, John Tailor, and William Bowden, do not deny, nor to the same any ways
answer, but the same averment altogether to admit do refuse, as at first, he
demands Judgment and his damages, by occasion of the Trespass and
Imprisonment aforesaid to be adjudged to him, etc. And because the Justices
here will avise themselves of and upon the premises aforesaid, whereof the
parties have put themselves to the Judgment of the Court aforesaid, before
that they give their Judgment thereof, Day is given to the parties here, until
in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Justices here, are not yet, etc.

Formedon.
Michaelmass Term, Anno 37. and 38. Eliz. Rot. 82. in the COMMON PLEAS, Lincoln
College Case, C. 3. part. fol. 53. a.
Robert Chamberlain Esquire. by Apollo Plain his Attorney, demands against the
Warden or Rector, and Scholars of the Blessed Lady Mary, and All Saints of
Lincoln, in the University of Oxford, the Manors of Pettesho, and Eckney, with
the appurtenances, Except 120. Acres of Pasture in Pettesho aforesaid, and 30.
Acres of Pasture in Eckney aforesaid, which Alured Cornburgh Esquire. Richard
Danvers Esquire. Nicholas Statham, and William Callow, gave to Richard Chamberlain
Esquire. and Sibil Fowler, and the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Richard
Chamberlain begotten: And which, after the death of the aforesaid Richard and
Sibil, and of Edward, Son and Heir of the said Edward Chamberlain, and of
Leonard, Son and Heir of the said Edward, and of Francis, Son and Heir of the
said Leonard, to the aforesaid Robert, Son and Heir of the aforesaid Francis,
ought to descend by the form of the gift aforesaid, etc. Whereupon he says,
That the aforesaid Alured Conn^burgh, Richard Dan^^rs, Nicholas and William,
gave the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Richard
Chamberlain, and Sibil, and to the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Richard
Chamberlain begotten, in form aforesaid, etc. By which gift, the said Richard,
and Sibil, were seized of the said Manors with the appurtenances, that is to
say, the said Richard, in his Demesne as of Fee and Right, and the said Sibil,
in her Demesne as of Free hold, by the form, etc. in the time of peace, in the
time of the Lord Ed. late King of England the 4th. after the Conquest, taking
thereof the profits to the yearly value, etc. And from him the said Richard,
the Right descended by the form, to one Edward, as Son and Heir, etc. And from
him the said Edward, the Right descended by the form, etc. to one Leonard, as
Son and Heir etc. And from him the said Leonard, the Right descended by the
form, etc. to one Francis, as Son and Heir, etc. And from the said Fran. Son of
the said Leonard, the Right descended by the form, etc. to this Robert, who now
demands as Son and Heir, etc. And which after the death, etc. And thereof
brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, by
William Pain their Attorney come, and defend their Right when, etc. And say,
That the aforesaid Robert Chamberlain, his Action aforesaid, against them ought
not to have, By protestation taking it, That the aforesaid Alured Cornburgh,
Richard Danvers, Nicholas Stathum, and William Collow, did not give the Manors
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Richard Chamberlain, and
Sibil Fowler, in manner and form, as in the Declaration aforesaid is alleged,
For Plea say, That long after the time in which the gift aforesaid is supposed
to be made, Richard Lyster Gent. Martin Linsey, John Cotesford, John Clayton,
William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, Clerks, were seized of the Manors
aforesaid with th appurtenances in their Demesne as of Fee, and so being thereof
seized, The aforesaid Sibil, Great-Grandmother of the said Robert Chamberlain,
whose Heir the same Robert is, The 5th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of
the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. the 11th. at Pettes^o aforesaid,
By her certain Writing of Release, which the said Warden, or Rector, and
Scholars, with the Seal of the aforesaid Sibil sealed, here in Court bring,
whose date is the same day and year, remised, released, and altogether for her
and her Heirs, for ever quit claimed, to the aforesaid Richard Lyster, Martin
Linsey, John Coteford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, then
of the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances in form aforesaid being seized,
in their full and peaceable possession then being, their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, All her Right, Claim, Title, Use, Interest, and Demand, which ever she
had, now has, or at any time after, might have, of and in the Manors
aforesaid with the appurtenances: And further, the said Sibil, by her aforesaid
Writing, granted for her and her Heirs, That she the said Sibil, and her Heirs,
the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the said Richard Lyster,
Martin Linsey, John Coteford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor,
their Heirs and Assigns, against the then Abbot of Westminster, and his
Successors would warrant, and for ever defend, as by the said Writing of
Release more fully appears: And this the said Warden, or Rector, and Scholars
are ready to averr, whereupon they demand Judgment, if the aforesaid Robert
Chamberlain, against the aforesaid Writing of Release, the said Warranty of the
said Sibil his Ancestor, whose Heir the said Robert is, in it contained, his
Action aforesaid against them ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid Robert
Chamberlain says, that he for any thing before alleged, to have his Action
aforesaid ought not to be barred, because he says, That long before the
aforesaid Deed, and before the aforesaid Alured, Richard Danvers, Nicholas
Stathum, and William Collow, had any thing in the Manors aforesaid with the
appurtenances, The aforesaid Richard Chamberlain, was seized of the aforesaid
Manors with the appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee, And the said Richard
so thereof being seized before the gift aforesaid, that is to say, the 12th.
day of June, in the year of the Lord Edward, late King of England, the 4th.
after the Conquest, the 11th. The aforesaid Richard Danvers, Alured Cornburgh,
Nicholas Stathum, and William Collow, out of the Court of the Chancery of the
said late King Edward the 4th. at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, then
being, brought and prosecuted a certain Writ of the said late King Edward the
4th. of Right, against the said Richard Chamberlain, then being Tenant of the
Free hold, of the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenaces, amongst other
things, to the then Sheriff of the County of Buckingham directed: By which
Writ, the said late King then and there commanded the said Sherif, That he
should command the said Richard Chamberlain, by the name of Richard
Chamberlain, Esquire. that justly, and without delay, he render to the said Richard
Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and William, by the names of Richard Danvers, Alured
Gorneburgh Esquire. Nicholas Stathum, and William Collow, the Manor aforesaid with
the appurtenances, (amongst other) by the names of the Manors of Pettesho, and
Eckney, with the appurtenances, and 6. Messuages, 200. Acres o^ Land, 20. Acres
of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, and 100. shillings Rent, with the
appurtenances in Pettesho; Eckney, and Emberton, which he claims to be his
Right and Inheritance: And whereupon they complained Chamberlain them unjustly
deforced, and unless he do, and the aforesaid Richard Danvers, Alured,
Nicholas, and William Collow, should him the said Sheri^ secure to prosecute
their claim, That then he summon by good summoners the aforesaid Richard
Chamberlain, that he be before the then Justices of the said late King Edward
the 4th. here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, from the 15. day of
St. John the Baptist, then nex^ following, to show wherefore ye should not do,
And that he have then this summons, and that Writ, Because Thomas Rokes, Esquire.
Chief Lord of the same Fee, remised thereof his Court to the said late King
Edward the 4th. At which 15. days of John the Baptist, before Thomas Brian Knight.
and his Companions, then Justices of the said late King Edward, the 4th. of the
Bench here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, came as well the aforesaid
Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas Stathum, and William Collow, by Thomas Gurney
their Attorney, as the aforesaid Richard Chamberlain, by John Wildstall then his
Attorney, And then the Sherif of the aforesaid County of Buckingham, that is to
say, Reginald Gray Esquire. then there returned the Writ aforesaid, to him in form
aforesaid directed, in all things served and executed, and sent, that the
aforesaid Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and William Collow, found to the
said then Sherif, sureties to prosecute his Writ aforesaid, that is to say,
Richard Do, and John Roo, And that the said Richard Chamberlain, was summoned
by James Tie, and John Baker, good summoners, etc. And hereupon, The said
Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas Stathum, and William Callow, by the said
Thomas Gurney their Attorney, in the said Court of the aforesaid late King
Edward the 4th. of the Bench here, that is to say, at Wostminster aforesaid, at
the 15. days aforesaid, of St. John Baptist, Declared against the said Richard
Chamberlain, of and upon their Writ aforesaid, and upon their Writ aforesaid by
the same Thomas Gurney, demanded against the aforesaid Richard Chambrlain, the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said
Writ of Right specified, as their Right and inheritance, by the aforesaid Writ
of the said late King Edward the 4th. because the aforesaid Thomas Rokes, Chief
Lord of the same Fee, Released thereof his Court to the said late King, And
whereupon then they said, That they themselves were seized of the Manors
aforesaid, and of the Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said Writ
of Right specified, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right, in the time of Peace,
in the time of the said late King Edward the 4th. taking the profits thereof to
the value, etc. And that such is their Right then, they did offer, etc. And the
aforesaid Richard Chamberlain, by the aforesaid John Wildsta^e, by his Attorney,
came and defended the Right of the said Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and
William, when, etc. And their seisin, of which seisin, etc. as of Fee and
Right, etc. And all, etc. And chiefly of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said Writ of Right specified, and then
vouched hereof to warranty, Robert King, who was present in the same Court in
his proper person, and willingly, the Manors, and Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said Writ of Right specified, to them
then did warrant, etc. Whereupon the aforesaid Richard Danvers, Alured,
Nicholas, and William, then demanded against the aforesaid Robert, Tenant by
his warranty, the Manors, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid, in the said
Writ of Right specified, in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon, then they said,
That they themselves were seized o^ the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid
with the appurtenances, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right in the time of
peace, in the time of the said late King Edward the 4th. taking thereof the
profits to the value, etc. And the aforesaid Robert, Tenant by his warranty
aforesaid, defended the right of the said Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas,
and William, when, etc. And their seisin, of which seisin, etc. as of Fee and
Right, and all, etc. And chiefly of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid
with the appurtenances, in the said Writ of Right specified. And then put
himself on the grand Assize, of the said late King Edward the 4th. and then
demanded Recognition to be made, whether he more right then had, to hold the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to him and his
Heirs, as Tenant thereof by his warranty as he then held, or the aforesaid
Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and William, to have the Manors,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said Writ of
Right specified, as they above them demanded, etc. And the aforesaid Richard
Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and William, then returned back in the same Court,
the same very Term of Holy Trinity, in the year of the Reign of the said late
King Edward the 4th. after the Conquest the 11th. by their then Attorney
aforesaid, And the aforesaid Robert, sollemnly called, did not come back, but
departed in despite of Court, and made default, wherefore it was then granted
by the same Court, That the aforesaid Richard Danvers, Alured, Nicholas, and
William, should recover their seisin against the aforesaid Chamberlain, of the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the said
Writ of Right specified, To hold to them and their Heirs, quietly from the
aforesaid Richard Chamberlain and his Heirs; And that the aforesaid Richard
Chamberlain, then should have of the Lands of the said Robert, to the value,
etc. And that the said Robert, should then be in mercy, etc. as by the Record
and Process thereof here in Court remaining it manifestly appears. Which
Recovery in form aforesaid had, was had to the use and intent, that the
aforesaid Alured, Richard Danvers, Nicholas Stathum, and William Collow,
should give the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid
Richard Chamberlain, and Sibil, and the Heirs Males of the Body of the said
Richard Chamberlain issuing: By Color of which Recovery, the aforesaid Alured,
Richard Danvers, Nicholas, and William Collow, into the Manors and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and were thereof seized in their
Demesne as of Fee, to the use and intent aforesaid: And so thereof to the use
and intent aforesaid being seized, The said Alured, Richard Danvers, William
Stathum, and Willam Collow, give the aforesaid Manors with the appurtenances
to the aforesaid Richard Chamberlain, and Sibil, By the names of Richard
Chamberlain Esquire. and Sibil Fowler, and the Heirs Males of the Body of the said
Richard Chamberlain issuing, as the said Robert Chamberlain, by his Writ and
Declaration aforesaid above supposes: By which gift the aforesaid Richard
Chamberlain, and Sibil, were seized of the Manors aforesaid with the
appurtenances, that is to say, the said Richard Chamberlain, in his Demesne as
of Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body issuing,
and the aforesaid Sibil, in her Demesne as of Free hold, for the term of her
life, by the form of the gift aforesaid: And afterward the said Richard
Chamberlain, at Pettesho aforesaid, took to Wife the aforesaid Sibil, Great
Grandmother of the aforesaid Robert Chamberlain, and had issue male of his Body
issuing, the aforesaid Edward Chamberlain, and afterward the said Richard
Chamberlain, at Pettesho aforesaid dyed, and the aforesaid Sibil him overlived,
and held her self in the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, and was
thereof sole seized in her Demesne as of Free hold, for the Term of her life, by
right of Survivor, etc. by the form of the gift aforesaid; And afterward the
said Sibil by her aforesaid Writing of Release, Remised, and released to the
aforesaid Richard Lyster, Martin Linsey, John Cottesford, John Clayton, and
William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, all her Right, Claim, Title, State, Use,
Interest and demand, of and in the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, in
manner and form, as in the aforesaid Bar above is specified; And that
afterward, the said Sibil, at Pettesho aforesaid dyed: And from the aforesaid
Richard, the right descended by the form, etc. to the aforesaid Edward, as Son
and Heir, etc. And from the said Edward, the right descended by the form, etc.
to the aforesaid Leonard, as Son and Heir, etc. And from the aforesaid Leonard,
the right descended by the form, etc. to the aforesaid Francis, as Son and
Heir, etc. And from the said Francis, the right descended by the form, etc. to
the said Robert, who now demands as Son and Heir, etc. as he by his Writ and
Declaration aforesaid supposes: And this he is ready to averr, wherefore, for
as much as by force of a certain Act of Parliament, in the Parliament of the
late Lord King Henry the 7th. at Westminster aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, in the year of his Reign the 11th. holden, made, The aforesaid
Warranty of the aforesaid Sibil, in form aforesaid made is altogether void, he
demands Judgment and his seisin of the Manors aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to be to him adjudged; And the aforesaid Warden or Rector, and
Scholars say, That by the aforesaid Act in the aforesaid Parliament of the late
King Henry the 7th. ^t Westminster aforesaid, in the year of his Reign the
11th. abovesaid, holden, made, It is provided, That the Act aforesaid, should
not extend to any such Recovery, or discontinuance in which the Heirs next
inheritable to such Woman, or where he or they who next after the death of the
said Woman, had or should have the estate of Inheritance in the said Manors,
Lands, and Tenements, should be assenting or agreeing to the aforesaid
Recoveries, where the same assent or agreements are of Record, or enrolled, as
by the said Act amongst other things it appears: And the said Warden, or
Rector, and Scholars further say, That before the making of the said Writing of
Release of the aforesaid Sibil, and after the death of the aforesaid Richard
Chamberlain, Nicholas Evan Clerk, and Thomas Hartop Clerk, the Second Day of
June, in the year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the 8th. after the
Conquest, the 4th. out of the Court of the Cha^cery of the said late King, then
being at Westminster aforesaid, sued forth an Original Writ of the said late
King of Entry upon Disseisin in the Post, against the aforesaid Edward
Chamberlain, of the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the then
Sherifs of the County of Buckingham directed, the said Edward, then being
Tenant of the Freehold of the said Manors with the appurtenances, By which
Writ, the said late King commanded the said Sherif, That the said Sherif should
command the said Edward Chamberlain, by the name of Edward Chamberlain Esquire,
that justly and without delay he render to the aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and
Thomas Hartop Clerk, The Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances amongst
other, by the names of the Manors of Pettesho, and Eckney with the
appurtenances, and of 6. Messuages, 200. Acres of Land, 20. Acres of Meadow,
200. Acres of Pasture, and 100. shillings of Rent, with the appurtenances, in
Pettesho, Eckney, and Emberton, which the said Nicholas, and Thomas, then
claimed to be their Right and Inheritance, and into which the said Edward
Chamberlain had not entry, but after the disseisin which Hugh Hunt, thereof
unjustly, and without Judgment did to the aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and Thomas
Hartop, after the first passage of the Lord King Henry, Son of King John, into
Gascoign as they said, and whereupon they complained, the said Edward
Chamberlain, did them disseise, And if the aforesaid Nicholas, and Thomas
Hartop, secure him the said Sherif, to prosecute their Claim, Then he summon by
good summoners, the aforesaid Edward Chamberlain, that he should be before the
Justices of the said late King Henry the 8th. here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, in the Morrow of St. John the Baptist, then next
following, to show, why he did not do it, And that he have, then here, the
summons, and that Writ, At which Morrow of St. John the Baptist, before Robert
Read Knight. and his Companions, then Justices of the said late King Henry the 8th.
of the Bench here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, came as well the
aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, by John Cowper then their Attorney,
as the aforesaid Edward Chamberlain, by Thomas Palmer, then his Attorney. And
the Sherif, that is to say, Ralph Verney Esquire. then returned here the Writ
aforesaid, in all things served and executed, that is to say, that the
aforesaid Nicholas, and Thomas, found to the then Sherif sureties to prosecute
his Suit aforesaid, that is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo; And that the
aforesaid Edward Chamberlain, was summoned by John Den, and Richard Fen: And
upon this the said Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, by declaring against the
said Edward Chamberlain, upon the Writ aforesaid, Demanded against the said
Edward Chamberlain, The Manors; Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
appurtenances, as their Right and Inheritance, and in which the said Edward
Chamberlain had not Entry, but after the first passage of the Lord King Henry,
Son of King John, into Gascoign, etc. And whereupon, then they said, that they
themselves were seized of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, in their
Demesne as of Fee and Right, in the time of Peace, in the time of the said late
King Henry the 8th. taking thereof the Profits to the value, etc. And unto
which, etc. And thereof then they brought suit, etc. And the aforesaid Edward
Chamberlain, by the aforesaid Thomas Palmer his Attorney, then defended his
right when, etc. And then vouched thereof to warranty, Thomas Fish, who was
then present in Court in his proper person, and willingly, the Manors,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid to him did warrant, and thereupon, the said
Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, demanded against him the said Thomas Fish,
then Tenant by his Warranty, The Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with
the appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon they then said, That
they were s^ised of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
appurtenances amongst other things, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right, in the
time of Peace, in the time of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. taking the
profits thereof to the value, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas Fish, Tenant by his
Warranty aforesaid, then defended his Right when, etc. And then prayed license
thereof to imparl, and had it, etc. And afterward, the very same Term, the
aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, returned back here into the Court
aforesaid, of the said late King Henry the 8th. by their Attorney aforesaid, and
the aforesaid Thomas Fish, Tenant by his warranty aforesaid, did not come back,
but in despite of Court departed and made default, Therefore then it was
granted by the aforesaid Court here, That the aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and
Thomas Hartop, should recover their seisin against the said Edward Chamberlain,
of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, and that
the said Edward should have of the Lands of the aforesaid Thomas Fish to the
value, and that the said Thomas Fish should be in mercy, etc. as by the Record
and Process thereof here in Court remaining, more fully appears. Which
Recovery, in form aforesaid had, was had to the use and to the intent, That the
aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, of the Manors aforesaid with the
appurtenances, should enfeoff the aforesaid Richard Lyster, Marti^, John
Cottesford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, To have and to
hold to them and their Heirs for ever: By Color of which Recovery, The
aforesaid Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, into the Manors aforesaid with
their appurtenances entered, and were thereof seized in their Demesne as Fee, and
so being thereof seized, The said Nicholas, and Thomas Hartop, of the said
Manors with the appurtenances, did (...)off the aforesaid Richard Lyster,
Martin Li^s^y, John Cottesford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert
Tailor, To have and to hold to them and their Heirs for ever: By virtue of
which F^^ffment, the said Richard Lyster, Martin, John Cottesford, John
Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor were seized of the same Manors
with the appurtenances, in their Demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized,
The aforesaid Sibil, in the life of the said Edw. for the better security of
the said Richard Lyster, Martin, John Cottesford, John Clayton, William
Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, in the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances,
according to Agreement between the same Edward and Sibil, first before the
aforesaid Recovery had by her Writing aforesaid of Release, Remised, and
Released to the aforesaid Richard Lyster, Martin, John Cottesford, John
Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, all her Right, Claim, Title,
State, Use, Interest, and demand of and in the Manors aforesaid with the
appurtenances, in (...)ner and form, as they above have alleged. And this they
are ready to aver. Whereupon they demand Judgment, And that the said Robert
Chamberlain; from having his Action aforesaid, against them ^e ba^^ed. And the
aforesaid Robert Chamberlain, ^y Protestation taking it, That the Recovery
aforesaid, was not had to the use and intent, That the aforesaid Nicholas Evan,
and Thomas Hartop, should infeoff the said Richard Lyster, Martin, John
Cottesford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, of the Manors
aforesaid with the Appurtenances; By Protestation also, that the aforesaid
Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, did not infeoff the foresaid Richard Lyster,
Martin, John Cottesford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, of
the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, By Protestation also, That the
aforesaid Sibil, for the better security of the aforesaid Richard Lyster,
Martin, John Cottesford, John Clayton, William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, in
the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, according to Agreement between
them the said Edward and Sibil, first before the aforesaid Recovery above
supposed to be had, by her Writing of Release aforesaid, did not remise and
release to the aforesaid Richard Lyster, Martin, John Cottesford, John Clayton,
William Hogeson, and Robert Tailor, as the aforesaid Warden or Rector and
Scholars, above in their Rejoinder have alleged, By Protestation also, That the
aforesaid Edward Chamberlain, at the day of the bringing of the Original Writ
of the said Nicholas Evan, and Thomas Hartop, out of the Court of the Chancery,
of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. that is to say, the second day of
June, in the year of the Reign of the same late King, the 4th. or ever after
was Tenant of the Freehold of the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, For
Plea, The said Robert Chamberlain says, That the aforesaid P^e^, of the
aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, above by Rejoinder pretended, is not
sufficient in Law to bar him the said Robert, from having his Action aforesaid,
against the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, as well for that that the
Rejoinder is a Departure from the aforesaid Bar of them the Warden, or Rector,
and Scholars, as for want of sufficient matter in the said Rejoinder contained;
And this he is ready to aver, wherefore, for want of a sufficient Rejoinder of
the said Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, in this part. The said Robert
Chamberlain, as at first, demands Judgment, and seisin of the Manors
aforesaid with the Appurtenances to him to be adjudged, etc. And the Warden, or
Rector, and Scholars, in as much as they sufficient matter in Law to bar the
aforesaid Robert from having his Action aforesaid against them the Warden, or
Rector, and Scholars, above by rejoyning have alleged, which they are ready to
aver, which matter the aforesaid Robert does not deny, nor to the same any
ways Answers, so to admit of the same averment altogether refused, as at
first demand Judgment, And that the aforesaid Robert Chamberlain, to have his
Action aforesaid be barred: And because the Justices here will avise themselves
of and upon the premises, before that they give their Judgment thereof, Day is
given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
their Judgment, because that the said Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At
which Day, come as well the aforesaid Robert, as the aforesaid Warden, or
Rector, and Scholars, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Justices
here, will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give
their Judgment thereof, Day further is given to the parties aforesaid, here
until from the day of Easter, in 15. Days, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the said Justices here thereof are not yet, etc. At which day, here
come as well the aforesaid Robert, as the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and
Scholars, by their Attorneys aforesaid: And because the Justices here, will
further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment thereof, further Day is given to the parties aforesaid here until in
the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
said Justices here are thereof not yet. At which Day, here come as well the
aforesaid Robert, as the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars by their
Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the Premise^, before they give their Judgment thereof,
further day is given to parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St.
Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here
thereof are not yet, etc. At which day, here come as well the aforesaid Robert,
as the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, by their Attorneys aforesaid;
And upon this the premises being seen, and by the Justices here fully
understood, It seems to the same Justices here, That the Plea of the
aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars, above by Rejoinder pretended, is
sufficient in Law, to bar the said Robert to have his Action aforesaid,
against the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and Scholars; Therefore it is granted,
That the aforesaid Robert take nothing by his Writ aforesaid, and that he be in
Mercy for his false Clamor; And that the aforesaid Warden, or Rector, and
Scholars, go thereof without Day, etc.

Indictment.
At the Sessions of Gaol Delivery at Newgate, 5to. Decembris, in the 8th. Year
of King JAMES, Machalleys Case, Co. 9. part. fol. 61. b.
AT the Sessions of Gaol Delivery of Newgate, holden for the City of London, at
the Justice Hall in the Old Baily, in the Parish of St. Sepulcher without
Newgate, in the Suburbs of the said City, upon Wednesday the 5th. day of
December, in the year of the Reign of the Lord James, by the Grace of God, of
England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, the 8th. and of
Scotland, the 44th. Before William Craven Knight, Mayor of the City aforesaid,
Thomas Flemming Knight, Chief Justice of the said Lord the King, to Pleas
before the King himself to be holden assigned, George Snigg Knight, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer of the said Lord the King* John Croke Knight, one of
the Justices of the said Lord the King, to Pleas, before the King himself to be
holden assigned, Thomas Foster Knight, one of the Justices of the said Lord the
King of the Bench, Edward Bromley Knight, one of the Barons of the said Lord
the King of his Exchequer aforesaid, John Sotherton, another Baron of his
Exchequer aforesaid, Henry Mountague Knight, Recorder of his said City of
London, and other of his Companions Justices of the said Lo^d the King, by
Letters Patents of the said Lord the King to them and others, and to any 4. or
more of them thereof made, To enquire, by the Oaths of good and lawful men of
the City London, as well within liberties as without, by whom the truth of the
matter might best be known, of what Treasons soever, Misprisions of Treasons,
Insurrections, Rebellions, And of whatsoever, Murders, Felonies, Man
slaughters, Killings, Burgla^ies, Misdeeds, Offenses, and Injuries whatsoever,
within the City aforesaid committed, in the said Letters Patents specified, and
to the said Treasons, and other the premises, according to the Law and Custom
of the Kingdom of the Lord the King of England, to hear and determine. As also
Justices of the said Lord the King, to Gaol delivery of Prisoners, there being
assigned, by the Oaths of Ralph Edmunds, Leonard Harwood, John Frost, Edward
Dames, John Lyssant, Francis Barton, Edward Parnell, Thomas Hyet, Henry Kent,
Edward Motley, Humphry Lee, Richard Westcot, William Fairbrother, Edward
Faweet, and Thomas Smith, good and lawful men of the City aforesaid, It is
presented, That whereas upon Saturday the 17th. day of November, in the year of
the Reign of our Lord James, by the Grace of God, of England, France, and
Ireland King, defender of the Faith, etc. the 8th. and of Scotland the 44th. in
the Court of the Lord the King, before Richard Pyot, Alderman, then, and as yet
one of the Sherifs of the City of London aforesaid, in his Compter, situate in
the Parish of St. Michael in VVoodstreet London aforesaid, according to the
Custom of the City aforesaid then holden, one Robert Radford, had leeved a
certain Plaint, upon a Plea of Debt of demand of 500. hundred pounds, against
one John Murray, of London Esquire. The Tenor of which Plaint follows in these
words, that is to say, John Murray, summon against Robert Radford Salter, in a
Plea of Debt upon demand 500. hundred pounds; And thereupon the aforesaid
Robert Radford, demanded process against the said John Murray, according to
the Custom of the City aforesaid to be seved: Upon which, at the Request of the
said Robert Radford, in this sort, in the same Court it was proceeded. That the
aforesaid Richard ^yot then, and yet one of the Sherifs of the City aforesaid,
To one Richard Fells, then one of the Sergeants at Mace of the Sherif, and
Minister of the Court aforesaid, by word of mouth, according to the Custom of
the City aforesaid, Commanded that he the said Sergeant at Mace, should take
and arrest the aforesaid John Murray, by his Body, if he should be found within
the Liberties of the City aforesaid, so as he have the Body of the said John
Murray, at the next Court of the said Lord the King, at the Guild Hall of the
City aforesaid, situate in the Parish of St. Lawrence, in the Old Jury, in the
Ward of Cheap London aforesaid, upon Wednesday, the 21. day of November, in the
8. and 44th. aforesaid to be holden, to answer the aforesaid Robert Radford, in
the Plea of his Plaint aforesaid, By virtue of which Command, The said Richard
Fells, The said John Murray afterward, that is to say, the 18th. day of the
said month of November, in the said years of the Lord the King that now is,
the 8th. and 44th. abovesaid, between the hour of 5. and 6. in the Afternoon of
the same day, At London aforesaid, That is to say, in the Parish of St. Martin
Bowyer Row, in the Ward of Farrington, within London aforesaid, in the Common
Kings high Way, there by his Body took and arrested, and then and there had in
his custody, And the aforesaid John Murrey, so under the custody of the said
Richard Fells, by virtue of the Command aforesaid, then and there (as before is
said) being, It so then and there happened, That the said John Murray, late of
London Esquire, otherwise called John Murray of London Esquire, one John
Mackall, late of London Yeoman, otherwise called John Maokallay, late of London
Yeoman, one John Engles, late of London Yeoman, otherwise called John English,
late of London Yeoman, and one Archibald Miller, late of London Yeoman, not
having the Fear of God before their eyes, but moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil, with Force and Arms, that is to say, with Swords,
etc. to the intent him the said John Murray, from his arrest aforesaid, then
and there to rescous in and upon the aforesaid Richard Fells, then and there
made an assault and affray, in which said affray, The aforesaid John Mackall,
otherwise called, John Mackalley, with a sword is called a Rapier, made of Iron
and Steel, of the value of 12. pence, wherehe the said John Mackall, otherwise
called John Mackalley in his right hand then and there had and held, the said
Richard Fells, in and upon the left part of his Body, under the left
shoulder blade of the said Richard, feloniously, voluntarily, and of malice
forethought then and there struck and thrust in, giving to the said Richard
Fells, then and there with the sword aforesaid, called a Rapier, in and upon
the left part of his Body, under the left shoulder, one blow and wound mortal,
of the length of half an Inch, and of breadth of half an Inch, and of depth 6.
Inches, of which said stroke, and mortal wound aforesaid, the aforesaid Richard
Fells then and there, that is to say, in the Parish and Ward last aforesaid,
presently dyed: And further, The Jurors aforesaid present, That the aforesaid
John Murray, late of London Esquire, otherwise called John Murry, late of
London Esquire, The aforesaid John Engles, late of London Yeoman, otherwise
called John English, late of London Yeoman, and the aforesaid Archibald Miller,
late of London Yeoman, the said 18th. day of November, in the years 8th. and
44th. abovesaid, between the Hours aforesaid, in the Parish, Ward, and place
last aforesaid, felonionly, voluntarily, and of their forethought malice were
present, fighting, procuring, helping, abetting, and comforting the aforesaid
John Mackall, late of London Yeoman, otherwise called John Mackalley, late of
London Yeoman, to the aforesaid Richard Fells in manner and form aforesaid to
be killed and murdered; And so the Jurors aforesaid say, That the aforesaid
John Mackall, late of London Yeoman, otherwise called John Mackalley, late of
London Yeoman, John Murray, late of London Esquire, otherwise called John
Murry, late of London Esquire, John Engles, late of London Yeoman, otherwise
called, John English, late of London Yeoman, and Archibald Miller, late of
London Yeoman, the aforesaid Richard Fells, at London aforesaid, that is to
say, in the Parish and Ward last aforesaid, feloniously, voluntarily, and of
their forethought malice, in manner aforesaid killed and murdered, against the
peace of the Lord the King that now is, his Crown and dignity, etc. And upon
this, at the self same Sessions before the aforesaid Justices, the aforesaid
John Murray, otherwise Murry, John Mackal, otherwise Mackalley, Io. Engles,
otherwise English, and Archibald Miller, in the Custody of the said Richard
Pyot, and Francis Jones, Sherifs of the City aforesaid, being in the Gaol of
Newgate aforesaid, to the bar there brought, in their proper persons came, and
severally being asked, how of the Felony and Murder aforesaid they would
acquit themselves, Every one of them for himself severally said, that he is not
thereof guilty, And thereof for good and ill, severally put himself upon the
Country; And Richard Langley Esquire. who in this behalf follows for the Lord the
King likewise; Therefore immediately came a Jury thereof, and the Jurors of that
Jury, by the Sherifs aforesaid, of the City aforesaid Impannelled, being
called, that is to say, VVil. Morgan, Tho. Dalbit, Tho. Evans, Tho. Austin,
Solomon Green, VVil. Chewn, William Ellil, Metcalse Allington, John Drake,
VVil. Tailor, Owen Dames, and Tho. Damport, appeared, who to speak the truth of
and upon the premises, chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That the
City of London is, and all the time whereof the memory of men is not to the
contrary^, was an ancient City; And that within the City aforesaid, all the
time aforesaid, there was a Court of Record holden in the Compter, situate in
the Parish of St. Michael, in VVoodstreet aforesaid, before one of the Sherifs
of the City aforesaid, for the time being, And that within the City aforesaid,
there is such, and from the whole time aforesaid, there was such a Custom, That
in the aforesaid Court, All and singular persons from the whole time aforesaid,
were used to levy Plaints of Pleas of Debt, amounting to whasoever sum against
any person whomsoever, and to cause the same Plaints to be entied in a Book of
the Porter of the Compter aforesaid, and that from the whole time aforesaid,
there was, and is a Porter of the Compter aforesaid, which Porter of the
Compter aforesaid, for the time being, from the whole time aforesaid, was an
Officer of one of the Sherifs of the City aforesaid, to enter Plaints in form
aforesaid levied in the book of the Porter of the Compter aforesaid, against
any person whasoever, at the suit of any person whatsoever, in Pleas of Debt,
amounting to what sum soever, in a certain short and summary manner. And that
the Plaints aforesaid, in the Book of the Porter aforesaid entered, from the
whole time aforesaid, used to be transferred and entered of Record, in the Rolls
of the Court aforesaid, in due form of Law, within reasonable and convenient
time after the entry of the same in the Book of the Porter aforesaid; And that
in the City aforesaid, there is, and for the whole time aforesaid there was a
Custom, That any person being a Sergeant at Mace of the said Sherif, and
Minister of the Court aforesaid, at the request of the party, whose Plaints so
are levied of Office, it was used after the Entry of the same Plaints, in the
Book of the Porter aforesaid, as well before the Entry of the same Plaints, in
the Rolls of the Court aforesaid, as after the Entry thereof in the Rolls of
the Court aforesaid, to take and arrest by his Body, any such person against
whom such Plaints was levied, to answer to the Plaint of such person, without
any other Command by word of mouth, or otherwise, to such Sergeant at Mace, and
Minister of the Court aforesaid in that behalf directed, or to be directed: And
the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Saturday the 17th day of November, in the year of our Lord, 1610. The aforesaid
Robert Radford, Citizen of London, requested the aforesaid Richard Fells, then
one of the Sergeants at Mace of the said Richard Pyot, then one of the Sherifs
of the City aforesaid, That he the said Richard Fells would cause to be levied
a Plaint of Debt of 500. pounds, in the Comptor aforesaid, at the Suit of the
said Robert Radford, against the aforesaid John Murray Esquire, and thereupon
would arrest the aforesaid John Murray, to answer to the aforesaid Robert
Radford, in the Plaint aforesaid; And the said Richard Fells thereupon was at
the said Compter, in the Parish of St. Michael in Woodstreet aforesaid, and
there the said 17th. day of November, in 8th. and 44th. years aforesaid, caused
to be levied a Plaint of Debt of 500. pounds, against the aforesaid John
Murray, at the Suit of the aforesaid Robert Radford, which Plaint then was
entered in the Porters Book of the Compter aforesaid, as in the like cases
usually it is, and according to the Custom aforesaid in these words. ss. John
Murray Esquire, against Robert Radford Salter, Debt. 500. pounds, Pledges Fleat
Streat by Robert Fells Sergeant: Which Plaint afterward was entered of Record
in the Rolls of the Court of the Compter aforesaid, in these words. ss.
Saturday the 17th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of King James, of
England, France, and Ireland, 8th. and of Scotland the 44th. John Murray
Esquire, S. against Robert Radford Salter, in a Plea of Debt upon demand 500
pounds, Pledges of following the Suit, John Fleat, and Richard Streat, by Fells
Sergeant, etc. But the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath say, That the Entry
aforesaid, in the Rolls of the Court aforesaid made, was upon Monday the 19th.
day of November, in the years 8th. and 44th. aforesaid, and not before. And
that the said Richard Fells, upon Sunday the said 18th. day of November, with
3. other Officers in his Company, stayed about the Gate called Ludgate, within
the Liberties of the City aforesaid, by virtue of the Plaint aforesaid, to
arrest the aforesaid John Murray as he should pass by: And afterward when the
said John Murray, between the hours of 5. and 6. in the Afternoon of the said
18. day of November, walked, and passed, by, and through Ludgate aforesaid, in
the Common Kings Highway, with 6. other Persons in his Company (the said
Persons being armed) The said Richard Fells, then being one of the Sergeants at
Mace, of the said Richard Pyot, then one of the Sherifs of the City aforesaid
sworn and known, and Minister of the Court aforesaid, near Ludgate, in the said
Common Kings Highway, in the aforesaid Parish of St. Martin Bowyer Row, in the
aforesaid Ward of Farrington within London aforesaid, came to the said John
Murray, and him the said John then and there within the Arms of the said
Richard, by virtue of the premises took and held, and to the said John Murray,
as in the words following presently said; I, him the said Richard Fells
meaning, Arrest you, meaning the said J* Murray, in the Kings Name, at the suit
of Mr. Radford, the said ^. Radford, in the Plaint aforesaid named, meaning:
But the said Jurors say, That the aforesaid Richard Fells, at the time of the
Arrest aforesaid, did not show to the said John Murray any Warrant, or his
Mace, but say, That the aforesaid Richard Fells, then carried and had at the
back of the said Richard, his Mace, and that none of the Officers aforesaid who
came in the Company of the said Richard Fells, any Weapen then had, And the
said John Murray looking about him, and striving with the said Richard ^ells,
the^ and there said to those persons who came in the Company of the s^id John
Murray, in these English words; Draw, Draw Rogues, upon which the said John
Mackal, otherwise Mackalley, and John Engles, otherwise English, then and there
being in the Company of the said John Murray, drew their Rapiers, And the said
Richard Fells, then being fallen upon the ground, and the said Richard Fells
lying uppermost, The said Joh. Mackall, otherwise Mackalley, with his Rapier
drawn, run to the said Richard Fells, then and there to rescue the said Murray
from the Arrest aforesaid, and with his Sword aforesaid, the said Richard Fells
struck, and thrust in, giving unto the said Richard Fells, in and upon the left
part of his Body, under the left shoulder* blade of the said Richard, the
stroke and mortal wound in the Indictment aforesaid mentioned, of which wound
the said Richard Fells, then and there, that is to say, in the Parish and Ward
last aforesaid instantly dyed: And futher the Jurors aforesaid say, That at the
time of the Killing of the aforesaid Rich. Fells, in manner and form aforesaid,
The said Jo. Murray, and John Engles, otherwise English, were present, and
aiding to the said John Mackall, otherwise Mackalley, to him the said Richard
Fells, in manner aforesaid to be killed; But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, The killing
aforesaid of the said Richard Fells, in form aforesaid don, be Murder or not,
the Jurors aforesaid do not know, And thereof demand the Advice of the Justices
and Court here, and if upon the whole matter aforesaid, It shall seem to the
Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid killing of the aforesaid Richard
Fells be Murder, Then the Jurors aforesaid say upon their Oath aforesaid, That
the aforesaid John Murray, John Mackally, and John English, are guilty, and
every one of them is guilty of the Murder of the said Richard Fells, in manner
and form, as by the Indictment aforesaid against them it is supposed; And that
they at the time of Murder aforesaid, in form aforesaid committed, had no Goods
or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, to the knowledge of the Jurors aforesaid: And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid killing of the aforesaid
Richard Fells, in form aforesaid committed, be not Murder, Then the Jurors
aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Murray, John
Mackall, and John Engles, are not guilty, nor any of them is guilty, of the
Murder of the aforesaid Richard Fells, as they have alleged, nor for that
occasion ever withdrew themselves, or any of them withdrew himself: And if
upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form foresaid found, It shall seem to the
Justices and Court here, That the killing of the aforesaid Richard Fells, in
form aforesaid done, be Felony or Manslaughter, Then the Jurors aforesaid,
say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Murray, John Mackall,
and John Engles are guilty, and every of them is guilty of the Felony and
Manslaughter aforesaid, And that they have no good^ nor Chattels, Lands or
Tenements. And further, the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid,
That the aforesaid Archibald Miller, in the said Indictment named, of the
Felony and Murder aforesaid is not guilty, nor for that occasion ever withdrew
himself. Therefore it is considered by the Court, That the aforesaid Archibald
Miller, go thereof acquitted without day, etc. And because the Court here, of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, concerning the aforesaid John
Murray, John Mackall, and John Engles, are not yet avised, Day is given to the
aforesaid John Murray, John Mackall, and John Engles, until the next Sessions
of Gaol Delivery aforesaid, for the aforesaid City to be holden, under the
Custody of the aforesaid Sherifs, in the mean while committed safely to be
kept, for to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. And because the Justices
aforesaid are not yet, etc.

Indictments.
The Record of the Conviction of Carliel, and others.
The Lord Sanchars Case, C. 9. part. fol. 114.
THE Inquisition taken at the Sessions of the Peace of the Lord the King for
the City of London, at the Guild Hall of the City of London aforesaid, upon
Wednesday the 27th. day of May, In the year of the Reign of our Lord James by
the Grace of God of England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. the 10th. and of Scotland the 45th. before James Pemberton Knight, Mayor
of the City of London aforesaid, Stephen Soan Knight, John Garrad Knight,
Thomas Bennet Knight, Thomas Low Knight, Henry Row Knight, and Henry Mountague
Knight, one of the Sergeants at Law of the Lord the King, and Recorder of the
said City, Justices of the said Lord the King to the Peace in the City
aforesaid to be kept, As also to diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and misdeeds in
the said City committed, to hear and determine assigned, by the oaths of
William Palmer, John Pemberton, Edward Bishop, John Harrison, William Erbury,
Thomas Nicholson, Humphry VVaterson, John Woodhall, Zachary Healing, Richard
Downs, Thomas Eagles, Thomas Dennis, Richard Tailor, Meredith ^roughton, and
Ralph Hanson, good and lawful men of the Body of the City aforesaid, Who say
upon their Oath aforesaid, That Robert Carliel, late of London Yeoman, and John
Jrweng, late of London aforesaid Yeoman, Not having God before their Eyes, but
moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, The 11th. day of May, in the
year of the Reign of our Lord James, by the Grace of God of England, France,
and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and of Scotland the 45th. at
London aforesaid, that is to say, in the Parish of St. Dunston in the East, in
the Ward of Farrington without London aforesaid, with force and Arms, etc.
Feloniously on their fore though Malice in and upon one John Turner, then and
there being in the Peace of God, and of the said Lord the King, made an assault
and an affray: And the aforesaid Robert Carliel, a certain Gun, called a
Pistol, of the value of 5. shillings, then and there charged with Gunpowder,
and one leaden Bullet, which Gun, the aforesaid Robert Carliel, in his Right
Hand then and there had, and held, in and upon the aforesaid John Turner, then
and there Feloniously, voluntarily, and of his forethought Malice did shoot
off and discharge. And the aforesaid Robert Carliel, with the leaden Bullet
aforesaid, from the Gun aforesaid then and there sent out, the aforesaid John
Turner, in and upon the Left part of the Body of him the said John Turner, near
the Left Papp of the said John Turner, then and there feloniously struck,
giving to the said John Turner, then and there with the leaden Bullet
aforesaid, out of the Gun aforesaid, then and there sent out, in and upon the
aforesaid Left part of the Body of the said John Turner, near the aforesaid
Left Papp of the said John Turner one mortal Wound, of the B^edth of half of
one Inch, and in the Depth of 5. Inches, of which mortal Wound, the aforesaid
John Turner, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid instantly
dyed, And that James Irweng Feloniously, and of his forethought Malice then
and there was present, adjoining, assisting, abbetting, comforting, and
maintaining the aforesaid Robert Carliel, to the Felony and Murder aforesaid,
in form aforesaid Feloniously to be done and committed; And so the Jurors
aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid say, That the aforesaid ^obert Carliel,
and James Irweng, the aforesaid John Turner at London aforesaid, in the Parish
and Ward aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, Voluntarily, and
of their forethought Malice did kill and murder, contrary to the Peace of the
Lord the King that now is, his Crown and Dignity, etc. And afterward, That is
to say, at the Gaol Delivery of the Lord the King at Newgate, holden by the
City of London aforesaid, at the Justice Hall, situate in the Old Baly, in the
Parish of St. Sepulcher, in the Ward of Farrington without London aforesaid,
the 23d. day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said our Lord James, by
the Grace of God of England, France, and Ireland the 10th. and of Scotland the
45th. before James Pemberton Knight, Mayor of the City of London aforesaid* The
right Reverend Father in God, John Bishop of London, Thomas Flemming Knight,
Lord Chief Justice of the Lord the King to Pleas, before the King himself to be
holden assigned, Edward Coke Knight. Chief Justice of the said Lord the King, of
the Bench, Lawrence Tanfeild Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer of the Lord
the King, Christopher Yelverton Knight, one of the Justices of the said Lord
the King to Pleas, before the King himself to be holden assigned, David
Williams Knight, another of the Justices of the said Lord the King to Pleas,
before the King himself to be holden assigned, John Croke Knight, another of
the Justices of the said Lord the King to Pleas, to be holden before the King
himself to be holden assigned, Stephen Soan Knight, John Garrard Knight, Thomas
Bennet Knight, Baptist Hicks Knight, Francis Bacon, Solicitor General of the
Lord the King, Henry Mountague Knight, one of the Kings Sergeants at Law, and
Recorder of the City of London aforesaid, and other their Fellows Justices of
the Lord the King, To his Gaol aforesaid of Prisoners, in the same being to be
delivered assigned, The aforesaid Robert Carliel, and James Irweng, under the
custody of Edward Barkham, and George Smythes, Sherifs of the City aforesaid,
to the Bar aforesaid brought, in their proper persons came, and severally
being asked, how of the Felony and Murder aforesaid they would acquit
themselves, The said Robert Carliel says, That he cannot deny, but that he is
guilty of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, to him in form aforesaid imposed,
and the Felony and Murder aforesaid expressly confesses, and thereof puts
himself upon the Mercy of the King; and the aforesaid James Irweng says, That
he of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, to him in form aforesaid imposed, is not
guilty, and thereof for good and ill puts himself upon the Country. Therefore
immediately he cause a Jury to come, etc. And the Jurors of the Jury aforesaid,
by the aforesaid Sherifs of the City aforesaid, to this impannelled being
called, that is to say, Humphry Sl^cy, William Morgan, Rouland Healing, Hugh
Hawesh, Henry Colthurst, William Hicks, William Hayes, Richard Bridges, William
Wild, John Palmer, Solomon Green, and Richard Rudd, came, who to say the truth
of and upon the premises, to the said James Irweng imposed, chosen, tried, and
sworn, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Irweng is guilty
of the Felony and Murder, to him in form aforesaid imposed, in manner and form,
as by the indictment aforesaid against them it is supposed; And that he, the
time of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, in form aforesaid committed, or ever
after had no Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, to the knowledge of the
Jurors aforesaid: Upon which, the said Robert Carliel, and James Irweng being
severally spoken unto, If they had any thing for themselves, or could say,
Wherefore the Court aforesaid, to Judgment and Execution of them and either of
them of the premises ought not to proceed, who said nothing, but what at first
they had said, Upon which, then and there, It is considered by the said
Justices, That the aforesaid Robert Carliel, and James Irweng, to the Gaol of
Newgate aforesaid from whence they came should be sent back, and thence be
lead, and either of them be lead unto the place of Execution, and there be
hanged, and either of them be hanged, until, etc.

The Indictment of Robert Creighton, Esquire.
THE Jurors present, for the Lord the King upon their Oath, That Middle.
whereas Robert Carliel late of London Yeoman, and James Irweng late of London
Yeoman, Not having God before their Eyes, but seduced by the instigation of the
Devil, the 11th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of our Lord James by the
Grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
and of Scotland the 45th. at London, that is to say, in the Parish of St.
Dunston in the West, in the Ward of Farrington without London aforesaid, etc.
with Force and Arms, etc. Feloniously, and of their forethought Malice, in
and upon one John Turner, then and there in the Peace of God, and of the said
Lord the King being, made an Aassult and Affray, And the aforesaid Robert
Carliel, a certain Gun called a Pistol, of the value of 5. shillings, then and
there charged with Gunpowder, and one leaden Bullet, which Gun, the said Robert
Carliel, in his Right Hand then and there had, and held, in and upon the
aforesaid John Turner, then and there Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of his
Malice forethought, did shoot off and discharge, And the aforesaid Robert
Carliel, with the leaden Bullet aforesaid, from the Gun aforesaid, then and
there sent out, the aforesaid John Turner, in and upon the left part of the
Body of him the said John Turner then and there feloniously struck, giving to
the said John Turner, then and there with the leaden Bullet aforesaid, near the
left papp of him the said John Turner, one mortal Wound, of the Breadth of half
an inch, and Depth of 5. inches, of which mortal Wound, the aforesaid John
Turner at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, instantly dyed,
And that James Irweng, Feloniously, and of his forethought Malice then and
there was present, ayding, assisting, abetting, comforting and maintaining the
aforesaid Robert Carliel, to the Felony and Murder aforesaid, in form aforesaid
to be done and committed, And so the aforesaid Robert Carliel, and James
Irwenge, the aforesaid John Turner, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of their
forethought Malice killed and Murdered, against the Peace of the Lord the King
that now is, his Crown and Dignity, one Robert Creighton, late of the Parish of
St. Margaret in the County of Westminster Esquire, not having God before his
Eyes, but being seduced by the Instig^tion of the Devil, before the Felony and
Murder aforesaid, by the aforesaid Robert Carliel, and James Irweng, in manner
and form aforesaid done and committed, that is to say, the 10th. day of May, in
the year of the Reign of our Lord James by the Grace of God of England, France,
and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, the 10th. and of Scotland the 45th.
the aforesaid Robert Carliel, at the aforesaid Parish of St. Margaret in
Westminster aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, to the Felony and
Murder aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, done and committed,
Maliciously, Feloniously, Voluntarily, and of his forethought Malice, did stir
up, abet, counsel, and procure, against the Peace of the said Lord the King
that now is, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

By Indictments, Trinitat. 10. of King James.
Information.
In the remembrances of the Exchequer, of the 34th. year of Queen Elizabeth,
that is to say, Amongst the Records of the Term of St. Hillary, in the year
aforesaid, Rot 149. remaining in the Exchequer, in the Custody of the Queens
Remembrancer there, amongst other things, it is contained, thus,

Porters Case, C. 1. part. fol. 16. b.
MEmorandum, That John Popham Esquire, the Queens Attorney General, Land. ss.
who follows for the Lady the Queen being present in this Court the 3d. day
of February, for the Queen gave the Court to understand and be informed, That
whereas, All that the Key and Wharf, called the Old Woolkey, and all Messuages,
Buildings, Lands, Advantages, Commodities, and Profits, to the same any way
belonging, or appertaining, situate and being in the Parish of All Saints
Barking, in the City of London, in the hands and possession of the said Lady
the Queen that now is, the 26^h. day of January in the year of her Reign the
34th. and long before were and stood, and of Right ought to be, as in the Right
of her Crown of England, as in very many Records, Rolls, and Remembrances of
this Exchequer, it more fully appears of Record; Yet one John Porter
Fishmonger, and Henry Cockain, the Laws of the said Lady the Queen that now
is, little regarding, but indending the dissenherisin of the Lady the Queen in
the premises, with Force and Arms* etc. the aforesaid 26th. day of January, in
the 34th. year aforesaid, in and upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen
that now is of the Premises, Entered, Intruded, and made Entry, And the issues
and profits thereof arising took and had to their own uses, and d^ yet take and
have, the Trespass aforesaid hitherto and yet continuing, in contempt of the
said Lady the Queen, and contrary to her Laws. Whereupon the aforesaid Attorney
General, of the said Lady the Quen that now is, for the said Lady the Queen
prays the advice of the Court in the premises: And that the aforesaid John
Porter, and Henry Cockain, come here to answer the said Lady the Queen in the
premises: Upon which, etc And the aforesaid Sherifs of the said City of London,
that they attatch the said John and Henry, in form aforesaid, so as, etc. in 8.
days of the Purification of the blessed Mary the Virgin this Term: Before
which day, that is to say, the 4th. day of February, The aforesaid John Porter,
here in Court found, and of the premises by the Barons here be spoken to of the
premises, is committed to the Prison of the Lady the Queen of the Fleet, there
to stay, until, etc. And presently the same day brought hither to the bar by
the Warden of the Prison aforesaid, by favor of the Court was let to bail to
Henry Cockain of the Parish of All Saints Barking, and Robert Dodd of the
Parish of St. Buttolph, without Algate London, that is to say, to every of them
Body for Body, until the next day, and so from day to day, and from Term to
Term, until, etc. By Color of which Bail, the said John Porter, from the
Prison aforesaid is delivered, And thereupon came then here, the said John
Porter, and Henry Cockain, that is to say, the said John Porter in his proper
person, and the aforesaid Henry Cockain, by Arthur Salway, his Attorney
specially admitted by the favor of the Court. And pray, etc. the hearing of
the Information aforesaid: And it is read unto them; Which being read, and by
them understood, The said John Porter and Henry complain them to be by color
of the premises in the Information specified, to be grievously troubled and
inquieted, and that not justly, For taking it by Protestation, that the
Information aforesaid, and the matter in the same contaned, is not sufficient
in Law, To which they have not necessity by the Law of the Land to Answer, Yet
for Plea, as to the Force and Arms, and what is contrary to the Peace of the
said Lady the Queen, or in contempt of the said Lady the Queen, The said John
Porter, and Henry say, in nothing thereof they are guilty, nor any of them is
guilty. And of this they put themselves upon the Country: And the aforesaid
Attorney General likewise, and as to the Entry, Intrusion, and ingresse in all
that the aforesaid Key and Wharf, called the Old Woolkey, and the aforesaid
Messuages, Buildings, and other premises with the appurtenances, in the
Information above specified supposed to be done, The said John Porter, and
Henry say, That the said Lady the Queen that now is, them the the said John
Porter, and Henry, or any of them thereof ought not to trouble: Because they
say, That long before the aforesaid 26th. day of January, in the said
Information mentioned, One the Lady Avice ^nevet Widow, late the Wife of
Nicholas Gibson of London Grocer, was seized of and in all that aforesaid Key
and Wharf, and other the premises with the appurtenances, in the said
Information specified, in her demesne as of Fee, And so being seized, The said
Lady Avice before the time in which it is supposed the Entry, Intrusion, and
Ingresse to be done, that is to say, the 13th. day of April, in the Reign of
the Lord Edward, late King of England the Sixth, at London, in the Parish of
All Saints Barking aforesaid, in the Ward of the Tower of London, Demised all
that the aforesaid Key and Wharf, and other the premises with the
appurtenances, to one Bartholmew Gibbs, To have to him and his Assigns, from
the Feast of the Birth of our Lord, in the year of our Lord, 1566. from thence
next ensuing, unto the end and Term of 40. years, from thence next following
and fully to be ended; By virtu^ of which Demise, the aforesaid Bartholmew,
after the aforesaid Feast of the Birth of our Lord, in the aforesaid year of
our Lord, 1566. and before the aforesaid time in which, etc. entered, and was
thereof possessed, and so being thereof possessed, The said Bartholmew, before
the time in which, etc. that is to say, the First Day of January, in the year
of our Lord, 1552. at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, made
his Testament and Last Will in Writing, and of the same his Testament and Last
Will made and constituted one Alice his then Wife his Executrix, And afterward
the said Bartholmew, the same Day and Year there dyed, of all the aforesaid Key
and Wharf, and other the premises with the appurtenances possessed, After whose
Death, and before the time in which, etc. the same Alice, taking upon her the
Charge and Execution of the Testament and Last Will aforesaid, in all the
aforesaid Key and Wharf, and other the premises with the appurtenances entered,
and was thereof possessed, and so being thereof possessed, The same Alice,
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 4th. day of May, in the year
of the Reign of the late Queen Mary, the First, at London, in the Parish and
Ward aforesaid, took to Husband one Thomas Wilcox, by which the said Thomas,
and Alice, in the right of the said Alice, were of all that the aforesaid Key
and Wharf, and of other the premises with their appurtenances possessed, And so
thereof being possessed, The said Thomas Wilcox, and Alice, before the time in
which, that is to say, the 16th. day of November, in the years of the Reign of
the Lord Philip, and the Lady Mary, late King and Queen of England, the First
and Second, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, by their Writing
sealed with their seals, and here into Court brought, whose Date is the same
Day and Year, Gave and Granted, all their Right, Title, Interest, and Term of
Years, which they the said Thomas, and Alice, then had to come, of and in all
that the aforesaid Key and Wharf, and the rest of the premises aforesaid with
their appurtenances, by reason of the execution of the Testament of the
aforesaid Bartholmew Gibbs aforesaid, to one John Haynes; By virtue of which
Gift and Grant, The same John Haynes, before the time in which, etc. into all
that the aforesaid Key and Wharf, and other the premises with the appurtenances
entered, and was thereof possessed, and so being thereof possessed, the said I.
Haynes, before the time in which, etc. that is say, the 21. Day of December. in
the Year of our Lord, 1559. at Land. aforesaid, in the Parish aforesaid, made
his Test. and Last Will in Writing, and by the same devised, and bequeathed,
the premises to one Joice then his Wife, and thereof made and constituted, etc.
Joice, then his Wife, his Executrix, and afterward the same Day and Year,
there of all the aforesaid Key and Wharf, and other the premises with the
appurtenances dyed possessed: After whose Death, and before the time in which,
etc. the aforesaid Joice, taking upon her the Charge of Execution of the
Testament and will of the aforesaid John Haynes, into all the aforesaid Key and
Wharf, and other the premises with the appurtenances, entered and was thereof
possessed, by virtue of Execution of the same Testament and Last Will of the
aforesaid John Haynes, and so being thereof possessed, the said Joice before
the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 6th. day of October, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 31. at London, in the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, took to Husband the aforesaid John Porter, By which,
the said John Porter was, and yet is thereof possessed: By Color of which, the
same John Porter, in his own Right, and the aforesaid Henry Cockain, as Servant
of the said John, and by his Commandment, unto all the aforesaid Key and Wharf,
and other the premises with the appurtenances, in the said Information
specified, the said time in which, etc. Entered, and the Issues and Profits
thereof by the whole time in the said Information specified took and had, and
do yet take and have, as to them it was and is lawful; Without that, that the
said John Porter, in and upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen, of the
aforesaid Key and Wharf, with the appurtenances in the said Information
mentioned, or any part thereof intruded, or either of them did intrude, in
manner and form, as in the said Information above is supposed: And without
that, that the aforesaid Key and Wharf, and other the premises with the
appurtenances in the said Information mentioned, or any parcel thereof, the
said 26th. Day of January, in the Year 34th. aforesaid, in the same Information
mentioned, or ever before, or after, stood, or were, or was in the Hands and
possession of the said Lady the Queen that now is, in manner and form, as in
the said Information is before supposed. And also without that, that there is
any Record, Roll, or Remembrance, in the Court of the Exchequer here, besides
the Record of the Information aforesaid, by which it may appear the aforesaid
Key and Wharf, and other the premises, or any parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, to be, or of Right to be, in the hands and possession of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, All and singular which the said John Porter,
and Henry Cockain, are ready to aver, as the Court here, etc. Whereupon they
pray Judgment, and that they as to the premises from this Court be dismissed,
etc. and each of them be dismissed. And because the Court will avise of the
Plea aforesaid, until further, etc. Day is given here to the aforesaid John
Porter, and Henry Cockain, in the same state as now it is, until to 15. Days
of Faster, at which Day, the aforesaid John, and Henry, came here as before:
And the aforesaid John Popham Esquire, Attorney General of the Lady the Queen
that now is, and who follows for the said Lady the Queen, present here in
Court, the same Day in his proper Person, By Protestation, not acknowleging any
thing in the Plea of the said John Porter, and Henry Cockain, by them before
pleaded, to be true, in manner and form as the said John Porter, and Henry
Cockain, in the Plea of the said John Porter, and Henry Cockain, by them above
pleaded, to be true in manner and form, as the said John Porter, and Henry
Cockain, in their Plea aforesaid above have pleaded; Yet for Replication, The
same Attorney of the said Lady the Queen that now is, for the said Lady the
Queen, says as he formerly said, That the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry
Cockain, in and upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen that now is, in
the aforesaid Key and Wharf, called the Old Woolkey, and other the premises in
the Information aforesaid specified, entered, intruded, and made entry in manner
and form, as in the Information aforesaid above it is alleged. And of this, The
Attorney of the said Lady the Queen, for the said Lady the Queen prays, that
it may be inquired of the Country; And the said Desendants say as before, and
pray likewise, Therefore that inquiry be made thereof, etc. And it is commanded
to the Sherifs of London, that they do not omit, etc. And that they cause to be
here from Easter, in one Month the same Term, 12. free and lawful men of our
Balywick, of the Neighborhood of the Parish of All Saints Barking, in the City
of London aforesaid, etc. whereof each, etc. by whom, etc. and who neither,
etc. And the same Day is given here to the said John Porter, and Henry Cockain,
at which day the said John, and Henry, come here as before, and the Sherifs,
that is to say, William Rider, and Benedict Burnham, returned the Writ
aforesaid, together with the Panel of the names of the Jurors which are in the
file of Writs executed for the Queen of the 34th. Year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, with the Remembrancer of London. And the Jurors did
not appear, Therefore it was commanded the Sherifs that they distrein the
Jurors by their Lands, etc. So that, etc. in 8. Days of Holy Trinity, or in
the mean time, before the Beloved and Faithful to the Lady the Queen, Roger
Manwood Knight, Chief Baron of this Exchequer, at Gui^d-hall of the City of
London aforesaid, upon Friday the 26th. day of May, in the Year of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, the 34th. in the Afternoon of the same Day, if he
shall first come thither. And it is said to the aforesaid John Porter, and
Henry Cockain, that they keep their Day before the aforesaid Chief Baron, at
the said Day and Place, and that they be here, at the said 8. days of Holy
Trinity, to hear their Judgment, If, etc. At which day, the said John Porter,
and Henry Cockin, come here as before, And the aforesaid Chief Baron, before
whom delivered here, the Tenor of the Record aforesaid, in form aforesaid
directed, which is amongst the Inquisitions and Extents of this Year of the
34th. of the Reign of the Queen that now is, with this Remembrancer indorsed
thus: ss. Afterward, that is to say, the Day and Place within contained,
before Roger Manwood Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer of the said Lady the
Queen, came as well the within named John ^opham, who prosecutes for the said
Lady the Queen, as the said within written John Porter, and Henry Cockain in
their proper persons, and the Jurors of the Jury whereof within mention is
made, being called, some of them appeared, and some of them not, as it
appears in the Panel, etc. And some of them now appearing, that is to say,
Roger Tasker, Humphry Street, George Gunbey, Thomas Cox, Thomas Langhorn, John
Eaton, William Fruit, and John Math, upon the Jury aforesaid are sworn, and
because the rest of the Jurors of the Jury did not appear, therefore others of
the standers by, by the Sherifs of the County aforesaid, to be chosen, at the
Request of the said John Popham, and by the command of the aforesaid Chief
Baron were new put, whose names to the Panel within written are filed,
according to the form of the Statute in such case late made and provided. And
the Jurors so anew put, that is to say, Thomas Wiggs, Henry Ayleward, Ralph
Baily, and Cutbert Booth, being called, likewise came, Who to the truth of the
matter within contained, together with the other Jurors aforesaid first
impannelled, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That long before the aforesaid
time of Intrusion aforesaid above supposed to be done, One Nicholas Gibson, was
seized of and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in
the Information aforesaid specified, in his Demesne as of Fee, and the Wharf and
Tenements aforesaid, held of the Lady the Queen in Socage, that is to say, of
the free Borough of the City of London by fealty only; And so being thereof
seized, the said Nicholas afterward, and before the time of the Intrusion
aforesaid, etc. that is to say, the 23d. day of September, in the year of the
Reign of the Lord Henry, late King of England, the 8th. the 32th. at London, in
the Parish of St. Dunstans in the East, made his Testament and last Will in
Writing, and constituted one Avice then his Wife, Executrix of his said Will,
and by the said his Will bequeathed, and devised, amongst other things, the
Whars and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Avice,
and her Heirs, in these English Words, and in form following, That is to say,
In the name of God Amen, I Nicholas Gibson Citizen, and Grocer of London, whole
of Mind, and of perfect Memory, albeit sick of Body, make this my present and
last Will and Testament, as well concerning the Order and Disposion of my Goods,
Chattels, and other things moveable, as of my Lands and Tenemetns, Rents,
Reversions and Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever. First, I give and
bequeath my Soul unto Almighty God, my Maker, Redeemer, and Savior, and my
Body to be buried where it shall please God after the said discretion of my
well beloved Wife Avice Gibson, my sole Executrix under written, whom I put in
special trust, that she shall see these things hereafter declared, to be well
and truly executed, don, and declared, and performed, as hereafter shall be
recited: Unto whom also, I give and bequeath, All my Goods, Chattels, Debts,
and other things, as well moveable, as unmovable, real, and personal, Lands
and Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and all my other Profits and
Commodities, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the
appurtenances, To have, and to hold, possess, and enjoy, All and singular my
said Lands, and Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Services, with the
appurtenances, Goods, Chattels, and other things, and all and singular other
the premises with the appurtenances, unto the said Avice Gibson, her Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for ever, upon condition following:
That is to say, Where it has pleased God to put me the said Nicholas Gibson in
Mind to edify diverse Meases, Mansions, and places convenient for a
Free School, the Master of the same, and certain Beadmen and Beadwomen, and
that the same cannot be established to continue, without great charges to be
employed and bestowed upon the same, and also Lands and Tenements, and other
Hereditaments, to be assured for the continuance of the same, I Will and
Declare, by this my last Will and Testament, That the said Gift, Legacy, and
bequest, of my Lands and Tenements, Goods, Chattels, and other things aforesaid
shall inure and take effect, by reason hereof unto my said Wife, upon condition
following: That is to say, That my said Wife, by the Advice of Learned Counsel,
in all convenient speed after my decease, shall assure, give, and grant, all my
said Lands and Tenements, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, for the
maintainanee of the said Free School, Almesmen, and Almeswomen for ever, if it
shall please God that my said Wife Avice Gibson, shall have all the Issues,
Revenewes, and Profits yearly coming, arising, and growing of the premises
during her life, bearing the charges for the keeping of the said School,
Beadmen and Beadwomen, and other charges for the maintenance of the premises,
in manner and form as I the said Nicholas have kept and maintained the same,
and as the same is now kept and maintained, without any diminution in any wise:
Which Avice Gibson, I make my sole Executrix of this my present Testament and
last Will. These being Witnesses, Thomas Rushton Sergeant at the Law, William
Gunston Esquire, Thomas Wood Cooper, Thomas Reinolds Clothworker, and John
Mucklow Scrivener. In witness whereof I have hereto put my Seal. Given the
23th. Day of September, in the year of our Lord God 1540. and in the 22d. year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the 8th. as by the said Will more
fully appears. And afterward the said Nicholas Gibson at London, in the
Parish of St. Dunstan in the East aforesaid, the 6th. Day of October, in the
year of the Reign of the said Henry late King of England the 8th. the 32th.
aforesaid dyed of such his estate so seized, of the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid with appurtenances, without issue of his ^ody begotten: After the
death of which Nicholas, The aforesaid Avice, in the aforesaid Parish of St.
Dunstan, took upon her the charge of Execution of the Testament aforesaid. And
before the aforesaid time of Intrusion aforesaid supposed, that is to say, the
13th. Day of April, in the year of the Reign of the Lord Edward late King of
England the 6th. the third, At London, in the Parish of All Saints Barking
aforesaid, demised the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to
one Bartholmew Gibbs, To have, and to hold, to him and his Assigns, from the
Feast of the Birth of our Lord, which then should be in the year of our Lord,
1566. until the full end of 40. years, from thence next following and fully
ended. By virtue of which demise, The same Bartholmew was of the Interest of
the Term aforesaid possessed, and so thereof being possessed, The said
Bartholmew before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the first Day of
January, in the year of our Lord, 1522. at London, in the Parish of All Saints
aforesaid, made his Testament and last Will in Writing, and constituted and
ordained one Alice, then his Wife his Executrix, of his said last Will and
Testament, And afterward the said Bartholmew, then and there dyed of such his
estate possessed, of the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances,
After whose death, and before the time in which, etc. the said Alice took upon
her tharge of the Execution of the Testament aforesaid, in the aforesaid Parish
of All Saints, and was of the Interest of the Term aforesaid, of 40. years
possessed, as Executrix of the Testament of the said ^artholmew, and so thereof
being possessed, The said Alice, Before the time in which etc. at London in the
Parish of All Saints aforesaid, took to Husband one Thomas Wilcox, By which,
The said Thomas and Alice, before the time in which, etc. were of the Interest
of the aforesaid Term of 40. years, of and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances possessed, and the said Thomas and Alice so thereof
being possessed, before the time in which, etc. that is say, the 16th. Day of
December, in the year of the Reign of the Lady Mary, late Queen of England, the
second, At London, in Parish of All Saints Barking aforesaid, granted all their
Estate, Interest, and Term of years, which they then had, of and in the Wharf
and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to one John Haynes. By virtue
of which Grant, The said John Haynes, was of the Interest of the aforesaid Term
of 40. years, of and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances possessed, And so thereof being possessed, The same John Haynes,
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 21. Day of September, in the
year of our Lord, 1559. at London, in the Parish of All Saints Barking
aforesaid, made his Testament and last Will in Writing, and made and ordained
one Joyce, his then Wife his Executrix of hi^ said last Will, and by the same
his Will willed and bequeathed, all his Estate, Interest, and Term of years,
which he then had of and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances to the said Joyce. And afterward the said John Haynes, at
London, in the Parish of All Saints Barking aforesaid, of such his Estate of
and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances dyed possessed.
After whose Death, the said Joyce took upon her the charge of the Execution of
the Testament aforesaid, and was of the Interest of the aforesaid Term of 40.
years, of and in the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances
possessed; And so thereof being possessed, the said Joyce, before the time in
which, etc. At London, in the Parish of All Saints aforesaid, took to Husband
the aforesaid John Porter, By which the said John Porter, and Joyce, were of
the Interest of the aforesaid Term of 40. years, of and in the Wharf and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances possessed. And the Jurors aforesaid
further say upon their Oath, That one John Gibson is Cosen, and Heir of the
said Nicholas Gibson, that is to say, Son and Heir of Hugh Gibson deceased,
Brother and Heir of the said Nicholas Gibson, And that the said John Gibson,
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 24th. Day of January, in the
year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 34th. into the Wharf
and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, by force of the Testament and
last Will of the said Nicholas Gibson, by color of Forfeiture, and by reason
of the Condition in the said last Will before specified, by the aforesaid
Avice, in her life forfeited and broken, entered and was thereof seized in his
Demesne as of Fee; And so thereof being seized, The said John Gibson, before the
time in which, etc. that is to say, the 25th Day of Janbary, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 34th. By his Writing indented,
bearing Date the same Day and year, in the Court of the said Lady the Queen of
her Chancery, at Westminster, being in due manner enrolled, and to the Jurors
in Evidence showed, Bargained, Granted, and Sold the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the said Lady the Queen that now is, To
have, and to hold, to the said Lady the Queen that now is, her Heirs and
Successors for ever. By Color of which Grant, Bargain, Sale, and Inrollement,
The said Lady the Queen that now is, was of the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances, seized in her Demesne as of Fee in the Right of the
Crown of England, and the said Queen that now is so thereof being seized, The
aforesaid John Porter, claiming the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid in his own
Right, and the aforesaid Henry, as Servant of the said John Porter, and by his
Commandment the aforesaid time in which, etc. into the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, upon the possession of the said Lady the
Queen that now is thereof entered and made ingresse; But whether upon the whole
matter aforesaid, by them the Jurors in form aforesaid found, the aforesaid
entry of the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry into the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, be an Intrusion upon the possession of the
said Lady the Queen of the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid, or not, The said
Jurors thereof pray the advice of the said Court of Exchequer, here, etc. And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by them the Jurors in form aforesaid ^ound,
It shall seem to the said Barons and Court here, That the aforesaid Entry of
the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry, into the Wharf and Tenements with the
appurtenances, be, and ought to be adjudged an Intrusion upon the possession of
the said Lady the Queen, Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the
aforesaid John Porter, and Henry, in and upon the possession of the said Lady
the Queen that now is, of the aforesaid Key and Wharf, called the Old Woolkey,
and other the premises in the Information above alleged, entered, intruded, and
made ingresse in manner and form, as in the Information aforesaid above is
alleged. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by them the Jurors in form
aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Barons and Court here, That the aforesaid
Entry of the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry, into the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances be not, nor ought to be adjudged, an intrusion
upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen of the aforesaid Wharf and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, Then the same Jurors say upon their
Oath, That the said John Porter, and Henry, in and upon the possession of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, of the aforesaid Key and Wharf, called the Old
Wolkey, and other the premises in the said Information above alleged, did not
intrude and make Entry in manner and form, as in the Information aforesaid
above is alleged. And because the Court here will avise of the premises before
further, etc. Day is given here to the said John Porter, and Henry Cockain, in
the same state that now is, until 8. days of St. Michael, before which day,
that is to say, in the Morrow of St. Michael, in the year of the Reign of the
Lady the Queen that now is, the process aforesaid with all things touching the
same, by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common Adjournment under her great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the 23d Day of September, in the
Year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 34th. aforesaid,
to the aforesaid Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer directed, which is
inrouled el^ewhere in the Remembrances of this Exchequer, of the aforesaid
34th. year of the Queen that now is, amongst the Records of this Exchequer, of
the Term of St. Michael Rott. On the part of this Remembrancer, until a Month
of St. Michael then next following: At which Day, the said Process aforesaid,
with all things touching the same, by another like Writ of Common Adjournment,
bearing Date at Hampton Court the 25th. Day of October, in the 34th. year
aforesaid and amongst the Records of the said Term of St. Michael, in the Roll
aforesaid, with the part of the Remembrancer aforesaid, likewise Inrouled, are
further adjourned until the Morrow of All Souls, at Westminster aforesaid, unto
the Castle of the Lady the Queen of Hartford, in the County of Hartford. And
the same Day is given here to the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry Cockain, At
which Day, the said John, and Henry, come here as before. And the Verdict
aforesaid being seen and the other premises by the Barons here, and the mature
deliberation thereof amongst them being had; Because upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It seems to the
Barons here, That the entry of the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry Cockain, in
the Wharf and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, is an Intru^^on upon
the possession of the said Lady the Queen, of the Wharf and Tenements
aforesaid: Therefore it is granted by the same Barons, That the aforesaid John
Porter, and Henry Cockain, of the aforesaid Entry, Intrusion, and Ingress in
and upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen, of the aforesaid Key and
Wharf, and other the premises, be convicted, and either of them be convicted,
And that the aforesaid Wharf and Tenements with the appurtenances, into the
Hands of the said Lady the Queen that now is, be taken, etc. And that the said
John Porter, and H. Cockain, be Attached by their Bodies wheresoever, etc. to
make a Fine for the contempt aforesaid, etc. And further, to do what to the
Court, etc. And it is commanded to the Sheriffs of London, that they attach
them in form aforesaid, so that, etc. in 8. Day of St. Hillary, Before which
Day, that is to say, The 28th. Day of November, in the year 35th. of the Queen
that now is, the Process aforesaid, together with all things touching the
premises were further adjourned by another Writ of Common Adjournment, under
the great Seal of England, to the Treasurer and Barons of this Exchequer
directed, which is in^ouled elsewhere in the Remembrances of this Exchequer, of
the 34th. year of the Queen that now is ended, and the 35th. began, with the
said Remembrancer from the aforesaid Castle of Hartford, unto Westminster
aforesaid. At which Day, the said John Porter, and Henry Cockain, at
Westminster aforesaid come here as before, And the Sheriffs did not return the
Writ; Yet the aforesaid John Porter, and Henry Cockain, at the same time come
here as before, And for the premises submitted themselves to the favor of the
Court, And that they might not be further in the premises troubled, prayed with
the favor of the Court to be admitted to make a reasonable Fine, with the Lady
the Queen in the premises, which by the Court here is granted to them. And upon
this, by color of a Writ of the said Lady the Queen, of her privy Seal, To the
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons, and other Officers of this Court of
Exchequer, of the second year of this Queen, that is to say, amongst the Writs
directed to the Barons, and in the Term of Easter, in this Exchequer inrouled,
remaining with the Remembrancer of the Queen, of Persons to be admitted by the
aforesaid Treasurer, Chancellor, Barons, and other Officers of this Exchequer,
according to their discretions they are admitted to make such Fine, etc.
according to the Tenor of the aforesaid Writ; and made a Fine in the premises,
as is contained in these Remembrances, that is to say, amongst the Fines of
this Term, one the part remaining of the Remembrancer of the Queen, By Color
of which Fine, It is granted to the Barons here, That against the aforesaid
John Porter, and Henry Cockain, for the Contempt aforesaid, there he not here
further Execution made, etc.

Information.
Trinity Term, Anno 37o Eliz. Rot. 199. in the Exchequer.
The Case of Alton Woods, Co. 1. part. fo. 26.
MEmorandum, that it is found in the Remembrances of this Exchequer, in the
37th. year of Queen Elizabeth, that is ^o say, amongst the Records of this Term
of Holy Trinity, with the part of the Queens Remembrancer in these words, That
is to say, Worcester ss. Memorandum, That Edward Coke Esquire, The Attorney
General of the Lady the Queen that now is, who prosecutes for the said Lady the
Queen present here in Court, the 20th. Day of June, this Term, in his own
person for the said Lady the Queen, gave the Court here to understand and be
informed, That whereas a Wood with the appurtenances, called Alcon, otherwise
Aluington Wood, containing by estimation, 3000. Acres of Wood in Alton,
otherwise Aluington, and Rock, in the aforesaid County of Worcester, in the
Hands and possession of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the first Day of
October, in the first year of her Reign and long before, and continually after
were and stood, and of Right ought to be, and yet ought as in the Right of her
^rown of England, as in very many Records, Roules, and Remembrances of this
Exchequer, it is evident and appears upon Record: Yet one Ann Countess of
Warwick, Humphry Hill, Richard Bushopp, and Edward Bushopp, little regarding
the Laws and Statutes of the said Lady the Queen that now is, but intending
the Disenherism of the Lady the Queen in the premises, with Force and Arms,
etc. the first Day of October, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 27th. and diverse Days and turns between the same first
Day of October, in the 27th. year, and the Day of Exhibiting of this
Information, in and upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen of the
premises Entered, Intruded, and made Entry, and the Issues and Profits thereof
coming perceived to their own uses and had, and as yet do perceive and have,
the same Trespass continuing, and as yet continuing in contempt of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, and against her Laws, Whereupon the aforesaid
Attorney of the said Lady the Queen, for the said Lady the Queen prays the Advice of the Cour^ in the premises. And the aforesaid Ann Countess of Warwick,
Humphry H^ll, Richard Bishopp, and Edward Bishopp come here, to answer the said
Lady the Queen of and in the premises, as it is contained there, And now, that
is to say, From the day of Holy Trinity, in three Weeks this Term, came here
the aforesaid Richard Bishopp, by Arthur Salwaie, his Attorney, to this, by
special favor of the Court admitted, and prays the hearing of the
Information aforesaid, and it is read unto him, etc. Which being read and
heard, and by him the said Richard fully understood, The said Richard
complains, by color of the premises in the Information aforesaid above
specified, to be troubled and unquietted, and that not justly. Because, By
Protestation, that the Information aforesaid, and matter in the same contained,
is not sufficient in Law, and to which the said Richard is not necessitated,
nor by the Law of the Land bound to answer in any manner. By Protestation also,
That the Wood aforesaid, in the Information aforesaid, above mentioned, does
not contain, nor the aforesaid time of the Trespass and Intrusion aforesaid
above supposed to be done, did contain in it 3000. Acres, in manner and form,
as by the Information aforesaid above is supposeed. Yet for Plea, The said
Richard, as to the Force and Arms, or whatsoever is against the Peace of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, As also the whole Trespass, Contempt, and
Intrusion, in the Information aforesaid above spec^fied supposed to be done,
besides the Entry and Ingresse into the Wood aforesaid, called Alton Wood,
otherwise Alvington Wood, the 21th. Day of February, in the Year of the Reign
of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 32th. and from the same Day, until the
Day of Exhibiting of the Information aforesaid, and besides, the perceiving the
Issues and Profits thereof by that time coming above supposed, The said
Richard says, that he in nothing thereof is guilty, in manner and form, as by
the Information aforesaid above is supposed, and upon this puts himself upon
the Country, And the aforesaid Attorney General of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, who for the said Lady the Queen in this behalf prosecutes likewise,
etc. Therefore an Inquisition be made thereof, etc. And as to the Entry and
Ingress into the Wood aforesaid, the aforesaid 21th. Day of February, in the
32th. Year aforesaid, and from that Day, until the Day of Exhibiting of the
Information aforesaid, as also to the taking of the Issues and Profits thereof,
by the time thereof coming above supposed to be done, the said Richard says,
That the said Lady the Queen that now is, him the said Richard ought not any
ways to impeach or trouble, because he says, That long before the aforesaid
time in which it is supposed, the Entry, Intrusion, and Ingress aforesaid to be
done, One Ann Countess of Warwick Widow, sometimes Wife of Richard sometimes
Earl of Warwick, was seized of the Manor of Abbotesley, otherwise Abberley,
otherwise Abbedeley, with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid County of
Worcester, whereof the aforesaid Wood in which, etc. then and until the time of
the grant here after specified, made to Robert Earl of Leicester, the third Day
of July, in the 30th. Year of Queen Elizabeth, here after mentioned, whereof
the Memory of Man then was not to the contrary was parcel, in her Demesne as of
Fee, and so thereof being seized, a Fine was levied in the Court of the Lord
Henry late King of England the 7th, at Westminst. in the County ^f Middlesex,
from the Day of St. Hillary in 15. Days, in the 3d Year of his Reign, before
Thomas Brian, Roger Townsend, and John Haugh Justices, and other the said late
Kings Faithful Subjects then there present, Betw^en him the Lord the King
plantiff, and the aforesaid Ann sometimes Countess, sometimes Wife of the
aforesaid Richard Earl of Warwick, by the Name of Ann Countess of Warwick
deforceant, of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc.
amongst other, etc. whereof a Plea of Covenant was sued between them in the
same Court, that is to say, That the said Countess granted to the said Lord the
King, the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. And the same
rendered back to him in the same Court, To have, and to hold to the said Lord
the King, and the Heirs Males of his Body begotten, and if it shall happen,
That the said Lord the King should die, without Heir Male of his Body begotten,
then after the decease of the said Lord the King the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. should wholly Revert to the same Countess, and her
Heirs quieted from the other Heirs of the aforesaid Lord the King, as by the
Record of the aforesaid Fine in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now
is, of the Bench at Westminster aforesaid remaining, more fully appears. By
virtue of which Fine, the aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. was seized of the
Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as Fee
tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body issuing, the
Reversion thereof to the aforesaid Countess, sometimes Wife of the aforesaid
Richard Earl of Warwick, and the Heirs of the said Countess expectant. And the
said late King so thereof being seized, and the Reve^sion thereof to the said
Countess in form aforesaid expectant, The said Countess afterward, and before
the time aforesaid in which, etc. At Abbot^sley, othewise Abberly, in the
aforesaid County of Worcester, dyed so as before is said, of the Reversion
aforesaid seized, After whose death, the Reversion aforesaid with the
appurtenances, descended to one Edward Earl of Warwick, as Cousin and Heir of
the said Countess, that is to say, Son and Heir of Isabel, Daughter of the said
Countess; By which, the said Earl was seized of the Reversion of the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. as of Fee, and Right; And the
said Edward, Earl of Warwick, so thereof being seized, By an Act in Parliament
of the said late King holden at Westminster the aforesaid 25th. Day of January,
in the Year of his Reign the 19th. amongst other things, It was Enacted by him
the said late King, by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That
whereas Peter Warbeck, with others of the aforesaid late Kings Rebellious
Enemies, and Traitors in a great multitude and number to him associated,
entered, and arrived in this Kingdom, in a certain place called VVhitessonbay,
in the Parish of St. Bercie in the County of Cornwall, the 7th. day of
September, in the Year of the Reign of the said late King the 13th. and levied
War against the aforesaid late King, Notwithstanding the aforesaid Peter in
his Journey, and issue to the said false and malicious purpose was overthrown,
and was taken, and by the same late King committed to the Prison of the Tower
of London, where, and in which place, the aforesaid Edward Earl of Warwick,
confederated with the aforesaid Peter, imagining, and intending, falsely, and
traitorously, the death and destruction of the said late King, and the
overthrowing of this Kingdom of England, intending to make the aforesaid Peter
King of the same Kingdom, by diverse devises amongst them conceived and
inspired, endeavored with diverse his Adherents, speedily by diverse false
Messages and Notes, to set him at liberty and at large, to the intent, to
Execute his false and Traiterous purpose, to aid and assist him to his utmost
endeavor, for which, the aforesaid Edward Earl of Warwick, by due course of
Law of the said late King, out of his own Confession was convicted and
attainted of High Treason, as his deserts in that behalf required; That the
said Earl for his offenses aforesaid, by Authority of Parliament aforesaid,
should be convicted, adjudged, and attainted of High Treason; And that he
should forfeit to the aforesaid late King and his Heirs, All his Honors,
Castles, Manors, Lordships, Hundreds, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges,
Advowsons, Nominations, Presentations, Rights, Fees, Tenements, Rents,
Services, Reversions, Remainders, Portions, Annuities, Pensions, Rights,
Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, and Debts, whereof the said Earl,
or any other to his use, was seized or possessed of the day of the Treason
either committed, or done, or at any time after within the Kingdom of England,
Ireland, Wales, Calice, or the Counties thereof, in Fee simple, Fee tail, for
Term of life or lives, Or in which the said Earl then, or at any time after had
lawful cause of Entry, within England, Ireland, Wales, Calis, or the Counties
of them. And further that the aforesaid Edward Earl of Warwick, should forfeit
to the said late King, and his Heirs, All Honors, Castles, Manors, Lordships,
Hundreds, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Advowsons, Nominations,
Presentations, Rights, Fees, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services, Reversions,
Remainders, Portions, Annuities, Pensions, Rights, Possessions, Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels, and Debts, whereof the said Earl, or any other person, seized
to his use, or was possessed of the second day of August, in the Year of the
Reign of the aforesaid late King the 14th. or at any time then after, as by the
said Act amongst other things more fully appears. And the said Richard says,
That the aforesaid Edward Earl of Warwick, Cousin and Heir of the said Ann
Countess of Warwick, in the Fine aforesaid named, and the aforesaid Edward
Earl of Warwick, in form aforesaid attainted, and in the Act aforesaid named,
are one and the same person, and not other or diverse. By color of which
Conviction and Attainder, and by force of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, The
aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. was seized of the Reversion of the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. as of Fee and of Right, in the
Right of his Crown of England; And so thereof being seized, and of the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee tail, in form
aforesaid being seized, The said late Lord the King, afterward and before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. At Westminster aforesaid dyed, of the Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. And of the Reversion aforesaid,
in form aforesaid seized; After whose death, the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. and the Reversion aforesaid descended to the Lord
Henry late King of England the 8th. as Son and Heir of the aforesaid late King
Henry the 7th. By which the said late King Henry the 8th. was seized of the
Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee
tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body issuing, and of
the Reversion of the said Manor with the appurtena^ces as of fee and right,
And the said late King Hen. the 8th. so being thereof seized, By a certain
Inquisition, taken at the Castle ^^ Worcester, in the aforesaid County of
Worcester, the 5th. day of July, in the year of the Reign of the aforesaid
late King Henry the 8th the 23th. before Roger VVinter Esquire, then Escheator
of the said late King the same County, by virtue of his Office by the Oaths of
Richard Friar Gent. Richard ^helton Gent. William Andrews Gent. Richard
Dedick Gent. Richard Hill of Leigh, Edward Enolt, Henry Dison, Roger ^bud,
Henry VVoodward, John Porter of Claynes, John Brodford, Walter Solli, Roger
Aldern of Martley, and Richard Walter taken, It was found amongst other
things, That the aforesaid Ann Countess of Warwick, in the Fine aforesaid
named, was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc.
in her Demesne as of Fee, and that she being thereof so seized, the Fine
aforesaid, in form aforesaid was levied; By which the aforesaid King Henry the
7th. was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof, etc.
in his Demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his
Body issuing, And that the said Countess was seized of the Reversion of the
said Manor as of Fee and Right, and that the said Countess of the said
Reversion so seized, of such her Estate thereof dyed seized, And that after the
Death of the said Countess, the said Reversion descended to the abovesaid
Edward, late Earl of Warwick, as Cousin and Heir of the said Countess, that is
to say, Son and Heir of Isabel, Daughter and Heir of the said Countess, By
which, the said Edward, late Earl of Warwick, was seized of the Reversion of
the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances as of Fee and Right, and that the
said late Earl, being thereof so seized, That the aforesaid Act in the
aforesaid Parliament of the aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. in the Year of
his Reign the 19th. aforesaid made, was in manner and form aforesaid, And that
by color of the same Act, the said late King Henry the 7th. was seized of the
Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances as of Fee and Right, And that the said
late King Henry the 7th. being so thereof sezed, and of the Manor aforesaid
with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, of such
his Estate thereof dyed seized; After whose Death, The Manor aforesaid with
the appurtenances, whereof, etc. and the Reversion aforesaid descended to the
aforesaid late Henry late King of England the 8th. as Son and Heir of the
aforesaid Lord King Henry the 7th. By which the said King Henry the 8th. was
seized of the Manor aforesaid with the appuretenances, whereof, etc. in his
Demesne of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of Body,
lawfully issuing, the Reversion thereof to him and his Heirs, in form aforesaid
expectant, as by the Inquisition aforesaid, in the Court of Chancery of the
said Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, in due manner returned, and
there remaining on Record more fully appears. And the faid Richard furher
says, That the aforefaid late King Henry the 8th. so of the Manor aforesaid
with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. And of the Reversion thereof in form
aforesaid being seized, The said late King Henry the 8th. the 3d. day of
November, in the ye^r of his Reign the 33th. at Westminster, aforesaid, By this
Letters Patents under his great Seal of England, sealed, which the said Richard
here in Court brings, bearing date at Westminster, aforesaid the same Day and
Year, Reciting, That whereas the said late King Henry the 8th. the 20th. day of
Octber, in the 19th. year of his Reign, by his Letters Patents, had given and
granted unto Walter Walshe, by the name of Walter Walshe, one of the Grooms of
his Privy Chamber, his Manor of Grafton ^leuere, by the name o^ the Manor of
Grafton Fleeford, with his appurtenances in the County of Worcester, and the
Advowson of the Church of Grafton Fleeford aforesaid, as also all and singular
hi^ Messuages, Lands and Tenements whatsoever, in Grafton Fleeford, in the
County aforesaid, together with the Knights Fees, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs,
Rents and Services whatsoever, to the Manor and other the premises and to
every part thereof any wise soever belonging or appertaining; To have, and to
hold the said Manor, and other the premises, with all and singular their
members and appurtenances whatsoever, to the abovesaid Walter, for the Term of
his Life, as in the said Letters Patents more fully it was contained. And
whereas also, the said late King Henry the 8th. the 6th. day of December, in
the Year of his Reign the 21th. by other his Letters Patents, had given and
granted to the aforesaid Walter Walshe, and to one Elizabeth then his Wife, by
the names of Walter VValshe, one of the Grooms of his Privy Chamber, and
Elizabeth his Wise, the Manor of Charleton, in the County of Somerset, by the
name of his Manor of Charleton in the County of Somerset, with all and
singular his members and appurtenances whatsoever, by whatsoever right or title
the said Manor in the Hands of the said late King then were, To have, and to
hold, the said Manor with the appurtenances, to the said Walter and
Elizabeth, and their Assigns, for the Term of the Lives of the said Walter
and Elizabeth, and the longer liver of them, as in the said Letters Patents it
was more fully contained. The aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. Then in
Consideration of the true and laudable Service to the said Lord the King by the
aforesaid Walter VValshe, before that time done, and after to be done, And for
that the said Walter, the aforesaid other Letters Patents, to him of the
aforesaid Manor of Grafton Fleeford, alias Fleuard, and the same Walter, and
the aforesaid Elizabeth, the aforesaid other Letters Patents, to them of the
aforesaid Manor of Charleton, with their Members, and singular their
appurtenances, in form aforesaid made, to the said late King Henry the 8th. in
his Chancery had restored there to be cancelled, unto the intent that the said
late King Henry, the aforesaid Manor of Grafton Fleuard with the
appurtenances, and the said Advowson of the Church of Grafton Fleuard, and all
and singular Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, of the said Lord the King in
Grafton Fleuard, As also the aforesaid Manor of Abottesly, in the aforesaid
County of Worcester with their appurtenances whatsoever, and the Advowson of
the Church of Abottesly, in the County aforesaid, and all Lands and Tenements
of the said Lord the King whatsoever, with the appurtenances in Abottesly,
otherwise Abberley, by other Letters Patents of the said late King, to the said
Walter, and Elizabeth, he would be pleased to grant. Which said former Letters
Patents, in the Court of Chancery aforesaid, at Westminster aforesaid, to the
same intent at the time of the making of the aforesaid Letters Patents here in
Court, were delivered up and cancelled, Of the special grace of the said King,
and of his certain Knowledge and mee^ motion, by the same Letters Patents here
in Court showed, and brought forth, gave and granted, unto the said Walter
VValshe, and Elizabeth his Wife, The aforesaid Manors of Grafton Fleuard, and
Abottesly, otherwise Aberley, with all and singular their members and
appurtenances, as also all and singular Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Services
Knights Fees, Liberties, Franchises, Courts Leets, Views of Frankpledges,
Parkes, Warrens, Waifes, Strayes, and other Commodities and Privileges
whatsoever, within the aforesaid Manors, or any of them being, or unto the
said Manors, or any of them in any manner belonging or appertaining. To have,
and to hold, the Manors aforesaid and every of them, and all the premises so
as before is said, by the said Letters Patents here in Court showed forth,
granted and every part thereof with their members ^d appurtenances whatsoever,
to the said Walter VVa^she, and Elizabeth his Wife, and to the Heirs Males of
the Body of the s^^d Walter begotten, as by the said Letters Patents amongst
other things more fully appears: And the said Richard says, That the
aforesaid Walter, long before the making of the aforesaid Letters Patents, and
at the time of the making thereof, and long after was Servant of the said late
King Henry the 8th. and one of the Grooms of the Privy Chamber of the said late
King, and many good, laborious, and laudable Services to the said late King
Henry the 8th. before the making of the said Letters Patents, did and
performed, and that he said Walter, the aforesaid other Letters Patents, of
the aforesaid Manor of Grafton Fleuard, and the said Walter, and Elizabeth,
the aforesaid other Letters Patents, of the said Manor of Charleton, with
their several members and appurtenances, in form aforesaid made to the said
late King Henry the 8th. before the making of the said other Letters Patents,
to them in form aforesaid made, and here in Court showed forth in his Chancery
aforesaid at Westminster aforesaid, had surrendered and procured to be
cancelled, as in the said Letters Patents, here in Court showed forth it is
alleged and testified: By virtue of which Letters Patents, here in Court showed
forth, The said Walter, and Elizabeth, were seized of the said Manor of
Abottesly with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other, that is to say,
The said Walter, in his demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and the
Heirs Males of his Body issuing, and the aforesaid Elizabeth, in her demesne as
of Free hold for the Term of her Life, and the said Walter, and Elizabeth, so
being thereof seized, the said Elizabeth afterward, and before the time in
which, etc. at Abottesly aforesaid dyed, And the aforesaid Walter over-lived
her, and held himself in the aforesaid Manor of Abottesly with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. and was thereof seized in his demesne of Fee tail,
in form aforesaid, by right of Survivour, And the said Walter, so thereof
being seized, By an Act of Parliament of the same late King Henry the 8th. at
Westminster aforesaid, the 8th. day of July, in the year of his Reign the
28th. holden, made, reciting by the said Act, Whereas the aforesaid Ann,
Countess of Warwick, in the Fine aforesaid above named, in the year of the
Reign of the late King Henry the 7th. the ^^ihrd, by Fine then levied before
the Justices of the King of Common Pleas at Westminster, had given and granted
unto the said late King Henry the 7th. amongst other things, The Lordship and
Manor of Abottesly, with the appurtenances, in the County of Worcester, To
have to the said King, and the Heirs Males of his Body issuing, as by the same
Fine remaining on Record, amongst other things it more fully appeared; By
virtue of which, the said late King was seized of the said Manor with the
appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee tail, and so thereof being seized, The
said Countess dyed, After whose death the Reversion of the said Manor with the
appurtenances in Fee simple, did descend and come to Edward late Earl of
Warwick, which Reversion and Fee simple of the said Manor, amongst other
Castles, Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, then after
escheated and came into the Hand and possession of the aforesad late King Henry
the 7th. and his Heirs, by the Attainder of High Treason of the said Edward
Earl of Warwick, as by the Record therefore more fully appears, And the
aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. so thereof being seized dyed, After whose
death, the same Castles, honors, manors, lands, tenements, and Hereditaments,
and other the premises in the Fine aforesaid contained, amongst other Lands,
Manors, Tenements, and Hereditaments descended and came to the said late K.
Hen. the 8th. as Son and Heir of the aforesaid late K. Hen. the 7th. by due
course of Inheritance, By virtue whereof the said late K. Henry the 8th. had
been, and was then thereof seized, And because the aforesaid Castles, Manors,
Lordships, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises were of great value, and
had many great and ample Liberties, Preheminences, Commodities, ^^d delights to
the same belonging, Therefore then and there, It was Enacted by Authority of
the same Parliament, That the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs, and
Successors from hence after, should have, hold, and enjoy for ever, all and
singular the aforesaid Castles, Manors, Tenements, Lands, and Hereditaments,
with the Appurtenances, and all and singular the premises: and that the said
Castles, Manors, Tenements, Lands, and Hereditaments, with the
Appurtenannances, and all and singular other the premises, by Authority of the
said Parliament should be adjudged in the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th.
his Heirs and Successors in Fee simple for ever, without the aforesaid, or any
other thing or things, before then had, made, or used, or to be allowed to the
contrary in any thing notwithstanding, as by the same Act more fully appears.
Saving always to all and singular person and persons, Bodies politic, and
corporate, their Heirs, and Successors, and to the Heirs, and Successors of
every of them, other than the aforesaid late Countess of Warwick, and her
Heirs, and the Heirs of the said Richard, late Earl of Warwick, Father of the
late Countess, all such Rights, Titles, Uses, Interests, terms of years,
Demise, Demises, Rents, Fees, Annuities, Possessions, Reversion, Remainder,
Distresses, Entries, Actions, Grants, Offices, Commons, Commodities, Liberties,
Profits, and Suits, in such manner, and form, and conditions, as they, or any
of them their heirs, and successors, or the heirs or succes. of any of them
had, could, might, or ought to have had, if the Act aforesaid never had bin
made, any thing in the said Act of Parliament to the contrary notwithstanding,
as by the said Act, amongst other things it more fully appears. By color of
which Act, the Reversion aforesaid, to the aforesaid Manor of Abbottesley,
otherwise Abberley, and the Manor aforesaid in Reversion, after the Estate and
Interest of the aforesaid Walter Walsh, and Elizabeth his wife, so as before is
said, granted to the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs, and
Successors in Fee simple did belong, according to the form and effect of the
Act aforesaid. By which the said late King Henry the 8th. was seized of that
reversion as of Fee and right, and the said late King so being thereof seized,
and the said Walter, of the aforesaid Manor of Abbottesley with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, The aforesaid
Walter, at Abbottesley aforesaid, before the aforesaid time, in which, etc.
died of such his Estate so seized. After whose decease, The said Manor with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. descended to one Walter Walsh his Son, as Son and
Heir Male of the body of the same Walter Walsh his Father Issuing, By which the
said Walter Walsh the Son after, and before the time in which, etc. entered, and
was thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and the
Heirs Males of his body issuing, and the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. was
seized of the Reversion thereof, as of Fee and Right; and so thereof being
seized, The said late King afterward, and before the time, in which, etc. at
Westminster aforesaid dyed of such his Estate thereof seized. After whose
death, The Reversion of the aforesaid Manor of Abbottesley with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. descended to the Lord Edward late King of England
the 6th. as Son and Heir of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. By which,
The said late King Edward the 6th. was seized of the Reversion of the said
Manor with the Appurtenances as of Fee and right, and so thereof being seized,
The said late King Edward the 6th. afterward, and before the time in which,
etc. at Westminster afores. dyed of such his estate thereof seized, with out
issue of his body issuing; After whose death the Reversion of the aforesaid
Manor of Abbottesly, with the appurtenances descended to the Lady Mary, late
Queen of England, as Sister and Heir of the said late King Edward the 6th. By
which the said late Queen Mary, was seized of the said Reversion, as of Fee and
right, and so thereof being seized, the said late Queen Mary afterward, and
before the time in which, etc. at Westminster aforesaid, dyed of such her
Estate thereof seized, without issue of her body issuing. After whose death,
the said Reversion did descend to the said Lady the Queen that now is, as
Sister and Heir of the aforesaid late Queen Mary: By which, the said Queen that
now is, was seized of the said Reversion as of Fee and right; and the said Lady
the Queen that now is, so thereof being seized, and the aforesaid Walter Walsh,
the Son, of the aforesaid Manor of Abbottesley, whereof, etc. in his demesne as
of Fee tail, in form aforesaid being seized, The said Walter afterward, and
before the time in which, etc. at Abbottesley aforesaid, dyed of such his
Estate thereof seized: After whose death, The said Manor with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. did descend to one William Walsh his Son, as Son
and Heir of the body of the aforesaid Walter VValsh the Son issuing. By which,
the said William, afterward, and before the time in which, into the said Manor
with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof seized in his
demesne as of Fee tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his body
issuing, and so thereof being seized, The said William afterward, that is to
say, the third day of July, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, the 30th. at Abbottesley aforesaid, by his Indenture of Bargain
and Sale, between Robert then Earl of Leicester, By the name of the Right
Honorable Robert Earl of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, of the both most Noble
Orders of the Garter, and Saint Michael Knight, Lord High Steward of her
Majesty's Household, Lord Chief Justice of Oyer and Terminer, of all the Forests
of her Majesty, and Chaces by South Trent, and one of her Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, of the one Part, And the afores. Willi. Walsh by the
name of Will. Wash of Witley, in the County of Worcester Esquire of the other party
made and afterward the 8th. day of the said Month of July, according to the
form of the Statute in that Case made and provided, in the Court of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, at Westminster aforesaid, in the said County of
Middlesex then being in due manner of Record Enrolled, One part of which Sealed
with the Seal of the said William Walsh, the said Richard Bushopp, here in
Court shows forth, whose Date is the same third day of July, in the 30th.
year aforesaid, For, and in consideration of a certain sum of Money to the said
William, by the aforesaid Earl of Leicester, then and there before had paid,
bargained, and sold to the said Earl of Leicester; The Wood aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. To have and to hold to the said Earl of Leicester,
his Heirs, and Assigns for ever. By color of which aforesaid Bargain, and
Sale, and Inrolment thereof, The said Earl of Leicester, into the Wood
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne
as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, The said Earl of Leicester afterward,
that is to say, the 5th. day of September. in the year of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, the 30th aforesaid, at Abbottesley aforesaid dyed of such his
Estate thereof seized without issue of his body issuing; After whose death the
Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances, descended to Ambrose then Earl of
Warwick, as Brother and Heir of the aforesaid late Earl of Warwick, By which,
The said Ambrose Earl of Warwick into the Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances
entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereon being
seized, The said Ambrose Earl of Warwick afterward, that is to say, the 24th.
day of January in the year of the Reign of the ^^d Lady the Queen that now is,
the 32th. at Abbottesley aforesaid, By his Indenture, between him the said
Ambrose Earl of Warwick, by the name of the Right Honorable Ambrose, Earl of
Warwick, of the most Noble Order of the Garter Knight of the one part, and
Edward then Earl of Bedford, and William Russel Knight, Charles Morrison
Knight, and Ambrose Copinger Esquire, by the names of the Right Honorable
Edward Earl of Bedford, William Russell Knight, Charles Morri on Knight, and
Ambrose Copinger Esquire. one part, of which sealed with the Seal of the said A^brose
Earl of Warwick, the said Richard Eushop here in Court brings, who^e date is
the same day and year, For and in consideration of the natural entire and
cordial love and affection, which the aforesaid Ambrose Earl of Warwick then
had, and bore to his most dear and beloved then wife, the said Ann Countess of
^arwick in the Information aforesaid above named, Daughter of the Right
Honorable Francis Earl of Bedford deceased, Grandfather of the said Edward
then Earl of Bedford, and Father of the said William Russel, as for and in
consideration of a Marriage before that time had, between the aforesaid Ambrose
then Earl of Warwick, and the aforesaid Lady Ann now Countess of Warwick then
his wi^e, and for and in consideration of the increase of the Jointure of the
said Ann, before that time made in the respect of the aforesaid Marriage, and in
consideration also of the better advancing of the said Ann, after the death of
the said Ambrose then Earl of Warwick, if she the said her beloved husband
should survive, to support, and sustein her Honorable Estate, and to pay such
debts, which the said Earl owed at the time of his death, and also such
Legacies, as the said Earl by his last Will in writing should bequeath, The
said Earl Covenanted and agreed for him, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, to and with the aforesaid Edward Earl of Bedford, William
Russell, Charles Morrison, and Ambrose Copinger, their Heirs, and Assigns, and
every of them, That immediately from and after the Sealing and delivery of the
said Indenture, The said Earl of Warwick his Heirs, and Assigns, and every of
them should stand and be seized of, and in the Wood aforesaid with the
appurtenances amongst other things, by the names of Alton Woods, otherwise
Alvington Woods with the appurtenances, si^u^te and being within the Parish of
Rock, or elsewhere, within the several Counties of Worcester, and Salop, or
any, or either of them, to the uses, (...)nts, and purposes, afterward in the
said Indenture expressed and declared; that is to say, To the use of him the
said Ambrose Earl of Warwick for the Term of his life, without impeachment of
any wast; and after the decease of him the said Earl of Warwick, to the use of
the aforesaid Ann Countess of Warwick, in the Information aforesaid named, by
the name of the Lady Ann, Countess of Warwick, wife of him the said Earl of
Warwick, and the right Heirs of the said Ann for ever; By color of which
Covenant and Grant aforesaid, and by force of a certain Act of transferring of
uses into possessions in the Parliament of the aforesaid Lord Henry, late King
of England the 8th. Father of the said Lady the Queen that now is, at
Westminster aforesaid, the 4th day of February, in the year of his Reign the
27th. holden, made, and provided, The aforesaid Ambrose Earl of Warwick was
seized of the Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances, amongst other things, in
his demesne, as of Freehold during his life, without impeachment of waste, the
remainder thereof, after the decease of him the said Earl of Warwick, to the
aforesaid Ann, late Countess of Warwick, and her Heirs expectant; And the said
Ambrose Earl of Warwick so thereof being seized, the remainder thereof in form
aforesa^d expectant, The said Ea^l afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid
21th. day of February, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now
is, the 32th. aforesaid, at Abbottesley aforesaid dyed, after whose death the
said Ann, now Countess of Warwick, into the Wood aforesaid, with the
appurtenances entered, and was, and yet is thereof seized in her demesne as of
Fee, by color and force of the premises: By which the said Richard Bushopp, as
servant unto the aforesaid Ann, now Countess of Warwick, and by her Command,
the aforesaid 21th. day of February, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is, the 32th. aforesaid, and the days and times aforesaid,
betwixt the same 21th. day of February, in the year 32th. aforesaid, and the
day of the exhibiting of the Information aforesaid, into the Wood aforesaid,
with the appurtenances entered, and the Issues and Profits thereof by that time
arising, to the use of the said Ann, now Countess of Warwick, took and had, and
does yet take and have, as it was, and is lawful for him to do. And the
aforesaid Richard further says, That the aforesaid William Walshe, yet
over-liveth, and is in full life, that is to say, at Abbottesly aforesaid,
without that, that the Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances, or any parcel
thereof, in the Hands and Possession of the said Lady the Queen that now is,
is, or before this was, or of Right ought to be in manner and form, as in and
by the Information aforesaid it is supposed; And without that, that the said
Richard Bushopp, in or upon the possession of the said Lady the Queen that now
is, of the Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances, or any part thereof Entered,
Intruded, or made Ingresse, in manner and form as by the Information aforesaid
it is supposed, and without that, that there is any Record, Roll, or
Remembrance, besides the Record of the Information aforesaid, by which it may
appear, that the Wood aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the Information
above specified, or any parcel thereof in the Hands and Possession of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, or stands, or of Right ought to be, or stand, in
manner and form as in the Information aforesaid above is supposed: All and
singular which, the said Richard Bushopp is ready to aver, as unto the Court,
etc. Whereupon, he prays Judgment, and that he as to the premises, from this
Court be dismissed. And because the Court here, ^^ avise of the Plea aforesaid,
before that further, etc. Day is given unto the ^fores. Rich. Bushopp, in
state, as now until 8. days of St. Michael, At which day the said Richard
Bushopp, came here as before; And the said Attorney General of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, who for the said Lady the Queen prosecutes, present here in
Court in his proper person for his said Lady the Queen, by Protestation, not
acknowledging any thing in the Plea aforesaid of the said Richard Bushopp, by
him above pleaded, to be true in manner and form as the said Richard in his
Plea aforesaid above has pleaded: Yet for Reply, the said Attorney of the said
Lady the Queen, for the same Lady the Queen says, That the Plea of the Richard
Bushopp, as to the Entry, Intrusion, and ingresse aforesaid, in the aforesaid
Wood, by him the said Richard, in the Information aforesaid to be done
supposed, is not sufficient in Law to discharge the said Richard of the said
Entry, Intrusion, and ingresse, whereupon for default of sufficient Answer in
this behalf, The said Attorney of the Lady the Queen, for the said Lady the
Queen prays Judgment, And that the aforesaid Richard, of the same Entry,
Intrusion, and Ingresse, by the aforesaid Richard, thereof supposed to be done
be convicted; And the said Richard says, That he sufficient matter in Law, to
bar the said Lady the Queen that now is, from the possession of the aforesaid
Wood, in the said Information specified, and of every parcel thereof above in
bar and exclusion of the Information has alleged, which he is ready to averr,
as unto the Court, etc. Which matter aforesaid, The Attorney of the Lady the
Queen, for the same Queen does not deny, nor to the same any ways for the said
Lady the Queen Answers, but the Averment aforesaid to admit altogether does
refuse; Wherefore as before the said Richard demands Judgment, and that he
as to the Premises from this Court be dismissed, etc. And because the Barons
here will avise themselves of and upon the Premises, whereof the aforesaid
Richard has above put himself in Judgment of the Court, before that they give
Ju^gement thereof, Further day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushopp here
until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
said Barons thereof not yet, etc. And as to the Trial of the Issue aforesaid by
the Country to be tried, above joined, It is commanded to the Sherif of the
aforesaid County of Worcester, that he do not omit, etc. And that he cause to
be here at the said 8. days of St. Michael, 12. good and lawful Men of the
Neighborhood of Alton, otherwise Alvington, and Rock, in the said County,
whereof each, etc by whom, etc. and who neither, etc. And the same day is given
here to the same Richard Bushopp here etc. At which day comes the said Richard
Bushopp, by his Attorney aforesaid, And as to the aforesaid Writ of Venire
Facias, the Sherif thereof did nothing, nor sent that Writ; Therefore as to the
Trial of the Issue aforesaid, as at first, It was commanded to the Sherifs of
the aforesaid County of Worcester, that he do not omit, etc. And that he cause
to be here from the day of Easter, in 15. days, 12, etc. To Recognize in form
aforesaid, etc. And the same day is given thereof here, to the aforesaid
Richard Bishopp, And because the Barons here will further avise with themselves
of and upon the Premises, whereof the aforesaid Richard Bishopp, above puts
himself in Judgment of the Court, day thereof is further given to the
aforesaid Richard Bushopp, here until from Easter Day in 15. days, to hear
thereof their Judgment, because the said Barons thereof are not yet, etc. At
which day comes the said Richard Bishopp by his Attorney aforesaid: And as to
the aforesaid Writ of Venire Facias, the Sherif thereof did nothing, nor sent
that Writ; Therefore as to the Trial of the Issue aforesaid, as at first, It is
Commanded to the Sherif of the aforesaid County of Worcester, that he do not
omit, etc. And that he cause to come here in 8. days of Holy Trinity, 12, etc.
to know in form aforesaid, and the same day is given thereof here, tothe
aforesaid Richard Bushop, and because the Barons here will farther avise
themselves of and upon the premises, whereof the said Richard Bushop above put
himself in the Judgment of the Court, farther day is given to the aforesaid
Richard Bushop here, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Barons
thereof are not yet, etc. At which day here comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop
by his Attorney aforesaid, and as to the aforesaid writ of Venire facias, the
Sherif did nothing thereof, nor sent that writ, therefore as to the trial of
the Issue aforesaid, as before it was commanded to the Sheriff of the aforesaid
County of Worcester, that he do not omit, etc. And that he cause to come here,
in 8 days of Saint Michael 12 etc. to recognize in form aforesaid, etc. And
the same day thereof is given here, to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, and
because the Barons here will farther avise themselves of and upon the premises,
whereof the aforesaid Richard Bushopp above put himself in the Judgment of the
Cour^, farther day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop until the aforesaid
8 days ^f Saint Michael to hear thereof their Judgment, because the same
Barons thereof are not yet, etc. At which day comes the said Richard Bushop,
by his Attorney aforesaid, and as to that writ of Venire facias, the Sheriff did
nothing, nor sent that writ; Therefore to try the issue aforesaid, as at first,
it was commanded to the aforesaid Sheriff of the County of Worcester, that he
do not omit, etc. and that he cause to come here from the day of Saint Hillary
in 14 days 12, etc. And the same day is given here to the aforesaid Richard
Bushopp, and because the said Richard Bushop above put himself on the Judgemtut
of the Court, farther day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushopp here until
from the said day of Saint Hillary in 15 days to hear their judgment thereof,
because the Barons here thereof are not as yet, etc. At which day comes the
said Richard Bushopp by his Attorney aforesaid, and the Barons here the premises
being seen whereof the aforesaid Richard Bushopp put himself upon in the
Judgment of the Court, and mature deliberation thereof amongst them being had,
Because it seems to the Barons that the plea aforesaid of the said Richard
Bushopp thereof by him in manner and form above pleaded is sufficient in Law to
discharge the said Richard Bushop of the Entry, Intrusion, and Ingresse by him
above supposed to be done in the aforesaid Wood called Alton, otherwise
Aluington Wood in the said Information specified the aforesaid 21th. day of
February in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 32th.
and from the said 21th. day of February until the aforesaid day of exhibiting
of the said Information, that is to say, the 27th day of June in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen the 37th and of the taking of the Issues
and Profits thereof for that time arising. It is granted by the Barons, that
the aforesaid Richard Bushopp, as to the aforesaid Entry, Intrusion, and
Ingresse by him above supposed to be done in the aforesaid Wood called Alton,
otherwise Aluington Wood in the Information specified the aforesaid 21th. day
of February in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the
32th. and from the said 21th. day of February until the aforesaid day of the
exhibiting of the said Information, that is to say, the 20th. day of June, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady Queen the 37th. and as to the taking of
the Issues and Profits thereof for that time arising, go thereof at present,
without day, saving always the right of the Queen if at another time, etc. And
as to the trial of the Issue aforesaid above joined by the Country to be tried,
it is commanded to the Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Worcester as at
first, that he do not omit, etc. And that he cause to come here from the day of
Easter in 15 days 12, etc. And the same day is given here to the aforesaid
Richard Bushopp: At which day, the said Richard Bushopp come hereas at first,
and the afores. Attorney General of the said Lady the Queen that now is, who for
the said Lady the Queen prosecutes, present here in Court at the same day in
his proper person, and by the Barons being spoken to and asked, If he against
the said Richard Bushopp for the trial of the aforesaid Issue above by the
Country would farther prosecute; said that No; upon which, the premises being
seen by the Barons here, and mature deliberation being had amongst them
thereof, it is granted, by the said Barons, that the aforesaid Richard Bushopp
as to the trial of the said Issue, go without day at present, saving always to
the Queen her Action If at another time, etc. And afterward, that is to say,
the 11th. day of April in the year of the said Lady Queen that now is the 39th,
the said Lady the Queen sent here her writ under the great Seal of England to
the Tresurer and Barons of this Court of Exchequer directed, the Tenor of which
follows in these words. ss. Elizabeth, by the grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland Queen, defender of the Faith, etc. To the Tresurer
and Barons of her Exchequer Greeting: Because in the Record and process; and
also in giving of Judgment in the plaint which was in our Court before you the
aforesaid Barons of our Exchequer aforesaid, in the years of our Reign the
37th. By Bil between us and Richard Bushopp, of certain trespasses and
intrusions, in certain of our Woods with the appurtenances called Alton,
otherwise Aluington Woods, containing by estimation, 3000 Acres of Wood,
manifest Error has entervened to our great damage. And whereas in the statute
in the Parliament of the Lord Edward late King of England the 3d. our
progenitor, at Westminster, and in the year of his Reign the 31th. holden,
made, amongst other things, It is agreed and established, that in all cases the
King or other persons touching where any one complains of Error made in the
process in the Exhequer, The Chancellor and Tresurer cause to come before them
in some Chamber of Counsel nigh to the Exchequer the Record of the process of
the same out of the Exchequer, and taking to them the Justices and such like
sages, as to them shall seem fit to be taken, They cause to be called before
them the Barons of the Exchequer aforesaid, to hear their Informations, and the
causes of their Judgment, and the business thereupon to be duly examined. And
if any Error was found, the same to be corrected and the Rolls to be amended,
and afterward them in the said Exchequer to do execution thereof to be
remitted as belongs, as in the said Statute it is contained: We therefore
willing, Errors if any such were, according to the form of the statute
aforesaid to be corrected, and speedy Justice to be done in that behalf,
Command you that if Judgment thereof be given then the Record and process
aforesaid with alll things concerning the same, before our beloved and faithful
Counselor Tho. Egerton Knight. keeper of our great Seal of England, and how the
aforesaid Tresurer in the Council Chamber next to the Enchequer aforesaid
called the Council Chamber, upon Tuesday, that is to say, the 21th. day of the
month of April, you cause to come. And to the same Keeper of our great Seal,
and you the aforesaid Tresurer, the Record being seen and examined, and the
process aforesaid, and your informations being heard, and you the aforesaid
Barons further in this part with the Council of the Justices and other sages
aforesaid Cause to be done, what of right and according to the form of the
Statute was to be done. Witness my self at Westminster the 11th. day of April
in the year of our Reign the 39th. Symons. At the said 29th. day of the said
Month of April, the aforesaid Worthy Man Thomas Egerton Knight. Keeper of the
great Seal of England, and William Lord Burghley Lord Tresurer of England,
caused to come before them the Record aforesaid, in the aforesaid Chamber next
to the Exchequer aforesaid, called the Council Chamber, and at the said day and
place came before the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer, the
aforesaid Atorney General of the Lady the Queen, and for the said Lady the
Queen said, that in the Record and process aforesaid, and in the giving of the
Judgment aforesaid of and upon the aforesaid demurrer in Law it is diversely
Erred, that is to say, that the aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his plea in bar
of the information aforesaid pleaded does suppose, that the aforesaid late King
Henry the 7th. was seized of the reversion of the manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. As of Fee and Right in the right of his Crown of
England by color of the Attainder of the aforesaid Edward late Earl of
Warwick, and by the force of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, in the year of
the Reign of the said late King the 19th. in the Bar aforesaid mentioned, by
which Act it was enacted, that the aforesaid Edward late Earl should forfeit to
the said late King all his Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
whereas, the aforesaid late King by virtue of the Attainder and Act of
Parliament aforesaid as before is said made, could not be seized of the
Reversion aforesaid, before inquisition thereof taken, and of record remaining,
by which it should be sound, that the aforesaid Earl at the time of the treason
aforesaid by him committed, or ever after was seized of the said Reversion, as
of Fee and right, and in this, that the aforesaid Richard does suppose, that
the aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. dyed seized of that Reversion, and that
the said Reversion descended to the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. as Son
and Heir of the aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. Whereas in fact the said
Reversion did not descend to the said late King Henry the 8th. nor by the Laws
of this Kingdom, could descend before the Inquisition thereof for the aforesaid
late King Henry the 7th. thereof to be found and of Record to remain. And in
this, that the said Richard Bushopp supposes that by a certain Inquisition
taken at the Castle of Worcester the 5th. day of July in the year of the Reign
of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th the 23th. before Roger VVinter Esquire
then Escheator of the said late King in the said County, by virt^e of his
office, It was found that the aforesaid Edward late Earl of Warwick, was
seized of the Reversion of the Manor aforesaid, as of Fee and Right, and so
thereof being seized, the aforesaid Act in the aforesaid Parliament of the
aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. in the 19th. year of his Reign aforesaid,
was made in Manner and form aforesaid and that by Color of the said Act of
Parliament aforesaid, the late King Henry the 7th. was seized of the Reversion
aforesaid, as by the Inquisition aforesaid in the Court of Chancery of the said
Lady the Queen at Westminster in due manner reserved and here of Record
remaining, more fully appears. Whereas every Inquisition taken upon
whatsoever Attainder of High Treason, taken before the Escheator, by virtue of
his Office ought to be returned into the Court of the Kings Exchequer, and
there ought to be filed, and not in the Court of Chancery. And if in the Court
of Exchequer returned, and there of Record it be not filed, then the said
Inquisition is void, and of no force in Law. And in this, That whereas the
aforesaid Richard Bushopp supposes, That the aforesaid late King Henry the
8th. the 3d. day of November, in the year of his Reign the 23th. by his Letters
Patents under his great Seal of England sealed, bearing date the same day and
year, reciting, That whereas the said late King, the 12th. day of October, in
the 12th. year of his Reign, had given, and granted, to the abovesaid Walter
Walshe, the Manor of Grafton Fleuard with the appurtenances, for the Term of
the life of the said Walter, and whereas, the same late King, the 6th. day of
December, in the year of his Reign the 21th. by other his Letters Patents, had
given, and granted, to the abovesaid Walter, and to one Elizabeth then his
Wife, The aforesaid Manor of Charleton with the appurtenances, in the said
County of Somerset, To have, and to hold, to the said Walter and Elizabeth,
and the longer liver of them, The late King Henry the 8th. for that, that the
said Walter, the aforesaid Letters Patents, to him of the aforesaid Manor of
Grafton Fleuard, and the said Walter, and the aforesaid Elizabeth, the said
Letters Patents to them of the aforesaid Manor of Charleton, in form aforesaid
made, to the said late King Henry the 8th. in his Chancery had delivered up
there to be cancelled; By the said letters patents, gave and granted to the
abovesaid Walter and Elizabeth, the aforesaid Manor of Abotesly with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. to have and to hold to them the said Walter and
Elizabeth, and to the heirs males of the body of the said Walter begotten:
And the aforesaid Richard Bushopp in his plea aforesaid has not showed in
fact, that the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. by his letters patents had
given and granted to the aforesaid Walter and Elizabeth the aforesaid Manor
of Charleton with the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the said Walter
and Elizabeth for the Term of the longest liver of them, as by the Law he ought
to have showed, and because expressly it is not showed in the said plea, that
the same grants were made, but only by way of recital, The aforesaid
Consideration in the aforesaid Letters Patents of the aforesaid late King Henry
the 8th. in the year of his Reign the 23th. aforesaid made, are void and
insufficient in Law, And the said late King, in his grant aforesaid, by reason
thereof was deceived. And in this, That the aforesaid Richard, in his Plea
aforesaid allegeth, that the aforesaid Walter and Elizabeth, the said Letters
Patents to them of the aforesaid Manor of Charleton, made in the Chancery of
the said late King Henry the 8th. had surrendered and procured to be cancelled,
By which the Estate of the said Walter and Elizabeth, of and in that Manor
was determined; Whereas, by the Law of the Land, the estate of the said
Elizabeth, then being under Covert Baron by the surrendering and cancelling of
the said Letters Patents was not determined, or surrendered up. And upon this,
That whereas, the aforesaid Richard Bushopp in his pleading alleged, That by
the aforesaid Act of Parliament of the said late King Henry the 8th. the 8th.
day of June, in the 28th. year of his Reign made, it was Enacted, That the said
late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs, and Successors should have, hold, and enjoy
all and singular the Manors aforesaid, with the appurtenances in Fee simple,
saving always to all person and persons, Bodies politic and Corporate, their
Heirs and Successors, and to the Heirs and Successors of every of them, other
than to the aforesaid late Countess of Warwick, and her Heirs, and the Heirs of
the said Richard late Earl of Warwick, Brother of the said late Countess, all
such Rights, Titles, Uses, Interests, Term of years, demise, demises, Entries,
Actions, Grants, and Conditions, which he, or any of their Heir, or the Heirs,
or Successors of any of them have or had, or might to have, or ought to have
had, if the said Act of Parliament had never been made, any thing in the said
Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And the aforesaid Richard Bushopp
in his Plea aforesaid, does not allege in fact, That the aforesaid Ann, now
Countess of Warwick, in whose Right, and as Servant of which Countess, the said
Richard makes Justification of the Trespass, and Intrusion aforesaid, was not
Heir of the said Richard late Earl of Warwick, as by the Law of the Land it
ought to be showed; and in this, that by the said Act of the 28th. abovesaid,
The aforesaid Manor of Abbottesley with the appurtenances, whereof etc. was
given by express words, to the said late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs and
Successors, and thereof the said Saving in the same Act mentioned, is repugnant
and void, to reserve any right in that Manor to any other person, and
therefore the aforesaid Walter Walshe, and Elizabeth his wife, to have or claim
any right or estate of, or in the said Manor, by force of the said Act of
Parliament are barred. And in this, That whereas, the aforesaid Plea of the
said Richard Bushopp above in Bar pleaded, is insufficient in Law to
discharge, or excuse him the said Richard, of the Trespass, intrusion, and
ingress aforesaid, upon which Plea the aforesaid Attorney, of the said Lady the
Queen had demurred in Law, and demanded Judgment there for the said Lady the
Queen, yet that notwithstanding, it is adjudged by the Barons, That the Plea of
the said Richard is sufficient in Law, him the said Richard of the Entry and
Intrusion into the aforesaid Wood called Alton-wood, otherwise Aluing^on-wood,
the aforesaid first day of February, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 32th, and from the same day, until the exhibiting of
the Information aforesaid, and of the taking of the issues and profits thereof
by that time to discharge. And so the same Attorney General for the said Lady
the Queen says, That in the Record, and process aforesaid, and in the giving
of the Judgment aforesaid, it is manifestly erred. And thereupon, the said
Attorney of the said Lady the Queen, for the said Lady the Queen prays, That
the Judgment aforesaid for those Errors, and others in the Record and Process
aforesaid be revoked, annulled, and be had for nothing. And also a Writ to warn
the aforesaid Richard Bushopp to be here before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, at a certain day, to hear the Record
and Process aforesaid, as also the aforesaid Errors which he the said Attorney
General of the said Lady the Queen that now is there alleged, and it is granted
unto him; And it is commanded to the Sherif of the said County of Worcester,
That by good and lawful men of his Balywick, he give warning to the said
Richard Bushop, that he before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
the Lord Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, upon Tuesday, falling the 26th.
day of the said Month of April, to hear in form aforesaid if, etc. And
further, etc. that to the Court, etc. At which day, the same Sherif, that is to
say, Edward Harwell Esquire, returned the Writ aforesaid, and sent that the
said Writ was so late delivered unto him, that for the shortness of the time
he could not execute it, Yet the aforesaid Richard Bushop, before the aforesaid
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, at the same day comes
into the Chamber aforesaid, by Arthur Salway his Attorney, and demands the
hearing of the Record, and of the Process, as also of the aforesaid Errors,
and they are read unto him. Which being read and heard, The said Richard says,
That in the Record and Process aforesaid, and in the giving of the Judgment
aforesaid, it is in nothing erred, and prays, That the aforesaid Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, do proceed as well to the Examination
of the Record and Process, as to the aforesaid matters for Errors alleged,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, And the aforesaid Attorney of
the said Lady the Queen says as above, and prays likewise, etc. And because
the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurey, will avise
themselves of and upon the premises before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given here to the abovesaid Richard Bushop, in the Chamber aforesaid,
until the next day after Tuesday, falling the 3d. day of May, to hear their
Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, into the Chamber aforesaid, the said
Richard Bushop, comes by his Attorney aforesaid, And because the aforesaid Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, are not yet avised of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises, further day is given to the abovesaid
Richard Bushop, in the Chamber aforesaid, until the first Tuesday, following
the Term of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which
day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord
Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his
Attorney aforesaid, And because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
the Lord Treasurer, are not yet avised of giving their Judgment of and upon
the premises, further day is given to the abovesaid Richard Bushop, in the
Chamber aforesaid, until the second Tuesday, in the Term of Michael next
coming, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, the aforesaid Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid did not
come, But John Popham Knight, and Edward Anderson Knight, Chief Justices of
each Bench come at the same day, and then are there present, according to the
form of the Statute in such case made, And the aforesaid, Richard Bushop, in
the Chamber aforesaid, comes by his Attorney aforesaid, before the said
Justices, And the aforesaid Business, and Suit of Errors, by the said Justices
is adjorned and continued, by virtue of the said Statute until Tuesday next,
And the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, to hear their
Judgment thereon, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and Lord Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid
Richard Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid, And because the aforesaid Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, and Lord Treasurer, are not yet avised of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises, further day is given to the aforesaid
Richard Bushopp, in the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday, falling the 8th of
November following, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before
the aforesaid Lord Treasurer, and the aforesaid Chief Justices, present in the
Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his Attorney
aforesaid, and because for the absence for the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, in the aforesaid Business and Suit of Error, it cannot be
proceeded, the same cause is continued and adjorned by them, the Lord
Treasurer, and Chief Justices, by virtue of the Act aforesaid made, until
Tuesday, falling the 22th. day of November then next following, in the Chamber
aforesaid, And the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the
same Chamber, to hear his Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the aforesaid Justices, in the
Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his Attorney
aforesaid, and the aforesaid Lord Treasurer, there then not coming, the
Business and Suit of Errors aforesaid, is continued and adjorned by them, the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Chief Justices, by virtue of the
aforesaid Act thereof made, until the second Tuesday, in the Term of St.
Hillary then next following, and the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard
Bushop, in the Chamber aforesaid, to hear their Judgment thereof. At which day
the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, came not
in the Chamber aforesaid, but the aforesaid Chief Justices of each Bench, came
into the same Chamber, and are there present, And the aforesaid Richard Bushop,
at the same day in the Chamber aforesaid, before the said Justices, likewise
comes by his Attorney aforesaid, and the aforesaid Business and Suit of Errors
is continued and adjorned further, by virtue of the Statute aforesaid thereof
made, until the first Tuesday in the Term of Easter next following, And the
same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushopp, in the Chamber aforesaid,
to hear their Judgment, etc. At which day before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, and the aforesaid Chief Justices, comes here the aforesaid
Richard Bushop, in the Chamber aforesaid, by his Attorney aforesaid, and the
said Lord Treasurer then and there not coming, the aforesaid Business and Suit
of Errors is continued and adjorned, by the Statute aforesaid thereof made,
further until the last Tuesday of the aforesaid Term of Easter, in the Chamber
aforesaid, and the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the
Chamber aforesa. to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, the
aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer aforesaid, come
not; But the aforesaid Chief Justices come into the same Chamber, and are there
present; And the aforesaid Richard Bushop, likewise comes by his Attorney
aforesaid, and the aforesaid Business and Suit of Errors by them is continued
and adjorned, further by virtue of the Statute aforesaid thereof made, until
the first Tuesday in the Term of the Holy Trinity then next following, and the
same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the Chamber aforesaid, to
hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the Chief Justices, in
the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his Attorney
aforesaid, and because, the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the
Lord Treasurer, then and there come not, the aforesaid Business and Suit of
Erors, is continued and adjorned, according to the form of the Statute thereof
made, further until Tuesday the 4th. day of July, in the same Term of the Holy
Trinity, and the same day is given to the aforesaid Ric. Bushop, in the Chamber
aforesaid, to hear his Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Chief Justices, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Ric
Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and Lord Treasurer come not, therefore the aforesaid Business and
Suit of Errors is continued and adjorned, according to the form of the Statute
aforesaid, further until the third Tuesday, in the Term of St. Michael next
following, and the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the
Chamber afores. to hear their Judgment, thereof etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Chief Justices, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid
Richard Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid, And because the aforesaid Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer come not, therefore the aforesaid
Business and Suit of Errors is continued and adjorned, by virtue of the Statute
aforesaid thereof made, further until the 21th. day of November, in the same
Term of St. Michael, and the same day is given to th aforesaid Richard Bushop,
in the Chamber aforesa. to hear their judgment thereof, etc. ^At which day,
before the aforesaid Chief Justices, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the
aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid, And because the aforesaid
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Treasurer come not, therefore the
aforesaid Business and Suit of Errors is adjorned and continued, according to
the form of the Statute aforesaid, until the second Tuesday of the Term of St.
Hillary next following, And the same day is given to the afores. Rich. Bushop,
to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Chief
Justices, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his
Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
Lord Treasurer come not, therefore the aforesaid Business and Suit of Errors is
continued and adjorned, by virtue of the Statute aforesaid thereof made,
further until the first Tuesday in the Term of Easter then next following, and
the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the Chamber
aforesaid, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Chief Justices, in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid
Richard Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Lord Keeper
of the great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, come not, therefore the Business and
Suit of Errors aforesaid, until the first Tuesday, in the Term of the Holy
Trinity next following, And the same day is given to the aforesaid Richard
Bushop, in the Chamber afores. to hear their Judgment thereof. At which day
before the aforesaid Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
Thomas Lord Buckherst, now Lord Treasurer of England, in the Chamber aforesaid,
comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by his Attorney aforesaid And the aforesaid
Attorney of the Lady the Queen, for the said Lady the Queen, as at first
prays, etc. And because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord
Treasurer, will further avise of giving their Judgment of and upon the
premises, before, etc. Further day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in
the Chamber aforesaid, until the second Tuesday in the term of St. Michael then
next following, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which day, before the
aforesaid Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber
aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his Attorney aforesaid, and
because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Tresurer are not
avised yet of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, day further is
given to the aforesaid Richard Bushopp in the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday
the 23th. day of October, the same Term of St Michael, to hear their Judgment
thereof, etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and the Lord Tresurer in the Chamber aforesaid, comes the aforesaid Richard
Bushop by his Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and Lord Tresurer are not yet avised of giving their Judgment of
and upon the premises, day further is given to the aforesaid Richard bushopp in
the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday the 30th. day of the said Month of
October, the same Term of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc.
At which day the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Tresurer, do
not come in the Chamber aforesaid, but the aforesaid Chief Justices in the
Chamber aforesaid come, and the aforesaid Richard Bushopp at the same day, in
the same Chamber, and before the same Justices, likewise comes by his Attorney
aforesaid: And the aforesaid business and suit of Errors is continued and
adjorned by virtue of the Statute aforesaid thereof made, further until
Tuesday the 6th day of November the same Term of Saint Michael, and the same
day is given unto aforesaid Richard Bushopp to hear their Judgment thereof.
etc. At which day neither the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the great Seal, nor Lord
Tresurer, nor the aforesaid Chief Justices come unto the Chamber aforesaid,
Afterward, the said Lady the Queen that now is sent here, another her writ
close under her Great Seal, out of her Court of Chancerie, to the Tresurer and
Barons of this Exchepuer directed, the Tenor of which writ follows in these
words. ss. Elizabeth, by the Grace of God of England, France and Ireland Queen,
defender of the faith, etc. To the Tresurer and her Barons of her Exchequor
Greeting, Because in the Record and Process, and because of giving of Judgment
in the plaint, which was in our Court before you the aforesaid Barons of our
Exchequer aforesaid, in the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the year of our Reign
the 37th. by Bill between us, and Richard Bushopp, of certain Trespass and
Intrusion in certain Woods with the appurtenances called Alton, otherwise
Aluington Wood, containing by estimation 3000 Acres of Wood in Alton, otherwise
Aluington and Rock in our County of Worcestor, manifest Error intervened to our
great damage; and because in the Statute in the Parliament of the Lord Edward
late King of England the 3d. our Progenitor at Westminster, in the 31th. year
of his Reign holden, made, amongst other things it is agreed unto, and
established, that in all cases the King or other persons concerning, where any
one complains of Error done in process in the Exchequer, the Chancellor and
Tresurer cause to come before them in some Chamber of Council nigh unto the
Exchequer, the same Record and process out of the said Exchequer, and taking to
them the Justices and other sages, such as to them they shall seem to be taken,
to call before them the Barons of the Exchequer aforesaid, to hear their
Informations and the causes of their Judgment, and upon this business duly
cause to be examined, and if any Error should be found, the same cause to be
mended and the Rolls amended, and after them into the Exchequer to do execution
thereof, to be sent back as belongs, as in the said Statute it is contained,
We therefore willing, Error, if any such were according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid to be corrected, and full and speedy Justice to be done, in
his behalf command you, that if Judgment be thereof given, then the Record and
Process, aforesaid with all things touching the same before our beloved and
faitfull Councellor Thomas Egerton Knight Keeper of our Great Seal of England,
and you, you the aforesaid Tresurer, in the Chamber of Council, nigh the
Exchequer aforesaid, called the Council Chamber, upon Tuesday, that is to say,
the 15th. day of February next coming, cause to come, that the same Keeper of
our Great Seal and you the aforesaid Tresurer the Record aforesaid seeing and
the process aforesaid, and hearing your Informations, you the aforesaid Barons
cause to be done, what of right according to the form of the statute aforesaid
was to be done. Witness my self at Westminster the 29th. day of January in the
year of the Reign the 42th. Symons. And at the aforesaid 5th. day of February,
in the aforesaid Writ mentioned, The aforesaid Thomas Egerton Knight, Keeper of
the Great Seal of England, and Thomas Lord Buckhurst, Lord Tresurer of England,
caused to come before them the Record aforesaid, in the aforesaid Chamber, nigh
the Exchequer aforesaid, called the Council Chamber, And at the same day and
place, come before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord
Tresurer, the aforesaid Attorney of the Lady the Queen, and for the said Lady
the Queen says, That in the Record and process, and also in the giving of the
Judgment aforesaid, It is diversely erred in manner and form, as by the
aforesaid Articles of Errors by him first alleged and assigned, above it is
alleged. And for the said Lady the Queen, prays another Writ of the Lady the
Queen, to warn the aforesaid Richard Bushopp, to be before the aforesaid Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer, at a certain day to hear the
Record and Process aforesaid, and also the Errors aforesaid, etc. and it is
granted unto him. And it is commanded to the Sherif of the County of Worcester,
That by good and lawful men of his Balywick, he warn the said Richard Bushopp
that he be before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord
Treasurer, in the Chamber aforesaid at Westminster, the first Tuesday in the
Term of Easter next following, to hear the Record and Process aforesaid, as
also the Errors aforesaid above alleged, and further, etc. What to the Court,
etc. At which day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper, and Lord Tresurer in the
Chamber aforesaid, the Sherif of the County of Worcester aforesaid, that is to
say, William Child Esquire, Returned the Writ aforesaid endorced thus. ss. By
virtue of this Writ to me directed, I gave warning to the aforesaid Richard
Bushopp, by John Jolley, John Harris, Thomas Penington, and John Wemb, good and
lawful men of my Balywick, to be before the said Keeper of the Great Seal, at
the day and place within contained, as within to me is commanded. And upon
this, the aforesaid Richard Bushop, by Arthur Salway his Attorney, at the same
day in the Chamber aforesaid, likewise comes, and demands the hearing of the
Record and Process, as also of the Errors aforesaid, and they are read unto
him, etc. Which being read and heard, the said Richard says, That in the
Record and process aforesaid, in nothing it is erred, And prays, That the
aforesaid Lord proceed to the Examination as well of the Record and Process
aforesaid, as of the business aforesaid for Errors by the said Attorney of the
said Lady the Queen above alleged, according to the form of the aforesaid
Statute thereof made: And the aforesaid Attorney of the Lady the Queen, for the
said Lady the Queen says as before he had said and prays likewise, etc. And
because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer,
will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment thereof, day is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushop, in the Chamber
aforesaid, until Tuesday next, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. At which
day, before the said Lord Keeper, and Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber aforesaid
at Westminster, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushop by his Attorney aforesaid,
And because the aforesaid Lord Keeper, and Lord Tresurer, are not yet avised of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, further day is given to the
aforesaid Richard Bushopp before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and the Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday, to hear their
Judgment thereof, etc. At which day before the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and the Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster, comes the
aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid
Lord Keeper and Lord Tresurer are not yet a vised of the giving of their
Judgment of and upon the premises, further day is given to the aforesaid
Richard Bushopp, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the
Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, until the first Tuesday in the Term of
Holy Trinity then next coming to hear Judgment thereof, At which day, before
the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the Lord Tresurer, in the
Chamber aforesaid at Westminster, comes the aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his
Attorney aforesaid, and because the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
Lord Tresurer, are not yet avised of giving their Judgment of and upon the
premises, day further is given to the aforesaid Richard Bushopp, before the
aforesaid Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber
aforesaid, until Tuesday, the third day of June the same Term of Holy Trinity,
to hear Judgment thereof, At which day, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and Lord Tresurer, in the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster, comes
the aforesaid Richard Bushopp by his Attorney aforesaid, And because the
aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord Tresurer are not yet avised
of giving their Judgment of and upon the Premises, day further is given to the
aforesaid Richard Bushopp, before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and the Lord Tresurer in, the Chamber aforesaid, until Tuesday the 10th. day of
June, next the same Term of the Holy Trinity, to hear their their Judgment
thereof, At which day before the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
the Lord Tresurer in the Chamber aforesaid, at Westminster comes Rchard
Bushopp, by his Attorney aforesaid, And upon this the premises being seen, by
the aforesaid Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the aforesaid
Tresurer, and mature deliberation thereof amongst them being had, and taking to
them the aforesaid John Popham Knight, Chief Justice of the said Lady the Queen
for Pleas, before the Queen her self to be holden assigned, and Edmond Anderson
Knight, Chief Justice of the said Lady the Queen, of the Bench, as also of
Francis Gaudy, one of the Justices to Pleas, before the aforesaid Lady the
Queen to be holden assigned, and calling before them the Barons of the
Exchequer aforesaid, and the reasons of the Judgment aforesaid of the said
Barons being heard, Because it seems to the aforesaid Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and to the aforesaid Tresurer with the Counsel of the Justices
aforesaid, That in the Record and Process aforesaid, and also in the giving of
the Judgment aforesaid, it is manifestly erred, Therefore it is granted by the
said Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the aforesaid Tresurer, That the
Judgment aforesaid be conversed and annulled, And that the aforesaid Richard
Bushopp, of the Entry, Intrusion, Trespass and Contempt aforesaid be
convicted, And that the aforesaid Richard Bushopp be amoved from the possession
of the premises; And be Attached by his Body wheresoever, etc. To make fine
with the Lady the Queen for the aforesaid his Trespass and Contempt, whereof in
form aforesaid he is convicted. And that the Record aforesaid be sent back into
the Exchequer aforesaid, for the Execution thereof for the aforesaid Lady the Q.
to be done, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid thereof made,
Therefore it is agreed by the Barons here, That the Writ of the Lady the Queen
that now is, issue forth out of the Court here, to amove the aforesaid Richard
Bushopp from the possession of the premises aforesaid, And to attach the
aforesaid Richard by his body wheresoever, etc. to make fine for the Trespass
aforesaid, and contempt, whereof in form abovesaid he is convicted, retorneable
here in 8 days of Saint Michael; and it is commanded to the said Sheriff of
the said County of Worcester, that him the said Richard he amove and attach in
the form aforesaid.

Monstrans de Droit, C. 1. part. Digges Case, fo. 157. a.
England ss. Memorandum, That Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, Tuesday next after 8. days of St. Hillary this Term, before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster, by his own proper Hands delivered here into
Court a certain Record before the Lady the Queen in her Chancery had in these
words,

Pleas, before the Lady the Queen in her Chancery at Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex, of the Term of Easter, in the veer of the Reign of our said Lady
Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland Queen, defender
of the Faith, etc. the 40th.

THe Lady the Queen that now is sent her writ closed, to the Sheriff of Sussex
directed in these words: Elizabeth by the grace of God of England France and
Ireland Queen defender of the faith, etc. To the Sheriff of Sussex greeting,
etc Whereas by a certain inqusition Inacted, taken at Dartford in our County of
Kent, the 8th. day of November, in the year of our Reign the 35th, before
Edward Fenuer one of our Justices to pleas, before us to be holden assigned,
William Sydley, Justinian Champnes, Edward Cook Esquiers, and William Kneaplock
Gent. Deputy of our Escheator of our County aforesaid by virtue of our
Commission to them and others in that behalf directed, to enquire after the
death of Thomas Digges Esquire by the Oaths of good and lawful men of the
County aforesaid (amongst other things) It is found, that the aforesaid Thomas
Digges in the same commission named, was seized in his demesne as of Fee
(amongst other things) of and in the Manor of Owtelmestone, with the
appurtenances, and in all Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances to the
same belonging and appertaining, lying and being in the said County of Kent,
and of 110 Acres of Land, Meadow, Pasture and Wood, with the appurtenances,
called Estendown and Beacondown, lying and being in Barham and Kingstone in the
said County of Kent, and of and in the Manor of Yoke and Yokes Court and
Fokeham, and in all Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the said
Manors belonging and appertaining, lying and being in the said county of Kent,
and of 40 Acres of Land Wood and Pasture called Throuhgly Close and Tyllers in
Barham aforesaid, which late were purchased of William Boys Gentleman by way
of Exchange, and of 2 Acres of Land and Wood lying and being in Wemingswold in
the aforesaid County; and farther by the Inquisition aforesaid it is found,
that Thomas Arch. Bishopp of Canterbury being seized in his demesne as of Fee as
in the right of his Arch Bishopric of Canterbery aforesaid, of and in the
Manor of Bishopps Born with the appurtenances in the said County of Kent, by an
Act of Parliament at Westminster in the County of Middlesex in the year of the
Reign of Henry late King of England the 8th. the 34th, made and provided
(amongst other things) it is enacted and established, that one Thomas Culpeper
Esquire. should have hold and enjoy by authority of the said Act aforesaid, to him
and his heirs of the body of him the said Thomas, of the body of one
Elizabeth sometimes his wise deceased lawfully begotten, and for default of such
issue, the remainder thereof to the Heirs of the body of the aforesaid
Elizabeth, and for default of such issue, the remainder thereof to the right
Heirs of one William Hante for ever, the aforesaid Manor of Bushops born with
the appurtenances, in the said County of Kent, and then parcel of the
possessions of the said Archbishop, to hold the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances (amongst other things) of the aforesaid Lord the King his Heirs
and Successors in Capite by the 20th part of a Knights Fee, and the Rent of 38
shillings by the year. By virtue of which Act of Parliament the said Thomas
Culpeper entered into the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances and was thereof
seized as the ^aw required; and so being thereof seized, the same Thomas
Culpeper by sufficient conveyance and assurance in Law, conveyed and assured
the aforesaid Manor of Bishopsborn with the appurtenances to one Anthony Awcher
Knight, to have and to hold to him and his heirs, By virtue of which, the said
Anthony Awcher Knight in the aforesaid Manor of Bishopsborn with the
appurtenances entered, and was there* of seized in his demesne as of Fee, the
estate of which Anthony Awcher of and in two parcels of Land and Wood with the
appurtenances called the Haute and Reed, containing by estimation 60 Acres of
Land, late were purchased by Christopher Digges Father of the aforesaid Thomas
Digges in the said Commission named, lying and being in Barham aforesaid, and
in Bourn, of which he died seized, the said Thomas Digges was of the aforesaid
parcels of Land and Wood with the appurtenances seized in his demesne as of Fee,
which parcel of Land and Wood with the appurtenances called the Haute and Reed
at the time of the making and ordeyning of the said Act of Parliament and time
whereof the memory of men is not to the contrary, were parcel of the said Manor
of Bishopsborn and the said Tho. Digges of the Manors, Lands, and Tenements,
and other the premises aforesaid, with the appurtenances as before is said,
being seized, dyed thereof so seized; And farther by the same Inquisition it is
found, that the Manor of Yoke otherwise Yokes Court aforesaid, the
appurtenances in Lenham and Frensted in the said County of Kent at the time of
the taking of the Inquisition aforesaid, and at the time of the death of the
aforesaid Thomas Digges, were holden of Warham St-leger Knight as of his Castle
of Leeds by the half of a Knights Fee, and were worth by the year in all
reprofits above reprises 5 pound 14 shillings. And that the Manor of Fokeham,
and other the premises to the said Manor belonging in Framsted and Lenham, at
the said time of the taking of the said Inquisition, and at the time of the
death of the said Thomas Digges, of whom or by what services the Jurors of the
same Inquisition were altogether ignorant, and they were worth by the year in
all the profits, above reprises 7 pound. And that the aforesaid Manor of
Outlemestone and other the aforesaid premises whatsoever with the appurtenances
to the said Manor belonging and appertaining, at the time of the taking of the
said Inquisition aforesaid, and at the time of the death of the said Thomas
Digges, were worth by the year in all the profits above reprises 20 pound, and
that the said Land called Eastendown, and Beacondown in Burham and Kingstone
aforesaid were holden of the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, in the right of his
Bishopric aforesaid, but by what services the aforesaid Jurors are altogether
ignorant, and they were worth by the year above reprizes 3 pound 6 shillings 8
pence, and that the aforesaid Lands called the Haute and Reed, late percel of
the aforesaid Manor of Bishopsborne and purchased by the aforesaid Christopher
Digges of the aforesaid William Awcher Esquire, were holden of the said Lady
the Queen in Capite by Knights service, that is to say, by particular,
according to the rate and quantity of the said Manor of Bishopsborn; and that
the said Lands and Pasture called Thoroughly Close and Tylers in Barham
aforesaid, late purchased by the aforesaid Christopher Digges, by way of
Exchange of William Boys, of who or whom, or by what services they were
holden, the Jurors aforesaid are altogether ignorant; and that the aforesaid
Land and Woods called Haute and Reed, and the aforesaid Land, Wood and Pasture
purchased of the aforesaid William Boys were worth by the year above reprises
4 pound. And that the aforesaid 2 Acres of Land in Wemings Woold aforesaid,
were holden of who or whom, or by what services the aforesaid Jurors were
altoge-Ignorant, and they were worth by the year above reprises 2 shillings,
and that the said Thomas Digges had not nor had more or other Lands and
Tenements in the said County of Kent in demesne or service of us nor of any
other, the aforesaid dayin which he dyed, and that the aforesaid Tho. Digges
dyed the 10th. day of April in the year of our Reign the 32th. leaving the said
Margaret his wife with. child with Tho. Posthumus Digges. And that the said
Thomas Posthumus Diggs born the second day of July in the 32 year aforesaid was
Son and Heir of the said Thomas Digges, and that the said Thomas Posthumus
Digges the Son at the time of the taking of the Inquisition aforesaid, was of
the age of 2 years 9 weeks and 6 days, as by the Inquisition aforesaid in our
Chancery returned and in the Files there remaining of Record, it more fully
appears: And whereas afterward, that is to say, the 23th day of January in
the Term of Saint Hillary in the year of our Reign the 39th before us in our
Chancery aforesaid, at Westminster aforesaid then being, came Christopher
Digges and Edward Digges, Sons of the said Christopher Digges in the
Inquisition aforesaid named, and prayed the hearing of the Inquisition
aforesaid, which was read unto them, which being read and heard, and by them
fully understood, the said Christopher and Edward, complained them by color of
the said Inquisition aforesaid to be grieved and molested, and that they from
the possession of the said Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances to the
said lands called Eastendown, and of two parts of so much of the demesne, and of
the said Manor of Owtelmestone with the appurtenances, to the said Lands called
Eastendown adjoining in 4 parts to be divided, as with the aforesaid Lands
called Eastendown, extend to the third part of all the Manors, Lands and
Tenements, whereof the aforesaid Christopher the Father dyed seized for the
part of the aforesaid Christopher and Edward of the premises aforesaid, to be
expelled and amoved, and that they from the possession thereof, and of every
parcel thereof, by color of the said Inquisition to be held out, and that
unjustly, by cause, they take it by Protestation, That the Inquisition
aforesaid, and the matter in the same contained, was insufficient in Law, to
which they needed not, nor by the Law of the Land were holden any ways to
Answer; And showing of their Right in that behalf, The said Christopher and
Edward said, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges, Father of them the said
Thomas, Christopher and Edward, was in his life time seized in his Demesne as of
Fee, of and in the aforesaid Manor of Owtelmeston in Barham, in the County
aforesaid, and of all and singular the Rights, Members, parcel, and
appurtenaces whatsoever, containing 200 Acres of Land, Meadow, Pasture, and
Wood; And also was seized of and in the aforesaid Manor of Yoke and Fockham,
lying and being in the Parish of Lenham, Frensted, and Harrisham, with his
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, containing 800. Acres of Land,
Meadow, Pasture, and Wood; And of and in the Manor of Marton, lying and being
in the Parishes of Sturrey, Hackington, and Saint Stephen, in the said County,
containing by estimation 40. Acres of Land, Pasture, Meadow, and Wood; And of
diverse Gardens in the City of Canterbury, containing half an Acre of Land; And
of and in the Manor of Netherherds, with the Appurtenances in the County
aforesaid, containing 200. Acres of Land; And also of a certain piece of Land
called Eastendown, lying and being in Barham aforesaid, containing by
Estimation 110. Acres, And of another piece or parcel of Land called Haute and
Reed, lying and being in the Parish of Barham aforesaid, containing 61. Acres
and a half, and in another piece of Land lying in Barham aforesaid, late as
before is said, purchased by Exchange of the aforesaid William Boys,
containing 40. Acres of Lands, which said Manors, Lands, and Tenements, and
other the premises, amount in the whole to 2500. Acres of Lands, and the said
Christopher Digges, the Father, of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances in form aforesaid being seized, The first day of February, in the
year of our Reign the 19th. made his Testament and last Will in Writing, and by
the said Testament and last Will declared and limited, as to the disposition
of the third part of all and singlar the premises, whereof the aforesaid
Christopher Digges, the Father, was before seized, due to us, or to any other
for Wardship, Primer-seisin, Livery, or any other manner, That his last Will
and meaning was to leave, that there might descend all those his Lands and
Tenements, called and known by the name of Eastendown, containing 110. Acres of
Lands, and all those Lands and Tenements, and Heditaments, which the aforesaid
Christopher Digges, the Father, had by descent after the death of Thomas Digges
of Newington, near Sitting^orn Esquire then deseased, And if the Lands and
Tenements as above is said, left to descend, should not be sufficient to
satisfy to us for the 3d. part was due to us, then his Will and meaning was,
That so much of the other of his Lands next adjoining to Eastendown aforesaid
should descend, and should be to his said Son Thomas Digges, as should be
sufficient to satisfy and fulfill to us the third part, And by the said his
Testament, expressly gave and bequeathed the other two parts of the aforesaid
Manors, Lands and Tenements, and other the premises before mentioned, with
their appurtenances whatsoever, to the use of the payment of his Debts, and
maintenance of Martha Digges then his Wife; And that afterward the said
Christopher Digges of all and singular the premises aforesaid, as is before
said, being seized, the 14th. day of the month of March, in the year 1566.
dyed, leaving after him issue Five Sons, then living and in full life being,
that is to say, the said Thomas Digges in the said Commission named, and the
aforesaid Christopher, Edward, Reginald, and John Digges, which said John dyed
in the life of him the said Thomas without issue: And that the said Christopher
and Edward, for further showing of their Right in the premises said, and are
ready to aver, That the aforesaid Christopher their farther, ever in his time
had held or enjoyed, any of the Lands and Tenements by descent of Inheritance
of the said Thomas Digges of Newington aforesaid, By which the third part of
the said Lands and Tenements of him the said Christopher be limited and
appointed to descend to satisfy us for the Wardship of the Heir of the said
Christopher, according to the intent of the same Testament and last Will
remained, to be made and taken out of the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown,
and of other the Lands and Tenements of the same Christopher, to the said Lands
called Eastendown next adjoining: And further, the said Christopher, and
Edward, Sons of the aforesaid Christopher, in Facto said, That the demesne Lands
of the said Manor of Outelmeston, at the time of the death of the said
Christopher, the Father, were next adjoining to the aforesaid Lands called
Eastendown, And that the aforesaid Christopher Digges, the Father, at the time
of his death, had not any Lands or Tenements next situate and adjoining to the
said Lands called Eastendown, than the demesne Lands of the Manor of
Outelmeston, with their Rights and Members, By which the third part by the
aforesaid Testament and last Will, left to descend, ought to be taken out of
the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, and of the demesne Lands of the said
Manor of Outelmeston aforesaid, called Eastendown next adjoining, And also
said, That the aforesaid Manors, Lands and Tenements, whereof the aforesaid
Christopher dyed seized, contained in them 2500. Acres of Lands, And that the
third part of the 2500. Acres of Lands, is 833. Acres of Lands, by which to
make the Lands called Eastendown, a full third part of all the Manors and
Tenements, whereof the said ^hristopher Digges dyed seized, ought to be taken
out of the demesne Lands of the said Manor of Outlemeston, next adjoining to
the said Lands called Eastendown, 733. Acres, Which third part of the Manors
and Lands aforesaid, after the death of the said ^hristopher Digges, Father of
the said Thomas, Christopher, Edward, Reginald, and John, as Sons of the said
Christopher descended, and of Right ought to descend. And that the aforesaid
Lands called Eastendown, as also the aforesaid demesne Lands of the aforesaid
Manor of Outlemeston, are, and time whereof the Memory of Man is not to the
contrary, are and were of the Tenure and nature of Gavelkind, and for all that
time parted and partable between Heirs Males, By which the said Thomas,
Christopher, Edward, Reginald, and John, into the aforesaid Lands called
Eastendown, and so much of the aforesaid demesne Lands of the aforesaid Ma^nor
of Outelmeston aforesaid, called Eastendown next adjoining, as with the
aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, amounted to the third part of all the
aforesaid Ma^nors, Lands and Teneme^ts, whereof the said Christ-Digges
aforesaid dyed seized, entered, and were thereof seized in their demesne as of
Fee in Copercenery; And so thereof being seized, The said John Digges dyed
without issue of his body of his purpart thereof seized: after whose death, the
aforesaid Thom. Christopher, Edward, and Reginald were seized of the aforesaid
Lands called Eastendown, and of so much of the demesne Lands of the aforesaid
Manor of Owtelmestone aforesaid, called Estendown next adjoining, as with the
aforesaid Lands called Eastendown did amount to the third part of all the
aforesaid Manor, Lands and Tenements, whereof the aforesaid Christopher dyed
seized, and were thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee in Copercenerie and
they being thereof so seized, the aforesaid Thomas Digges dyed thereof seized:
and further the said Christopher and Edward said, that afterward the aforesaid
Thomas Digges in the aforesaid Commission named, so thereof as is said of his
purpart of the premises being seized, dyed thereof seized, after whose death
the said Christopher and Edward together with the aforesaid Reginald into the
aforesaid Lands and Tenements being as before is said, of the nature and tenure
of Gavelkind entered, and were by virtue of the said Custom of Gavelkind
thereof Lawfully seized in Copercenerie as of their purparts, until after the
birth of thesaid Thomas Posthumus Digges and by Color of the Inquisition
aforesaid, the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown and the aforesaid Manor of
Owtelmestone amongst other things were totally and wholly seized into our
hands. And the aforesaid Christopher and Edward utterly thereof and of their
aforesaid purparts thereof to them as before is said, due and belonging, they
were amoved and expelled unjustlie; with this, that the said Christopher and
Edward will averr, that the aforesaid Manor of Owtelmestone and the aforesaid
Lands called Eastendown in the aforesaid last Will of the aforesaid Christopher
the father mentioned and left to descend as before is said, are the same Lands
called Eastendown, and the said Manor of Owtelmestone in the Inquisition
aforesaid mentioned, whereof the said Christopher and Edward demand Judgment,
and that our hands from the two parts of the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown,
and so much of the Demesne Lands of the aforesaid Manor of Owtelmestone next
adjoining to the aforesaid Lands called Easten. as do amount to the third part
of the aforesaid Manors and Lands whereof the aforesaid Christopher the father
dyed seized, in 3 parts to be divided, that is to say, of 416 Acres of Lands,
which to them for their purpart by the death of the aforesaid Christopher
Digges their Father by the Custom aforesaid, thereof to them due and belonging,
are, and to them of right descended, and ought to descend, be amoved; and that
they to their said purparts of the premises, together with the Issues and
profits thereof, and of every parcel thereof, from the time of the taking of
the Inquisition aforesaid, and in the mean time received, be restored, etc. And
whereas, we by our letters Patents under our Great Seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster, the 7th. day of September in the year of our Reign the 38th.
have committed to Margaret Digges the late Wife of the aforesaid Thomas Digges,
and now the Wife of Thomas Palmer Esquire, the Wardshipp of the body and the
Marriage of the said Thomas Posthumus Digges, To have, enjoy, and possess the
wardshipp and Marriage of the said Thomas Posthumus Digges, to the said
Margaret, her Executors and assigns, until the said Margaret, her Executors and
assigns, the effect of the Marriage of the said Thomas Posthumus Digges receive,
or have or should receive, or have, By virtue of which the said Thomas Palmer
and Margaret as in the right of the said Margaret are of the Wardship aforesaid
possessed; and because it seems expedient to us that the said Thomas Palmer
and Margaret be warned before it be further proceeded in the said plea, We
command you by good and Lawful men of your Bayliwick you warn the aforesaid
Thomas Palmer and Margaret, that they be here before us in our said Chancery in
16 days of Easter next following wheresoever it then shall be, to Inform us
and our Council wherefore our hands from the aforesaid two parts of the
aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, and so much of the Demesne Lands of the said
Manor of Owtelmestone next adjoining to the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown,
as should amount to the third part of the aforesaid Manors, Lands, and
Tenements whereof the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father dyed seized, in 4
parts to be divided, that is to say, of 416 Acres of Land which to the
aforesaid Christopher and Edward for their purpart after the death of the
Christopher their Father according to the Custom aforesaid thereof to the
aforesaid. Christopher and Edward are due, and belonging, and which to them of
right descended, and ought to descend, be amoved, and that the said Christopher
and Edward, to the said purparts of the said premises together with the Issues
and profits thereof, and each parcel thereof, from the time of the taking of
the Inquisition aforesaid in the mean time received ought not to be restored
according to the said plea and petition of the said Christopher and Edward; and
farther to do and receive which our Court shall consider in this behalf,
Witness my self at Westminster the 23th. day of January in the year of our
Reign the 40th. And have here the names of them by whom you gave warning, and
this writ; And now at this day, that is to say the aforesaid 15. days of
Easter, before the Lady the Queen in her Chancery here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, come the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and
Edward Digges, by John Rotherham their Attorney of themselves, the 4th. day,
against the said Thomas Palmer, and Margaret, of the Plea aforesaid, and George
More Knight, Sherif of the said County of Sussex, before the said Lady the
Queen in her said Chancery, here sent the said Writ executed and returned, that
is to say, that he, by virtue of the said Writ to him directed, the 12th. day
of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
40th. abovesaid, by John Byrstie Gent. and Thomas Wolf Gent. good and lawful
men of his Balywick, gave warning to the said Thomas Palmer and Margaret, to be
here at this day, to in form the said Lady the Queen and her Council, as the
Writ aforesaid in it imports and requires, and as by the said Writ to him it
was commanded: At which day, the said Thomas Palmer and Margaret, before the
aforesaid Lady the Queen, in the said Court here at Westminster aforesaid,
according to the warning aforesaid, to them as before is said given, come
likewise, and pray license with the Queens Council, thereof to imparl before
the said Lady the Queen, in the said Court here, until the Morrow of the Holy
Trinity, then next following, etc. Wheresoever, etc. And then to Answer, etc.
And have it, etc. And the same day is given to the aforesaid Christopher Digges
the Son, and Edward Digges then and there, etc. At which Morrow of the Holy
Trinity, before the said Lady the Queen in the said Court here, that is to say,
at Westminster aforesaid, come as well the aforesaid Christoph^r Digges the Son,
and the said Edward Digges, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer and Margaret, by
their Attorneys aforesaid, And upon this the said Thomas Palmer and Margaret,
pray license further with the Queens Council thereof to i^parl, before the said
Lady the Queen in the said Court here, until 8. days of St. Michael then next
coming, etc. wheresoever, etc. and then to Answer, etc. and have, etc. And the
same day is given to the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward
Digges then and there, etc. At which 8. days of St. Michael, before the
aforesaid Lady the Queen in the said Court here, that is to say, at Westminster
aforesaid, came as well the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward
Digges, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer and Margaret, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and upon this, the said Thomas and Margaret pray the hearing of the
Writ aforesaid, and it is read unto them, etc. Which being read and heard, The
said Thomas and Margaret say, That the Hands of the said Lady the Queen, from
the said two parties of the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, and so much of
the Demesne Lands of the aforesaid Manor of Outelmeston, next adjoining to the
aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, as amount to the third part of the aforesaid
Manors, Lands and Tenements, in 4. parts to be divided, nor from any part
thereof ought to be amoved, nor the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and
Edward Digges to the aforesaid purparts of the premises above demanded,
together with the Issues and Profits of the purparts of the premises, in the
mean time aforesaid received ought not to be restored: Because protesting that
the aforesaid Manors and Tenements of which it is supposed the aforesaid
Christopher Digges the Father to have dyed seized, or any part thereof are not
of the nature of Gavelkind, in the said County of Kent, protesting also that
the said Christopher Digges the Father, by his last Will and Testament, did not
Will and Devise the Manors and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, as
the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and the said Edward Digges, in their
Declaration above have alleged, For Plea say, That the aforesaid Christopher
Digges the Father, in his life time was seized of all the Manors and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, in his Demesne of Fee, and so thereof being
seized, the 6th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 10th. at Owtelmeston aforesaid, by a certain Indenture
between him the said Christopher of the on^ part, And Henry Crispe of Tennet,
in the aforesaid County of Kent Knight, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard
Brook, Thomas Leveson, and Richard Horewood Gent. of the other part made, and
with the Seal of the said Christopher the Father sealed, bearing date the same
day and year, As Well in the consideration of a Marriage between the said
Christopher the Father, and Martha Sister of the aforesaid John and Richard
Brook, before that time had and solemnized, as in the consideration of the sum
of 200. pounds, of good and lawful Money of England, before the solemnization of
the Marriage aforesaid, to the said Christopher the Father paid, and also for
the preferring and sure advancing of the aforesaid Thomas Digges, then Son and
Heir aparent of the said Thomas begotten; As also for diverse other good causes
and considerations the said Christopher the Father moving, Covenanted, Granted
and Agreed to and with the aforesaid Henry Crisp, John Brook, Francis Gatacre,
Richard Brook, Thomas Leveson, and Richard Horewood, their Executors, and
Administrators in form following, That as well the said Christopher Digges the
Father, and his Heirs, and every other person and persons, and their Heirs, who
then stood or were seized, or that at any time then after should stand or
should be seized, of and in all and singular the Manors, Messuages, Lands
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, of the said
Christopher Digges the Father, whatsoever with the Appurtenances, situate lying
and being in the aforesaid County of KENT, from thence forward should stand and
be seized of and in all and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, and other the
premises in the said County of KENT, with all and singular their Appurtenances,
to the only uses and intents afterward in the said Indentures mentioned and
expressed, and to no other use, intent or purpose, That is to say, To the use
of the said Christopher Digges the Father, for the Term of his life, And after
the decease of the said Christopher the Father, to the use of the said Thomas,
Son of the said Christopher the Father, and the Heirs Males of the Body of the
said Thomos lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and for default of such
issue, to the use of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Christopher the
Father, upon the Body of the said Martha lawfully to be begotten, as by the
said Indenture amongst other things it more fully appears; By virtue whereof,
and by force of a certain Statute of tranferring of uses into possession, in
the Parliament of the late King HENR^ the 8th. the 4th. day of February, in the
year of his Reign the 27th, at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, holden
made, The said Christopher Digges the Father, was seized of the Manors and
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Freehold for
the Term of his life, the Remainder thereof to the aforesaid Thomas in form
aforesaid expectant, And the said Christopher the Father, being thereof so
seized, the Remainder thereof in form aforesaid expecting, The said Christopher
the Father, at Owtelmeston aforesaid dyed, of such his Estate thereof seized,
After whose Death, The said Thomas Digges the Son, into the Manors and
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenancesentred and was thereof seized in his
Demesne as of Fee-tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body
begotten, by virtue of the Indenture aforesaid, and by force of the Statute
aforesaid; And so being seized of all and singular the Manors and Tenements
aforesaid, The aforesaid 10th. day of April, in the year of the Reignof the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 32th. At Owtelmeston aforesaid, of such his
Estate dyed seized, Thomas Posthumus Digges, being Son and Heir of his Body,
within Age, and in the Ward of the said Lady the Queen, as by the said
Inquisition it is found, without that, that the aforesaid Christopher Digges
the Father, dyed seized of the Manors and Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, in his Demesne as Fee, as the aforesaid Christopher, the Son, and
Edward, in the Monstrans de droit aforesaid, above have alleged, And this they
are ready to aver, Whereupthey demand Judgment, If the Hands of the said Lady
the Queen, from the aforesaid two parts of the aforesaid Lands called
Eastendown, and so much of the Demesne Lands of the Manor of Outelmeston, next
adjoining to the aforesaid Lands called Eastendown, as amount to the third part
of the aforesaid Manors, Lands and Tenements, whereof it is supposed that the
said Christopher the Father, dyed seized in 4. parts to be divided, or of any
part thereof ought to be amoved, Or the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son,
and Edward to the aforesaid purparts of the premises, in the mean time
aforesaid received ought to be restored: And the aforesaid Christopher the Son,
and Edward, as at first say, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father
dyed, seized of the Manors and Tenements aforesaid in his Demesne as of Fee, as
in their Monstrans de droit aforesaid above they have alleged, And this they
are ready to aver, And pray, that it be inquired of by the Country: And the
aforesaid Thomas Palmer and Margaret likewise, etc. And therefore day is given
to the parties aforesaid, before the said Lady the Queen, in 8. days of Saint
Hillary, wheresoever it should be, to do, and receive what shall be just in the
premises; And that it is commanded to the Sherif of KENT, that he cause to come
before the said Lady the Queen at that day, 12. good and lawful men of the
Neighborhood of Barham, Lenham, Frensted, Harrisham, Sturrey, Hackington, and
the Parish of Saint Stephens, and of the Manor of Netherhard, in his Balywick,
whereof every one have 4. l. per Annum in Lands, Tenements, or Rents at the
least, by whom the truth of the matter might best be known; And who neither,
etc. To Recognize, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
come as well the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward Digges, by
Thomas Westbie the Elder their Attorney, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer and
Margaret, in their proper persons; And the Sherif of KENT returned the names of
the Jurors, etc. Whose names, etc. Whereof none, etc. Therefore it is commanded
to the said Sherif of KENT, that he have their Bodies before the Lady the Queen,
in 8. days of the Purificaiion of the blessed Mary, wheresoever, etc. to
Recognize in form aforesaid, etc. And the same day is given to the parties
aforesaid, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come
as well the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and the said Edward by their
Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer and Margaret in their proper
persons: And the Sherif sent not his Writ thereof, etc. There again as before,
It is commanded, etc. That he destrein the Jurors aforesaid, by all their
Lands, etc. So that he have their Bodies before the Lady the Queen, from the
day of Easter, in 15. days wheresoever, etc. Unless the Justices of the Lady
the Queen to Assizes, in the County of KENT to be taken assigned, first upon
Monday, in the 5th. Week of Lent, at Rochester, in the aforesaid County of
KENT, according to the form of the Statute shall come for default of Jurors.
And therefore that the Siherif have their Bodies, etc. to Recognize in form
aforesaid, And the same day is given to the parties aforesaid; At which day,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came as well the aforesaid Christopher
Digges the Son, and Edward Digges by their Attorney, as the aforesaid Thomas
Palmer and Margaret in their proper persons. And the aforesaid Justices to
Assizes, before whom, etc. sent here the Record had before them in these words:
After wards, the day and place within contained, before Francis Gaudy, one of
the Justices to Pleas, before the Queen her self to be holden assigned, and
George Kingsmill, one of the Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench,
Justices of the said Lady the Queen to Assize^, in the said County of Kent to
be taken assigned, by the form of the Statute, etc. come as well the within named
Christ^pher Digges, and Edward Diggs, by Edmond Gibbon, their Attorney within
written, as the said Thomas Palmer and Margaret, by Nathaniel Manley their
Attorney. And the Jurors of the Ju^y, whereof within mention is made, likewise
being called come, who to say the truth of the within contained, chosen, tried,
and sworn, say upon their Oaths, That long before the day of the bringing of
the Monsirans de droit within written, one Christopher Digg, otherwise Digges
Esquire, in the Monstrans de droit within named, Father of the aforesaid
Christopher Digges, and Edward Digges, was seized of the Manors, Lands and
Tenements with the appurtenances, in the Monstrans de droit specified, and of
and in Lands and Tenements, in the Indenture hereafter specified in his Demesne
as o^ Fee; And so thereof being seized, The said Christopher Digges the Father,
before the day of the bringing of the Monstrans de droit within written, that
is to say, the 6th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 10th. By his Indenture, between him the s^id Christopher
Digges the Father of the one part, and Henry Cripps Knight, John ^rook, Francis
Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas Leason, and Richard Horewood Gent. of the other
part made, one part whereof with the Seal of the said Christopher Digges the
Father sealed, to the Jurors aforesaid, in Evidence was showed, whose Date is
the same day and year, For the Considerations and Causes in the same Indenture
specified, covenanted, and granted for him and his Heirs, To and with the
aforesaid Henry ^ripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas
^eison, and Richard Horewood and their Heirs, That the said Christopher Digges
the Father, and his Heirs, then from thenceforth would stand and be seized, of
and in all and singular the aforesaid Manors, Lands and Tenements, to the
Behoofs and uses, Provisons and intents, in the same Indenture specified, The
T^nor of which Indenture follows in these words. ss. This Indenture made the
6th. day of May, in the 10th. year of the Reign o^ our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the Grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. Between Christopher Digg, otherwise Digges, of Outelmeston
in the County of Kent Esquire on ^he one part, and St. Henry Cripps or Thenett,
in the said County Knight, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Thomas Leweson, and
Richard Horewood Gent. on the other part witnesses, That whereas the said
Christopher Digges, did ^eretofore mary and take to Wife Martha Brook, Sister
of the said John Brook, and Richard Brook, and now Wife of the said Christoper,
and during the said Marriage had, and continuing, they had and have issue be
ween their, Thomas Digg, otherwise Digges, now being Son and Heir apparent of
the said Christopher, Therefore as well in Consideration of the said Marriage so
had betw^en the said Christopher and Martha, As al^o for and in consideration
of the sum of 200. pounds, of good and lawful money of England, before the
solemnization of the Marriage aforesaid, unto the s^id Christopher well and
truly contented, satisfied and paid, As also for the Preferment and certain
Advancement of the said Thomas ^igges, and of the Heirs Males of the said
Thomas Digges of his Body lawfully to be begotten, And also for diverse other
good considerations the same Christopher Digges thereunto specially moving, It
is now Covenanted, Granted, Concluded, Condescended and Agreed, between the
parties to these presents, and the said Christopher Digges and his Heirs, does
by these presents Covenant, Grant, and Agree, to and with the said Sr. Henry
Cripps Knight, John Brook, ^rancis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson, and
Richard Horewood, their Executors and Administrators in manner and form
following, That is to say, That as well the said Christopher Digges, and his
Heirs, and all and every other person or persons, and their Heirs, which now
stand or be seized, or at any time hereafter shall stand or be seized, of and
in all and singular his Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Services whatsoever with their appurtenances, set, lying and being in the said
County of Kent, shall from the day of the Date of these presents stand and be
seized, of and in all and every the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, and other the premises, in the
said County of Kent, to the only uses and intents hereafter, in these presents
mentioned and expressed, and to none other use, intent or purpose; That is to
say, To the use of the said Christopher Digges for his natural life, and after
the decease of the said Christopher Digges, Then to the use of the said Thomas
Digges, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Heirs Males, Then to the use of the Heirs Males of the body of the said
Christopher, upon the Body of the said Martha lawfully to be begotten. Provided
always, and it is nevertheless Covenanted and Agreed, by these presents,
between the said parties to these presents, upon the Considerations above
mentioned, That for the Preferment and Advancement of the other Children of the
said Christopher Digges, and for the payment of his Debts or Legacies, or for
any other necessary purpose or intent, It shall and may be lawful to and for
the said Christopher Digges, together with Sr. Henry Cripps Knight, John Brook,
Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson, and Richard Horewood, or three
of them, the said Henry Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook,
Thomas Leweson, and Richard Horewood, at any time hereafter, during the life of
the said Christopher Digges, together with and by the joint Consent and
Agreement of the said Henry Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook,
Thomas Leweson, and Richard Horewood, or three of them the said Henry, John,
Francis, Richard, Thomas, and Richard, by their Joint Deed or Writing Indented
of them the said Christopher Digges, Henry Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre,
Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson, and Richard Horewood, or of the said Christopher
Digges, or of three of them, the said Henry, John, Francis, Richard, Thomas and
Richard, and being sealed with the seals of the said Christopher Digges, Henry
Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson, and Richard
Horewood, or of the said Christoper Digges, or three of them the said Henry,
John, Francis, Richard, Thomas, and Richard, and to be enrolled in any Court of
Record of our sovereign Lady the Queen, or of her Heirs and Successors, to make
void and frustrate any of the use, or uses, estate, or estates, in these
presents above mentioned, expressed, or declared, only for, of or in any such
part or parcel of the premises, as by the said Christopher Digges, Henry
Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson, and Richard
Horewood, or by the said Christopher Digges, or three of them, the said Henry,
John, Francis, Richard, Thomas and Richard, shall be thought meet and
convenient, and by the said Writing Indented and Enrolled, shall be expressly
limited and appointed, and no otherwise; And thereof by the said Writing
Indented, so to be in^olled of new, to declare, limit, or appoint any such new,
or any other such use, or uses, estate, or estates, as to the said Christopher
Digges, Henry Cripps, John Brook, Francis Gatacre, Richard Brook, Thomas
Leweson, and Richard Horewood, or any three of the said Henry, John, Francis,
Richard, Thomas, and Richard, shall be thought meet and convenient, as by the
said Writing Indented shall be expressed and declared, and not otherwise, any
thing in this present Indenture contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding: And that immediately from and after such new Declaration,
Limitation and Appointing of any new, or other use, or uses, of or in any part
or parcel of the premises, by writing Intended, sealed, and enrolled as
aforesaid, than the use, and uses, estate, or estates, of such and so much
only of the premises, whereof any such new Declaration, Limitation, or
Appointment, shall be so had, and made, shall be, And the said Christopher
Digges, his Heirs and Assigns, and all other person or persons, their Heirs
and Assigns, which at any time hereafter, shall stand and be seized of or in
so much of the premses, whereof any such new Declaration, limiting and
appointing, shall be so had, and made, shall stand and be seized thereof, to
the use of such person and persons, and to such use, intents and conditions, as
shall be mentioned and expressed, in the said Writing Indented and Enrolled,
and to none other use, intent or purpose, any thing above mentioned to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof the parties
to these presents inter changeably to this present Writing Indented, have put
their Seals the day and year above written. By virtue of which Indenture, and
by force of a Statute transferring of uses into possession, in the Parliament
of the Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. the 4th. day of February, in
the year of his Reign the 27th. at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex
holden, made, The aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, was seized of the
Manors and Tenements with the appurtenances, within monstra^s de droit above
specified in his Demesne as of Freehold, for the term of his life, the remain^er
thereof to the aforesaid Thomas, and the Heirs Males of his Body issuing, and
for default of such issue, The Remainder thereof to the Heirs Males of the Body
of the said Christopher the Father of the aforesaid Martha lawfully begotten:
And the said Christopher Digges the Father, so of the Manors and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances being seized, the Remainder thereof to the
aforesaid Thomas, in form aforesaid expecting, The said Christopher Digges the
Father, and the aforesaid Ioh. Brook Ric. Brook and Tho. Leweson afterward,
and before the day, etc. that is to say, the 6th. day of May, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 12th. By a certain
Indenture between them, the said Christopher Digges the Father, and the
aforesaid John Brook, Richard, and Thomas Leweson of the one part, and Thomas
Ovington, and Thomas Digges, of Chertham in the County of Kent Gent. of the
other part made, and in the Court of Chancery of the said Lady the Queen that
now is at Westminster, then being, the 4th. day of Iunc, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 12th. aforesaid, in due manner
of Record enrolled, one part of which, with the Seals of the aforesaid
Christopher Digges the Father, John, Richard, and Thomas Leweson sealed, To the
Jurors aforesaid in evidence was showed, whose Date is the same day and year
abovesaid, In which Indenture, reciting the first Indenture, bearing Date the
6th. of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 10th. abovesaid, made between him the said Christopher Digges the Father,
of the one part, and the aforesaid Henry Cripps Knight, John Brook, Francis
Ga^acre, Richard Brook, Thomas Ltweson, and Richard Horewood, of the other
part, Covenanted, Granted, and Agreed, to and with the aforesaid Thomas
Ovington, and Thomas Digges, their Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, in manner and
form as follows in these words. And also, whereas, The said Christopher
Digges, at the time of the making of the said Indenture in these presents above
recited, was seized of an Estate of Inheritance, amongst other the Man^rs,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, abovesaid, of and in one Close, in the
abovesaid Parish of Barham, in the occupying of Bartholmew Baker, containing by
estimation 3. Acres, and 2. Acres of Land in Stony Rock, and 3. Acres and 2.
yards in Parsonage-field, in the occupation of the said Bartholmew Baker, in
Barham aforesaid, and 2. half Acres of Land in the occupying of Henry Crowd,
and one half Acre, late in the occupation of John Barham Gent. in the Parish of
Barham aforesaid, And also 3. Acres called Green Hill, and one Acre lying in
Brom lease, joining to Thomas Laddes Ground, and one yard in John Nashes Land,
lying in Barham aforesaid, and Kingston next Barham in the County aforesaid,
and also 16. Acres of Down Land and Pasture, in the said Parish of Barham and
Kingston aforesaid, and Adsham in the County aforesaid, in the occupying of
Kembers Heirs, and also the moiety of 31. Acres of Marish Land, and Arable, the
moiety of one Tenement lying in the Parish of Woekham, in the said County, and
3. Acres of Marish Land more late in the occupying of Robert Formel, and 5.
Acres of that, now in the occupying of David Deem, of Littleborn Court, lying
in the Parishes of Littleborn, and Wockham aforesaid, and Ickham in the County
aforesaid, And also one Tenement with 7. Acres of Land, lying at Stelling
Mennis, in the Parish of Ekham, late in the occupying of Richard Ovingden, 30.
Acres of Wood-Land, in the Parish of Netherherds, now in the occupying of the
said Christopher Digges, and 1. Acre of Arable Land, in the occupying of Henry
Rigden, called Bedleacre, and also 2. Acres of Land in Demisdale, and 3. Acres
in Spotts Cross, half an Acre in Wholdstane, in the parishes of Barham and
Kingstone, and 12. Bushels of Rent Barley out of William Ademe's Land, in
Kingston aforesaid, and 3. Acres of Land, at a Place called Marley, within the
Parish of Kingston, in the occupying of James Adem, and also 1. Tenement with
7. Acres of Arable Land and Pasture, in the occupying of Henry Crowd, in the
Parish of Barham aforesaid; And also 60. Acres of Arable Land, Pasture, and
Down-Land; in the Parish of Barham aforesaid, and also 3. Acres of Meadow,
lying in Winch, in the Parish of Tannington, and 7. Seames of Rent Barley in
the Parish Sutton next Sandwitch, and also 3. Acres of Arable Land in the
occupation of Richard Ragely, in the Parish of Kingston aforesaid, and 36.
Acres of Wood-Land, Arable and Pasture, and half a Message, half a Barn, and
half a Stable, an Outhouse, and a Meadow containing 12. Acres, adjoining to the
Barn in the occupying of James Herringe, in the Parishes of Kingstone
aforesaid, and Bourn in the County aforesaid. Whereupon, and for and in
consideration, that the said Christopher Digges is endebted to divese persons
in the sum of 900. pounds or thereabouts, and that he the said Christopher may
have full authority to sell and alienate some part of the said Lands and
Tenements, for the payment of his said debts, It is now Covenanted, Granted,
Condescended and Agreed, Between the said Christopher Digges, John Brook,
Richard Brook, and Thomas Leweson, and the above named Thomas Ovington, and
Thomas Digges, their Heirs and Assigns; And the said Christopher Digges, John
Brook, Richard Brook, and Thomas Leweson, for them and every of them, their
Heirs and Assigns, by their joint Consent and Agreement, do Covenant, and
Grant, to and with the said Thomas Ovington, and Thomas Digges, their Heirs and
Assigns by these presents, That from the Inrollment of this present Indenture,
in the Queens Majesty's Court of Chancery, That all and every the said use, and
uses, considerations, and intents, limited, declared, and mentioned, in the
abovesaid Indenture in these presents above comprised, And to, and as
concerning only all and singular those several parcels of the premises
particularly above mentioned, shall be utterly void, frustrate, and be
determined and ended. And that the said Christ. Digges, and his Heirs, and all
and every other person and persons, which now stand, or be seized, or at any
time hereafter shall stand and be seized; of and in the said several parcels
particularly above mentioned with their Appurtenances, shall from the time of
the Inrollment of these presents, stand and be of all and every the same
particular parcells above mentioned only, with their Appurtenances, seized
only unto the use of the said Christopher Digges, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, and to no other use, uses, purposes, and intents: In Witness whereof the
parties abovesaid to these present Indentures, their Seals interchangeably have
set, dated the day and year first above written, as by the Indenture aforesaid
more fully appears. By color of which Indenture and Inrollment, and by force
of the aforesaid Statute of transferring of uses into possession, made and
provided, The aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, was seized of the
aforesaid parcel of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments with the Appurtenances,
in the Indenture aforesaid particularly further specified as the Law requires:
And further, the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, of the Manors, Lands and Tenements, in
the Monstrans de droit within written with their Appurtenances, in form
aforesaid being seized, The said Christopher Digges the Father, and the
aforesaid John Brook, Richard Brook and Richard Horewood afterward, and before
the time of the bringing of the Monstrans de droit within written, that is to
say, the 20th. day of September, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 13th. By another Indenture between them the said
Christoph^r Digges the Father, John, Richard, and Richard Horewood on the one
part, and the aforesaid, Thomas Ovington, and Thomas Digges, of Chartham
aforesaid, on the other part made, By the names of Christopher Digges of Barham
in the County of Kent Esquire, John Brook, Richard ^rook, and Richard Horewood
Gent. on the other part made, and in the Court of the Lady the Queen of Common
Pleas, at Westminster afterward, that is to say, in the Term of St. Michael,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 13th. and
14th. in due manner of Record enrolled, one part whereof, with the Seals of the
a^oresaid Christopher Digges the Father, John, Richard Brook, and Richard
Horwood sealed, and to the Jurors aforesaid in Evidence showed, whose date is
the same day and year, reciting the aforesaid Indenture, bearing date the 6th.
day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
10th. abovesaid, made between the aforesaid Cheistopher Digges the Father of
the one part, and the aforesaid Henry Gripps Knight, John Brook, Francis
Ga^a^re, Richard Brook, Thomas Leweson and Richard Horewood, of other the part,
Covenanted, Granted, and agreed, to and with the aforesaid Thomas Ovington, and
Thomas Digges, their Heirs and assigns in manner and form, as follows in
these words. Whereupon, and ^or and in Consideration, that the said Christopher
Digges is endebted to diverse persons in the sum of a 1000 pound or there
abouts and that he the said Christopher may have full authority to sell and
alienate part and parcel of all and singular his said Lands and Tenements
whatsoever for the payment of his said debts, and for any other necessary
purpose and intent, it is now Covenanted, granted, condescended, and agreed
Between the said Christopher Digges, John Brook, Richard Brook, and Richard
Horewood, and the above Thomas Ovington and Thomas Digges their Heirs and
assigns. And the said Christopher Digges, John Brook, Richard Brook, and
Richard Horewood, for them and every of them, their Heiirs and Assigns, by
their Joint consent and agreement, do covenant and grant to and with the said
Thomas Ovington, and Thomas Diggss their Heirs and Assigns by these presents,
that from the time of the Inrollment of this present Indenture in the Queens
Majesty's Court of Chancery, that all and every the said use and uses,
considerations and intent, in any wise limited, declared, and mentioned in the
abovesaid Indenture in these presents above comprised and for and as concerning
all and singular their Manors Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever, with the appurtenances in any wise
mentioned, meant, comprised and specified, in the abovesaid Indenture in these
presents above comprised except, -- or Meadow lying and being in the Parish of
Bishopsborne in the said County of Kent containing by estimation -- or
thereabouts, and now or late in the occupation or possession of one Vincent
Edley, or of his Assigns, shall be utterly void and frustrate, and be
determined and ended, and that the said Christopher Digges and his heirs, and
all and every person and persons which now stand and be seized, or at any time
hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in all and singular the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and
Hereditaments whatsoever with the appurtenances, or any parcel thereof, in any
wise mentioned, meant, comprised, or specified in the abovesaid Indenture, in
these presents comprised (except before excepted) shall from the time of the
Inrolment of these presents, stand and be seized of and in all and singular the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and
Hereditaments whatsoever with the appurtenances, in the said former Indenture,
or in these presents meant, contained, or, specified, and of and in all and
every part and parcel thereof (except before excepted) to the only use of the
said Christopher Digges, his Heirs and assigns for ever, and to no other use
or uses, purposes or intents. In witness whereof, the parties abovesaid to
these present Indentures their Seals enterchangeablie have set, dated the day
and year first above written, as by the said other Indenture further recited
more fully appears: And the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, so as
before is said, of the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
aforesaid with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid Indenture bearing date the
20th. day of September in the 13th year abovesaid as the same requires being
-- the said Christopher Digges the Father afterward, and before the day of the
being of the Monstrans de dro^t within written, that is to say, the 20th. day
of October in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
14th. By another certain Indenture between the said Christopher Digges the
Father, of the one part, and Richard Gaunt Gentleman, and Lawrence Applegate of
the other part made, one part of which with the Seal of the said Christopher to
the Jurors aforesaid, in evidence was showed, whose date is the same day and
year, covenanted and granted for him and his Heirs, to and with the aforesaid
Richard Gaunt and Lawrence Applegate, in manner and form as in the Indenture
aforesaid is contained, the Tenor of which follows in these words. Thi^
Indenture made the 25th. day of ctober in the 14th. yeear of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and
Ireland, defender of the Faith etc. Between Christopher Digges of Barham, in
the County of ^ent Esquier, on the one party, and Richard Gaunt of the City of
Canterbury Gent^em^n and Lawrence Applegate of the Parish of Saint George of
the same City Draper, on the other party, Witnesses, That it is Covenanted,
granted, condescended, and agreed, by all the parties to these Indentures by
these presents, in manner and form following, that is to say, that first the
said Christopher Digges for him and his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
does Covenant and grant, to and with the said Richard Gaunt, and Lawrence
App^egate, their Executors and assigns by these presents, that he the said
Christopher and Martha his Wife, before the end of this Instant Term of Saint
Michael, upon the writ of Covenant to be persued by the said Richard and
Lawrence out of the high Court of Chancery, and retornable before the Queens
Majesty's Justices of the common plea at Westminster, shall acknowledge and
levy a fine of all those the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Marshes,
Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Underwoods Rents, and Services, to any the same
Manors appertaining, or in any ways belonging, set, lying and being in the
Parishes of Barham, Kingstone, Bishop Borne, Pati^chborne Littleborne,
Wellborne, Sturrey, Harrisham, Saint Stephens, Hackington Netherherds, Lenham,
and Brensted, in the County of Kent and also all other the Lands and Tenements
whatsoever, which he the said Christopher Dighes now has or late had in the same
County, and that by he names of Owtelmestone, Mayton Hackington and Yokes
Court, with the appurtenances, and 40 Messu^ges, 20 Tofts, 1 Mill, 3
Dovehouses, 20 Garde^s, 10 O^ch^rds, 1000 Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow,
100 Acres of Pasture, 600 Acres of Wood, 10 Acres of Heath and Furze, and 5
pound Rent, and the Rent of 10 Quarters of Barley with the appurtenances, in
Barham, Kingstone, Bishopsborne, Bridge, Patricksboone, Littleborne, Wellborne,
Sturrey, St. Stephens, Hackington, Netherherds, Lenham, Harrisham, Frensted,
Sutton, Repple, and Sholden, and nevertheless it is covenanted, granted, and
agreed, between the said Christopher Digges, Rich Gaunt, and Lawrence
Applegate, and they their Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, do covenant and grant
by these presents, to and with the said Christopher Digges his Heirs,
Executors, and Assigns, in form following, that is to say, that the same Fine,
and the use and execution of the same, as to the Manor of Yokes Court with the
appurtenances, and one Message called Fokeham, 500 Acres of Land, Meadow and
Pasture by estimation be it more or less with the appurtenances, set, lying and
being in the parishes of Fremsted, Lenham, and Harrisham in the County of Kent
aforesaid, 160 Acres of Land, Meadow, and Pasture in the Parish of Netherherds,
Nackington, and Patricksborne in the said County, And all those Lands arable
and Pasture, containing by estimation 200 Acres called Gore and Ilding, lying
and being in the Parishes of Barham and Kingstone, now late in the (...) of
James Herenge and John Nethersale or of their assigns, all Woods, Wood-Lands,
Underwoods, Courts, Rents, perquisites of Court, to all the same only excepted,
shall be to the use of the said Christopher Digges and Martha, and the Heirs
and Assigns of the said Christopher Digges for ever. And that the said Fine,
use, and execution thereof, as well to the said Manors of Owtelmestone, Mayton,
and all the Lands, Meadows, Marshes Feedings, Woods, Underwoods, Rents and
Services, to the same Manors or any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertayning, and also all other the Lands, Messuages, Tenements, Meadows,
Pastures, Marshes, Woods, Underwoods, and other Hereditaments whatsoever, above
in these presents specfi^ed, mentioned, or comprised, the use thereof in the
abovesaid Fine in form abovesaid to be levied and acknowleged before by this
Indenture not limited or appointed (the Rent of 10 quarters of Barley only
except) to be to the only use and behoof of the said Christopher Digges his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use or uses, purpose or intent,
and that the said Fine or use and execution thereof as to the abovesaid 10
Quarters of B^rley to be to the only use and behoof of the abovesaid Richard
Gaunt and his Heirs for ever. In witness whereof the parties abovesaid to these
present Indentures their Seals enterchangeably have set, dated the day and year
first above wri^ten; And the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father (so as
before is said) of the Manors. Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in the Monstrans de droi^ within written
specified as the Law requires, being seized, Afterward, and before the
bringing of the Monstrans de droit within written, that is to say from the day
of Saint Martin within written in 15 days in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is the 14th. abovesaid, A Fine was levied in the Court
of the said Lady the Queen that now is at Westminster in the County of
Middle^ex, before James Dyer, Richard Weston, John Welsh, and Richard Harper,
then Justices: and afterward in 8 days of Saint Hillary in the year of the
same Lady the Queen that now is the 14th. abovesaid there then granted and
recorded before the said Justices and others of the Queens faithful people
then and there present, between the aforesaid Richard Gaunt Gentleman and
Lawrence Applegate plainti^s and the aforesaid Christopher Digges and Martha
his Wife deforceants, of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in
the Monstrans de droit within written with the appurtenances, amongst other, by
the names of the Manors of Owtelmestone, Mayton, Nackington, and Yokes Court
with the appurtenances, and 40 Messuages, 20 Tofts, one Mil, 3 Dovehouses, 20
Gardens, 12 Orchards, 1000 Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 700 Acres of
Pasture, 600 Acres of Wood, 100 Acres of Furze and Heath, and 100 shillings of
Rent, and the Rent of 10 Quarters of Barley with the appurtenances in Barham,
Kingstone, Bishopsborn, Bridge, Patricksborne, Littleborne, Wellborne, Sturrey,
Saint Stephens, Nackington Netherherds, Lenham, Harisham, Frinsted, Sutton,
Ripple, and Shalden, whereupon a plea of Covenant then was summoned between
them in the said Court, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges, and Martha do
acknowledge, the aforesaid Manors and Rents with the appurtenances, to be the
Right of the said Richard, and those which the said Richard and Lawrence then
had of the gift of the aforesaid Christopher and, Martha and these then remised
and quit claimed from them the said Christopher and Martha and their Heirs, to
the aforesaid Richard and Lawrence and the Heirs of the the said Richard for
ever: and moreover the said Christopher, and Martha then had granted for them
and Heirs the of the said Christopher, that they warrant to the aforesaid
Richard and Lawrence, and the Heirs of the said Richard, the aforesaid Manors,
Tenements, and Rents with the appurtenances, against all men for ever, and for
this Recognition, Release, Quit claim, warranty, Fine and Concord, the said
Richard and Lawrence gave to the aforesaid Christopher and Martha 8 pound
Sterling, which Fine was levied with proclamations according to the form of the
Statute in such case made and provided. And further the Jurors say upon their
oath aforesaid, that the aforesaid Fine, in form aforesaid levied, was had and
levied to the uses and intents in the Indenture aforesaid, bearing date the
26th. day of October in year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now
is the 14th. as abovesaid above specified, By color of which Fine, Indenture
and Statute aforesaid, the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father was seized,
of the Manors, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
as the Law requires: And the Jurors aforesaid further say upon their Oath
aforesaid, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, so (as before is
said) of the Manors and Tenements above written as the Law requires, being
seized, the said Christopher Digges the Father, and the aforesaid John Brook,
Richard Brook, and Richard Horewood, afterward, that is to say, the 7th. day
of November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 14th. came into the Court of the said Lady the Queen of her Chancery, and
then and there acknowleged the Indenture aforesaid, bearing date the 20th. day
of September, in the 13th. year aforesaid, to be their deed: and upon that the
said Indenture afterward, that is to say, the 7th day of November, in the 14
year aforesaid, in the said Court of Chancery in due Manner of Record was
Enrolled: By virtue of which, and force of the Statute aforesaid, the said
Christopher Digges the Father was of the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, within
written seized as the same Law requires; and so thereof being seized, the said
Christo. Digges, the Father, afterward, and before the day of the bringing of
the showing of right within written, that is to say, the first day of February
in the year of our Lord 1576, and in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 19th. made his Testament and last Will in writing, of
which said Testament and last Will, the Tenor (amongst other) follows in
these Words. In the Name of God Amen: The first day of February, in the year of
our Lord God 1576, and in the 19th year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender
of the Faith, etc. I Christopher Digges of Saint Gregory's, without the Walls
of the City of Canterbury Esquire, Son and Heir of William Digges late of
Barham in the County of Kent deceased, being sick in body, but of good and
perfect remembrance, thanked be the Almighty God, Revoking and making void all
other my former wills, ordayn and make this my present Testament and last Will
in manner and form following, That is to say, this is the last Will of me the
abovesaid Christopher Digges made the day and year abovesaid, touching the
disposition of all my Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the County of
Kent, and Canterbury, or elsewhere in the Realm of England. First touching the
thirds and third part of my Land to be due unto the Queens Majesty, or any
other for Wardship, Primer, seisin, Livery or otherwise my Will and meaning is
to leave to descend to Thomas Digges my Son, to have and to hold to him and his
Heirs for ever, All these my Lands and Tenements called or known by the name of
Eastendown, containing by estimation 10 Acres of Land, and all these Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, which I had by descent after the death of Thomas
Digges of Newington next Sittingborn Esquire deceased, and if the said Lands,
Tenements, as is as aforesaid left to descend to Thomas my Son, do not amount
to satisfy the Queens Highness of the Thirds, or third part to be due unto
her Highness, Then my Will and meaning is, That so much other Lands next
adjoining to the said Eastendown, shall descend and be to my said Thomas
Digges, as shall suffice to satisfy and make up the Queens Highness Thirds or
third part, and that her Highness be answered out of the Rents and Profits of
the same, and out of the Demesne made of the Manor of Owtelmestone. Item, I
will, That Thomas Ovington aforesaid, immediately after my departure of this
present world, shall sell all my Lands in the Parishes of Hards and Nackington,
in the County aforesaid, with the Rents thereunto belonging. Item, I will That
the said Thomas Ovington, or his Assigns, immediately after my death, sell all
those my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with the Appurtenances whatsoever,
in the Parishes of Sturrey and Hackington, otherwise St. Stephens, in the
County of Kent aforesaid, and all those my Gardens in the County of Canterbury
aforesaid, for the sum of 200. pounds, of good and lawful Money of England, And
I will, that the said 200. pounds, coming of the sale of my Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments aforesaid with the appurtennces, in Sturrey, Hackington, and
in the County of Canterbury, And also that all the Money coming of the sale of
all my Lands, in the Parishes of Hards and Nackington aforesaid, shall go and
be employed toward the payment of my Debts, and for and toward the
performance of this my present Testament and last Will. Item, I will, That if
Martha my Wife, by Release or otherwise, will grant over all that Estate that
she has, or may have, in the Lands in Hards and Nackington aforesaid, with the
Rents thereunto belonging, by way of Jointure, unto such as the said Thomas, or
his Assigns, shall make sale thereof, That then the said Martha, for and in
recompense of her said Jointure therein, shall have for term of her life, all
my Lands in Barham abovesaid, which I purchased of Mr. William Awcher, and also
all my Lands there, as I late had of Mr. William Boys, by way of Exchange for
other Lands. Item, I will, That Harry Aldy, and Nicholas Frankline aforesaid,
shall have all the aforesaid Lands and Tenements with their Appurtenances,
Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, other than such as before are
given to Thomas Digges my Son, and to Martha my Wife for the term of her life,
or by the way of Jointure or otherwise, or willed to be sold as aforesaid, and
shall receive and take the yearly Revenews and Profits thereof, for and toward
the further and full payment of my Debts, and Legacies, and Annuities before
expressed and here under mentioned, and also of my Funeral Charges, for and
toward the bringing up of my Sons and Daughters aforesaid, until either Martha
my Wife, or the aforesaid Thomas Ovington and Richard Brook, or the aforesaid
Thomas Ovington enter into Bond unto the said Henry Aldy, and Nicholas
Franklin, or to their Assigns, in such manner and form as before is expressed.
Item, I will that if the aforesaid Thomas Ovington, and Richard Brook, within
one month after such refusal aforesaid, my Wife do enter into Bond unto the
abovesaid Hen. Aldey, and Nic. Franklin, as is aforesaid, and within the time
aforesaid That the said Tho. and Rich. immediately after such Bond had and made,
shall have the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, and other Hereditaments
whatsoever, other than such as before are given to Thomas Digges my Son, or to
Martha my Wife, for Term of her life by way of Jointure or otherwise, or
appointed to be sold, or are appointed to the Poor as is aforesaid, and shall
receive and take the yearly Revenews and Profits thereof, in such manner, and
form. and for such purpose and effect, and for no other, and for so long as my
aforesaid Wife should have done, if she should have entered into Bond as
aforesaid, But if the aforesaid Richard Brook do not within the time above
limited, enter into Bond to the aforesaid Henry and Nicholas, with the said
Thomas Ovington in manner and form aforementioned, but shall refuse or neglect
so to do, Then I will, if the aforesaid Thomas Ovington, within the time
aforesaid do enter into Bond, unto the aforesaid Henry Aldy, and Nicholas
Franklin, in the sum of 400. pounds, according as is above specified, Then I
will, immediately after the said entry into such Bond, by the said Thomas
Ovington, unto the said Henry and Nicholas made and done, That then the said
Thomas Ovington, or his Assigns, shall have the aforesaid Lands and Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, and Hereditaments, other then such as before is given to
Thomas, Digges my Son, or to Martha my Wife, or appointed to be sold, or
appointed to the Poor to dwell in as aforesaid, And receive and take the yearly
Revenews and Profits thereof, in such manner and form, and for so long as my
aforesaid Wife, or her Assigns should have done, if she should have entered
into Bond as is aforesaid, and as the aforesaid Richard Brook, and the said
Thomas Ovington and their Assigns, should have done, if the said Thomas
Ovington and Richard Brook had entered into Bond, unto the aforesaid Henry and
Nicholas, as is above specified. Item, I will, after all my Debts, Legacies,
Payments, Annuities, and Funeral Charges, shall be fully satisfied, discharged,
or be, or may be fully levied, That then all my Lands and Tenements with their
Appurtenances, other than the Lordship of Yok, and the Manor of Fokeham with
their Aphurtenances, in the Parishes of Leneham, Freinsted, and Harisham in the
County of Kent aforesaid, and the Lands of Barham aforesaid, appointed to my
Wife for term of her life as is aforesaid, And the Lands and Tenements in
Sturrey and Hackington, otherwise Saint Stephens in Canterbury, and the Lands
in Hardes and Nackington aforesaid, with the Rents thereunto belonging
appointed to be sold as aforesaid (excepted and reserved) shall be to my Eldest
Son then living, and to the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten for ever,
paying yearly unto every other of my Sons then living, until every of them
shall come to the age of 24. years, 4. pounds of lawful money of England, at the
Feast day of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady the Virgin, and Saint Michael
the Archangel, by even portions half yearly to be paid, and also paying yearly
to every of my aforesaid Daughters then living, until every of them shall be
married, or shall come to the age of 21. years, five Marks, of lawful Money of
England, at the Feast days next aforesaid, by even portions yearly to be paid,
And if default of payment happen to be of the aforesaid several 4. pounds,
yearly to every or any of the aforesaid Sons as is aforesaid, or of the
aforesaid several five Marks yearly to be paid, to every or any of the
aforesaid Daughters as is aforesaid, That then it shall be lawful to every, or
to any of my aforesaid Sons or Daughters, for default of payment of the sums or
sum due unto them or any of them, by way of Annuity as is aforesaid, into the
Lands and Tenements and other Hereditaments, above limited to my Eldest Son
aforesaid, and to his Heirs Males as aforesaid, to enter and destrein, and the
destress there so taken lawfully with them or any of them to lead, drive, or
carry away, until every of them shall be fully satisfied and paid. Item, I
will, That after the decease of Martha my Wife, if then my Eldest Son
aforesaid, or the Heir Male of his Body lawfully begotten then living, shall be
of the full age of 22. years, That then the said Eldest Son, or his Heir Male
aforesaid, shall have the aforesaid Lordship of Yoke, and the Manors of Falkham
with their Appurtenances, and the Lands aforesaid bought of Mr. Awcher, and had
in Exchange of Mr. Boys, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten for ever. And if then my Eldest Son aforesaid, or his Heirs Males as
is aforesaid, shall come of the full age of 22. years, Then I will, that the
yearly Profits and Revenews of the abovesaid Lordship of Yoke, and Manor of
Falkham with their Appurtenances, and the Lands aforesaid bought of Mr. Awcher,
and had in Exchange of Mr. Boys, aforesaid, until my said Eldest Son, or his
Heir Male abovesaid, shall come to the full age of 22. years, shall go and be
employed toward the payment of my Debts, Legacies, Payments, and Annuities
aforesaid. Item, I will, That if it happen my Eldest Son aforesaid, or his Heir
Male aforesaid, to depart this transitory world without Heirs Males, or Male of
his Body lawfully begotten, Then for lack of such Heir Male, All and every the
aforesaid Lordship, Manors, Lands, Tenements, with the Appurtenances, Rents,
Services, and Hereditaments, other than such as are appointed to be sold, and
for the Poor as aforesaid, shall be and remain to his next Eldest Brother then
living, and to the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten for ever, paying
yearly to every of his Brothers my Sons then living, until every of them shall
be of the full age of 24. years, 4. pound of lawful money of England, and to
every of his Sisters, my Daughters then living, five Marks of lawful money, in
such manner and form, and so long as is before specified. Item, I will, That all
and singular the abovesaid Lordships, Manors, Lands and Tenements with the
Appurtenances Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, whatsoever in the
County of Kent, or else where, other than such as before specified to be sold by
Thomas Ovington aforesaid, and willed to my Eldest Son aforesaid, as is before
specified, for lack of Heir Male of the Body of any my aforesaid Sons, shall
successively remain from Brother to Brother, and to his Heir Male, paying
yearly for so long to his Brothers and Sisters as is aforesaid; And if it
fortune all my said Sons depart this transitory world, without Heirs Males, or
Male of their or his Body lawfully begotten, Then for lack of such Heir Male, I
will, all the aforesaid Lordship, Manor, Lands and Tenements with their
Apurtenances, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, in the Parishes of
Leneham Frinsted, Harrisham aforesaid, shall be and remain to my Daughters
aforesaid, and to their Heirs for ever Item, I will, That all other my
Lordships, Manors, Lands and Tenements with their Appurtenances, Rents,
Reversions and Services, and other Hereditaments in Barham aforesaid, for lack
of Heirs Males, or Male of the Body of any of my Sons lawfully begotten, shall
remain to Thomas Digges, one of the Sons of Leonard Digges Esquire. late in the
Parish of Sutton, in the County of Kent aforesaid, and to the Heir Males, or
Male of his Body lawfully begotten for ever; And for lack of such Heir Male, to
remain to James Digges, another of the Sons of the said Leonard, and to the
Heirs Males, or Male of his Body lawfully to be begotten for ever; and for lack
of such Heir Male, to remain to the Right Heirs of me the aforesaid Christopher
Digges, another of the Sons of the aforesaid Leonard, and to the Heirs Males of
his body lawfully begotten for ever; and for lack of such Heir Male, to remain
to the right Heirs of me, the said Christopher Digges for ever, As by the
Testament and last Will aforesaid, amongst other things more fully appears.
And that afterward, and before -- etc. that is to say, the second day of
February, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
19th. the aforesaid Christopher, the Father, at Barham, in the County aforesaid
dyed, of the Manors, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid, in the Monstrans
de droit within written, specified, with the appurtenances mentioned so as
aforesaid as the ^aw requires, seized. And further the Jurors aforesaid, say
upon their O^th aforesaid, That the aforesaid Martha Digges, wife of the
aforesaid Christopher Digges, the Father him the said Christopher Digges her
Husband over lived; and that the aforesaid Martha afterward, that is to say,
the 4th. day of May, in the 19. year afores. a^ Barham aforesaid dyed: And
further the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
^h^mas Digges. Father of the aforesaid Posthumus Digges, in the Inquisition,
and Monstrans de droit named, and the aforesaid Tho. Diggs, in the Indenture
af^rel. here first specified named, were one and the same person, and not other
nor diverse; and that the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, in the Inquisition
aforesaid specified, and the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, in the Indenture
aforesaid, here first mentioned and comprised, are the self same Manors, Lands,
and Tenements and not others nor diverse, And that the aforesaid Lands. and
Tenements whereof the uses by the aforesaid Indenture, bearing date the 6th. day
of May, in the 12th. year aforesaid are revoked, are not the Manors, Lands, and
Tenements, in the aforesaid Monstrans de droit specified, nor any parcel
thereof, And that the uses of the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, in the
aforesaid Monstrans de droit specified, nor any part thereof, by the aforesaid
second Indenture here within specified was not Revoked, annulled, or mentioned
to be by the same revoked, or annulled: and that the aforesaid Manors, Lands,
and Tenements, whereof the uses by the aforesaid Indenture, bearing date the
20th. day of September, in the 13th. year aforesaid, mentioned to be by the
same Indenture. Revoked, and annulled, are the same Manors, Lands, and
Tenements, in the Monstrans de droit within written specified; and not other,
nor diverse. But whether upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, The said Christopher Digges the Father dyed seized of the Manors, Lands,
and Tenements, in the Monstrans de droit within written specified in his demesne
as of Fee, as in the aforesaid Monstrans de droit it is supposed, or not, the
Jurors aforesaid, are utterly Ignorant. And thereof pray the Advice of the
Justices aforesaid, and of the Court here, etc. And if, upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the same Justices and Court here, etc. That the aforesaid, Christopher Digges
the Father dyed, seized of the Manors, and Tenements, in the Monstrans de droit
within written specified in his demesne as of Fee, or of any part thereof with
the Appurtenances, Then the Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, dyed seized of the Manors, and
Tenements, with the Appurtenances, in the Monstrans de droit specified, or of
so much thereof, as to the same Justices shall ^eem the same Christopher so
dyed seized in his demesne as of Fee, as the aforesaid Christopher Digges, the
Son, and the aforesaid Edward Digges within pleading have alleged, And if upon
the whole m^tt^r aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid sound,
It shall seem to the same Justices, and Court here, etc. That the aforesaid
Chr^stopher Digges the Father dyed not seized of the Manors, and Tenements,
with the appurtenances, in the Monstrans de droit within written specified, or
of any parcel thereof in his demesne as of Fee, Then the said Juror* say upon
there Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father, dyed not
seized of the Manors, and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, in the Monstrans
de droit within written specified, or of so much thereof, as to the said
Justices aforesaid, shall seem the same Christopher so not to dye seized of ^n
his demesne as of Fee, in his demesne as of Fee, as the said Thomas Palmer, and
Margaret, within pleading have alleged, And because the Court of the Lady the
Queen hereof giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, are not yet
avis^d, day thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid in state is now
before the Lady the Queen, until the morrow of the Holy Trinity, wheresoever,
etc. to hear their Judgment of, and upon the premises, etc. because the Court
of the Lady the Queen here thereof are not yet, etc. At which day, before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Christopher Digges
the Son, and Edward Digges by their Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid,
Thomas Palmer, and Margaret, in their proper persons; And because the Court of
the Lady the Queen here, of giving their Jugement, of and upon the premises,
are not yet avised, further day is given to the parties aforesaid in suit, as
now before the Lady the Queen, until in 8. days of Saint Michael wheresoever,
etc. to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court or the
Lady the Queen here thereof, are not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come a^well the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son,
and the said Edward Digges by their Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid Thomas
Palmer, and Margaret, in their proper persons, and because the Court of the
said Lady the Queen here o^ giving their Judgment, of and upon the premises
are not yet avised, day thereof is given to the parties aforesa^d, before the
Lady the Queen, until in 8. days of Saint Hillary wheresoever, ande. for to
hear their Judg^ment thereof, etc. because the Court of the Lady the Queen here
are not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come
the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward Digges, by their Attorney
aforesaid, as the said Thomas, and Margaret, in their proper persons, and
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of, giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises are not yet avised, further day is given to the parties
aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen, until from Easter day, in 15. days
wheresoever, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here, thereof are not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and
Edward Digges by their Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer, and
Margaret, in their proper persons, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen,
of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises are not yet avised, further
day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, until the morrow of the Holy Trinity wheresoever, etc. to hear
their Judgment hereof, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here, are not
yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come as well
the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward Digges by their Attorney
aforesaid, as the aforesaid Thomas Palmer, and Margaret in their proper
persons: Upon which seen and by the Court of the Lady the Queen here, all and
singular the premises here fully understood, and mature deliberation thereof
being had, Because it seems to the Court of the Lady the Queen that now is
here, That the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Father dyed not seized of the
Manors, and Tenements with the Appurtenances, in the Monstrans de droit
aforesaid above specified, or of any parcel thereof in his demesne as of Fee, It
is granted that the aforesaid Christopher Digges the Son, and Edward Digges
take nothing by their Writ aforesaid, but for their false clamor thereof be in
mercy, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas Palmer, and Margaret go thereof without
day, etc.

Prohibition: and Attachment upon Prohibition.
Easter Term, Anno 38. Eliz. Rott. 628. in the Kings Bench: Co. 2. part. The
Bishop of Winchesters Case.
MEmorandum, that at another time, that is to say, Michael. Term last past,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come Robert Wright, by Thomas Webb
the younger, and brought here in the Court of the said Lady the Queen, then and
there his Bill against John Wright Executor of the Testament and last Will of
Nicholas Wright late whilst he lived Farmer, as he affirmed, of the Rectory
of the Parish Church of Eastmeon, otherwise called Eastmeam, in the Diocese of
Winchester, in the Province of Canterbury, in the Custody of the Marshalsea,
etc. in a Plea of Trespass and Contempt against those who prosecuted in the
Spiritual Court, against the Queens Prohibition to the contrary thereof,
directed and delivered: And are Pledges of suit John Do, and Richard Roo:
which Bill follows in these words: ss. South: That is to say, Robert Wright,
who as well for the Lady the Queen as for himself prosecuteth, complains of
John Wright Executor of the Testament and last Will of Nicholas ^^ight
deceased, late whilst he lived, as he affirmed, of the Rectory of the Parish
Church of Eastmeon, otherwise called Eastmeam, in the Diocese of Winchester, in
the Province of Canterbury, in the Custody of the Marshal, of the Marshalsey of
the Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self being, why he sueth in the
Spiritual Court, after the Queens Prohibition to the contrary thereof directed
and delivered, for that, that is to say, whereas all and singular Pleas, and
Conusans of Pleas, of whatsoever grants, demyses, or conttacts arising within
this Kingdom of England made and had, and the validity of such grants, and
demyses in Law, and other such Pleas, and Conusance of Pleas, so as they be not
Testamentary, or Matrimonial, to the said Lady the Queen that now is, and her
Royal Crown do especially appertain; and by the Laws of the Land of this
Kingdom of England, and not by the Laws or Sentences Ecclesiastical, ought to
be tried, determined, and discussed, and ever heretofore accustomed and ought
to be; And whereas Stephen by Divine Providence, late Bishop of Winchester, the
4th. day of July, in the year of the Reign of the Lord Henry late King of
England the 8th. the 38th. was seized in his demesne as of Fee in the Right of
his Bishopric, of and in the Manor of Eastmeon, in the County aforesaid,
whereof one capital Message called the Site of the Manor of Eastmeon, 800.
Acres of Lands, 50. Ac^es of Meadow, 1000. Acres of Pasture, and 400. Acres of
Wood with the Appurtenances, in Eastmeon in the County aforesaid (being demesne
Lands of the Manor aforesaid) then and time whereof the memory of man is not to
the contrary, was and yet are parcel, and also of and in one Message with the
Appurtenances, being in Eastmeon aforesaid, being to the Mansion house of the
same Manor. And whereas the said Stephen, and all his Predecessors, Bishops of
the Bishopric aforesaid, for the time being seized of the Manor aforesaid, and
other the premises with their Appurtenances, The Site of the Manor aforesaid,
and the capital message aforesaid, and the demesne Lands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, by himself, his Farmers, and Tenants thereof, and every parcel
thereof for Term of years, or at Wiil, held and were enjoyed, exonerated,
acquitted, freed, discharged, and privileged, of and from the payment of Tithes
whatsoever, of, in, or upon the capital message aforesaid, and the demesns
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and of every and any parcel thereof yearly
what way soever, for the whole time aforesaid, growing, happening, renewing, or
arising. And the aforesaid Stephen, late Bishop aforesaid, of the capital
Message aforesaid, and the demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
form aforesaid being seized, and the same having, and holding, exonerated,
acquitted, freed, and discharged, and privileged, of and from the payment of
Tithes whatsoever, of, in, and upon the capital Message aforesaid, and other
the premises with the Appurtenances, or any parcel thereof, growing, renewing,
or any wise happening. The said Stephen, the 4th. day of July, in the year of
the Reign of the said late King Henry the 8th. the 38th. at Eastmeon, in the
County aforesaid, By his Indenture with his Seal Episcopal sealed, and to the
Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is, here brought bearing date the
same day and year, demised to one Robert Wright, Grandfather of the said Robert
that now is plantif, The Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, By the name of all the Demesne Lands o^ the Manor of Eastmeon
aforesaid anciently belonging, with all Houses, Stables, Barns, and Buildings
upon the Moiety aforesaid, then and of old time situate, lying and being with
the Appurtenances, which Moiety, then lay in the fields on the South side of
the Town of Fastmeon aforesaid, Together with the Meadows, Feedings, and
Pastures, Enclosures, Ways, Paths, and other their Appurtenances, together
with the Farm of 40. Muttons, called Weathers, the highest price 16. pence, 40.
Ew Sheep, the highest price 16. pence, To have and occupy the said Moiety of
the Teneme^ts aforesaid with the Appurtena^ces, in form aforesaid demised, To
the aforesaid To. Wright the Gra^dfather and his Assigns, from the Feast of
St. Michael the Archangel, in the year of our Lord God, 1575. until the end and
Term of 40. years, then next following, and fully to be complete and Ended:
Yielding therefore yearly during the Term aforesaid, to the aforesaid Stephen
late Bishop aforesaid, or his Successors, at his Exchequer of Woluesloy in
Winchester, in the County of Southampton, then being, 10. pound, and 10.
shillings, of lawful money of England, at the Feasts of Easter and St. Michael,
by even and equal portions to be paid, and for the farm of the aforesaid 40.
Weathers, and 40. Ew Sheep, 11. pound, 13. shillings, and 4. pence, to be paid
at the Feast of St. Martin the Bishop Ad vincula, for the chief Weathers 3.
pence, and for the chief Ews 4. pence, as by the same Indenture amongst other
things it more fully appears. Which Indenture of demise, to the aforesaid
Robert Wright the Grandfather, in form aforesaid made, and all and singular
therein contained, Afterward, that is to say, the 20th. day of July, in the
38th. year abovesaid, William Kingsmill, then Dean of the Cathedral Church of
the Holy Trinity of Winchester aforesaid, and the Chapter of the same place, at
Winchester aforesaid, that is to say, in their Chapter House, there by their
Writing of Confirmation with the Seal of the Chapter sealed, in the life time
of the aforesaid Stephen, then being Bishop of Winchester aforesaid, and in the
life time of the said Robert Wright the Grandfather, now deceased, ratified,
and confirmed, as by the Writing of Confirmation, thereof bearing date the day
and year last aforesaid, amongst other things it appears. By virtue of which
demise and Confirmation, The same Robert Wright the Grandfather, was of the
Interest of the Term aforesaid, in the aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid, demised, possessed, and
the aforesaid Robert Wright the Grandfather, of the Interest of the Term
aforesaid, in the Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
in form aforesaid demised being possessed, The said Robert Wright the
Grandfather, the 14th. day of August, in the year 1558. at Eastmeon aforesaid,
made his Testament and last Will in Writing, and by the said his Testament made
and ordained Margaret then his Wife, and Nicholas Wright his younger Son, to be
Executors of his last Will, And by the said his last Will, gave and bequeathed
all his Interest aforesaid, of and in the aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands
aforesaid, so as is said demised, with the Appurtenances then to come, to
Edward Wright the Eldest Son of the aforesaid Robert the Grandfather, and
afterward the aforesaid Robert Wright the Grandfather, at Eastmeon aforesaid
dyed, of his Interest aforesaid, of and in the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to the said Robert the Grandfather, in form aforesaid demised,
possessed; After whose death, the aforesaid Margaret and Nicholas, took upon
them the burden of Execution of his last Will and Testament aforesaid, at
Eastmeon aforesaid, And the said Executors at Eastmeon aforesaid, gave their
consent that the said Edward Wright should have and enjoy to him and his
Assigns, the interest aforesaid, of the aforesaid Term of years, of and in the
Moiety of the demesne Lends aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the said Robert
Wright the Grandfathe, in form aforesaid demised; By virtue whereof the said
Edward was of the interest of the Term aforesaid possessed, and being so
thereof possessed, The said Edward, the 11th. day of July, in the year of our
Lord, 1563. at Eastmeon aforesaid, made his Testament and last Will in Writing,
and by his said Testament constituted and appointed Agnes then his Wife, to be
sole Executrix of his said last Will, And by the said his last Will, gave and
bequeathed all his interest aforesaid, in the Moiety aforesaid, of the demesne
Lands aforesaid, so as before is said, with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid
Robert Wright now the planti^, one of the Sons of the said Edward; And
afterward, the said Edward Wright, at Eastmeon aforesaid, dyed of his Interest
aforesaid, of and in the Moiety aforesaid, of the demesne Lands aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid demised, possessed; After whose death, the
aforesaid Agnes took upon her the burden of Execution of the last Will of the
said Edward aforesaid, at Eastmeon aforesaid, and the said Executrix, at
Eastmeon aforesaid gave her consent, that he the said Robert Wright, should
have and enjoy to him and his Assigns, the interest of the Term aforesaid, of
and in the aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, in form aforesaid demised. By virtue of which, the said Robert
Wright now plantif, was of the Interest of the Term aforesaid of and in the
Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances possessed, until
the morrow of the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, in the year of our Lord,
1575. in which morrow of the aforesaid Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, in
the year 1575. aforesaid, The said Robert Wright now plantif, into the
aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances, entered,
and was thereof possessed, And so thereof being possessed, the said Moiety with
the Appurtenances, had, held, and enjoyed, and now has and occupies, and
ought to have and occupy, of and from the payment of Tithes whatsoever, of, in,
or upon the Moiety aforesaid, of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, or any parcel thereof yearly, any manner of ways growing and
appertaining, renewing, or arising, for the occasion aforesaid in this behalf
alleged, utterly exonerated, acquitted, freed and privileged, by reason of the
Prescription and Privilege aforesaid. And whereas by the Statute in the
Parliament of the Lord Edward, late King of England the 6th. holden at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the 4th. day of November, in the
second year of his Reign, amongst other things, It is enacted by authority of
that Parliament, That no person be sued, or otherwise compelled to yield, give,
or pay, any manner of Tithes, for any Manors, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
which by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, or by any Privilege
or Prescription, were not chargeable with the payment of any such Tithes, by
any Composition real, as by the said Act amongst other things it more fully
appears; Yet the aforesaid Nicholas Wright, in his life time pretending
himself to be Farmer of the Rectory of the Parish Church aforesaid, and by
color of a demise to him thereof made, by Thomas by Divine Providence then
Bishop of Winchester, for the Term of 21. years supposed to be made, upon that
occasion falsely supposing Tithes, whatsoever in and upon the aforesaid Moiety
of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Robert
Wright, the Grandfather, in form aforesaid demised, arising and happening to
the said Nicholas Wright, by virtue of the demise aforesaid, to him in form
^foresaid supposed to be made, to belong and appertain, whereas in truth, The
said Robert now plantif, the Moiety aforesaid of the demesne Lands aforesaid, by
virtue of the Demise aforesaid, to the aforesaid Robert Wright the Grandfather,
in form aforesaid made, and by reason of the immunity of the Privilege and Act
aforesaid above specified, was exonerated, acquitted, freed, and privileged, of
and from payment of Tithes, whatsoever thereupon growing, to have and enjoy,
ought during the Term aforesaid, to the aforesaid Robert Wright the
Grandfather, in form aforesaid granted of the premises, not ignorant,
endeavoring, the Queens Majesty that now is, and her Regal Crown to
desinherit, and to draw the conusance of her Pleas, which do belong to her
Royal Crown, and not to the spiritual Court, to another Jurisdiction and
Examination in the spiritual Court, supposing the Indenture of demise
aforesaid, to the aforesaid Robert Wright the Granfather made, and the Writing
of Confirmation aforesaid, as also the Estate of him the said Robert now
plantif, of and in the Moiety aforesaid, of the demesne Lands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Robert the Grandfather, from the Tithes
aforesaid, in form aforesaid discharged had and made, to be void and of no
validity in Law, whereas in truth, The Indenture of demise aforesaid, and the
Writing of Confirmation the^eof, and also the Estate of the said Robert
aforesaid, the now plantif, of and in the Moiety of the aforesaid demesne Lands
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances to the aforesaid Robert the Grandfather, in
manner aforesaid demised, so as before is said discharged of Tithes, is good
and effectual in the Law; And whereas in truth, the same demise to the
aforesaid Nicholas in form aforesaid alleged to be made, (if any such wa^,) was
utterly void and insufficient in Law, and as to any Tithes of, in, and upon the
aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid growing is; The said Robert
Wright now the plantif, in the spiritual Court before the Reverend and worthy
Man, Mr. William Awbray, Doctor of Law, in the Court of Audience of causes and
business, in the Court of Canterbury lawfully deputed to hear, of and for the
withdrawing, and not payment of Tithes of Wheat, Barley, Pease, and Beans, of,
in, and upon, the aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid, in the year
of our Lord, 1590. growing, renewing, arising, and happening, as also of and
for the withdrawing, and non payment, of the Tithes of the Wool of Lambs and
Sheep, of the said Robert now plantif, of, in, and upon the aforesaid Moiety of
the demesne Lands aforesaid, in the year of our Lord aforesaid, kept shorn and
arising, as also of the Tithes of the Aples of the said Robert Wright the
plantif, of, in, and upon, the said aforesaid Moiety of the demesne Lands
aforesaid, in the year aforesaid, growing, gotten, and arising, the 8th. day of
October, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, at
Eastmeon aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, drew into suit: And the aforesaid
Nicholas, the same Robert now plantif, before the aforesaid spiritual Judge,
for that occasion aforesaid to appear, and to the said Nicholas, of and upon
the premises, to answer in that manner the validity in Law of the Indenture of
the demise aforesaid, by the said Stephen late Bishop aforesaid, in form
aforesaid made, and the Confirmation aforesaid, as also the Estate of the said
Robert the now plantif aforesaid, of and in the aforesaid Moiety of the
aforesaid demesne Lands with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Robert Wright
the Grandfather, in form aforesaid made, and the Tithes thereof arising, to the
spiritual Court aforesaid, to draw and determine, caused most unjustly bound:
Which Plea, by Appeal in that behalf had and made, from the aforesaid Court of
Audience, before the worshipful and worthy men, Robert Forth, Thomas Binge,
John Lloyd, Thomas Leg, and Richard Swale, Doctors of Law, Judges, Delegates,
in that behalf was duly removed, and in the spiritual Court before the same
Judges Delegates, or some of them at Eastmeon aforesaid, as yet depends
undecided: and although the said Robert the now Plaintiff, The Indenture of
demyse aforesaid, and the Writing of Confirmation aforesaid, and the Estate of
the said Robert now Plaintiff aforesaid, of and in the aforesaid Moiety of the
demesne Lands aforesaid, of the Tithes aforesaid, discharged with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid Robert Wright the Grand Father in form
aforesaid demysed, and the other matter aforesaid in this part contained, as
well to the aforesaid spiritual Court, before the aforesaid William Ambrey,
spiritual Judge aforesaid, as in the aforesaid spiritual Court, before the
Judges Delegates aforesaid, in discharge of the premises is showed, pleaded,
and alleged, and the Sealing and delivery of the Indenture aforesaid, and of
the Writing of Confirmation aforesaid, and the residue of the matter in that
behalf contained on the part of him the said Robert Wright, the now Plaintiff,
in the premises in that behalf alleged according to the Law of this Kingdom of
England with unavoidable truth and witness he offered to prove, yet the said
Judge of the Court of Audience aforesaid, and the aforesaid Judges Delegates in
the aforesaid spiritual Court aforesaid, The Plea, Allegation, and that proof
utterly refused, and every of them refused to admit. And afterward the Appeal
aforesaid so depending in the aforesaid spiritual Court before the Judges
aforesaid, The said Nicholas Wright at Eastmeon aforesaid, made his Testament
and last Will in writing, and thereof constituted and ordained John Wright his
Executor of his said Testament, and afterward there dyed, after whose death,
the aforesaid John Wright, took upon him the charge of the Execution of the
Testament aforesaid, and the Prosecution of the Appeal aforesaid, in the cause
aforesaid, and afterward the aforesaid John Wright the Executor aforesaid, the
aforesaid Robert Wright now Plaintiff in the aforesaid spiritual Court, before
the aforesaid Judges Delegates at Eastmeon aforesaid, for the occasion
aforesaid unjustly bound to appear, and the said Robert now Plaintiff, of, and
in the premises to condemn, and to the Tithes aforesaid, in the aforesaid
several spiritual Courts in form aforesaid demanded to him to be paid, to
compel by the Definitive sentence of the said Court of Delegates, with all his
power, yet endeavors, and daily threatens: And although the Writ of the
aforesaid Lady the Queen of Prohibition to the aforesaid Judges Delegates, and
other Judges in that behalf, the 12th, day of July, in the year of the Reign of
the Queen that now is, the 37th at Eastmeon aforesaid to the contrary thereof
was directed and delivered, The said John Wright the Plea aforesaid, after the
Queens Majesty's Prohibition first to the contrary thereof, in form aforesaid
directed and delivered, that is to say, the first day of October in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 37th. at Eastmeon
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid prosecuted, and in the Plea aforesaid,
proceeded, the said Writ of the said Lady the Queen of Prohibition, to the
aforesaid spiritval Judges, first to the contrary thereof in form aforesaid
directed and delivered in any thing notwithstanding, in contempt of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, and to the damage, prejudice, impoverishing, and
grievous molesting of him the said Robert now Plaintff, and contrary to the
form and effect of the Prescription, Privilege, and Act of Parliament
aforesaid; whereupon the same Robert now Plaintiff says, That he is the worse,
and has damage to the value of 40. Marks, and thereof as well for the said
Lady the Queen, as for himself, he brings suit, etc. And now at this day,
that is to say, Wednesday after 10. of ^aster this Term, until which day the
said John Wright, had license to the Bill aforesaid to imparl, comes as well
the said Robert Wright by his Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid ^ohn
Wright, by Stephen VVorley his Attorney, and the said John, defends the
force and injury when, etc. and all the contempt, and whatsoever, etc. and
says, he did not prosecute the Plea aforesaid, in the spiritual Court
aforesaid, after the Queens Prohibition to him first to the contrary directed
and delivered, in manner and form as the aforesaid Robert Wright, who as well,
etc. above against him complains: And of this puts himself upon the Country,
and the aforesaid Robert who as well for, etc. likewise, etc. But to have a
consultation in this behalf, The said John by Protestation* not acknowleging
any thing by the aforesaid Robert above alleged to be true, For Plea, the said
John says, That well and true it is, That the aforesaid Robert, in the
aforesaid spiritual Court, before the aforesaid Judges, Delegates, showed,
pleaded, and alleged, That the aforesaid Stephen late bishop of Winch^ster
^foresaid the aforesaid 4th. day of July, in the 38th. year aforesaid, was
seized of the aforesaid Manor of Eastmeon with the Appurtenances, in the County
of Southampton aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid capital Message with the
Appurtenances, called the Site of the Manor of Eastmeon, 800. Acres of Land,
500. Acres of Meadow, 400. Acres of Wood with the Appurtenances, in Eastmeon
aforesaid, being demesne Lands of the Manor aforesaid, then and from the time
aforesaid were parcel, And of and in the aforesaid Message with the
Appurtenances, being the Mansion house of the Manor aforesaid, in his demesne as
of Fee in the right of his Bishopric aforesaid, And that the said Stephen and
all his Predecessors, Bishops of the Bishopric aforesaid, being seized of the
Manor aforesaid, and other the premises with their Appurtenances, from the
whole time aforesaid, for him and his Farmers, his Tenants thereof, and of
every parcel thereof, for the term of years, or at will, had, holden, and
enjoyed, to them discharged, acquitted, freed, and privileged, of and from the
payment of any Tithes, of, in, or upon the aforesaid capital Message and
demesne Lands aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof yearly, any manner of ways, by the whole time aforesaid, growing,
happening, and renewing or arising; And that the aforesaid late Bishop, of the
capital Message aforesaid, and of the demesne ^ands aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, in form aforesaid being seized, and the same having, and
holding, exonerated, acquitted, freed, and privileged, of and from the payment
of Tithes whatsoever, in and upon the capital Message aforesaid, and other the
premises with their Appurtenances, or any part thereof growing, renewing, or in
any wise happening, the aforesaid 4th. day of July, in the year of the reign of
the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. the 38th. aforesaid, at Eastmeon
aforesaid, by his aforesaid Indenture, with the Seal of his Bishopric sealed,
bearing date the said day and year, demised to the aforesaid Robert Wright, the
Grandfather of the aforesaid Robert, The Moiety of the demesne Lands aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, by the name of all the demesne Lands of the Manor of
Eastmeon aforesaid, of old appertaining, with all Houses, Stables, Barns, and
Buildings, upon the Moiety aforesaid then and of old, situate, lying, and
being, with the Appurtenances, which Moiety, then lay in the Fields on the
South part of the Town of Eastmeane aforesaid, To have and to hold the said
Moiety with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Robert Wright the Grandfather,
and to his Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which then
should be in the year of our Lord God, 1575. until the end and Term of 40.
years, from thence next following and fully to be ended; And that afterward,
that is to say, The aforesaid 20th. day of July, in the 38th. year aforesaid,
the aforesaid William Kingsmill, then Dean of the aforesaid Cathedral Church of
the Holy Trinity of Winchester, and the Chapter of the same place, at
Winchester aforesaid, in their Chapter House aforesaid, by their Writing
aforesaid sealed, with the Chapter-Seal aforesaid, in the life of the aforesaid
late Bishop, and in the life time of the aforesaid Robert Wright the
Grandfather, confirmed and ratified; And that the said Robert Wright, by virtue
of the demise and confirmation aforesaid, was of the interest of the Term
aforesaid, of and in the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances possessed, and
so thereof being possessed, the aforesaid 14th. day of August, in the year of
our Lord, 1658. aforesaid, at Eastmeon aforesaid, made his Will in Writing, and
by his said Will, constituted the aforesaid Margaret and Nicholas Wright his
Executors, and by the said his Will, gave and bequeathed all his interest
aforesaid, of and in the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the
aforesaid Edward Wright, Son of the said Robert the Grandfather. And
afterward, at Eastmeon aforesaid dyed, of his Interest aforesaid, in form
aforesaid possessed; After whose death the aforesaid Edward, by the assent of
the Executors aforesaid, was of the Interest of the aforesaid Term of years, of
and in the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances possessed. And that the said
Edward, so being thereof possessed, the aforesaid 11th. day of July, in the
year of our Lord, 1563. abovesaid, at Eastmeon aforesaid, made his Will in
Writing, and by his said Will constituted one Agnes then his Wife his Executrix
of his Will aforesaid; And by the said his Will gave and bequeathed all his
Interest aforesaid, of and in the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to
the aforesaid Robert Wright the now plantif, and afterward there dyed of such
his interest aforesaid, of and in the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
in form aforesaid possessed; And that the said Robert now plantif, by the
consent of the said Agnes, the burden of the Execution of the Will aforesaid,
upon her taking, was of the Interest of the Term aforesaid, of and in the
Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances, possessed, until the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel, in the year of our Lord, 1575. immediately after which
Feast, the said Robert into the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances entered
and was thereof possessed, and that the aforesaid Robert thereof so possessed,
the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, likewise had and occupied, and ought
to have and occupy, of and from the payment of Tithes, whatsoever, of, in, and
upon the Moiety aforesaid with the Appurtenances, or any part thereof yearly,
any ways growing, happening, renewing, or arising by the occasion aforesaid
alleged, utterly discharged, acquitted, freed, and privileged, by reason of the
Prescription and Privilege aforesaid, and by force of the said Statute
aforesaid in the aforesaid Parliament of the aforesaid late King Edward the
6th. at Westminster aforesaid, the aforesaid 4th. day of November, in the
second year of his Reign, of the payment of Tithes, then made as the aforesaid
Robert Wright now plantif above alleged; But the said John Wright further
says, That the aforesaid Judges, Delegates, in the aforesaid Court, before
them, the Plea and Allegations of the aforesaid Robert Wright, now plaintiff,
allowed, and the Proofs thereof by him the said Robert brought* accepted, and
admitted. Without that that the aforesaid Judge, Delegates, in the aforesaid
spiritu^l Court before them, the Plea, Allegations, and Proofs, of the
aforesaid Robert Wright, now plan if ^foresaid, refused to admit in manner and
form, as the aforesaid Robert now plantif above has alleged: And this he is
ready to aver, whereupon he demands Judgment, and the Writ of the Lady the
Queen of consultation, to him in this behalf to be granted. And the aforesaid
Robert Wright now Plantif says, That he for any thing by the aforesaid John
Wright, above in pleading alleged, The said Writ of the said Lady the Queen of
Consultation ought not to have, because he says, That the Plea aforesaid, by
him the said John Wright, in form aforesaid above pleaded, and the matter
therein contained, is insufficient in Law to the aforesaid Writ of the Lady the
Queen of Consultation to be brought, to which the said Robert needs not, nor
by the Law of the Land is bound in any wise to answer, wherefore for default of
sufficient answer in this behalf, The said Robert demands Judgment, and his
damages aforesaid for the occasion aforesaid, to be adjudged unto him, etc. And
the aforesaid John Wright says, That the Plea aforesaid, by him the said
John, in manner and form aforesaid above pleaded, and the matter in the same
contained, is good and sufficient in Law, to the aforesaid Writ of the said
Lady the Queen of Consultation, to have and demand, which Plea, and the matter
in the same contained, the said John is ready to aver, and prove as to the
Court, etc. And because the said Robert to that Plea does not Answer, nor the
same hitherto any wise denies, the said John as at first demands Judgment,
and the Writ of the said Queen of Consultation, in this behalf to be granted
unto him, etc. And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, day is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until the same --
next after -- to hear their Judgment o^ and upon the premises, etc. Because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here, are not yet, etc.

Prohibition.
Michaelmas Term, Anno 31. and 32. Eliz. Rot. 447. in the Common Pleas, Co. 4.
part, Jeffreyes Case. Fol. 64.
M^morandum, That upon Monday, next after a Month of St. Michael this Term,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came William Jeffrey Cent. in his
proper person, and informed the Count of the Lady the Queen that now is here,
That whereas, according to the Law of the Land, and the Custom of this Kingdom
of England, time whereof the Memory of Men is not to the contrary, within the
said Kingdom had and used, The Inhabitants and Residents within any Parish
within the Kingdom aforesaid, within which any Parish Church is, The said
Church at their own propper costs, as often as need required was repaired, and
from the whole time aforesaid, used to be, and ought to be repaired, And that
every other person or persons, inhabiting without the same Parish in any other
Parish, from the Reparations thereof from the time aforesaid, were discharged
and acquitted, And whereas by the Law of the Land, and the Custom aforesaid, It
is not lawful to any person or persons, to impose any Rate or Tax upon any
person, not dwelling in any Parish where such Church to be repaired, is, in
respect, or by reason of any Lands or Tenements, which the said person holds
or occupies in the said Parish, where the said Church is to be repaired, as
above is said for the Reparation of any Church so unrepaired, without his
consent. And whereas also the Trial and Determination of the cause aforesaid,
is a matter determinable at the Common Law, and not by the Laws or Censures
Ecclesiastical, any ways to be Tried, Ended, or Discussed, nor used to be time
whereof the Memory of Man is not to the contrary; Yet Abraham Kenshely, and
Thomas Foster, Churchwardens of the Parish of Haylesham, in the County of
Sussex, not being ignorant of the Premises, falsely, and subtilely, pretending
the aforesaid William Jessrey, to be an Inhabitant within the Parish of
Haylesham aforesaid, (whereas in truth, the aforesaid William Jeffrey is, and
was dwelling within the Parish of Chiddingly, in the County aforesaid, and
never was dwelling within the Parish of Haylesham aforesaid) And the same
Church of Haylesham aforesaid, by Tenants and Proprietors of Lands and
Tenements within the same Parish behoved, and ought to be repaired,
Endeavoring the Queens Majesty that now is, and her Regal Crown to desinherit,
and the Conusance of Pleas, which to the said Queens Majesty, and to her Regal
Crown, and not to the spiritual Court does belong, to draw to be determined in
the spiritual Court, The said William Jeffrey, in the spiritual Court
aforesaid, before Doctor DREWRT, Doctor of Law in and throughout the whole
Archdeaconry of Lewis, of the most Reverend Father in Christ by Divine
Providence, Thomas Lord Bishop of Chichester, lawfully deputed, at the
procuring of the same Abraham and Thomas, in this behalf, of and for a certain
Tax upon him the said William Jeffrey, to and about the Reparations of the
Parish Church of Haylesham aforesaid, imposed, caused to be cited, and him the
said William in the spiritual Court aforesaid, before the aforesaid spiritual
Judge to appear, and him the said William so appearing to answer to certain
Articles of and for the Tax aforesaid, that is to say, for that the said
William Jeffrey, knew, believed, and heard, that within the Archdeaconry of
Jews, in the County aforesaid, there was a Church commonly called the Parish
Church of Haylesham, and that the said Parish Church, as well in the tiling as
in the covering thereof, as in other things needed and wanted, so that unless
it were repaired, it was feared it would fall to decay and ruin: And that as
well of Common Right, and of an ancient and laudable Custom, as also time
whereof the Memory of Men is not to the contrary, inviolably, and unquestoned,
it was used and observed, within the Parish of Haylesham aforesaid, That all
and singular the Parishoners intending the Reparation of any Church unrepaired,
according to the Rate and the Quality of their possessions, having and
occupying in same Parish, might or ought to impose a Rate or Tax, and also that
the said Church (mature deliberation being had thereof) could not be repaired
for less sum than Threescore and Ten pounds, As also that the Churchwardens
of the Parish Church of Haylesham aforesaid, for the time being, in the year of
our Lord, 1589. and two years then last past, of and with the consent of all
the Parishioners of Haylesham aforesaid, or the greater or better number of the
same, A Rate according to the Quantity and Qualities of the possessions
aforesaid, and of the Rents within the said Parish, being for the Reparation of
the said Church, of the possessions aforesaid, or Rents in the said Parish of
all and singular to be imposed, and the same to be taxed, had, decreed, and had
appointed a day and place, for the Rate and Tax aforesaid to be made, And that
of the same day in which the said Rate should be imposed, notice was given to
all the Parishioners a^oresaid, as also to Forreiners having Lands,
Possessions, or Rents, in the Parish of Haylesham aforesaid, and also in the
public Market there: And that at the time and place appointed for the imposing
of the aforesaid Tax or Rate, those Church* wardens, as also the Parishioners
of the said Parish, to the Rate and Tax aforesaid to be made proceeded, And the
sum of 4. pence of every Acre of Land, called Marsh-land, as also the sum of 2.
pence, of lawful Money of England, of every Acre of Land called Vpland, within
the Parish of Haylesham aforesaid being, for the Reparations of the aforesaid
Parish Church, by the havers and occupiers of the aforesaid Acres were imposed,
to be paid to the Churchwardens of the aforesaid Parish Church. As also that
the said William, 30. Acres of Marsh, called Marsh Ground, and 100. Acres of
Land, called Vpland, within the Parish aforesaid held and occupied, or Rents
for the same then received; And that the sum from the havers and occupyers of
the possessions aforesaid, or Rents within the aforesaid Parish of Haylesham
aforesaid, did not extend unto above the sum of 50. pounds of good and lawful
Money of England, according to the Rate and Tax aforesaid, to be levied and
collected, under the name and color of their Office (as before is said) of and
upon the premises to answer unjustly bound. And although the said William
Jeffrey, the matter aforesaid, above contained, in the spiritual Court
aforesaid, before the aforesaid spiritual Judge, in his discharge of the
premises often had pleaded, alleged, and the same with inevitable truth and
good Witness offered to prove, that he by the Law of the Land in form
aforesaid ought not to be cited, for the payment of the aforesaid sum upon him
the said William Jeffrey, for the Reparations of the Church of Haylesham
aforesaid, as before is said taxed, and for that the Tax aforesaid, for the
Reparations of the Church aforesaid, in the case aforesaid, is a matter
determinable at the Common Law, and not in the spiritual Court; Yet the said
spiritual Judge, to admit the same Plea, and Allegation utterly refused; And
the aforesaid Abraham, and Tho. Foster, him the said William Jeffrey, in the
spiritual Court aforesaid in the premises to be condemned, and to the payment
of the aforesaid several sums of Money, upon him the said William Jeffrey, for
the Reparations of the Church aforesaid, above in this behalf specially imposed
and taxed, which then by the Law of the Land (as before is said) to pay for the
reason aforesaid ought not, or is bounden to do, by the definitive Sentence of
the said spiritual Court, with all his strength endeavoreth, and daily
threatens, in contempt of the Queen that now is, and to the loss, prejudice,
impoverishing, and manifest grievance of him the said William, as also contrary
to the Law of the Land aforesaid: And this, the said William Jeffrey is ready
to aver, and humbly imploring the aid and assistance of the said Court of the
said Lady the Queen, that now is here, demands remedy, And the Writ of the said
Lady the Queen of Prohibition, to the aforesaid spiritual Judge, in form
aforesaid, to forbid him, that he the Plea aforesaid, nor any thing touching
the same before him he futher hold not, and it is granted unto him, etc. And
thereupon comes John Porter of Cheddingley, in the County aforesaid of Sussex
Esquire, Ard Thomas Aynscomb of Buxted, in the County aforesaid Gent. in their
proper persons, and undertake for the aforesaid William Jeffrey, That if it
happens the aforesaid Abraham Kenshley, and Thomas Foster, To the Court of
the Lady the Queen hereafter to come, to demand the said Queens Writ of
Consultation, or otherwise, to sue for Justice there of and upon the premises,
That then the said William, the said matter, or suggestion, should follow with
effect, until the Plea thereof, by some lawful means be ended, that is to say,
each of the Bail aforesaid upon the penalty of 10. pound, which said sum of 10.
pound, the Bail aforesaid acknowledged, and each of them acknowledged of their
Lands and Goods, and of every of them to be levied to the use of the said Lady
the Queen, If it shall so happen the said William, not to prosecute in form
aforesaid, with effect, etc.

REPLEVIN.
Michaelmas Term: Anno 23. Eliz. Rot. 1160. in the Common Pleas, C. 1. part
Capels Case. Fo. 54.
THomas Gately was summoned to answer John Hunt of a Plea, wherefore he took
the Cattle of the said John, and them detained against Gages, and Pledges, etc.
And whereupon, the said John, by John Lutwich his Attorney, complains that
the aforesaid Thomas, the 27th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen, that now is, the 22th. at Howcaple, in a certain place
called Stockins, took his Cattle, that is to say, 6. Oxen, and 6. Cows of him
the said John, and them unjustly detained against Gages, and Pledges until,
etc. whereupon he says, he is the worse, and has loss to the value of 100
pound, and thereof brings suit, etc. and the aforesaid Thomas, by Thomas
Willis his Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. And as
Bailiff of Anthony Capel Gent. acknowledges the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. and justly, etc. Because that
he says, that the place in which it is supposed the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid to be done, does contein, and at the time of the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid supposed to be done, did contein in it 300. Acres of Land, with the
appurtenances in Howcaple aforesaid, and that long before the aforesaid time in
which, etc. One Thomas Capel Esquire, was seized of the Manor of Howcaple, with
the appurtenances in the County aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid 300. Acres of
Land with the appurtenances in which, etc. are, and at the aforesaid time in
which, etc. as also time whereof the memory of men is not to the contrary were
parcel, in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, after the fourth
day of February, in the year of the Reign of the Lord Henry, late King of
England the 8th. the 27th. and before the time in which, etc Of the said Manor
with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other enfeoffed John Warmcombe,
Richard Wahrein, Alexander Whittington, Thomas Walwem, John I loid and Henry
Jones, To have and to hold the said Manor with the appurtenances, whereof, etc.
amongst other, to the said John Warmcombe, Richard Walwein, Alexander
Whittington, Thomas Walwein, John Llud, and Henry ^ones, their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, To the use of the aforesaid Thomas Capel, and the Heirs Males
of his body lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use of
Edward Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Edward lawfully
begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use of Richard Capel, and the
Heirs Males of the body of the said Richard lawfully begotten; and for default
of such issue, to the use of William Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of
the said William lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use
of Giles Capel, for the term of the life of the said Giles, and after the
decease of the said Giles, to the use of the Right Heirs of the said Thomas
Capel for ever: By virtue of which Feoffment, and by force of a certain Act of
Parliament of the aforesaid late King at Westminster, of transferring uses into
possession, in the 27th. year abovesaid, holden, made, The aforesaid Thomas
Capel was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances, whereof
(amongst other) in his demesne as of Feetail, that is to say, to him and the
Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, the
remainder thereof to the aforesaid Edward Capel, and the Heirs Males of his
body lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, the Remainder thereof in
form aforesaid expectant, and the aforesaid Thomas Capel, of the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other, in form
aforesaid being seized, before the aforesaid time in which, etc. at Howcaple
aforesaid dyed, of such his estate thereof seized, after whose death, The Manor
aforesaid with the appurtenances amongst other, descended to one William Capel,
as Son and Heir of the body of the aforesaid Thomas Capel lawfully begotten, by
which, the said William Capel the Son, before the aforesaid time in which* etc.
into the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. entered, and was
thereof seized in his demesne as of Feetail, that is to say, to him and the
Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, the
remainder thereof to the aforesaid Edward, and the Heirs Males of his body
lawfully begotten, in form aforesaid expectant. And the said Edward of that
remainder as of Feetail and Right being seized, before the time in which, etc.
at Howcaple aforesaid dyed of such his Estate seized, after whose death the
remainder thereof descended to one Richard Capel, as Son and Heir of the body
of the aforesaid Edward lawfully begotten: By which, the said Richard Capel the
Son, was seized of the aforesaid remainder, of the Manor aforesaid, with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other, as of Feetail, that is to say to
him, and the heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; and the said Richard
Capel the Son being thereof so seized, and the said William Capel the Son, of
the said Manor with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other, in form
aforesaid being seized, The said Richard Capel the Son, before the time in
which, that is to say, the 22th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 18th. at Howcaple aforesaid, By his
writing, which the said Thomas Gateley, with the Seal of the said Richard
Capel, Sealed here in Court brings, whose date is the same day and year,
granted to the aforesaid Anthony Capel by the name of Antho. Capel his Son, one
annuity or yearly rent of 50. l. to be going out of the Manor aforesaid, with
the appur. thereof, whereof, etc. amongst other, To have, hold, and enjoy, the
aforesaid annuity, or yearly Rent of 50. pound, to the aforesaid Anthony Capel
his Heirs and Assigns forever, at two Terms of the year, that is to say, at
the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the Anuntiation of the blessed
Mary the Virgin, by equal Portions to be paid; and if it should happen the
aforesaid annuity, or yearly Rent of 50. pound, to be behind not paid in part,
or in all, after any of the Feasts aforesaid, in manner, and form as before is
said, it ought to be paid, by the space of 20. days, that then, and from
thenceforth, and in all times, as often as it should happen the aforesaid
annuity, or yearly Rent so to be unpaid, that then it should be lawful, to the
aforesaid Anthony Capel, his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them into the
Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other, and into
any part or parcel thereof to enter and distrein, and the distresses so there
taken, and had, to drive, carry away, impound, and with him to retein, until
the said Anthony Capel or his Assigns, as well of the aforesaid, annuity, or
yearly Rent, so being behind be paid, as of the arrerages thereof, if any were,
should be satisfied and paid, as by the said writing^ amongst other things more
fully appears; and the aforesaid William Capel the Son of the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances thereof, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid
being seized, afterward, and before the time, in which, etc. That is to say,
the 10th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is, the 19th. at Howcaple aforesaid, dyed without Heir Male of his
body issuing; and because 25. pound, of the aforesaid yearly Rent of 50. pound,
after the death of the said William Capel the Son, at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, the 20th. by the space of 20. days after the Feast, to the aforesaid
Anthony Capel, the aforesaid time in which, etc. were behind not paid, The said
Thomas Gately, as Bailiff of the said Anthony, for the said 25. pound, of the
aforesaid yearly Rent, in form aforesaid being behind, does well avow the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place in which, etc. and justly, etc. as
in parcel of the Manor aforesaid, whereof, etc. to the distress of the said
Anthony aforesaid, charged and bound, etc. with this, that the said Thomas
Gateley will averr, That the aforesaid Richard Capel, at the time of the taking
aforesaid was, and as yet is living, and in full life, that is to say, at
Howcaple aforesaid, etc. And the aforesaid John Hunt says, That the aforesaid
Thomas Gateley for the cause before alleged, the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place, in which, etc. as Bailiff of the said
Anthony Capel, to be just ought not to a vow, Because he says, That well and
true it is, That the aforesaid Thomas Capel Esquire, was seized of the
aforesaid Manor of Howcaple, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in his demesne
as of Fee, and so thereof seized, after the aforesaid 4th. day of February, in
the year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the 8th. the 27th. aforesaid,
and before the aforesaid time in which, etc. Of the said Manor, with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. enfeoffed the aforesaid, John Warmcombe, Richard
Walweyn, Alevander Wittington, Thomas Walweyn, John Lloid, and Henry Jones, To
have, and to hold, the said Manor with the appurtenances amongst other, to the
said John Warmcombe, Richard Walweyn, Alexander VVittington, Thomas Walweyn,
John Lloid, and Henry, and their Heirs and Assigns forever, to the use of the
aforesaid Thomas Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Thomas
lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use of the aforesaid
Edward Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Edward lawfully
begotten; and for such default of such issue, To the use of the aforesaid
Richard Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Richard lawfully
begotten; and for default of such ^^e, To the use of the aforesaid William
Capel, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said William lawfully begotten;
and for default of such issue, to the use of Giles Capel, for the Term of the
life of the said Giles; and after the decease of the said Giles, to the use of
the Right Heirs of the said Thomas Capel forever. By virtue of which Feoffment,
and by force of the Statute aforesaid, The aforesaid Thomas Capel was seized of
the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other in his
demesne as of Feetail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his body
lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, the remainder thereof, to the
aforesaid, Edward Capel, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; and
for default of such issue, the remainder thereof in form aforesaid expectant;
and that the aforesaid Thomas Capel of the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized, before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. dyed of such his Estate thereof seized: After
whose death the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst
other, descended to the aforesaid William Capel, as Son and Heir of the body of
the aforesaid Thomas Capel lawfully begotten; By which the said William Capel
the Son, afterward and before the time in which, etc. into the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other, entered, and was
thereof seized in his demesne as of Feetail, that is to say, to him and his
Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; and that the aforesaid William Capel
the Son, of the said Manor with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other,
in form aforesaid being seized, The said Richard Capel, Son of the aforesaid
Edward Capel, the 22th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, the 18th. at Howcaple aforesaid, by the aforesaid
his Writing, granted to the aforesaid Anthony Capel, the aforesaid annuity, or
yearly Rent of 50. pound, to be going out of the Manor aforesaid, with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. as the aforesaid Thomas Gately above alleged. But
the said John Hunt further says, That the aforesaid William Capel of the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being seized:
That the Fine was levied in the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is
here, at Westminster aforesaid, from the day of Saint Martin in 15. days, in
the year of her Reign, the 19th. before James Dyer, Richard Harper, Roger
Manwood, and Robert Mounson, then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the
Bench here; and afterward in the 8th. day of Saint Hillary, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 19th. aforesaid, there
granted and Recorded before the same Justices, and other the said Lady the
Queens faithful people then there present, Between Richard Wooton, and Richard
Shawley Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid Will. Capel defenda^t, of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other, By the names of
the Manors of Capel, otherwise Hugh Capel, Showle, and Okeridge with the
Appurtenances, and 20. Messuages, 10. Tofts, 20. Cottages, 2. Mills, 3.
Dovehouses, 800. Acres of Land, 260. Acres of Meadow, 1700. Acres of Pasture,
200. Acres o^ Wood, 1000, Acres of Furz and Heath, and 5. pound Rent with the
Appurtenances i^ Capel, otherwise Hugh Capel, Showle, Okeridge, ^^rkell, and
^edbary. As also of the Advowson of the Church of Capel, otherwise Hugh Capel,
whereof a Plea of Covenant was summened between them in the said Court, That is
to say, That the aforesaid William acknowleged the aforesaid Manors, Tenements,
and Rents with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson of the Church aforesaid, to
be the Right of the said Richard, as these which the said Richard and John, had
of the gift of the aforesaid William, and those remised and quit claimed, from
him and his Heirs, to the aforesaid Richard and John, and the Heirs of the
aforesaid Richard forever. And further, the said William, granted for him and
his Heirs, That they warrant to the aforesaid Richard and John, and to the
Heirs of the said Richard, the aforesaid Manors, Tenements, Rents with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid, against all Men forever: And for
that Recognition, remise, quit claim, Warranty, Fine, and Concord, The said
Richard and John, gave to the aforesaid William, 700. pound Sterling; Which
Fine, in form aforesaid levied, was levied and had to the use of the said John
Hunt, and his Heirs: By virtue of which Fine, and by force of the Statute
aforesaid, the said John was seized of the Manors aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee; And the said John, so
thereof being seized, Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin Castleton, before the
aforesaid time of the taking, etc. that is to say, the 4th. day of Iunuary, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 19th.
abovesaid, sued forth out of the Court of the Chancery of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex then being, A
certain Writ of the said Lady the Queen of Entry upon Disseisin in the Post,
against him the said John Hunt, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. amongst other, by the names of the Manor of Capel, otherwise Hugh
Capel, otherwise How Capel with the Appurtenances, and 20. Messuages, 10.
To^ts, one Mill, 2. Dovehouses, 500. Acres of Land, 200. Acres of Meadow, 600.
Acres of Pasture, 100. Acres of Wood, 700. Acres of Furz and Heath, and 4.
pound Rent with the Appurtenances in Capel, otherwise Hugh Capel, otherwise How
Capel, Brocherton, and Sellershop, as also of the Advowson of the Church of
Capel, otherwise Hugh Capel, otherwise How Capel, To the then Sheriff of the
aforesaid County of Hereford directed; By which Writ, the said Lady the Queen
that now is, To the said then Sheriff commanded, That the said Sherif should
command the said John Hunt, that justly and without delay, he render to the
aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin, the Manor, Tenements and Rents
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid, which the said
Thomas, and Baldwin, to be their Right and Inheritance, and in which the said
John then had not Entry, but after Disseisin which Hugh Hunt, thereof unjustly
and without Judgment did to the aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin,
within 30. years then last past as they said; And if he should not do, and the
aforesaid Thomas Spencely, and Baldwin, should secure him the said Sheriff for
the prosecuting of their claim, Then he summon, by good Summoners him the said
John Hunt, that he should be before the then Justices of the said Lady the
Queen here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, in 8. days of St.
Hillary then next following, to show wherefore he did not do it. And that the
said then Sheriff should have there the summons, and that Writ: At which 8.
days of St. Hillary, before the aforesaid Janes Dyer Knight, and his
Companions then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here, came
as well the aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin, as the said John Hunt in
their proper persons, And James Warnecome Esquire, then Sheriff of the
aforesaid County of Hereford, then and there returned the Writ aforesaid, to
him in form aforesaid directed, in all things served and executed, that is to
say, That the said Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin, had found to him the said
Sheriff sureties for to prosecute that Writ, that is to say, John Do, and
Richard Roo: And that the said John Hunt, was summoned by John Den, and
Richard'^en, and upon that, The aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin,
declaring against him the said John Hunt, upon the Writ aforesaid, demanded
against him the said John Hunt, the Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid, as their Right and Inheritance,
and in which the said John had not then Entry, but after the Deseisin which
Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without Judgment did to the aforesaid Thomas
Spenceley, and Baldwin, within 30. years, etc. And whereupon they then said,
That they themselves were seized of the Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, in their demesne as of Fee and Right, and of the
Advowson aforesaid as of Fee and Right, in the time of Peace, in the time of
the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the profits thereof to the value, etc.
And in which, etc. And thereof then they brought suit, etc. And the said John
Hunt in his proper person, then defended his Right when, etc. And vouched
thereof to warranty the aforesaid William Capel, who then present there in the
same Court here in his proper person, willingly the Manor, Tenements, and Rent
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid to him did
warrant, And upon that, The said Thomas, and Baldwin, then demanded against the
aforesaid William, Tenant by his Warranty, the Manor, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the Advoson aforesaid, in form aforesaid,
etc. And whereupon then said, That they themselves were seized of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in their demesne as of
Fee and Right, And of the Advowson aforesaid as of Fee and Right in time of
Peace, in the time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the Profits
thereof to the value, etc. And the aforesaid William, Tenant by his Warranty
aforesaid, then defended his Right when, etc. And further then vouched to
warranty John Howel, who then likewise was present here in the said Court in
his proper person, and willingly, the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid
with the Apurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid to him did warrant, etc. And
thereupon, The said Thomas, and Baldwin, then demanded against him the said
John Howel, Tenant by his warranty, the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid in form aforesaid etc. And
whereupon, they then said, That they themselves were seized of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid in their demesne as of Fee and Right, And of the
Advowson aforesaid as of Fee and Right in the time of Peace, in the time of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, taking the Profits thereof to the value, etc.
and in which etc. And thereof then brought ther^ suit, etc. And the aforesaid
John Howell, Tenant by his Warranty, defended then his Right when, etc. And
then said, That the aforesaid Hugh did not disseise the aforesaid Thomas
Spenceley and Baldwin, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, and of the Advowson aforesaid, as the said Thomas, and Baldwin,
by their Writ and Declaration above then supposed, and of that then put
themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and John
Barldwin, then demanded license thereof to in parl, and had it, and afterward
the said Thomas, and Baldwin, came back here into the same Court here the same
Term in their proper persons, and the aforesaid John Howel, although he was
solemnly called, did not then come back, but in contempt of the Court departed
and made default: By which, Then it was granted in the same Court here, That
the aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin, recover their seisin against him
the said John Hunt, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson aforesaid; And that the said John should have
of the Lands of the said William Capel, to the value, etc. And that the said
William further should have of the Lands of the said John Howel, to the value,
etc. And that the said John then should be in mercy, etc. By virtue of which
Recovery, The aforesaid Thomas Spenceley, and Baldwin, into the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, entered and was thereof seized in
their demesne as of Fee. Which Recovery, and the Execution thereof, in form
aforesaid sued forth and had, was to the use of the said John Hunt, and his
Heirs for ever. By which, and by force of the Statute aforesaid, the said John
Hunt was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his demesne as
of Fee. And so thereof being seized, before the time of the taking, etc. put
his Cattle aforesaid, into the aforesaid 300. Acres of Land, the grass then
there growing to eat, and the Cattle aforesaid were in the said 300. Acres of
Land, the grass in them then growing eating, until the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, the aforesaid 22th. day of November, in the year of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, at Hew Capel aforesaid, in the aforesaid place called
Stockins, took the said Cattle of him the said John, and them unjuly detained
against Gages and Pledges, until, etc. as the said John against him above
complains: And this he is ready to aver; Wherefore in as much as the
aforesaid Thomas Gately, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid
place in which, etc. above acknowlegeth, The said John demands Judgment, and
his damages, for the occasion of the taking and unjustly detaining of the said
Cattle, to him to be adjudged. And the aforesaid Thomas Gateley says, That the
aforesaid Plea of the said John Hunt, in bar of the Avowry aforesaid pleaded,
i^ insufficient in Law to bar him the said Thomas, as Bailiff of the aforesaid
Anthony from the just avowage of the taking of the Cattle aaforesaid, in the
place in which, etc And that he to that Plea, in form aforesaid pleaded,
needs not, nor is bound by the Law to Answer, And this, he is ready to aver,
wherefore, for want of a sufficient Plea in this behalf, The said Thomas
demands Judgment and a return of the Cattle aforesaid, together with his
damages to be adjudged unto him, etc. And the aforesaid John Hunt, in as much
as he sufficient matter in Law to the aforesaid Thomas as Bailiff of the same
Anthony, from the just acknowleging of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in
the place aforesaid in which, etc. to be barred above confesses, which he is
ready to aver, which matter the aforesaid Thomas does not deny, nor to the same
any ways Answers, but altogether refuses to admit the same Averment, As at
first demands Judgment and his damages by the occasion of the taking, and
unjustly detaining of the Cattle aforesaid, to be to him adjudged, and. And
because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises,
before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid
here, until the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because that the said Justices here thereof are not yet, etc. At which day,
here come as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by
their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of Saint Michael,
to hear their Judgment thereof, because the said Justices here thereof are not
yet, etc. At which day here comes, as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the
aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here, will further avise themselves before they give their Judgment
of and upon he premises, day is given to the parties here, until in the morrow
of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the aforesaid John
Hunt, as the said Thomas Gateley by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the
Justices here will further avise themselves, before that they give their
Judgment of and upon the premises, day is given to the parties aforesaid here,
until in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
same Justices here are not thereof yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise themselves of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, day is given to the parties
here until from the day of Easter, in 15. days, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the same Justices here are not thereof as yet, etc. At which
day here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves before they give their Judgeme^t of and upon the premises, day is
given to the parties aforesaid here until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to
hear their Judgment thereof, because the Justices here thereof are not yet,
etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid
Thomas Gateley by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will
further avise themselves, before they give their Judgment of and upon the
premises, day is given to the parties here until the Morrow of ALL SOULS, to
hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here are inot yet, etc.
Before which day, the Plea aforesaid was adjourned by the Writ of the said Lady
the Queen of Common Adjornment from Westminster aforesaid, unto the Castle of
the Lady the Queen of Hertford, in the County of Hertford, until the aforesaid
morrow of All Souls: at which day, that is to say, at the aforesaid Castle of
Hertford, comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will
further avise themselves, before that they give their Judgment of and upon the
premises, day is given unto the parties aforesaid, until in 8. days of St.
Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here
thereof are not yet, etc. Before which day the Plea aforesaid was adjorned by
the Writ of the La^y the Queen of Common Adjornment, from the aforesaid Castle
of Hertford, unto Westminster aforesaid, at the aforesaid 8. days of St.
Hillary: at which day here, that is to say, at Westminster, comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before that they give their Judgment thereof, further day
is given here to the parties aforesaid, until from Easterday in 15. days, to
hear their Judgment thereof, because the Justices here are not thereof as yet,
etc. At which day, comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the said Thomas
Gately, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will
further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before that they give their
Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until in the
morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here, are not thereof as yet, etc. At which day here comes as well
the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves, before
they give their Judgment of and upon the premises, day is given to the parties
here, until in 8. days of St. Michael, for to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the same Justices here, are not thereof as yet, etc. At which day, here
comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley by
their Attorneys aforesaid, and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves, before they give their Judgment of an^ upon the premises, day is
given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof, are not yet,
etc. At which day here comes, as well the said John Hunt, as the aforesaid
Thomas Gately, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will
further avise themselves, before they give their Judgment of and upon the
premises, day is given to the parties here, until from the day of Easter in
15. days to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here, are
thereof not yet, etc. at which day here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt,
as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here will further avise themselves, before that they give their
Judgment of and upon the premises, day is given to the parties aforesaid here,
until in 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the same Justices here are not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here, will avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties
aforesaid, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the same Justices here thereof, are not yet, etc. at which day here
comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by
their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid, until from the day of Easier in t5.
days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof,
are not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as
the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the
Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before
they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here,
until In the morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well
the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before that they give their Judgment thereof, day is given
to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Michael, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof, are not yet, etc. at
which day comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will
further avise of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment
thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St.
^illary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here
thereof, Lot as yet, etc. at which day, here comteh as well the aforesaid John
Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Justices here, will further avise of and upon the premises, before
they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid, here
until from Easter day, in 15. days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here come as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to
the parties aforesaid, here until the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here (...) not yet, etc. At which
day here, comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the said Thomas Gateley,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid here until in 8. days of Saint Michael,
to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet,
etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the
aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here, will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before
they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here
until in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the same justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well
the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the justices here, will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before that they give their judgment thereof, day further
is given to the parties aforesaid, here until from the day of Easter, in 15.
days, to hear their judgment thereof, because that the same justices here
thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the aforesaid John Humt,
as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before
they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here
until in the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their judgment thereof,
because the same Justices here not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well
the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before that they give their judgment thereof, day is given
to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear
their judgment thereof, because the same Justices hear not yet, etc. At which
day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will
futher avise themselves of and upon the premises before they give their
judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here until in 8. days
of Saint Hillary, to hear their judgment thereof, because the same Justices
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John
Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Cateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the parties
aforesaid here until from the day of Easter, 15. days to hear their judgment
thereof, because the same justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day,
here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley by
their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until the Morrow of the Holy
Trinity, to hear their judgment hereof, because the same Justices here thereof
not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the
aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before
they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the part^es aforesaid here,
until in 8. days of Saint Michael to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the same Justices here, thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well
the said Iohnt Hunt, as the aforesaid, Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here, will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to
the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof, not yet, etc. At
which day here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will
further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until from the
day of Easter in 15. days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here, thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to
the parties aforesaid here, until in the morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof, not yet, etc.
at which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid
Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here
will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8.
days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here thereof, not yet, etc. at which day, here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here, will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, further day is
given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here, of their Judgment
thereof, not yet, etc. at which day here, comes as well the aforesaid John
Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and
because ^he Justices here, will further avise themselves, before they give
their Judgment of and upon the premises, day further is given to the parties
aforesaid here until from the day of Easter in 15. days ^o hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof, not yet, etc. at
which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas
Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices will further
avise themselves of and upon the premises, day is given to the partis aforesaid
here, until in the morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. at which day,
here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day is
given to the parties a^oresaid here, until in 8. days of St. Michael, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here, thereof not yet, etc.
at which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid
Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here,
will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their
Judgment thereof, day further is given to the parties aforesaid here, until
in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here, thereof not yet, etc. at which day here comes, as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and
because the Justices here, will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day further is given to the
parties aforesaid here until from the day of Easter in 15. days, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc.
at which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John, as the aforesaid Thomas,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here, will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until in the morrow of the Holy
Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here,
thereof not yet, etc. at which day here comes as well the aforesaid John, as
the aforesaid Thomas, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices
here, will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give
their Judgment thereof, day is further given to the parties aforesaid, until
in 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here, thereof not yet, etc. at which day, here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hunt, as the aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day furthe is
given to the parties aforesaid here, until in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here, thereof not yet, etc.
At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John, as the aforesaid Thomas,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day further is given to the parties a^oresaid here until from the day of
Easter in 15. days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid
John, as the aforesaid Thomas, by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the
Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises before
they give their Judgment thereof, day further is given to the parties aforesaid
here until the morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes
as well the aforesaid John, as the aforesaid Thomas, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, further day is
given to the parties aforesaid here until the morrow of All Souls, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the said Justices here thereof not yet, etc.
Before which day the Plea aforesaid was adjorned by the Writ of the Lady the
Queen of Common Adjornment from Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, unto
the Castle of the Lady the Queen of Hertford, in the County of Hertford, at the
same morrow of All-Soules, etc. At which day here, that is to say, at the
Castle of Hertford, comes as well the aforesaid John, as the aforesaid Thomas,
by their Attorneys aforesaid; and because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid here in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
their Judgment thereof, before the said Justices here thereof not yet, etc.
Before which day, the Plea aforesaid, was adjorned by the Writ of the Queen of
Common adjornment, from the said Castle of the said Queen of Hertford, in the
County of Hertford unto Westminster aforesaid, in the aforesaid County of
Middlesex, at the same 8. days of St. Hillary, etc. And now here, that is to
say, at Westminster aforesaid, comes as well the aforesaid John, as the
aforesaid Thomas Gateley, by their Attorneys aforesaid: and upon this, the
premises being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, It seems to
the same Justices here, That the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid John Hunt
above in Bar of the Conusance aforesaid pleaded is sufficient in Law to him
the said Thomas Gateley, as Bailiff of the said Anthony, justly acknowledging
the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which to Bar, as
the aforesaid, Ihhn Hunt* above alleged, for which, the aforesaid John Hunt his
damages, for the occasion of the taking, and unjustly deteining of the Cattle
aforesaid, against the aforesaid Thomas Gateley ought to recover, But because
it is not known, what damages the aforesaid John Hunt, for the occasion of
taking, and unjustly deteining of the Cattle aforesaid sustained, It is
Commanded to the Sheriff, that by the Oaths of good and lawful men of his
County, he diligently enquire what damages the said John Hunt sustained, as
well by the occasion of the taking, and unjustly deteining of the Cattle
aforesaid, as for his Costs and Charges by him about his suit in this behalf
expended; and the Enquire which, etc. The Sheriff make to appear here from the
day of Easter in 15. days under his Seal, etc. And the Seals, etc. At which
day here comes the aforesaid John Hunt, by his Attorney aforesaid; And upon
this, The same John Hunt, acknowledges here in the Court here, that he would
not further prosecute the same Thomas Gateley for any damages to him, for the
occasion of the taking, and unjustly deteining of the Cattle aforesaid to be
adjudged, but all the said damages to him so to be adjudged willingly here in
Court to the said Thomas Gateley does remise and release; Therefore the said
Thomas Gateley of those damages be acquitted, etc.

REPLEVIN.
Trinity Term: Anno 36. Eliz. Rot. 1676. in the Common Pleas, C. 1. part,
Archers Case. Fol. 65.
John Smith Gent. was summoned to Answer to William Baldwin of a Plea,
wherefore he took the Cattle of the said William, and them unjustly detained,
Essex.
against Gages, and Pledges, etc. And whereupon, The said William by Isaac
Hamond his Attorney complains, That the aforesaid John, the 9th. of January,
in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 36th. at
Bocking, in a certain place called the Meadow, abutting upon the Common
Highway, leading from Braintree, unto Pantforld, in the County aforesaid
against the North-East, and upon the Lands of John Mott toward the South*
West, took Cattle, that is to say, 26. Sheep of him the said William, and them
unjustly detained against Gages and Pledges, until, etc. Whereupon he says he
is the worse, and has loss to the value of 40. pound, and thereof he brings
suit, etc. And the aforesaid John, by Tho. Reynolds his Attorney comes, and
defends the force and Injury when, etc. And as Bailiff of Joh. Kent gent. Son
of Joh. Kent gent. deceased. well acknowledges the taking of the Cattle
aforesa. in the place aforesa. in which, etc. and justly, etc. Because he says,
That the same place in which it is supposed the taking the Cattle aforesaid
above to be done, contains in it self 4. Acres of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Bocking aforesaid, which 4. Acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances, at the time aforesaid in which etc. Was the Soil, and Freehold
of the said John Kent the Son; and because the Cattle aforesaid, the time
aforesaid in which, etc. were in the same then eating the grass, and doing
damage there* The said John Smith, as Bailiff of the aforesaid John Kent the
Son, does well acknowledge the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place
aforesaid in which, etc. and justly, there so damage feisant etc. And the
aforesaid William Baldwin says, That the said John Smith, as Bailiff of the
said John Kent the Son, for the reason before alleged, ought not to make
Conusance, of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid to be just, Because he says,
That long before the said taking aforesaid had, One John Archer Gent. was
seized of the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture, with their appurtenances in which,
etc. in his demesne as of Fee; and he the said John being thereof so seized,
before the aforesaid time of the taking aforesaid done, that is to say, the
8th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now
is, the 36th. aforesaid, gave license unto the said William, to put his Cattle
aforesaid, into the aforesaid place in which, etc. to eat the grass there
growing, By virtue of which license, the said William afterward, that is to
say, the said aforesaid 9th. day of January, in the 36th. year aforesaid, put
his Cattle aforesaid, in the place in which, etc. to eat the grass there
growing, which Cattle were in the said place in which, etc. eating the grass
then growing in the same, until the said John Smith, the aforesaid 9th. day of
January, in the year of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 36th. aforesaid, at
Bocking aforesaid, in the aforesaid place called the Meadow, took the Cattle
aforesaid of him the said William, and them unjustly detained against Gages and
Pledges until, etc. As he above him complains, without that that the
aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc. the time
of the taking aforesaid done, was the Soil and Freehold of the said John Kent
the Son, as the said William above has alleged. And this he is ready to aver;
Wherefore in as much as the said John Smith, acknowlegeth the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, The said William demands
Judgment and his damages, for the occasion of the taking, and unjustly
detaining of the same Cattle to be adjudged to him, etc. And the aforesaid John
Smith, as at first says, That the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with their
appurtenances in which, etc the time aforesaid, in which, etc. were the Soil
and Freehold of the said J. Kent the Son, as he before has alleged, And of
this, puts himself upon the Country, and the said William Baldwin likewise,
And therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he cause to come here from
the day of Holy Trinity, in 3. Weeks 12. etc. by whom, etc. and who neither,
etc. to Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. And afterward the Process was
continued between the aforesaid parties of the aforesaid Plea by juries put
between them in respite, here until this day, that is to say, from Easter Day,
in three Weeks, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 37th. And now here at this day, comes as well the aforesaid William, as
the aforesaid John Smith, by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the Jurors thereof
impannelled being called likewise come, who to say the truth of the premises,
chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That one Francis Archer, was
seized of the said 4. Acres of Pasture with their appurtenances, in which, etc.
in his demesne as of Fee, and held the same of one Thomas Wilson, as his Manor
of -- in the County aforesaid in Free Socage, and that the said Francis Archer
had issue, one Robert Archer, which Robert, had then issue the aforesaid John
Archer the Son, and his Right and next Heir apparent; Which aforesaid Francis
Archer, so of the aforesaid 4. acres of Pasture with the appurtenances being
seized, before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 25th. day of
November, in the year of our Lord, 1578. made his last Will and Testament in
Writing, and by the same his last Will, Willed and Bequeathed the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, amongst other things as follows. Item, I
give and bequeath to Robert Archer my Son, All that my Message or Tenement
with the appurtenances (called the Greyhound) with all and singular the Lands
and Grounds, which, and whatsoever I had purchased and bought, of one John
Palmer, as they are set, lying and being in Bocking aforesaid, To have, and to
hold, the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises, late purchased and
bought of the said John Palmer, as is aforesaid, to the said Robert Archer my
Son, from and after the day of my death, forthwards during his natural life,
and after the death of Robert Archer my Son, I will, my said Message or
Tenement (called the Greyhound) together with all the Lands and Grounds which
I lately purchased of the said John Palmer, shall wholly remain to the Right
and next Heir, of the same Robert Archer, and to the Heirs of his Body lawfully
begotten for ever. And afterward, the aforesaid Francis Archer, dyed of the
aforesaid 4. acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, amongst other in form
aforesaid seized. And the said jurors further say upon their Oath, That the
aforesaid Francis Archer, purchased the aforesaid 4. acres of Pasture with
their appurtenances of the aforesaid John Palmer, in the aforesaid last Will of
the aforesaid Francis named; And the jurors further say upon their Oath, That
after the death of the said Francis Archer, the aforesaid Robert Archer, being
Son and Heir apparent of the aforesaid Francis, into the aforesaid 4. acres of
Pasture with their appurtenances, entered and was thereof seized of such estate,
as the Law in this case requires; And the said Robert so thereof being seized,
before the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the 21th. day of
January, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
26th. by his deed of Feoffment, with the Seal of the said Robert sealed, and to
the jurors aforesaid in Evidence showed, Enfeoffed one John Kent, Father of the
said John Kent, in the Conusance aforesaid above named, of the aforesaid 4.
acres of Pasture with their appurtenances, in which, etc. amongst other, By the
name of all that his Message or Tenement, and all Houses, Buildings, Barns,
Orchards, Gardens, with the appurtenances, sometimes called or known by the
name of the Greyhound, or otherwise, or by what other name or names the same
were called or known, situate, lying and being in Bocking aforesaid, in a
street there called Bocking haud, and of all those Lands, Meadows, and
Pastures, to the same belonging or appertaining, or with the same at any time
then before demised, used, or occupied, lying, and being at Bocking aforesaid,
To have and to hold to the aforesaid John Kent the Father, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the proper use and behoof of the said John, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And further the said Robert Archer, and his Heirs, by the
deed aforesaid, all and singular the aforesaid Messuages, or Tenements, Houses,
Buildings, Meadows, Pastures, and other the premises aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid John Kent the Father, his Heirs and Assigns,
to the use in the said deed mentioned, against all men did warrant, as by the
said Charter of Feoffment, to the Jurors aforesaid given in Evidence it more
fully appears. By virtue of which Feoffment, the aforesaid John Kent the
Father, was seized of the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with their
appurtenances, in which, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, And further, the Jurors
before say upon their Oath, That after the Feoffment aforesaid, in form
aforesaid made, The aforesaid John Archer, Son, and right and next Heir
apparent of the aforesaid Robert Archer, in the lives of the aforesaid Robert
Archer, and John Kent the Father, into the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with
the appurtenances, in which, etc. Upon the possession of the aforesaid John
Kent the Father, thereof entered, upon whose possession of the said John Archer
thereof, the said John Kent the Father afterward re-entred, and was of the
aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with their appurtenances, in which, etc. seized
as the Law in this case requires, and the said John Kent the Father, so
thereof being seized, before the aforesaid time in which, that is to say, the
16th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is
the 27th. made his Testament and last Will in Writing, and by the same his last
Will, gave and bequeathed to the aforesaid John his second Son, and his Heirs,
the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, in which, etc.
amongst other, and afterward and before the time in which, etc. the aforesaid
John Kent the Father, of such estate of the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with
the appurtenances, in which, etc. dyed seized, After whose death, The aforesaid
John Kent the Son, into the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with their
Appurtenances, entered and was thereof seized, of such estate as the Law in this
case requires: And afterward, and before the aforesaid time in which, etc.
The aforesaid Robert Archer dyed, After whose death, The aforesaid John Archer
Son, and right and next Heir of the aforesaid Robert Archer, into the aforesaid
4. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, in which, etc. upon the possession
of the said John Kent the Son, thereof entered, and was thereof seized, as the
Law in this case requires. And the said John Archer, so thereof being seized,
the aforesaid 8th. day of November, in the 36th. year aforesaid, gave license
to the said William Baldwin, to put his Cattle aforesaid, into the aforesaid
place in which, etc. the grass in the same then growing to eat; By virtue of
which license, the said William afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid 9th.
day of January, in 36th. year abovesaid, put his Cattle aforesaid, into the
aforesaid place in which, etc. to eat the grass then and there growing, which
Cattle were in the same place in which, etc. the grass in the same then eating,
until the aforesaid John Smith, as Bailiff of the aforesaid John Kent the Son,
the aforesaid 9th. day of January, in the 36th. year abovesaid, in the
aforesaid place called the Meadow, to the use of the said John the Son entered,
and took the aforesaid Cattle of the aforesaid William, and them detained
against Gages and Pledges, Until, etc. as the aforesaid William Baldwin above
against the aforesaid John Smith complains: And if upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, it shall seem to
the Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with their
appurtenances, in which, etc. the aforesaid time in which, etc. were not the
Soil and Freehold of the aforesaid John Kent the Son, Then the said Jurors say
upon their Oath, That the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances,
in which, etc. the aforesaid time in which, etc. were not the Soil and Freehold
of the aforesaid John Kent the Son, as the aforesaid William Baldwin above has
alleged: And then they assess the damages of the said William Baldwin, by
occasion of the taking and unjust detaining of the aforesaid Cattle, above his
costs and charges by him about his suit in this behalf expended to 14. pence,
and for his costs and charges to 2. pence. And if upon the whole matter
aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, it shall seem to
the Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid 4. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. the aforesaid time in which, etc. were the Soil
and Freehold of the aforesaid John Kent the Son, as the said John Smith above
allegeth, Then they assess the damages of him the said John Smith, by the
occasion aforesaid, above his costs and charges by him about his suit in this
behalf expended, to 12. pence, and for his costs and charges to 2. pence, And
because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises,
before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties here in
the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the
aforesaid William, as the aforesaid John by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their judgment thereof, day farther is given to the
parties here until in 8. days of St. Michael, to hear their judgment of them,
because the same justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes
as well the aforesaid William, as the aforesaid John, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises before they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the
parties here in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their judgment thereof,
because the same justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day comes as well
the aforesaid William, as the aforesaid John by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, day further is given to the parties aforesaid here until from
Easter Day, in 15. days, to hear their judgment thereof, because the same
justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, comes as well the aforesaid
William, as the aforesaid John by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
justices here, will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, before
they give their judgment thereof, day further is given to the parties
aforesaid here until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their judgment
thereof, because the same justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day,
here comes as well the aforesaid William, as the aforesaid John, by their
Attorneys aforesaid; And upon this, The premises being seen, and by the
justices here fully understood, It is granted that the said William, take
nothing by his Writ aforesaid, but be in mercy for his false clamor, and the
aforesaid John thereof go without day, etc. And that he have retorn of his
Cattle aforesaid, to hold for ever irreplegiable, etc. and how, etc. And that
the Sheriff make it appear here in 8. days of Saint Michael, etc. It is also
granted, That the aforesaid John, recover against the said William, his damages
to 14. pence, by the jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid assessed, as also 18.
pound, 8. shillings, and 10. pence, to him the said John at his request, for
his costs and charges aforesaid, by the Court here of Increase adjudged, which
damages amount in the whole to 19. pound, etc.

Replevin.
Trinity Term, Anno 380. Eliz. Rot. 183. in the Common Pleas, C. 1. part,
Bredons Case. Fo. 67. Suss.

WIlliam Bredon, and John Bredon, were summoned to answer to Agnes Gardener
Widow, of a Plea, Wherefore they took the Cattle of the said Agnes, and them
unjustly detained against Gages and Pledges, etc. And whereupon the said Agnes,
by Thomas Waller her Attorney complains, That the aforesaid William and John,
the 18th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now
is the 37th. at Stowmarket, in a certain Place called the Parkwood, parcel of
the Manor of Columbine hall, took Cattle, that is to say, 15. Cowes Milch, and
5. Calves of the said Agnes, and them unjustly detained against Gages and
Pledges, until, etc. Whereupon she says, that she is the worse, and has
damage to the value of 10. pound, And thereof brings suit, etc. And the said
William, and John, by Richard Walker their Attorney, come and defend the force
and injury when, etc. And as Bailiffs of Martha Carry Widow, do acknowledge the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place in which, etc. And justly, etc.
Because they say, That the same place in which it is supposed the taking above
to have been made, does contain, and at the time of the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, did contain in it self 8. Ac^es of Lands with the appurtenances, in
Stow-market aforesaid, and that long before the aforesaid time in which, etc.
One John Gardener Gent. was seized of and in the Manor of Collumbine hall,
otherwise Thorney Collumbers, with the appurtenances in the County aforesaid,
whereof the aforesaid 8. Acres of Land with the appurtenances, in which, etc.
are, and the aforesaid time in which, etc. And also from the time whereof the
Memory of Man is not to the contrary were parcel, in his demesne as of Fee, and
he being thereof so seized, A Fine was levied in the Court of the Lady the
Queen that now is of the Bench here, that is to say, at Westminster, in 8.
days of Saint Michael, in the year of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
29th. before Edmond Anderson, Francis Windham, William Periam, and Francis
Rodes, then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here, and other
the said Queens faithful people here then present, Between Edmond Carry Knight,
and Robert Carry Esquire, Plaintiffs, and William Carry Esquire, the aforesaid
John Gardener, and the said Agnes now Plaintiff, then the Wife of the said
John, and George Totty Gentleman, and Elizabeth his Wife, by the names of
William Carry Esquire, John Gardener Gentleman, and Agnes his Wife, George
Totty Gentleman, and Elizabeth his Wife Deforceants, of the Manor aforesaid
with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. And of 10. Messuages, 10. Cortages, 10
Barns, one Dove-house, 20. Cartilages, 20. Gardens, 10. Orchards, 300. Acres of
Land, 60. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30. Acres of Wood, 60. Acres
of Furz and Heath, the Rent of 1. pound of Wax, and 4. Capons, 30. shillings of
Rent, with the appurtenances, in Stow*market, Newton, Gipping, and One House;
As also of the view of Frank Pledge, in Stow-market, Newton, Gipping, and One
House, By the names of the Manors of Collumbine hall, otherwise Thorney
Collum^bers with the appurtenances, and of 10. Messuages, 10. Cottages, 10.
Barns, one Dove house, 20. Curtilages, 20. Gardens, 10. Orchards, 300. Acres of
Land, 60. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30. Acres of Wood, 60. Acres
of Furz and Heath, 30. shillings of Rent, and of the Rent of 1. pound of Wax,
and 4. Capons with the appurtenances, in Stow-market, Newton, Gipping, and One
House, as also of the view of Frank Pledge, and whatsoever to view of Frank
Pledge does appertain in Stow-market, Newton, Gipping, and One House, whereof a
Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the said Court, that is to say,
That the aforesaid William, John, Agnes, George, and Elizabeth, acknowledge the
aforesaid Manor, Tenements, Rents, and view of Frank Pledge with their
appurtenances, to be the right of him said Edmond, as those which the said
Edmond and Robert, had of the gift of the aforesaid William, John, Agnes,
George, and Elizabeth, and them released and quit claim from them the said
William, John, Agnes, George, and Elizabeth, and their Heirs to the aforesaid
Edmond, and Robert, and to the Heirs of the said Robert for ever. And besides
the said William granted, for him and his Heirs, That they would warrant to the
aforesaid Edmond and Robert, and to the Heirs of the said Edmond, the aforesaid
Manor, Tenements, Rents and view of Frank Pledge, against him the said William,
and his Heirs forever. And further, the said John and Agnes, granted for them
and the Heirs of him the said John, that they would warrant, to the aforesaid
Edmond and Robert, and to the Heirs of the said Edmond, the Manor, Tenements,
Rents and view of Frank Pledge with the appurtenances, against him the said
John and Agnes, and the Heirs of the said John for ever. And moreover, the said
George and Elizabeth, granted for them, and the Heirs of him the said George,
that they would warrant to the aforesaid Edmond and Robert, and to the Heirs of
the said Edmond, The Manor, Tenements, Rents and view of Frank Pledge with the
appurtenances, against them the same George and Elizabeth, and the Heirs of the
said George forever. Which Fine of the Manor, Tenements, Rents and view of
Frank Pledge aforesaid with the appurtenances, in form aforesaid levied, was
had and levied, To the use of them the said John Gardener, and Agnes then his
Wi^e, for the Term of their lives, and of the longest liver of them, without
impeachment of waste, in any the Woods and Underwoods, And after the decease of
the same John Gardener and Agnes, To the use of the aforesaid William Carry, and
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten; And for default of such issue, To the
use of the aforesaid ^ob. Carry then Esquire. and now Knight, and the Heirs of his
Body lawfully begotten; And for default of such issue, To the use of Henry Carry
Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs for ever. By virtue of which Fine, And
by ^orce of a certain Act of Parliament of the Lord Henry late King of England
the 8th. At Westminster in the County of Middlesex, the 4th. day of February,
in the year of his Reign the 27th. of trans^erring of uses into possession, The
said John Gardener and Agnes, were seized of the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances, whereof, etc. in their demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of
the lives of them the said John and Agnes, and the longer liver of them,
without impeachment of waste, the aforesaid remainder thereof, after the death
of them the said John and Agnes, to the aforesaid William Carry, and the Heirs
of his Body law^ully begotten, the Remainder thereof for default of such issue,
To the aforesaid Robert Carry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten; And
for default of such issue, the Remainder thereof to the aforesaid Henry Carry
Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs for ever. And the aforesaid John
Gardener, and Agnes his Wife, so thereof being seized, Another Fine was levied
in the said Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is of the Bench here, At
Westminster aforesaid, from the day of Easter, 15. days, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 32th. before Edmond Anderson,
Francis Windham, William Periam, and Thom. Walm^sley, then Justices of the said
Lady the Queen of the Bench here, and other the said Lady the Queens faithful
people then there present. Between John Higham Knight, and Thomas Turner
Esquire, By the names of John Higham Knight, and Thomas Turner Esquire
Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William Carry and the aforesaid Martha then his
Wife, and the aforesaid John Gardener, and the aforesaid Agnes then his Wife
Deforceants, of the aforesaid Manor of Collumbine-hall, otherwise Thorney
Collumbers, with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. By the name of the Manor of
Collumbine-hall, otherwise Thorney Collumbers with the appurtenances, in
Stow-market, Newton, Gipping, and One House, whereof a Plea of Covenant was
sued between them in the said Court, that is to say, That the aforesaid William
Carry and Martha, John Gardener and Agnes, acknowledged the aforesaid Manor with
the appurtenances, whereof, etc. To be the Right of the said John Higham, as
that which the said John Higham, and Thomas, and of the gift of the aforesaid
William Carry and Martha, John Gardener and Agnes, and the same released and
quit claimed for them, the said William Carry and Martha, John Gardner and
Agnes, and their Heirs, to the aforesaid John Higham, and Thomas, and the Heirs
of the said John Higham for ever. And further, the said William Carry and
Martha, and John Gardner and Agnes, granted for them, and the Heirs of the said
William Carry, that they would warrant to the aforesaid John Higham, and Thomas,
and to the Heirs of the said John Higham, the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances, against all Men for ever. And for the same Acknowledgement,
Release, Quit claim, Fine and Concord, The said John Higham, and Thomas,
granted to the aforesaid Martha, a certain Annuity or yearly Rent of 40. pound,
of lawful Money of England, to be issuing out of the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances, and that to her rendered in the same Court of the said Lady the
Queen: To have and perceive the aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent of 40. pound,
to the said Martha at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the
Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, by equal portions yearly to be
paid, all the life time of the said Martha, if the aforesaid John Gardner and
Agnes, or any of them so long should live, the first payment thereof to begin
at that Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, which next after the decease of the
aforesaid William Carry should happen: And if it should happen the aforesaid
Annuity or yearly Rent of 40. pound to be behind in part, or in all, after any
of the Feasts of the Feasts aforesaid, in which as before, it ought to be paid,
and not paid, That then it should be lawful to the said Martha, all her life,
if the said John Gardener and Agnes, or either of them should so long live,
into the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances, to enter and distrein, and the
distresses so there taken and had lawfully to lead away, carry and drive, and
with them to keep, until of the aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent of 40. pound,
with the Arrerages thereof (if any were,) they should be satisfied and paid, as
by the Record of the said Fine in the Court of the said Lady the Queen of the
Bench aforesaid, here remaining amongst other things more fully appears. And
the aforesaid William Carry afterward, that is to say, the 4th. day of March,
in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 35th. at Stow
market aforesaid dyed, After whose death, By virtue of the Fine aaforesaid last
recited, The aforesaid Martha was, and yet is seized of the aforesaid Annuity,
or yearly Rent of 40. pound, in he^ demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of her
life, if the said John Gardener, and Agnes his Wife, or either of them should
so long live; And because 40. pound of the aforesaid yearly Rent, to the said
Martha at and after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the year of
the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 35th. as also the aforesaid
time in which, etc. were behind, not paid, The said William Br^don, and John
Bredon, as Bailiffs of the said Martha, acknowledged the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. And justly, etc. for the said
40. pound, of the Annual Rent aforesaid, to the said Martha so being behind, as
in the Lands, to the distress of the said Martha of the Rent aforesaid, in
form aforesaid charged and bound, etc. With this, that the said John Bredon,
and William will aver, That the aforesaid Martha is yet living, and is in full
life, that is to say, at Littlewrating, in the aforesaid County of Suffolk,
etc. with this also, That the said William Bredon, and John Bredon will aver,
That the aforesaid Agnes now Plaintiff, and the aforesaid Agnes one of the
Deforceants, in the aforesaid several Fines named, are one and the same person,
and not others or diverse, etc. And the aforesaid Agnes, as to 20. pound of the
yearly Rent aforesaid, at the Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the
Virgin, in the 35th. year abovesaid payable, says, That she cannot deny, but
that the said 20. pound, at the said Feast were behind to the aforesaid Martha
not paid, as the aforesaid William Bredon, and John, by their Conusance
aforesaid supposed. And as to the aforesaid other 20. pound, of the aforesaid
40. pound Residue, which the aforesaid William and John, by this Conusance
aforesaid suppose to have been behind, not paid to the aforesaid Martha, at the
aforesaid Feast of Saint Michael, in the 35th. year abovesaid, It is said, That
the aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, by reason of the aforesaid
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. For the
same 20. pound ought not acknowledge it to be just, for it is said, That well
and true it is, That the said John Gardener was seized of the Manor aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, And the said
John so thereof being seized, The said Fine in the Conusance of the said
William Bredon, and John Bredon above first mentioned, was levied in the
aforesaid Court of the Queen here in the aforesaid 8. days of Saint Michael,
in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 29th. above
written, before the aforesaid then Justices, and other the Lady the Queens
faithful people then there present. Between the aforesaid Edmond Carry Knight,
and Robert Carry Esquire Plaintiffs, And the aforesaid William Carry Esquire,
and John Gardener, and the said Agnes now Plaintiff, then Wife of the aforesaid
John Gardener, And the aforesaid George Totty, and Elizabeth his Wife
Deforceants, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And
of the aforesaid Tenements and Appurtenances in the Conusance aforesaid above
mentioned, and that the said Fine in form aforesaid levied, was had and levied
to the use of the aforesaid John Gardener, and of her the said Agnes, for the
Term of their lives, and the longer liver o^ them; And after the decease of the
aforesaid John and Agnes, To the use of the aforesaid William Carry, and the
Heirs his body lawfully begotten; And for default of such issue, To the use of
the aforesaid Robert Carry Knight, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten;
And for default of such issue, To the use of the aforesaid Henry Carry Knight,
Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs for ever. By virtue of which Fine, and by force
of the aforesaid Act of transferring uses into possession, holden, made, The
aforesaid John and the said Agnes, were seized of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of the
lives of them the said John and Agnes, and the longer liver of them, the
Remainder thereof after the death of them the said John and Agnes, to the
aforesaid William Carry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the
Remainder thereof for default of such issue, to the aforesaid Robert Carry, and
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the Remainder thereof for default of
such issue, to the aforesaid Henry Carry Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs
for ever, as the aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, by his Conusance
aforesaid above supposes: But the said Agnes further says, That the aforesaid
John Gardener and Agnes. so of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. for the Term of the lives of them the said John and Agnes, and
the longer liver of them, in form aforesaid being seized, the Remander thereof
after the death of the aforesaid John and Agnes, to the aforesaid William Carry,
and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the Remainder thereof for default
of such issue, to the aforesaid Robert Carry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully
begotten, the Remainder thereof for default of such issue, to the aforesaid
Henry ^ary Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs expectant, before the levying
of the aforesaid second Fine in the Conusance of the said William Bredon, and
John Bredon, above mentioned. Another Fine was levied in the same Court of the
said Lady the Queen that now is of the Bench here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, from the day of Easter in 15. days, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 31th before the aforesaid
Edmond Anderson, Francis Windham, and William Periam, then Justices of the Lady
the Queen of the Bench here, and other of the Queens faithful people, then and
there present, Between David Bulward, and Robert Ham, by the names of David
Bulward, and Robert Ham Plaintiffs, And the aforesaid William Carry, by the name
of William Carry Esquire Deforceants, of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And of 20. Messuages, one Dove-house, 20. Gardens,
300. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30. Acres of
Wood, and 1. pound* 6. shillings, 4. pence Rent, and of the Rent of 4. Capons,
and 1. pound of Wax with the Appurtenances, in Stow-market, Newton, Gipping,
and One House, by the name of the Manor of Collumbine-hall, otherwise Thorney
Collumbers, with the Appurtenances, and 20. Messuages, one Dove-house, 20.
Gardens, 300. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30.
Acres of Wood, and 1. pound, 6. shillings, 4. pence Rent, and the Rent of 4.
Capons, and 1. pound of Wax, with the Appurtenances in Stow-market, Newton,
Gipping, and One House, whereof a Plea of Covenant was sued between them in the
said Court, That is to say, That the aforesaid William acknowledge the
aforesaid Manor, Tenements, Rents and premises with the Appurtenances, to be
the Right of the said David, as those which the said David and Robert had of
the gift of the aforesaid William, and those released and quit claimed, from
him and his Heirs, to the said David and his Heirs for ever. And besides, the
said William granted for him and his Heirs, That they warrant to the said
David and Robert, and to the Heirs of the said Dazid, the aforesaid Manor,
Tenements, Rents with the Appurtenances, against the aforesaid William, and
his Heirs for ever, as by the Record of the same Fine, in the Court of the said
Lady the Queen of the Bench, here remaing more fully appears. Which Fine, in
form aforesaid levied and had, was levied and had, to the use of the aforesaid
David and Robert, and their Heirs, to the intent, and until a perfect Recovery,
by Writ of the Lady the Queen of Entry for Deseisin of the Post, of the Manor
and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, were sued against the said
David and Robert, by one Robert Peirson Gentleman, according to the course of
Common Recoveries used to be had. And the aforesaid John Gardener, and Agnes
his Wife, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof for the Term
of the lives of them the said John Gardener and Agnes, and the longer liver of
them, so as before is said, being seized the Remainder thereof to the aforesaid
David, and Robert Ham, and their Heirs in form aforesaid expectant. The said
Fine in the Conusance of the said William Bredon, and John Bredon, above second
mentioned in form aforesaid, was levied in the aforesaid Court of the Lady the
Queen, here from the day of Easter in 15. day, in the year 32th. abovesaid,
before the aforesaid then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench,
Between the aforesaid John H^gham Knight, and Thomas Turner Esquire Plaintiffs,
and the aforesaid ^illiam Carry, and the aforesaid Martha then his Wife
Deforceant, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenance, whereof, etc. And the
aforesaid John Higham, and Thomas, by the same Fine granted unto the said
Martha, the aforesaid Annuitity or yearly Rent of 40. p. to be issuing out of
the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and those to her in form aforesaid
rendered, To have and perceive the aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent of 40.
pound, at the aforesaid Feasts of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the
Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, by equal portions yearly to be
paid all the life time of the said Martha, if the aforesaid John and Agnes, or
any of them should so long live, the first payment thereof ^o begin at tha^
Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, which next after the decase of the said William
Carry should happen to be, with the aforesaid clause of distress in the said
Fine mentioned, As the aforesaid William B^edon, and John Bredon, by their
Conusance aforesaid above suppose. By virtue of the levying of which Fine last
mentioned, so had and levied, The aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes, Forfeited
their Estate aforesaid, for the Term of their lives, the life of the longer
liver of them, in the aforesaid Manor with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And
afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid 24th. day of March, in in the 35th.
year abovesaid, the aforesaid William Carry, at Stow-market aforesaid dyed,
without issue of his Body lawfully begotten, After whose death, and before the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the year of 35th. abovesaid, The
aforesaid Robert Carry Knight, by reason of the aforesaid Forfeiture of the
Estates of the aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes, and and in the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. entered and was thereof seized
in Feetail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten;
And so thereof being seized, The said Robert afterward, and before the
aforesaid time of the taking aforesaid made, that is to say, the 17th. day of
March, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 37th.
abovesaid, At Stowmarket aforesaid, gave license to the said Agnes, to put her
Cattle into the aforesaid place in which, etc. to eat the grass in the same
then growing. By virtue of which license, the said Agnes after, and before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. put her Cattle aforesaid, into the aforesaid
place in which, etc. to eat the grass in the same, Which Cattle were in the
aforesaid place in which, etc. Until the aforesaid William Bredon, and John
Bredon, the day and year above in the Declaration aforesaid above specified, At
Stow market aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, called the ^arkwood,
took the aforesaid Cattle of the said Agnes, and them unjustly detained against
Gages and Pledges, until, etc. as she above against them complains. And this
she is ready to aver, wherofore in as much as the said William Bredon, and John
Bredon, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which,
etc. above acknowlegeth, The said Agnes demands Judgment and her damages for
the occasion of taking and unjustly deteining of her Cattle aforesaid, to be
adjudged unto her. And the aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, as to
the aforesaid Plea of the Agnes, to the Conusance of the said William and John,
for the aforesaid 20. pound, Residue made in Bar pleaded, say, That well and
true it is, that the aforesaid Fine in the Bar of the aforesaid Agnes, second
specified, in the aforesaid Court of the Lady the Queen of the Bench aforesaid,
here in the aforesaid 15. day of Paster, in the year of the Reign of the Lady
the Queen that now is the 3^th. abovesaid, before the said Edmond Anderson,
Francis Windham, and William Periam, then Justices of the said Lady the Queen
of the Bench aforesaid, here, and other of the said Lady the Queens then
Faithful People then here present, Between the aforesaid David Bulward, and
Robert Ham Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William Carry Deforceant, of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And of the aforesaid Tenements
and Rents with the Appurtenances, in the said Fine in the Bar of the aforesaid
Agnes, second specified and mentioned, in form aforesaid was levied, as the
aforesaid above has alleged: But the said William Bredon, and John Bredon,
further say, That the aforesaid F^ne in the Bar of the aforesaid Agnes, second
specified in form aforesaid levied, was had and levied, To the use of the said
David Bulward, and Robert Ham, and their Heirs to the intent and until, a
Recovery by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Entire Surdisseisin in the Post,
of the Manor with the appurtenances whereof, etc. And of the Tenements and
Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, against the said David and Robert
should be had, and afterward unto the use of John Gardener, and the aforesaid
Agnes, for the Term of their lives, and the longer liver of them, And after
their decease, to the use and behoo^ of the aforesaid William Carry, and the
Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, By which, Afterward, that is to say, the
^th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now
is the 31th. the aforesaid Roger Pierson, in the Court of the Chancery of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, the said Court at Westminster, in the County
of Middlesex then being, brought and prosecuted, a Writ of the said Lady the
Queen that now is of Entry upon disseisin in the Post, against the aforesaid
David, and To. Ham, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, to the Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Suffolk directed, the
said David and Robert, then being Tenants of the Freehold of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine in
the Bar of the aforesaid Agnes second specified: By which Writ, the said Lady
the Queen that now is, sent to the said Sheriff, That the said Sheriff command
the aforesaid David, and Robert Ham, by the names of David Bulward, and Robert
Ham, that they justly, and without delay, render to the aforesaid Roger
Peirson, by the name of Roger Pierson, The Manor, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, by the names of the Manors of
Cullumbine-hall, otherwise Thorney Cullumbers with the Appurtenances, and 20.
Messuages, one Dove-house, 20. Gardens, 300. Acres of ^and, 100. Acres of
Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30. Acres of Wood, and 1. pound, 6. shillings,
4. pence Rent, and the Rent of 4. Capons, and one pound of Wax with the
Appurtenances, in Stow*maket, Newton, Gipping, and One-House, which he claims
to be his Right and Inheritance, And in which the said David and Robert, had
not Entry, but after disseisin which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without
Judgment did to the aforesaid Roger within 30. years, then last past as he
said. And whereupon he complained, that the aforesaid David and Robert, him
unjustly deforced, and if they did not, etc. And if the aforesaid Roger should
secure the said Sheriff of the prosecuting of his claim, Then the said Sheriff,
summon by good summoners, the aforesaid David and Robert, that they should be
before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here, that is to say, at Westminster.
from the day Easter, in one Month next following, to show wherefore they had
not done it. And that the said Sheriff should then have here the summons, and
that Writ, etc: At which Month of Easter here, that is to say, at Westminster
aforesaid, comes as well the said Roger, as the said David and Robert in their
proper persons, And then the Sheriff of the aforesaid County of Suffolk, that
is to say, Philip T^lney ^squire, then returned here the Writ aforesaid, in him
in form directed* served and executed in form following, That is to say, That
the aforesaid Roger had found to the said Sheriff sureties for the prosecuting
of his said Writ, that is to say, John Do, and Richard Roo, etc. And that the
aforesaid David and Robert, were summoned to be then here by John Den, and
Rich. Fen, etc. Upon which the aforesaid Roger declaring, against the aforesaid
David and Robert, then Tenants of the Freehold, of the Manor, Tenements, and
Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid, upon his Writ
aforesaid, in his proper person aforesaid, demanded against the said David and
Robert, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, as
his Right and Inheritance; And in which the said David and Robert had not Entry
but after disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without Judgment
did to the aforesaid Roger, within 30. years now last past, etc. And whereupon
he said, That he himself was seized of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee in time of Peace, in
the time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking thereof the Profits to the
value, etc. And in which, etc. And thereof then brought Suit, etc. And the
aforesaid David and Robert Ham, then defended their Right when, etc. And
vouched thereof to warranty the said William Carry, by the name of William
Carry Esquire, who then likewise was present in the same Court in his proper
person. And willingly the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, to him did warrant, etc. And upon this, the aforesaid Roger
demanded against him the said William Carry Tenant by his warranty, The Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc.
And whereupon, he then said, That he himself was seized of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee
in time of Peace, in the time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the
Profits thereof to the value, etc. And the aforesaid William Carry Tenant, by
his warranty aforesaid, came and defended his Right when, etc. And further
thereof vouched to warranty David Howel, who then likewise was present in the
same Court in his proper person, and freely the Manor, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid, with the appurtenances to him did warrant, etc. And upon this, The
aforesaid Roger, demanded against the said David Howell Tenant by his warranty,
the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the appurtenances in form
aforesaid, etc. And whereupon, then he said, That he himself was seized of the
Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demesne as
of Fee and right in time of peace, in the time of the Lady the Queen that now
is, taking the profits thereof to the value, etc. And in which, etc. And
thereof his brought suit etc. And the aforesaid David Howell Tenant by his
warranty, defended his Right when, etc. And then said, That the aforesaid Hugh,
had not disseised the aforesaid Roger of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the appurtenance, as the said Roger by his Writ, and Declaration
above supposed; and of this put himself upon the Country, etc. And the
aforesaid Roger then prays license thereof to imparl, and had it, etc. And
afterward, the aforesaid Roger comes again here into Court the very same Term
in his proper person; And the aforesaid David Howell, although he be then
sollemnly called, does not come back, but in despite of the Court, departs
and makes default; wherefore then it was granted in the said Court here; That
the said Roger should recover his seisin against the aforesaid David Bulward,
and Robert Ham, of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the
appurtenances; and that the said David Bulward, Robert Ham, should have of the
Lands of the aforesaid William Carry to the value, etc. And that the said David
Howell, should be thereof in mercy, etc. Upon which, the aforesaid Roger then
in the same Court demanded the Writ of the Lady the Queen, to have to him full
seisia and possession of the Manor, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, to the
Sheriff of the County aforesaid to be directed, and to him it was granted
retorunable here in the morrow of the Holy Trinity then next following, At
which day here comes the aforesaid Roger in his proper person, and the then
Sheriff of the County of Suffolk, The aforesaid Philip Tilney Esquire then sent
here, That he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him directed, the 16th day of
May then last past, gave to the aforesaid Roger seisin of the Manor, Tenements,
and Rents aforesaid with the appurtenances, as by the said Writ to him it was
Commanded, etc. Which Fine in the Bar of the aforesaid Agnes above specified
in form aforesaid levied, and the Recovery aforesaid, in form aforesaid had,
were levied and had, To the use of the aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes for
the Term of their lives, and the longer liver of them; and after the decease of
them, the said John Gardener and Agnes, to the use of the said William Carry,
and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, By virtue of which Fine and
Recovery in form aforesaid had, and by force of the aforesaid Act of
transferring of uses in possession, The aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes, were
seized of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in their
demesne as of Freehold, for the term of the lives of the said John and Agnes,
and the longer liver of them, the remainder thereof, after the death of the
aforesaid John and Agnes, to the aforesaid William Carry, and the Heirs of his
body lawfully begotten expectant; and the said John Gardener and Agnes so
thereof being seized, the Remainder thereof to the aforesaid William Carry, in
form aforesaid expectant, The aforesaid Fine in the Conusans of the said
William Bredon, and John Bredon, above specified in form aforesaid, was levied
in the aforesaid Court of the said Lady the Queen here, from the aforesaid day
of Easter in 15. days, in the 32th year aforesaid, before the aforesaid then
Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Bench aforesaid here, Between the
aforesaid Io. Higham, and Thomas Turner Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William
Carry and Martha, and the aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes deforceants of the
Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. And the aforesaid John
Higham, and Thomas, by the same Fine granted to the said Martha, the aforesaid
annuity, or yearly Rent of 40. pound, to be issuing of him the aforesaid Manor
with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And the same to her in the said Court
here in form aforesaid Rendered, To have, and to hold the same Annuity or yearly
Rent of 40. pound, to the aforesaid Martha, at the aforesaid Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, by
even portions yearly to be paid, all the life time of the said Martha, if the
aforesaid John Cardiner, and Agnes, the first payment thereof to Martha, if the
aforesaid J. Gardener, and Agnes, or either of them should so long live, the
first payment thereof to begin, at the Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, next after
the decease of the aforesaid VVil. Carry, should first happen to be, with the
aforesaid clause of distress in the Fine mentioned; And the aforesaid VVil.
Carry afterward, that is to say, the 24th. day of March, in the year 35th.
aforesaid, at Stow-market aforesaid dyed, After whose death, by virtue of the
Fine aforesaid, The aforesaid Martha was and as yet is seized of the aforesaid
Annuity or yearly Rent of 40 p. in her demesne as of Freehold for Term of her
life, if the aforesaid John Gardener, and Agnes, or either of them shall so
long live. And this they are ready to aver, Wherefore they demand Judgment,
and Retorn of their Cattle aforesaid, together with their damages to be to them
adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid Agnes, as at first says, That the aforesaid
John Gardener was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, and he the said John so thereof being
seized, the Fine aforesaid in the Conusance, of the aforesaid William Bredon,
and John Bredon, first above mentioned, was levied in the aforesaid Court of
the Queen here, in the aforesaid 8. days of Saint Michael, in the year of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 29th. abovesaid, before the aforesaid then
Justices, and others the said Lady the Queens faithful people then there
present, Between the aforesaid Edmond Carry Knight, and Robert Carry Esquire
Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William Carry Esquire, John Gardener, and her the
said Agnes now Plaintiff, then the Wife of the aforesaid John Gardener, and the
aforesaid George Totty, and Elizabeth his Wife Deforceants, of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenancs, whereof, etc. And of the aforesaid Tenements
and Rents with the Appurtenances, in the aforesaid Fine in the Conusance
aforesaid first mentioned, And that the said Fine, in form aforesaid levied,
was had and levied, To the use of the aforesaid John Gardener, anc her the said
Agnes, for the Term of their lives, and the longer liver of them, and after the
decease of the aforesaid John and Agnes, To the use of the aforesaid William
Carry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, and for default of such
issue, to the use of Robert Carry Knight, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue, to the use of the aforesaid Henry Carry
Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs for ever. By virtue of which Fine, and
by force of the aforesaid Statute of transferring uses into possession, holden
and made, The aforesaid John and Agnes, were seized of the Manor aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in their demesne as of Freehold, for the Term
of the lives of them the said John and Agnes, and the longer liver of them, the
Remainder thereof after the death of them the said John and Agnes, to the
aforesaid William Carry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the
Remainder thereof for default of such issue, to the aforesaid Robert Carry, and
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the Remainder thereof for default of
such issue, to the aforesaid Henry Carry Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heis
for ever. And that the aforesaid John Gardener, and Agnes, so of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. for the Term of the said John
and Agnes, and the longer liver of them* in form aforesaid being seized, the
Remainder thereof after the death of them the said John and Agnes, to the
aforesaid William Carry, and the Heirs o^ his Body lawfully begotten, the
Remainder thereof for default of such issue, to the aforesaid Robert Carry, and
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, the Remainder thereof for default of
such issue, to the aforesaid Heny Carry Knight, Lord of Hunsdon, and his Heirs
expectant. Before the levying of the aforesaid Fine in the Conusance of the
aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, above second mentioned, The
aforesaid other Fine in the aforesaid Plea of her the said Agnes, above
specified was levied, in the aforesaid Court of the Queen here, from the
aforesaid day of Easter in 15. days, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 31th. before the aforesaid then Justices, and other
the faithful people of the Lady the Queen then there present, Between the
aforesaid David* Bulward, and Robert Ham Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William
Carry Deforceant, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc.
And of the aforesaid 20. Messuages, One Dove house, 20. Gardens, 300. Acres of
Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of Pasture, 30. Acres of Wood, 1. pound,
6. shillings, 4. pence Rent, and the Rent of 4. Capons, and 1. pound of Wax
with the Appurtenances, in Stow-market, Newton, Gipping, and One house: Which
Fine in form aforesaid levied and had, was had and levied to the use of the
aforesaid David, and Robert Ham, and to their Heirs for ever, to the intent in
the Plea of the aforesaid Agnes above mentioned, the aforesaid John Gardener,
and Agnes, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. for the
Term of the lives of them the said John Gardener, and Agnes, and the longer
liver of them, so as before is said being seized, the Remainder thereof to the
aforesaid David, and Robert Ham, and their Heirs expectant, the aforesaid
Recovery in the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid William Bredon, and John
Bredon, above mentioned, in form aforesaid was had; And the aforesaid Agnes,
further in Facto says, That the aforesaid John Gardener and Agnes, from the
time of the levying of the Fine in the Conusance of the aforesaid William
Bredon, and John Bredon, second mentioned in form aforesaid was levied. Without
that, that the aforesaid David, and Robert Ham, the aforesaid day of bringing
of the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Entry, Sur Disseisin in the Post, in the
aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon above
mentioned, or ever afterward were ever Tenants of the Freehold, of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rents with the Appurtenances, in the Recovery aforesaid above
mentioned, as the aforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, above have
alleged, And this she is ready to aver, Wherefore she demands Judgment and
his Damages, by occasion of the taking, and unjust detaining of the Cattle
aforesaid, to her to be adjudged. And the aforesaid William Bredon, and John
Bredon say, That the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid Agnes, to the Conusance of
them the said William and John, as to the aforesaid 20. pound, residue of the
40. pound, at the aforesaid Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the year
35th. abovesaid, payable above by Rejoinder pleaded, is insufficient in Law, to
bar her the said Agnes, from having her Action aforesaid, of the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, against them the said
William and John, or to bar the said William and John, from the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. And that they to that
Plea, in manner and form aforesaid pleaded need not, nor by the Law of the Land
are bound to Answer, for that, that is to say, That the aforesaid Induction of
the Plea of the said Agnes, to the Traverse aforesaid, in her Plea aforesaid to
the Conusance of them the said William and John, above rejoyning pleaded, is
not sufficient in Law to induce that Traverse, And that the Traverse of the
aforesaid Tenances of the David, and Robert Ham, the day of the bringing of the
aforesaid Writ of Entry upon Disseisin in the Post, of the aforesaid Manor,
Tenements, Rents with the Appurtenances, in the same Plea pleaded is not
material in Law. And this they are ready to aver, wherefore for want of
sufficient Plea, of the said Agnes in this behalf, the said William and John,
as at first demand Judgment, and the retorn of the Cattle aforesaid, together
with damages, etc. to be to them adjudged. And the aforesaid Agnes, for as much
as she has alleged sufficient matter in Law, and the aforesaid William Bredon,
and John Bredon, from their Conusance aforesaid, as to the aforesaid 20. pound,
of the aforesaid 40. p. residue at the aforesaid Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel payable, to have to bar, and the said Agnes to have her Action
aforesaid, against the said William and John, above has alleged, which she is
ready to aver, which matter the aforesaid William and John do not deny, nor to
the same do any ways Answer, but the the same Averment utterly refuse to
admit, as before, demands Judgment and her damages, by occasion of the
taking, and unjustly detaining, of the Cattle aforesaid, to her to be adjudged.
And because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises,
before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties
aforesaid, here until in 8. days from Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day,
here comes aswelthe aforesaid Agnes, as the aforesaid Will. Bredon, and J.
Bredon by their Atornies aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further
avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment
thereof, day further is given to the parties aforesaid, here until in 8. days
of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid Agnes,
as the aforesaid Will. Bredon, and John Bredon, by their Attorneys aforesaid.
And upon this, The premises seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, It
seems to the said Justices here, That the aforesaid Plea, of the aforesaid
Agnes, to the Conusance of the aforesaid William and John, as to the aforesaid
20. pound, residue of the aforesaid 40. pound, at the aforesaid Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, in the year 35th. abovesaid, payable by Rejoinder
pretended, is not sufficient in Law, for the said Agnes to have her Action
aforesaid, of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, against the said William and
John, or to maintain: Or them the said William and John, from the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. justly acknowledged to
bar, as the aforesaid William and John, above have alleged. Therefore it is
granted that the aforesaid Agnes, take nothing by her Writ aforesaid, but be in
mercy for her false claim; And the aforesaid William and John, go thereof
without day, etc. And that they have retorn of the Cattle aforesaid, to be
holden to them irreplegiable for ever. And how, etc. the Sheriff make it appear
from the day of Easter 15. days, etc. And it is also granted, That the said
William and John, ought to recover their damages, by the occasion aforesaid
against the aforesaid Agnes. But because it is not known what damages the said
William and John have sustained by that occasion, It is commanded the Sheriff,
that by the Oaths of good and lawful men of the County aforesaid, he diligently
enquire what damages the said William and John have sustained, as well by
occasion of the premises, as their costs and charges by them about their Suit
in this behalf expended; And the Enquiry which, etc. They send here at the
aforesaid Term under Seal, etc. and the Seals, etc. At which day here come the
aaforesaid William Bredon, and John Bredon, By their Attorney aforesaid, And
the Sheriff thereof did nothing, nor sent the Writ thereon, Therefore, that an
other Writ, be made in form aforesaid, retornable here from the day of Holy
Trinity, 15. days, At which day here came the aforesaid William and John, by
their Attorney aforesaid. And the Sheriff, that is say, Thomas Edon Esquire, now
sent, That before the coming of the Writ aforesaid, The Cattle aforesaid were
esloyned out of his Balywick, to places to him unknown, By which the Cattle
aforesaid to the said William and John, he could not retorn as to him it was
commanded. Also the same Sheriff sent here a certain Inquision taken before him
at Bury Saint Edmonds in the County aforesaid, the 30th. day of May last past,
by the Oaths of 12. men, etc. by virtue of the Writ aforesaid taken, by which
it is ^ound, That the aaforesaid William and John, sustained damages by the
occasion aforesaid, above their costs and charge by them about their Suit in
this behalf put unto 5. ponnd, And for their costs and charges to 10.
shillings. Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, That of the other Ca^tel
of the aforesaid Agnes, to the value of the Cattle aforesaid first taken, he
take in Withernam, and them to the aforesaid William and John, without delay he
do deliver to be detained, to them until the Cattle aforesaid, first taken were
returned. And how, etc. that he make it appear here in 8. days of St. Michael,
etc. And also that the aforesaid Agnes be attached, that she be here at the
aforesaid Term, to answer as well to the Lady the Queen of her Contempt
aforesaid, as to the aforesaid William and John, of the damages and injuries
to them in this behalf offered, etc. And also it is granted, That the aforesaid
William and John, recover against the aforesaid Agnes, their damages aforesaid
to 5. pound, and 10. shillings, by the Enquiry aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, as also 2^. pound, 3. shillings, and 4. pence, to them the said William
and John, at their requests for their Costs and Charges by the Court here of
Increase adjudged, which damages in the whole do amount to 26. pound, 13.
shillings, and 4. pence.

Replevin.
Hillary Term, Anno 35 Eliz. Rot. 498. in the KING'S BENCH, C. 1. part, Ann
Mayowes Case, Fol. 141. Kent.

GEorge Mason, and Francis Easterley, were Attached by the Writ of the Lady the
Queen of Second Deliverance, to Answer to John Kettel, of a Plea, wherefore
they took the Cattle of the said John, and them unjustly detained against Gages
and Pledges, etc. And whereupon the said Joh. Kettel, by Edward Willan his
Attorney, complains, That the aforesaid George and Francis, the 18th. day of
June, in the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth, now Queen of England, the
33th. at Sutton Atthone, in the County aforesaid, in a certain place there
called Abraham's Land, took Cattle, that is to say, 7. Cowes, and One Bull of
the said John and them un justly detained against Gages and Pledges, until,
etc. Whereupon, the said John Kettel says, that he is the worse, and has
damage to the value of 30. pound, and thereof brings suit, etc. And the
aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Easterley, by Michael Low their Attorney,
come and de^end the force and injury when, etc. And justly, etc. Because they
say, That the aforesaid Plea in which it is supposed the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid to have been done, does contein, and at the time of the taking
aforesaid, above supposed to be done, did contein in it self by Estimation 8.
Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, in Sutton Atthone aforesaid, and that
long before the aforesaid time in which, etc. One Dionisius Mayow Gentleman,
was of the aforesaid place in which, etc. amongst other, seized in his demesne
as of Fee, and so thereof being seized* The same Dionisius afterward, that is
to say, before the time of the taking aforesaid, above supposed to be done,
that is to say, The 30th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of the said ^ady
the Queen that now is the 19th. at Sutton Atthone aforesaid, by his Writing
sealed with his Seal, and to the Court of the Lady the Queen that now is
brought, bearing date the same day and year, gave and granted to the aforesaid
Ann, by the name of Ann Maxey, of Chigwell, in the County of Essex, One Annuity
or yearly Rent of 20. pound, of lawful Money of England, to be issuing out of
the aforesaid place in which, etc. Amongst other, by the names of all Lands and
Tenements of him the said Dionisius, in Sutton Atthone, aforesaid, and in
Willington, in the aforesaid County of Kent: To have, and perceive the
aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent aforesaid of 20. pound aforesaid, to the
aforesaid Ann and her Assigns, for the time of the natural life of her the
said Ann, at the Feast of the blessed Lady Mary the Virgin, and St. Michael the
Archangel, by equal portions yearly to be perceived. And if it should happen
the aforesaid yearly Rent or Annuity of 20. pound, at any Feast of payment, in
which it is said ought to be paid, within 40. days after any Feast of the
Feasts, in part or in whole, be behind and not paid, that then it be lawful to
the aforesaid Ann, or her Assigns, in the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, to enter and distrein, and the distresses there found or taken,
to carry away, lead and drive, and with her to keep, until of the whole
aforesaid yearly Rent or Annuity, together with all the Arrerages thereof, if
any should be to her, she should be fully satisfied and paid, as by the said
Writing amongst other things more fully appears. By virtue of which Gift and
Grant, the said Ann, was of the Annuity, or yearly Rent aforesaid, seized in
her demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of her life; And so thereof being
seized, The said Ann afterward, and before the time in which etc. at Su^ton
Atthone aforesaid, took to Husband the aforesaid Dionisius, And afterward, and
before the time in which it is supposed, the taking aforesaid of the Cattle
aforesaid to be done, that is to say, the 20th. day of March, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 29th. the aforesaid
Dionisius, at Sutton Atthone aforesaid dyed, and the aforesaid Ann, him over
lived, and was of the Annuity or yearly Rent aforesaid, seized in her demesne as
of Freehold for the Term of her life. And because 20. pound of the Annuity or
yearly Rent aforesaid, by one whole year ended at the Feast of Saint Michael
the Archangel, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 29th. and within the space of 40. days then next following, were not paid
to the said Ann, but were behind, The said George Mason, and Francis, as
Bailiffs of the said Ann, do well acknowledge the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. as in parcel of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the distress of the said Ann, in form
aforesaid charged and bound. And this they are ready to aver, Whereupon, They
demand Judgment and Retorn of the Cattle aforesaid, together with their
damages costs and charges, by them about their Suit in this behalf put unto, to
be adjudged unto them, etc. And the aforesaid John Kettel says, That the
aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Easterly, by any thing before alleged, the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, to be just,
ought not to acknowledge; For he says, that long before the aforesaid time of
taking of the aforesaid Cattle done, and long before the grant of the aforesaid
Annuity or yearly Rent aforesaid of 40 pound, And long before the said
Dionisius Mayow, had any thing of and in the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with
their Appurtenanes, One Thomas Mayow was thereof seized in his demesne as of
Fee; And so being thereof seized, The said Tho-Mayow, before the time of the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, and long before the Grant of the aforesaid
Annuity, that is to say, the 15. day of January, in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen the 19th. at Sutton Atthone aforesaid, of the said 8. Acres
of Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. Enfeossed one Thomas Scot, of
Sutton Atthone aforesaid Gentleman, and John Fremling of Dartford, in the said
County Baker, amongst other things, By the name of all those his Two Manors, of
Sawters and Sawley, with the Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, and all other the
Houses and Buildings to the said Manors belonging, Orchards and Gardens with
the Appurtenances, situate, lying and being in Sutton Atthone aforesaid, then
in the Tenure or Occupation of the said Thomas Mayow, and also by the name of
all other his Houses and Buildings, Lands and Tenements, Meadow, Pasture,
Woods, and Underwoods, Rents, and Reversions, situate, lying and being within
the Towns, Parishes, and Fields, of Sutton Atthone aforesaid, Wilmington, and
Dartford, or elsewhere, in the aforesaid County of Kent, as also the Reversion
and Remainder, of all and singular the premises, Rents, and yearly profits,
reserved upon whatsoever Demises or Grants of the premises, or any parcel
thereof before then made: To have, and to hold the aforesaid Manors, and other
the premises with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. To the aforesaid Thomas
Scot, and John Fremling, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use and
behoof of the aforesaid Dionise Mayow, Son and Heir Apparent of the said Thomas
Mayow his Heirs and Assigns for ever, of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the
services thereof first due, and of right accustomed, upon the Conditions
following, That is to say, That the aforesaid Dionise Mayow, or his Heirs,
should pay or cause to paid to Petronill Martin, of Mylton, in the aforesaid
County of Kent Widow, the yearly Rent of 10. pound, for the Term of the life of
her the said Petronill. Which yearly Rent of 10. pound, the aforesaid Thomas
Mayow, to the aforesaid Petronill, before had granted, for and in consideration
of a Marriage to be had and solemnized, between the aforesaid Thomas Mayow, and
the aforesaid Petronill, after the death of the aforesaid Thomas Mayow, And
upon Condition, That if the aforesaid Thomas Mayow, at any time during the
natural life of the said Thomas, should pay or cause to be paid to the
aforesaid Thomas Scot, and John Fremling, or to either of them, or to the Heirs
of the longer liver of them, 10. shillings of good and lawful Money of England,
that then the Feoffment aforesaid, should be void, and of no force in Law: And
that then it should be lawful to the aforesaid Tho. Mayow, into the aforesaid
Two Manors, and all the premises with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. to
re-enter, and the same to have again in his former Estate and Condition, any
Act, Thing, Cause, or Matter whatsoever to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding. By virtue of which Feo^fment, and by force of a certain Act,
in the Parliament of the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, the 4th. day of February, in the year
of his Reign the 27th. of transferring uses into possession, The said Dionise
Mayow, was seized of the aforesad 8. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances,
in which, in his demesne as of Fee, upon the Conditions aforesaid: And so
thereof being seized, The said Dionise, before the aforesaid time of taking the
Cattle aforesaid, that is to say, the 30th. day of May, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 19th. abovesaid, at Sutton
Atthone aforesaid, by his Writing ^eal^d with his Seal, bearing date the same
day and year, Gave and Granted to the aforesaid Ann, by the name of Ann Maxey,
of Chigwel, in the County of Essex, the Annuity or yearly Rent aforesaid, of
20. pound to be issuing out of the aforesaid place in which, etc. amongst
other, in manner and form as the aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Easterley,
above in their Conusance abovesaid have all^ged; And the said Ann afterward,
and before the aforesaid time in which. etc. At Sutton Atthone aforesaid took
to Husband the said Dionise, and afterward, and before the time of the taking
of the Cattle aforesaid, that is to say, the 30th. day of January, in the year
of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 24th. The aforesaid
Thomas Mayow, at Sutton Atthone aforesaid, paid to the aforesaid Thomas Scot,
and John ^remling 10. shillings, of good and lawful Money of England, in the
Condition of the Feoffment aforesaid above mentioned, in full satisfaction and
performance of the Condition aforesaid, By which, The said Thomas Mayow,
afterward and before the aforesaid time of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid,
into the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which, etc.
amongst other, entered and was thereof seized, that is to say, in his demesne as
of Fee, and so thereof being seized, The said Thomas Mayow, before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 3d. day May, in the year of the Reign of the
said Lady the Queen that now is the 24th. abovesaid, at Sutton Atthone
aforesaid, by his Writing sealed with his Seal, and to the Court of the said
Lady the Queen, now here brought, bearing date the same day and year, enfeoffed
one Thomas Waller, amongst other, of the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. by the name of Abraham's Land, containing by
Estimation 9. Acres, more or less, lying in Sutton Atthone aforesaid: To have,
and to hold the same Close called Abraham's Land with the Appurtenances, amongst
other, to the aforesaid Thomas Waller, his Heirs and Assigns, To the only
proper use and behoof of the said Thomas Waller, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, as by the said Writing amongst other things more fully appears: By
virtue of which ^ coffment, the said Thomas Waller, of the aforesaid Close with
the Appurtenances, in which, etc. was seized in his demesne as of Fee, and so
thereof being seized, The aforesaid Dionise Mayow, afterward and before the
aforesaid time of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, that is to say, the 20th.
day of March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
29th. at Sutton Atthone aforesaid dyed, as the aforesaid George Mason, and
Francis Easterley, above in pleading have alleged; After whose death, and
before the aforesaid time of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, that is to
say, the 29th. day of September, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 32th. The aaforesaid Thomas Waller, at Sutton Atthone
aforesaid, demised and to farm set, to the aforesaid John Kettel, the aforesaid
Close with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. amongst other, To have and to hold
to the aforesaid John Kettell, and his Assigns, from the aforesaid 29th. day
of September, in the 32th. year abovesaid, unto the end and Term of one whole
year then next following, and fully complete and ended; By virtue of which
demise, the aforesaid John Kettell afterward, and before the aforesaid time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 30th. day of September, in the 32th. year
aforesaid, in the Close aforesaid in which, etc. entered and was thereof
possessed; And so thereof being possessed, The same John Kettell afterward,
and before the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the 17th. day of
June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 33th.
put his Cattle aforesaid, into the aforesaid Close, to eat the grass there, as
it was lawful for him to do, which Cattle, were in the aforesaid Close, etc.
there the grass there late growing eating, until the aforesaid George Mason,
and Francis Easterley, the aforesaid Cattle, the aforesaid time in which, etc.
unjustly took and detained in manner and form, as the aforesaid John Kettell
above against them complains. And this he is ready to aver, Wherefore in as
much as the said George and Francis, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid above
acknowledges, The said John Kettel demands Judgment, and his damages
aforesaid, for the occasion of the taking, and unjust deteining of the said
Cattle, to be adjudged to him, etc. And the aforesaid George Mason, and Fracis
Easterl^y say, that well and true it is, that before the aforesaid time of the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, above supposed to be done, and before the grant
of the aforesaid Annuity of 20. pound, and before the said Dionise had any
thing in the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which,
etc. The aforesaid Thomas Mayow, in the Bar aforesaid to the Conusance
aforesaid named, was seized of the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee; And so thereof being seized, That the
said Thomas the aforesaid 15. day of January, in the 19th. year aforesaid, of
the said 8. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, enfeoffed the aforesaid
Thomas Scot, and John Fremling, in the Bar named, To have, to them and their
Assigns for ever, To the use of the said Dionise, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, upon the Conditions aforesaid, in the Bar above in this part specified;
And that by virtue of the same Feoffment, and by force of the aforesaid
Statute, the said Dionise was seized of the aforesaid 8. Acres of Pasture with
the Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other, in his demesne as of Fee, in
manner and form, as the aforesaid John Kettel, in the Bar aforesaid to the
Conusance aforesaid above in pleading alleged. And the said George and Francis
now Defendants further say, That the aforesaid Dionise before the aforesaid
time of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, above supposed to be done, that is
to say, the aforesaid 30th. day of May, in the 9th. year aforesaid, by his
Writing aforesaid, gave and granted to the aforesaid Ann, the aforesaid Annuity
or yearly Rent of 20. pound, to be issuing out of the aforesaid place in which,
etc. Amongst other, in manner and form as the aforesaid John Kettell, in his
Bar aforesaid to the Conusance aforesaid, above in pleading has alleged, To
have, and to hold the Annuity or yearly Rent aforesaid of 20. pound, to the
aforesaid Ann, and her Assigns, for the Term of the natural life of the said
Ann, at the Feasts aforesaid, above in this behalf specified, by equal portions
yearly to be perceived, with the aforesaid clause of distress in that Writing
contained, in the Conusance above in this behalf specified; And the said
George, and Francis Fasterly, also in Facto say, That the aforesaid Thomas
Mayow, the aforesaid Grant of the Rent aforesaid, and the Estate of the said
Ann, in the said Rent then and there, that is to say the aforesaid 30th. day of
May, in the 19th. year abovesaid, at Sutton Atthone aforesaid, by the name of
Thomas Mayow, of Sutton Atthone, in the County of Kent Gentleman, by his
Writing sealed with the Seal of him the said Thomas, and to the Court of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, here brought, bearing date the same day and
year, to the aforesaid Ann, by the name of Ann Maxey, of Chigwel, in the County
of Essex, ratified and confirmed, as by the said Writing amongst other things
more fully appears; By color of which, the said Ann was of the Annuity or
yearly Rent aforesaid, seized in her demesne as of Freehold, for the Term of her
life; And so thereof being seized, the said Ann afterward, and before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. At Sutton Atthone aforesaid, took to Husband the
aforesaid Dionise; And afterward, and before the aforesaid time in which it is
supposed, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid to be done, that is to say, the
aforesaid 20th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 29th. aforesaid, the aforesaid Dionise, at Sutton
aforesaid dyed; And the aforesaid Ann, him overlived, and was, and yet is of
the aforesaid Annuity or yearly Rent of 20. pound, seized in her demesne as of
Freehold, for the Term of her life, And because 20. pound of the Annuity or
yearly Rent aforesaid, by a whole year ended, at the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
29th. aforesaid, and within the space of 40. days then next following, were
not paid to the said Ann, but were behind, the aforesaid George Mason, and
Francis Easterley, as Bailiffs of the said Ann, do acknowledge the taking of
the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. And justly, etc. As
in parcel of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the distress
of the said Ann, in form aforesaid charged and bound: And this they are ready
to aver, whereupon, as at first they demand Judgment, and Retorn of the Cattle
aforesaid, with their Damages, Costs, and Expenses, by them about their Suit in
this behalf put unto, according to the form of the Statute in such case had and
provided, to be adjudged unto them, etc. And upon this, the aforesaid John
Kettel prays, That the Writing of Confirmation of the Annuity aforesaid, be
inrouled in these words, etc. And it is inrouled in this form as follows. ss.
To all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, Thomas Mayow,
of Sutton Atthone aforesaid in the County of Kent Gentleman, and Dionise Mayow,
Son and Heir Apparent of the said Thomas Mayow, of Bernards Inn, in the County
of Middlesex Gentleman, greeting, in our Lord God everlasting. Kn^w ye, We the
aforesaid Thomas and Dionise, to have given, granted, and in this our present
Writing confirmed to Ann Maxey, of Chigwell, in the County of Essex, for and in
Consideration of a certain Marriage to be had and solemnized, Between the
aforesaid Dionise Mayow, and Ann Maxey foresaid, one yearly Rent or Annuity of
20. pound, of lawful Money of England, of all, our, or either of our Lands and
Tenements, in Sutton Atthone aforesaid, and Wilmington in the County of Kent
aforesaid, To have and perceive, the said yearly Rent or Annuity of 20. pound
aforesaid, of the aforesaid Lands and Tenements with their Appurtenances, to
the aforesaid Ann and her Assigns, for the term of the life of the aforesaid
Ann, at the Feasts of the Annuntiation of the blessed Mary the Virgin, and
Saint Michael the Archangel, by equal portions yearly to be perceived; And if
it happen the aforesaid yearly Rent, or Annuity of 20. pound, at any Feast of
payment in which it is said it ought to be paid, within 40. days after any of
the aaforesaid Feasts, in part or in all, to be behind and unpaid, That then it
be lawful to the aforesaid Ann, and her Assigns, into the aforesaid Lands and
Tenements, to enter and distrein, and the distresses there found and taken, to
carry away, lead, drive, and with them to keep, until of the aforesaid yearly
Rent or Annuity, together with all the Arrerages thereof if any were, to them
it be satisfied and paid, of which yearly Rent or Annuity, we have put the
aforesaid Ann Maxey in full possession and seizin, by paying of one penny of
lawful Money of England, etc. In witness whereof we the aforesaid The. Mayow,
and Dienise Mayow, to this our present Writing, our Hands and Seals have put;
Dated the 30th. day of May, in the year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, by
the Grace of God, o^ England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
the 19th. Which being Read and Heard, The said John Kettel says, That the Plea
aforesaid, by the aforesaid George and Francis, above to the Bar of the said
John Kettell aforesaid, to the Conusance aforesaid in manner and form aforesaid
above pleaded, and the matter in the same contained is not sufficient in Law,
to the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place aforesaid, in which, etc.
justly acknowledged, to which the said John Kettell needs not, or by the Law
of the Land is any ways bound to Answer; Wherefore for want of a sufficient
Plea in this behalf, the same John as at first demands Judgment, and his
damages aforesaid, by the occasion aforesaid, to be to him adjudged, etc. And
the aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Easterley say, that the plea aforesaid,
by them the said George and Francis, above unto the Bar of the aforesaid John
Kettell aforesaid, to the Conusance aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid
above pleaded, and the matter in the same contained, is good and sufficient in
Law, to the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which,
etc. justly acknowledged, Which Plea, and the matter therein contained, the
said George and Francis, are ready to aver and prove, as the Court, etc. And
because the aforesaid John Kettell, to that Plea does not Answer, nor the same
as yet any ways denies, The said George and Francis, as at first demand
Judgment, and Retorn of the Cattle aforesaid, together with their damages,
according to the form of the Statute in such case late had and provided to them
to be adjuged. And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here, of their
Judgment of and upon the premises to be given is not yet avised, day is given
to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen, until from the day of
Easter 15. days, wheresoever, etc. to hear their Judgment of and upon the
premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At
which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid
by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Court of the Lady the Quen that
now is, here of giving their Judgment of upon the premises is not yet avised,
further day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen in the
Morrow of the Holy Trinity, wheresoever, etc. to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westmin. came the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Court of the La^y the
Queen that now is here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, is
not yet avised, day further is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady
the Queen, in 8. days of Saint Michael, wheresoever, etc. to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. Before which day, The Plea aforesaid was adjorned by
the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen,
until from the day of Saint Michael in one Month, at the Town of Saint Alban,
in the County of Hertford, At which day, the Plea aforesaid was further
adjorned, by another Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before
the said Lady the Queen, until the Morrow of All Souls, at the Town of Saint
Alban aforesaid: At which day, before the Lady the Queen, at the Town of Saint
Alban aforesaid, comes as well the said John Kettel, by his Attorneys
aforesaid, as the aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Easterley, in their
proper persons, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen that now is
here* of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, is not yet avised,
day further is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen, in 8.
days of Saint Hillary, wheresoever, etc. to hear their Judgment of and upon
the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. Before which day, the Plea aforesaid was further adjorned, by another Writ
of the Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen at
WESTMINSTER aforesaid, at the aforesaid 8. days of Saint Hillary. At which
day, before the Lady the Queen at WESTMINSTER, come as well the aforesaid John
Kettell, by his Attornie aforesaid, as the aforesaid George Mason and Francis
Esterley in their proper persons: and because the Court of the said Lady the
Queen that now is here of giving their Judgment of, and upon the premises, is
not yet avised, day farther is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady
the Queen, from the day of Easter 15. days wheresoever, etc. to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here, thereof not yet etc. at which day, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, comes as well the aforesaid John Kettle, by his Attorney aforesaid,
as the aforesaid George Mason, and Francis Esterley in their proper persons.
And upon this, all and singular the premises, by the Court of the said Lady the
Qeen that now is here being seen, and matute deliberation thereof being had,
Because it seems to the Court of the Lady the Queen that now is here, that
the plea aforesaid, by the aforesaid George and Francis, to the Bar of the
aforesaid John Kettle aforesaid, to the Conusance aforesaid, in manner and form
aforesaid, above pleaded, and the matter in the same contained is good and
sufficient in Law, Therefore it is granted, that the said John Kettle take
nothing by his writ aforesaid, and that he and his Sureties for his false
clamor aforesaid, thereof be in mercy, etc. and the aforesaid George Mason and
Francis Esterly thereof go without day, etc. and have Retorn of their Cattle
aforesaid, to be holden by them irreplegiable for ever. And further according
to the form of the Statute in such case late had and provided, it is granted,
that the aforesaid George Mason and Francis Easterly, recover against the
aforesaid John Kettle, their damages which they have sustained as well by the
occasion of the premises, as for their Costs and charges by them about their
suit in this behalf expended. But because to the said Court of the said Lady
the Queen that now is here, It is unknown what damages the said George and
Francis in this behalf sustained: It is commanded to the Sheriff, that by the
Oath of good and lawful men of his Ba^liftwick, he diligently enquire what
damages the aforesaid George and Francis have sustained, and the Enquire which,
etc. to the Lady the Queen in the morrow of the Holy Trinity, whenever, etc.
under Seal, etc. and the Seals, etc. he send together with the Writ of the said
Lady the Queen thereof to him directed. The same day is given to the said
George and Francis, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, comes the aforesaid George and Francis in their proper persons,
And the Sheriff, that is to say, Michael Sands Esquire, at that day, Certified
that the Cattle aforesaid, before the Receiving of the Writ aforesaid, were
esloined to places, to the said Sheriff unknown, by the within named John
Kettel, so that the Cattle to the aforesaid George and Francis Esterley, he
cannot retorn irreplegiable, as to the said Sheriff by the Writ aforesaid it
was commanded; And further the said Sheriff certified, an Enquiry before him
the 8th. day of June, in the 36th. year aforesaid, at Dedford Strand, in the
County aforesaid, by the Oaths of 12. and lawful Men of his Baliwick taken, by
which it is found, That the aforesaid George Mason, and Francis, sustained
damages by the occasion of the premises, above their costs and chages, by them
about their Suit in this behalf expended to 40. shillings, and for their costs
and charges to 2. pence, Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid George
Mason, and Francis Esterley, recover against the aforesaid John Kettell, their
damages aforesaid, by the Inquisition aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, As
also 9. pound, to them the said George and Francis, for their costs and charges
aforesaid, by the Court of the Lady the Queen here of Increase adjudged, which
damages here in the whole do amount to 11. pound, and 2. pence, And the
aforesaid John Kettell in mercy: And further it is commanded to the Sheriff,
that of the Cattle of the said John Kettell in his Bailiwick, to the value of
the Cattle aforesaid, which to the aforesaid George and Francis were adjudged,
he take in Withernam, And them to the aforesaid George and Francis, cause to be
delived, to be kept by them, until the Cattel^ of them the said Goorge and
Francis, in the said Court first adjudged can be delivered, etc.

REPLEVIN.
Easter Term: Anno 36. of Elizabeth Rot. 731. in the COMMON PLEAS, C. 2. part,
Bettiworths Case. fol. 27 a.
THomas Bettisworth, was summoned to Answer to John Hayward of Sussex.
a Plea, wherefore he took the Cattle of the said John, and them unjustly
detained against Gages and Pledges, etc. And whereupon, The said John, by John
Comber his Attorney complains, That the aforesaid Thomas, the 28th. day of
October, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 19th.
at Ipping, in a certain place called ^^ynolds, took the Cattle, that is to say,
Two Cows of the said John, and them unjustly detained against Gages, until,
etc. And whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has damage to the value
of 10. pound, etc. And thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas,
by John Trot his Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when, etc.
And does well avow the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place
in which, etc. And justly, etc. Because he says, That the said place in which
it is supposed, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid to be done, contained in it
self One Acre and half of Land with the Appurtenances, in Ipping aforesaid, And
that long before the aforesaid time in which, etc. One John Bettisworth, was
seized of and in One Message, and a Garden, 12. Acres of Land, and one Acre of
Wood with the Appurtenances, in Ipping aforesaid, whereo^ the aforesaid place
in which, etc. is, and the aforesaid time in which, etc. from the time whereof
the Memory of Men is not to the contrary, was parcel in his demesne as of Fee;
And so thereof being seized, the said John long before the aforesaid time in
which, etc. that is to say, the 20th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen that now is the 11th. at Ipping aforesaid, by his Indenture
made between the aforesaid John Bettisworth of the one part, and the aforesaid
John Hayward, by the name of John Hayward, of the same Parish and County
Husbandman, of the other part, demised, granted, and to farm let, to the
aforesaid John Hayward, the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. To have, and to hold, the s^id Tenements with the Appurtenances,
to the said John Hayward and his Assigns, from the Feast of the Annuntiation
of the blessed Mary the Virgin, then next following, until the end and Term of
21. years, from thence next following, and fully to be complete and ended;
Yielding, and paying, therefore yearly during the said Term, to the aforesaid
John Bettisworth, and his Assigns, 12. pence at the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, or within 10. days next after the said Feast. By virtue of which
Demise, the said John Hayward, in the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, entered and was thereof possessed, the Reversion thereof to the
said John Bettisworth, and his Heirs expectant, And the said John Hayward so of
the Tenements aforesaid with the Apputtenances, whereof, etc. being possessed,
and the aforesaid John Bettisworth, of the Reversion thereof, and of the Rent
aforesaid being seized, in his demesne as of Fee, The said John Bettisworth,
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the 3d. day of January, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 19th. At Ipping
aforesaid, dyed of such his Estate of the Reversion and Rent aforesaid, with
the Appurtenances whereof, etc. seized, without issue of his Body begotten;
After whose death, the said Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. descended to the said Thomas Bettisworth, as
Brother and Heir of the said John Bettisworth; By which the said Thmas was
seized of the aforesaid Reversion, of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. and of the Rent aforesaid, in his Demesne as of
Fee, And because 12. pence of the Rent aforesaid, for one whole year after the
death of the aforesaid John Bettisworth, ended at the Feast of Saint Michael
the Archangel, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the
19th. to the said Thomas the aforesaid time in which, etc. was behind and not
paid, the said Thomas does well avow the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the
aforesaid place in which, etc. as in parcel of the Tenements aforesaid with
their Appurtenances, to the aforesaid John Hayward in form aforesaid demised,
and justly, etc. for the said 12. pence of the Rent aforesaid to him the said
Thomas so being behind, etc. And the aforesaid John Hayward says, That the
aforesaid Thomas for the reason before alleged ought not avow the taking of the
cattle aforesaid in the place aforesaid in which, etc. to be just; because he
says, That well and true it is, That the aforesaid John Bettisworth, was
seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his
demesne as of Fee, And so thereof being seized, demised to the said John
Hayward, the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. To have,
and to hold to the said John Hayward, for the aforesaid Term of the aforesaid
21. years, as the aforesaid Thomas above alleged; But the said John Hayward
says, That the aforesaid John Bettisworth, of the Reversion of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, in
form aforesaid being seized, before the afor^said time in which, etc. into the
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. upon the possession
of him the said John Hayward, thereof entered, and him the said John from his
possession did expel, and amove, And immediately after, of the said Tenements
with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. enfeoffed one William Bettisworth, To
have, and to hold the said Tenements with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. to
the said William, and his Hers and Assigns for ever; By virtue of which
Peoffment, the aforesaid William was seized of the same Tenements with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, upon the which possession
of the said William Bettisworth thereof the said John Hayward afterward, and
before the aforesaid time in which, etc. claiming his Term aforesaid, of and in
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. into the said
Tenements with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc re-entred, and was thereof
possessed, and so thereof being possessed, The said John Hayward, before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. put the Cattle aforesaid, into the aforesaid
place in which, etc. to eat the grass in the same then growing; Which Cattle
were in the said place in which, etc. eating the grass in the same then
growing, until the aforesaid Thomas, the Day and Year in the Declaration
aforesaid above specified, At Ipping aforesaid, in the aforesaid place called
Raynolds, took the Cattle of him the said John Hayward, and them unjustly
detained against Gages and Pledges, until, etc. as he above against him
complains: Without that, that the aforesaid John Bettisworth, dyed of the
Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. and
of the Rent aforesaid seized, as the aforesaid Thomas above has alleged; And
this he is ready to aver, wherefore in as much as the aforesaid Thomas, the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. above
acknowledges, The said John Hayward demands Judgment, and his damages by
the occasion of the taking, and unjust deteining of the said Cattle, to be
adjudged unto him, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas as at first says, That the
aforesaid J. Bettisworth dyed of the Reversion of the Teneme^ts aforesaid with
the Appurtenances whereof, etc. and of the Rent aforesaid seized, as he above
alleged; and of this puts himself upon the Country, and the said John Hayward
likewise; Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he cause to come here,
from the day of Easter, in 5. weeks 12. etc. by whom etc. And who neither, etc.
To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. At which day here came the Parties,
etc. And the Sheriff sent not the Writ: Therefore as before, It is cmmanded to
the Sheriff, that he cause to come here 12. etc. in the Morrow of the Holy
Trinity, To recognize, etc. At which day here comes the parties, And the
Sheriff sent not the Writ, Therefore it is commanded the Sheriff as at first,
That he cause to be here the morrow of Saint Martin 12. etc. to Recognize in
the form aforesaid, At which days come the Parties, and the Sheriff sent not
the Writ: Therefore as at first, it is commanded the Sheriff, that he cause to
come here 12. etc. 8. days of St. Hillary, etc. To Recognize, etc. in the form
aforesaid, etc. At which day the Parties come, etc. and the Sheriff sent not
the Writ, etc. Therefore as at first, it is comman^ed to the Sheriff, that he
cause to come here from Faster day 15. days 12. etc. to Recognize in form
aforesaid, etc. at which day here come the Parties, etc. and the Sheriff sent
not the Writ, etc. Therefore as at first, it is commanded the Sheriff that he
cause to come here in the morrow of the holy Trinity 12. etc. to Recognize in
form aforesaid, etc. At which day the parties come here, etc. and the Sheriff
sent not the Writ, etc. Therefore as at first, it is commanded to the Sheriff,
that he cause to come here in the morrow of Saint Martin 12. etc. to Recognize
in form aforesaid, etc. At which day the Parties come here, etc. and the
Sheriff sent not the Writ: Therefore it is commanded the Sheriff, that he cause
to come in 8. days of Saint Hillary 12. etc. to Recognize in form aforesaid; At
which day the Parties come, and the Sheriff sent not the Writ, (And so several
Venire Facias were award to the Sheriff, from Term to Term, to return Jurors at
a day, every of the said Term; as at first, and the parties come at the said
days, and the Sheriff sent not the Writ; as in the Rolls upon Record
appears) And Process was continued between the Parties aforesaid, of the Plea
aforesaid by Jurors put in respite, until this day, that is to say, in days of
St. Michael in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 31.
Unless the Justices of the Lady the Queen to Assizes in the County aforesaid to
be taken assigned by the form of the Statute, etc. upon Wednesday the 27th of
June at East Greinstead in the County aforesaid first should come. And now at
this day, as well the aforesaid John Heyward, as the aforesaid Thomas
Bettisworth come by their Attorneys aforesaid: And the aforesaid Justices of
Assizes before whom, etc. sent here their Record in these words: Afterward the
day and place within contained, before Robert Clarke one of the Barons of the
Lady the Queen of her Exchequer, and John Puckering one of the Sergeants at Law
of the Queen, Justices of the said Lady the Queen, to take Assizes in the
County of Sussex Assigned by the form of the Statute, etc. come as well the
within named John Hayward, by William Siday his Attorney, as the within written
Thomas Bettisworth by John Lions his Attorney, And the Jurors of the Jury
whereof within mention is made, being called, some of them, that is to say,
Edward Pickham, William Ails, Thomas ^etley, William ^revet, Edmond Gray, John
Lock, John Capron, and John Andrew appeared, and was sworn Jurors in the said
Jury: And because the rest of that Jury did not appear, others of the standers
by chosen by the Sheriff, at the request of the aforesaid Thomas Bettisworth,
And by the command of the Justices aforesaid, were new put to them, whose n^mes
to the Panel within written, are filled according to the form of the Statute
in such case of late made and provided: The names of which Jurors so put to,
that is to say, John Pit, Thomas Bayley, William Leefe, and Thomas Aglewyn
come; and to say the truth of the matter within contained, together with the
Juros first impannelled and sworn, chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their
Oath, That one John Bettisworth was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in
the within written Message and Garden witht the Appurtenances in Iping within
written, whereof the within written place in which, etc. and at the within
written time in which, as also time whereof the memory of man is not to the
contrary, was parcel: And further the Jurors say upon their Oaths aforesaid,
that the aforesaid place in which, etc. does contain, and the aforesaid time in
which, etc. did contain in it ^elf, one Acre and half an Acre of Land, and
called by the name of Rainolds, and is, and the aforesaid time in which, etc.
as also time whereof the memory of men is not to the contrary, was a several
Close by it self separately enclosed; and further the Jurors say upon their
Oath, That the aforesaid John Bettisworth so thereof (as before is said) being
seized: Afterward, that is to say, the 20th. day of March, in the year of the
Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 11th. at Iping afo^esaid, By his
Indenture within written, made between the aforesaid John Bettisworth of the
one part, and the aforesaid John Hayward of the other part. demised, granted,
and to farm let to the aforesaid John Hayward, the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. To have and to hold the said Tenements with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. to the aforesaid John Hayward, and his Assigns,
from the Feast of the blessed Mary the Virgin then next following* unto the end
and term of 21. years then next following fully to be complete and ended;
Yielding and paying therefore yearly, to the aforesaid John Bettisworth and his
Assigns 12. d. At the Feast of St. Mich^el the Archangel, or within 10. days
next after the said Feast. By virtue of which Demise, the said John Hayward
into the Tenants aforesaid with the Apurtenances whereof, etc. entered, and was
thereof possessed, the reversi^n thereof to the aforesaid John Bittesworth and
his Heirs expectant: And he the said John Heyward of the Tenements aforesaid
with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. being possessed: and the aforesaid John
Bettisworth of the Reversion thereof, and of the Rent aforesaid being seis^d in
Demesne as of Fee: The said John Bettisworth into the aforesaid Close, in which,
etc. called Rainolds in the possession of the said John Heyward entered, and
there immediately after, sealed and delivered as his Deed; a certain Deed,
containing a Feoffment of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances
whereof, to one William Bettisworth his Heirs and Assigns for ever; And
further, the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, that immediately after the
sealing and delivery of the Deed of Feoffment aforesaid, possession and seisin
upon that Deed of Feoffment was g^ven and delivered, by the aforesaid John
Bettisworth, to the aforesaid William Bettisworth, in and upon the aforesaid
Close called Raynolds, in which etc. neither the aforesaid John Hayward, nor
any other, at the said time of the delivery of the said possession or seisin,
of the said Close being; By virtue whereof, the said William Bettisworth, into
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. entered, and
thereof was seized, as the Law requires. And the Jurors further say upon their
Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Hayward, at the time of the giving and
delivery of the possession and seisin in the Close aforesaid, was in the
Message and the Residue of the Tenements aforesaid, by virtue of the Lease
aforesaid to him made, and that afterward and before the time in which, etc.
the aforesaid John Hayward into the aforesad Close called Raynolds, with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. re-entred, claiming the same Close to the Lease
aforesaid, to him in form aforesaid made; And further, the Jurors say, upon
their Oath aforesaid, That afterward, and before the time in which, etc. that
is to say, the 3d. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 19th. the said John Bettisworth, at Ipping aforesaid
dyed, without issue of his Body begotten; And that the aforesaid Thomas
Bettisworth, is his Brother and next Heir. But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, ^he possession and seisin in manner and
form aforesaid, given and delivered, of and in the aforesaid Close called
Raynolds, in which, etc. be, or in Law ought to be adjudged a good and lawful
possession and seisin of the aforesaid close called Raynolds, in which, etc.
the Jurors are utterly ignorant, and thereof they pray the advice of the
Justices here of the Lady the Queen, and if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in
form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the said Justices of the Lady the Queen,
That the aforesaid possession and seisin, in form aforesaid given and
delivered, of and in the aforesaid Close called Raynolds, be or in Law ought to
be adjudged, a good and lawful possession and seisin, of the aforesaid Close
called Raynold^, in which, etc. with the Appurtenances, etc. Then the Jurors
aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said John Bettisworth, did
not dye seized of the Reversion of all the Tenements within written with their
^ppurtenances, etc. nor of the Rents within written seized, as the said John
Hayward within for him allegeth. And then they assesse damages of the said John
Hayward, for the ocasion within writteh, above his costs and charges by him the
said John Haward, about his Suit expended to 4. pence, and for his costs and
charges to 2. pence. But if upon the whole mat^er aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, It shall seem to the said Justices of the said Lady the Queen, That the
aforesaid possession and seisin* in form aforesaid given and delivered, of and
in the aforesaid Close called Raynolds, in which, be not, nor in Law ought to
be adjudged a good and lawful possession and seisin* of the aforesaid Close
called Raynolds, in which, etc. Then the Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid,
That the aforesaid John Bettisworth dyed of the Reversion of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, and of the Rents aforesaid seized,
as the said Thomas Bettisworth, within for him allegeth. And then they assesse
damages of the said Thomas Bettisworth, for the occasion within written, above
his costs and charges mentioned about his Suit expended to 4. pence, and for
his costs and charges to 2. pence. And because the justice^ here will avise
themselves of and upon the premises before they give their Judgment thereof,
day is given to the parties aforesaid, here until in 8. days of Saint Hillary,
to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Justices here thereof not yet,
etc. At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John Hayward, as the
aforesaid Thomas Bettisworth, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises, further
day is given to the parties aforesaid, here until from the day of Easter 15.
days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Justices here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day, here come as well the aforesaid John Hayward, as the
said Thomas Bettisworth, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices
here, will further avise themselves of upon the premises before they give their
Judgment thereof, day further is given to the parties aforesaid, here until
the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid John John Hayward, as the aforesaid Thomas Bettisworth, by their
Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
further day day is given to the parties aforesaid, here until in 8. days of
Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here
thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the said John Hayward,
as the aforesaid Thomas Bettisworth, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because
the Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the premises before
they give their Judgment thereof, day further is given to the parties
aforesaid, here until in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day,
here comes as well the aforesaid John Hayward, as the aforesaid Thomas
Bettisworth, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here, will
further avise themselves of and upon the premises before they give their
Judgment thereof, further day i^ given to parties aforesaid, here until from
the day of Easter 15. days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid John Hayward, as the aforesaid Thomas Bettisworth, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, day further is
given to the parties aforesaid here until the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear
their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc.
At which day, here comes as well the aforesaid John, as the aforesaid Thomas,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, and upon this, The premises being seen, and by
the Justices here fully understood, It is granted that the aforesaid John, take
nothing by his Writ aforesaid, but be in mercy for his false clamor, etc. And
the aforesaid Thomas go thereof without day, etc. And that he have retorn of
the Cattle aforesaid to be kept by him irreplegible for ever. And how, etc. The
Sheriff make it here appear in 8. days of Saint Michael, etc. It is also
granted, That the aforesaid Thomas recover against the said John, his damages
aforesaid by the Jurors in form aforesaid assessed, as also 11. pound, and 9.
shillings, and 6. pence, to the said Thomas at his request, for his costs and
charges aforesaid, by the Court here of increase adjudged which damages, in the
whole do amount to 12. pound.

REPLEVIN.
Michaelmass Term, Anno 27. and 28. Eliz. Rot 1739. in the COMMON* PLEAS, Co.
4. part, Cornwall.
Bevils Case. fol. 6. a.
NIcholas Francis, was Attached by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Second
Deliverance, to answer to Walter Parker of a Plea, wherefore he took the Cattle
of him the said Walter, and them unjustly detained against Gages and Pleges,
etc. And whereupon, the said Walter, by Francis Eyrman, by his Attorney
complains, That the aforesaid Nicholas, the 30th. day of October, in the year
of the Reign of the Lady the Lady the Queen that now is the 15th. at Tallan, in
a certain place called Newton, took the Cattle, that is to say, Two Oxen of him
the said Walter, and them unjustly detained against Gages and Pledges, until,
etc. whereupon he says that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of
20. pound, And thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Nicholas, by
William Leigh his Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when, etc.
And as Bailiff of John Bevill Esquire, does well acknowledge the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. And justly, etc.
Because he says, That the same place called Newton, in which it is supposed
the taking of the Cattle aforesaid to be done, does contain, and the time of
the taking of the Cattle aforesaid supposed to be done, did contain in it self
20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in Tallon aforesaid, and that long
before the aforesaid time in which, etc. One Robert Smith, the Elder Esquire,
was seized of the said 20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in his demesne
as of Fee, and held the said 20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, of the
aforesaid John Bevill, as of his Manor of Kal^gath, in the County aforesaid, by
Knights Service, that is to say, by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage to the Lady the
Queen, when it should happen ^2. shillings; And when more, more, and when
less, less, and also by the Service of doing Suit at the Court of him the
said John at his Manor aforesaid twice by the year, that is to say, once within
a Month next after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and again, within
a Month next after the Feast of Easter every year, at that Manor holden, of
which Services, the aforesaid John Bevill, was seized by the Hands of the
aforesaid Robert Smith the Elder, as by the Hands of his very Tenant, that is
to say, of the Homage, Fealty, Escuage, and Suit of Court, as of his Fee and
Right; And that afterward, the aforesaid Robert Smith the Elder, dyed of the
aforesaid 20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances seized, After whose death,
the aforesaid 20. Acres of Land with their Appurtenances, descended to one
Robert Smith, Son and Heir of the aforesaid Robert Smith: By which the said
Robert Smith the Son, before the time in which, etc. in the aforesaid 20. Acres
of Land with the Appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized in his demesne as
of Fee; And because the Homage of the aforesaid Robert the Son, the aforesaid
time in which, etc. to the aforesaid John Bevill behind not done, the said
Nicholas as Bailiff of the said John Bevill, does well avow the taking of the
Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. And justly, etc. for
that Homage so undone, in the Lands of the said John, in form aforesaid holden,
etc. And upon the aforesaid Robert the Son, as upon the very Tenant of the
aforesaid John Bevill, and within his Fee and Lordship. And the aforesaid
Walter says, That long before the said time of the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid done, The s^id Robert Smith was seized of the aforesaid 20. Acres of
Land with the Appurtenances, in Tallon aforesaid, called Newton, in his demesne
as of Fee, And so thereof being seized, before the time of the taking aforesaid
done, that is to say, the 24th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the
said ^^dy the Queen that now is the 13th. at Tallon aforesaid, Leased the
before(...) 20 Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, to him the said Walter, To
have to the said Walter and his Assigns, from the aforesaid 24th. day of
January, in the year afores. unto the end of the Term of 5. years then next
following, to be complete and ended; By virtue of which Lease, the said Walter
into the aforesaid 20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances entered, and was,
and yet is thereof possessed, the Reversion thereof after the Term aforesaid
ended, to the aforesaid Robert Smith the Son, and his Heirs expectant; Without
which Robert the Son, the said Walter cannot answer to the avowry aforesaid, of
the said Nicholas, nor the Plea thereof bring into Judgment. And prays aid of
the aforesaid Robert Smith the Son, who is present herein Court in his proper
person* and willingly joins himself in aid against the aforesaid Nicholas, in
the Plea aforesaid, etc. And upon this, as well the said Walter, as the
aforesaid Robert Smith the Son, who, etc. say that the aforesaid Nicholas, for
the reason before alleged, ought not avow the taking of the Cattle aforesaid,
to have been just; For by Protestation, that the aforesaid Robert Smith the
Son, did not hold the aforesaid 20. Acres of Land with the Appurtenances called
Newton, in Tallon aforesaid, of the aforesaid J. Bevill, as of his Manor of
Keligath, by Knights Service, that is to say, by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage,
to the Lady the Queen, when it should happen 42. shillings, and to more, more,
and less, less, etc. As also by the Service of doing Suit at the Court of the
said John Bevill, of his Manor aforesaid twice by the year, that is to say,
once within one Month after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, and again
within one Month after the Feast of Easter, every year, at that Manor to be
holden, as the aforesaid Nich. above has alleged; For Plea he says, That the
aforesaid John Bevil never was seized of the aforesaid Services, as the said
Nicholas above has alleged, And this they are ready to aver, Wherefore in as
much as the said Nicholas above acknowledges the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. the said Walter, and the
aforesaid Robert, who, etc. demand Judgment and their damages, by the occasion
of the taking, and unjust deteining of the Cattle aforesaid, to the said
Walter to be adjudged; And the aforesaid Nicholas, as at first says, That the
aforesaid John Bevill, was seized of the aforesaid Services, by the Hands of
the aforesaid Robert Smith the Father, as by the Hand of his very Tenant, as he
above alleged; And of this puts himself upon the Country, and the aforesaid
Walter, and the aforesaid Robert Smith the Son, who, etc. likewise; Therefore
it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he cause to be here from the day Saint
Martin 15. days, 12. etc. by whom, etc. and who neither, etc. to Recognize,
etc. Because as well, etc. Process against the Jurors, to try the issue
aforesaid, is contained until 15. of Easter, in the 19th. year of Queen
Elizabeth, unless the Justices to Assizes, in the County aforesaid to be taken
assigned, by the form of the Statute, etc. Upon Monday, in the 5th. Week of
Lent, the said 19th. year first come, At which Assizes, the Verdict was given
as follows. The Jurors say upon their Oath, That the within named John Smith
the Father, held the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, called Newton,
of the within named John Bevill as of the within written Manor of Keligath, by
Knights Service within written; And that the said John Bevill, was seized of
the Fealty and Suit of Court, only parcel of the Services within written, by
the Hands of the aforesaid Robert Smith the Father, as by the Hands of his very
Tenant. But whether the aforesaid seisin of Fe^lty, and Suit of Court
aforesaid* be a good and sufficient s^isin of the whole Services within
written, or not, the Jurors are altogether ignorant: And pray thereof the
advice and di^cretion of the Justices aforesaid. And if upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the same Justices, That
the aforesaid seisin of Fealty, and Suit of Court, be not a good and sufficient
seisin of the whole Services aforesaid, Then the Jurors say upon their Oath,
That the aforesaid John Bevill was not seized of the within written Services,
by the Hands of the aforesaid Robert Smith the Father, as by the Hand of his
very Tenant, as the said Walter within alleged; And then they assess the
damages of him the said Walter, by occasion of the taking, and unjust detaining
of the Cattle aforesaid, besides his costs and charge by him about his Suit in
this behalf expended to 12. pence, and for his costs and charges to 40.
shillings. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, it shall seem to the
Justices, That the said seisin of Fealty, and Suit of Court aforesaid, be a
good and sufficient seisin of the whole Services within written, Then the said
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said John Bevill was seized o^
the Services within written, by the Hands of the aforesaid Robert Smith the
Father, as by the Hands of his very Tenant, as the aforesaid Nicholas within
alleged. And then they assess the damages of the said Nicholas, by occasion of
the premises, besides his costs and charges by him about his Suit in this
behalf expended to 12. pence, and for his costs and charges to 40. shillings.
And because the Justices here will avise themselves of upon the premises before
they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties here, until in
the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Justices here thereof not yet, etc. And so the Plea aforesaid, was continued
until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, in the 25th. year of Queen Elizabeth,
which day Judgment was given as follows. At which day, here comes as well
the aforesaid Walter Parker, by his Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid
Nicholas Francis, by William Aylesbury his Attorney. And upon this, The premises
being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, It seems to the
Justices here, That the aforesaid seisin of Fealty, and Suit of Court
aforesaid, is a good and sufficient seisin of the whole Services aforesaid;
Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid William Parker, take nothing by his
Writ aforesaid, but be in mercy for his false clamor. And the aforesaid
Nicholas Francis, thereof go without day, and that he have Retorn of his Cattle
aforesaid, to be kept by him irreplegible for ever, etc. It is also granted,
That the aforesaid Nicholas Francis recover against the aforesaid Walter
Parker, his damages aforesaid to 41. shillings, by the Jurors in form aforesaid
assessed, as also 13. pound to the said Nicholas, at his request for his costs
and charges aforesaid, by the Court here of Increase adjudged, which damages in
the whole do amount to 15. pound, 1. shilling, etc.

REPLEVIN.
Trinity Term, Anno 7mo. JACOBI, Rot. 3661. in Salop.
the COMMON PLEAS, Co. 8. part, John Talbotts Case.
John Pendleton, was attached by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of second
deliverance, to answer to John Chapman of a Plea, wherefore he took the Cattle
of him the said John Chapman, and them unjustly detained against Gages, and
Pledges, etc. And whereupon, The said John Chapman, by Thomas Salter his
Attorney complains, That the aforesaid John Pendleton the second day of
September, in the year of the Lord the King that now is of England, etc. the
6th. at Albrighton, in a certain place, called Bromly took his Cattle, that is
to say, two Bullocks of the said John Chapman, and them unjustly detained
against Gages, and Pledges until, etc. whereupon he says, that he is the
worse, and has damage to the value of 20. pound, and thereof he brings suit,
etc. And the aforesaid John Pendleton, by Nicholas Gibbens his Attorney comes,
and defends the force and injury when, etc. and as Bailiff of Jo. Talbot
Esquire, does well avow the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid
place in which, etc. and justly, etc. Because he says, That the place in which
it is supposed the taking aforesaid to be done, does contein, and at the time
of the taking thereof above supposed to be done, did contein in it self 3.
Acres of Pasture, lying in the aforesaid field, called Bromley in Albrighton
aforesaid; and that long before the taking of the Cattle aforesaid supposed to
be done, One John Chapman Father of the now Plaintiff, was seized of the
aforesaid 3. Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc. in his
demesne as of Fee, and the said 3. Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in
which, etc. held of the aforesaid John, as of his Manor of Albrighton in the
County aforesaid, by Fealty and the Service of doing suit, at the Court of the
said John Talbot, of his Manor aforesaid, from 3. weeks, to 3. weeks, at that
Manor to be holden. As also by the service of rendering after the death of every
Tenant of the said 3. Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc.
dying thereof seized, the best Beast which should be of such Tenant, at the
time of his death, in the name of a Heriot; of which services the aforesaid
John Talbot, was seized by the hands of the aforesaid John Chapman the Father,
as by the hands of his very Tenant, that is to say, of the Fealty and suit of
Court aforesaid, as of Fee and right, and of the Heriot aforesaid, in his
demesne as of Fee. And the said John Chapman the Father of the three Acres of
Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc. in his demesne as of Fee in form
aforesaid being seized, afterward, and before the time in which, etc. At
Albrighton aforesaid, of such his Estate dyed thereof so seized. And the said
John Pendleton further says, That the aforesaid John Chapman the ^^ther, at
the time of his death, at Albrighton aforesaid, was possess^d o^ an Ox, of the
price of 100 shillings as his proper Ox, which Ox was the best Beast of the
aforesaid John Capman the Father, at the time of his death, whereupon sell the
Heriot thereof to the aforesaid John; and because the Heriot aforesaid, after
the death of the aforesaid John Chapman the Father the said time in which, etc.
was behind not delivered, the said said John Pendleton* as Bailiff of the
aforesaid John Talbot, does well avow the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in
the aforesaid place in which, etc. and justly, etc. for the Heriot aforesaid
not delivered, as within his Fee and Lordship, etc. And the said John Chapman
now Plaintiff says, That the aforesaid John Pendleton, as Bailiff of the
aforesaid John Talbot, in the cause above before alleged, ought not avow the
taking o^ the Cattle aforesaid to be just, Because he says, That long before
the aforesaid time of the taking aforesaid done, and before the aforesaid John
Chapman the Father, had any thing in the said 3. Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in which, etc. One ^ohn ^arny was seized of a Message, and of
half a Yard Land of Meadow, and Pasture, with the appurtenances, containing by
estimation, 50. ^cres in Albrighton aforesaid, whereof the said 3. Acres of
Pasture, with their appurtenances in which, etc. were parcel in his demesne as
of Fee, and the said Message, and one half Yard of Land, Meadow, and Pasture
wholly, with the appurtenances whereof, etc. held of the aforesaid John Talbot,
as of his Manor of Albrighton aforesaid by Fealty, and doing suit at the Court
of the said John Talbot of his Manor aforesaid, from 3. weeks, to 3. weeks, at
that Manor yearly to be holden, as also by the service of rendering after the
death of every Tenant of the said Message, and half Yard Land of Meadow and
Pasture wholly with the appurtenances whereof, etc. dying thereof seized, the
best Beast that was to such Tenant, at the time of his death in the name of a
Heriot. And the said John Barny of the Message, and half Yard Land, of such
Meadow and Pasture, with the appurtenance^, wholly in form aforesaid, being
seized long before the time of the taking, etc. that is to say, the first day
of May, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 32th. of
the said 3. Acres of ^and, parcel of the aforesaid half Yard Land of Land,
Meadow, and Pasture, with the appurtenances whereof enfeoffed the aforesaid,
^ohn Talbot, To have and to hold to the said John Talbot, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever. By virtue of which Feoffment, the aforesaid John Talbot was, and yet
is seized of the aforesaid 3. Acres of Lands parcel, etc. in his demesne as of
Fee; and he the said John so being thereof seized, and the aforesaid John Barny
of the Message aforesaid, and the rest of the aforesaid half Yard-Land, of
Mead^w and Pasture, with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid
being seized, The said John Barny afterward, and before the time of the taking
aforesaid done, that is to say, the first day of May, in the year of the Reign
of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 36th. of the aforesaid 3. Acres of
Pasture with the appurtenances in which, etc. Enfeoffed, the aforesaid John
C^apman the Father, and his Heirs for ever; By virtue of which Feoffment, the
said John Chapman the Father, was seized of the said 3. Acres of Pasture with
the appurtenances in which, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being
seized, the said John Chapman the Father after, and before the time of the
taking* etc. At Albrighton aforesaid, of such his Estate of, and in the same 3.
Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc. dyed thereof seized,
after whose death, the said 3. Acres of Pasture with their appurtenances in
which, etc. descended to the said John Chapman now Plaintiff, as Son and Heir
of the said John Chapman the Father: By which the said John Chapman now
Plaintiff, into the 3. Acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in which, etc.
entered, and was, and yet is thereof seized in his demesne as of Fee; and so
thereof being seized, The said John Chapman the now Plaintiff, before the time
of the taking, etc. put his Cattle into the aforesaid Place in which, etc. to
eat the Grass in the same then growing, as it was lawful for him to do, which
Cattle were in the place aforesaid, in which eating the Grass there growing,
until the said John Pendleton, the aforesaid second day of September, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, the 6th. abovesaid, at
Albrighton aforesaid, in the afores. place, called Bromley Wake, the Cattle of
him the said Io. Chapman aforesaid, and them unjustly detained against Gages
and Pledges until, etc. as he above against him complains; and this he is
ready to aver, wherefore in as much as the aforesaid John Pendleton the taking
of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, etc. to Bar, and
that he to that Plea in manner and form aforesaid pleaded needs not, nor by
the Law of the Land, is bound to answer, wherefore, for want of a sufficient
Plea in Bar, in this behalf the said John Pendleton, demands Judgment, and
Return of the Cattle aforesaid, together with his damages to be adjudged unto
him; And the aforesaid John Chapman now Plaintiff, in as much as he sufficient
matter in Law, to Bar the aforesaid John Pendleton, from justly avowing the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place in which, etc. above has alleged,
which he is ready to averr, which matter the aforesaid John Pendleton, does not
deny, nor to the same any ways answers, but refuse to admit the same
averment, as at first demands Judgment, and his damages by the occasion of
the taking, and unjust deteining of the same Cattle to be to him adjudged, etc.
And because the Justices here, will avise themselves of and upon the premises,
before they give their Judgment thereof; Day is given to the parties, etc.

REPLEVIN.
Trinity Term, Anno 6to. of King James Rot. 1611. in the COMMON PLEAS, C. 9.
part Henry Conneys Case.
BArtholmew Colpit, was summoned to answer to John Crane of a Plea, wherefore
he took the Cattle of the said John, and them detained against Gages and
Pledges; and whereupon, The said John, by Thomas Ganton his Attorney
complains, that the aforesaid Bartholmew the 19th. day of October, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, the 5th. at Fidde St Giles,
in a certain place there containing in it, two Acres of Pasture the Cattle,
that is to say, 3. Steers of the said John, etc. and them unjustly detained
against Gages and Pledges until, etc. whereupon he says, he is the worse, and
has damage to the value of 20. pound; and thereof brings suit, etc. And the
aforesaid Bartholmew, by William Dany his Attorney comes and defends the
force and injury, etc. and as Bailiff to John Welby Esquire, does well
acknowledge the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the place in which, etc. and
justly, etc. Because he says, that the said place, in which it is supposed the
taking of the Cattle aforesaid to be done does contein, and aforesaid time in
which it is supposed, the aforesaid taking to be done, did contein in it self,
2. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, in Fidde Saint Giles aforesaid,
lying there in a certain Field, called South graftfield, near the Lands foot,
of Richard Welby Gent. sometimes Richard Delaland on the part of the North, and
the Kirkland on the part of the West; and that one Henry Conny Esquire before
the time, in which was seized of the aforesaid 2. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, and held the same of one
William Stermin Esquire, as of his Manor of Richards, with the Appurtenances,
in Tidde St. Giles aforesaid, by Fealty, and the Rent of 13d. yearly, at the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel to be paid, as also by the Service of
doing Suit at the Court of the said William Stermin of his Manor aforesaid,
from 3. weeks, to 3. weeks, upon seasonable warning at the Manor aforesaid to
be holden: Of which Services the said William Stermin, was seized by the hands
of the aforesaid Henry Conny, as by the hands of his very Tenant, that is to
say, Of the Fealty and Suit of Court aforesaid, as of Fee and Right, and of the
Rent aforesaid, in his demesne as of Fee, Of which Manor with the Appurtenances,
the aforesaid William Stermin was seized in his demesne as of Fee, and so
thereof being seized, the aforesaid William Stermin, before the time in which,
etc. Of the aforesaid Manor with the Appurtenances, the aforesaid John Welby
enfeoffed. To have and to hold to the said Joh. Welby, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever. To which Feoffment by the aforesaid William Stermin to the aforesaid
John VVelby in form aforesaid made, the aforesaid Henry Conny afterward, and
before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the first day of November, in
the year of the Reign of Lord the King that now is the first then, of the
aforesaid two Acres of Lands, with the Appurtenances in form aforesaid being
seized at Fidde St. Giles aforesaid attorned: By color of which Feoffment and
attorment aforesaid. The said John VVelby was, and yet is seized of the Manor
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee; and because 40.
shillings, and 4 pence, of the Rent aforesaid, for 4. whole years, was at the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the
King that now is the 5th. and after the Attornment aforesaid, in form aforesaid
had, to the aforesaid John Welby, the aforesaid time in which, etc. behind, not
paid, The said Bartholmew as Bailiff of the aforesa. Jo. Welby, does well
acknowledge the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in
which, for the aforesaid 4. shillings, and 4. pence, of the Rent aforesaid, so
being behind, and justly, etc. as within his Fee and Lordship. And the
aforesaid John Crane says, That the aforesaid Bartholmew, as Bailiff of the
said John Welby, for the cause above alleged, the taking of the Cattle
aforesaid, in the aforesaid place in which, ought not avow to be just, Because
by Protestation, that the aforesaid Henry Conny, held not the aforesaid 2.
Acres of Land with the Appurtenances, of the aforesaid William Stermin, as of
his Manor of Richards aforesaid, by Fealty and the Rent of 13. pence, for every
year at the Feast of Saint Michael to be paid, as also by the Service of doing
Suit at the Court of the said William Stermin, of his Manor aforesaid, from 3.
Weeks to 3. Weeks, upon reasonable warning, at that Manor to be holden, as the
said Bartholmew above has alleged. And for Plea he says, That the aforesaid
Henry, before the time of the taking aforesaid done, and at the time of the
taking, etc. was, and yet is seized, of the aforesaid 2. Acres of Pasture with
their Appurte. in his demesnas of Fee, and held the same of Martin by Divine
Providence, then Bishop of ^ly, as of his Manor of Fidde St. Giles, with the
Appurtenances, in Fiddy Saint Giles aforesaid, by Fealty only for all Services;
Without that, that the aforesaid Henry, at Fidde Saint Giles aforesaid, to the
aforesaid John Welby attorned Tenant, in manner and form, as the said
Bartholmew above has alleged. And this he is ready to aver, Wherefore for as
much as the aforesaid Bartholmew, the taking of the Cattle aforesaid, in the
aforesaid place in which, etc. above acknowledges. The said John demands
Judgment and his damages, by the occasion of taking of the said Cattle to be
to him adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid Bartholmew, as at first says, That the
said Henry, did attorn Tenant to the aforesaid John Welby, in manner and (...)
as the said Bartholmew above has alleged. And o^ this puts (...)lf upon the
Country, and the said John likewise; Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff,
that he cause to come here from the day of the Holy Trinity, in 3. Weeks 12.
etc. By whom, etc. And who neither, etc. Because as well, etc. And afterward,
the day and place within contained, before Edward Coke Knight, Chief Justice of
the Lord the King of the Bench, and William Daniel Knight, one of the Justices
of the Lord the King of the Bench aforesaid, Justices of the said Lord the King
to Assizes, in the County of Cambridge to be taken assigned, by the ^orm of the
Statute, etc. this turn associated, (the presence of the aforesaid William
Daniel not expected,) by virtue of the Writ of the said Lord the King of (...)
etc. came as well the within named John Crane, as the within written Bartholmew
Colpit, by their Attorneys within contained. And the Jurors of the Jury,
whereof within mention is made, being called, come, who to say the truth of the
within contained, chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That the
within named Henry Conny, before the time within written, in which, etc. was
seized o^ the within written 2. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances* in
which, etc. in his demesne as of Fee, by descent from his Father; And that the
said Henry, the said 2. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, held of the
within named William Stermin, ^s of his Manor of Richards with the
Appurtenances in Fidde St. Giles within written by Fealty, and the Rent of 13.
pence, at the Feast of Saint Mi^hael the Archangel to be paid, as also by the
service of doing Suit at the Court of him the said William Stermin of his
Manor aforesaid, from 3. weeks, to 3. weeks, upon reasonable warning, at the
Manor aforesaid, yearly to be holden; and that of the services aforesaid, the
said William Stermin, was seized by the hands of the aforesaid Henry Conny, as
by the hands of his very Tenant, that is to say, of the Fealty and Suit of the
Court aforesaid, as of Fee and Right; and of the Rent aforesaid, in his demesne
as of Fee, as the aforesaid Bartholmew within has alleged; And further, the
Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid William
Stermin, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, was seized in his
demesne as of Fee, And so thereof being seized, The said William Stermin, before
the within written time in which, etc. of the said Manor with the
Appurtenances, enfeoffed the within named John Welby, To have, and to hold to
the said John Welby, his Heis and Assigns forever. And that the aforesaid Henry
Conny, being of the Age of 20. and within the Age of 21. years, at the
aforesaid Feoffment, by the said William Stermin, to the aforesaid John Welby,
in form aforesaid made, of the aforesaid 2. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances, in form aforesaid being seized, at Fidde Saint Giles aforesaid
agreed, and the payment of the Rent aforesaid, to the aforesaid John Welby
promised. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It
shall seem to the Court here, That the agreement of the aforesaid Henry Conny,
to the Feoffment aforesaid, and his promise of the payment of the Rent
aforesaid, so as before is said, by him the said Henry Conny, he being within
the Age of 21. years, are an Attornment; Then the Jurors aforesaid, say upon
their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Henry did Attorn Tenant to the
aforesaid John Welby, in manner and form, as the aforesaid Bartholmew Colpit
within has alleged; And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the Jurors in
form aforesaid found, it shall seem to the Court, That the Agreement of the
said Henry Conny, to the Feoffment aforesaid, and his promise aforesaid, of
payment of the Rent aforesaid, so as before is said, by him the said Henry,
being within the age of 21. years, be not an Attornment. Then the Jurors say
upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Henry Conny, did not Attorn Tenant to
the aforesaid John Welby, as the aforesaid John Crane in pleading has alleged,
and then they assesse the damages of the said John, by occasion within written,
besides his costs and charges by him about his Suit expended to 12. pence, and
for his costs and charges to 5. shillings. Therefore, etc.

RESTITUTION.
Trinity Term, Anno 13. JACOBI, Rot. 23. in the KING'S BENCH, C. 11. part, James
Bags Case. fol. 93. a.
JAMES by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Mayor and Cominalty of the Borough of Plymouth, in the County of Devon
greeting, etc.
Whereas, James Bagg, one of the 12. Chief Burgesses, or Magistrates of the
Borough aforesaid, according to the custom of the Borough aforesaid, hithereto
used, was duly chosen and made. And whereas the same James, in the Office in of
the 12. Chief Burgesses or Magistrates of the Borough aforesaid, a long time
carried, and well governed himself; Yet you the Mayor and Cominalty of the
Borough aforesaid, little regarding the aforesaid James, unduly and without
reasonable cause, from the Office of one of the 12. Chief Burgesses and
Magistrates of the Borough aforesaid, unjustly, and have amoved, in contempt of
us, and to the no little damage and grievance of him the said James, and the
hurt of his Estate, as we by his complaint have understood; We therefore to the
said James, willing, due, and speedy Justice to be done in this behalf, as is
just, command you, and every of you, as before time we have you commanded,
firmly enjoying you, That immediately after the Receipt of this Writ, the
aforesaid James, in the aforesaid Office of one of the 12. Chief Burgesses or
Magistrates of the Borough aforesaid you restore, with all the Liberties,
Privileges, and Commodities, to the Office aforesaid, belonging and
apperteining, Or that you signify the cause thereof unto us, least in your
default, complaint, thereof again to us come; And how this our Writ shall be
executed to us, from the day of Holy Trinity, in three Weeks, wheresoever we
shall be England, you make it to appear under the penalty of 40. pound, this
our Writ then sending back, etc. Witness E. Coke, at Westminster the 12th. day
of June, in the year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland the 13th. and
of Scotland the 48th. By the Term of Trinity, Anno 130. Jac. King JAMES, Rot.
23. Execution of this Writ does appear in a certan Schedule to this Writ
annexed, John Clement Mayor, The Answer of the Mayor and Cominalty of the
Borough of Plymouth to the Writ, to this Schedule annexed, According to the
command of the Writ aforesaid, To the Lord the King we most humbly certify,
That the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England, by her Letters Patents with the
great Seal of England sealed, bearing date at Westminster, the 28th. day of
February, in the 43th. year of her Reign, for her self, her Heirs and
Successors, granted to the Mayor and Cominalty of the Borough of Plymouth
aforesaid, and their Successors amongst other things, That the Mayor and
Recorder of the Borough aforesaid, for the time being, the time that they
should happen to be in their Offices; And further, the Predecessors of the said
Mayor then alive, and for the time being and their Successors, should be
Justices of the said late Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to keep the Peace in
the said Borough, and within the Limits, Precincts, and Liberties thereof, and
to be kept, and to cause to be conserved and kept, without any Command,
Commission, or Warrant for the same to be had, or to be obtained: And further
to the said Lord the King, we certify, That within the Borough aforesaid,
there is, and time whereof the Memory of Man is not to the contrary, there was
a Usage and Custom, That the Mayor and 12. chief Burgesses of the same Borough,
stood, and were of the private Council of the Borough aforesaid, and 24. of the
other most discreet Burgesses of the Borough aforesaid, for the time being, to
this chosen and sworn stood, and were, together with the aforesaid Mayor, and
12. Chief Burgesses of Common Council, of the Borough aforesaid, for the
regulating and government of the same Borough. And that every such Burgess,
who was chosen into the fellowship of the 24. Burgesses of the Common Council
aforesaid, before he was to be admitted to the said fellowship, should take
corporal Oath before the Mayor of the same Borough, for the time being, that he
should carry himself well and honestly, as well toward the Mayor of the
Borough aforesaid, for the time being, and to them from time to time should
show Reverence, and that he should maintein and uphold the Liberties and common
Profit of the Borough aforesaid, with his best Counsel and Advice; And further,
we Certify, That every one of the aforesaid 12. Chief Burgesses, from time to
time chosen, should be preferred by the Mayor of the Borough aforesaid, or the
rest of the aforesaid 12. Chief of the Burgesses, or by the greater part of
them, for the time being, only without the consent, or assent of the aforesaid
24. the other Burgesses who are (as before is said) of the Common Counsel of
the Borough aforesaid, to this required. And further, we Certify, That the
aforesaid James Bagg, the first day of May, in the year of the Reign of the
Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England the 32th. was duly chosen and appointed,
one of the aforesaid 24. of the Burgesses of the Common Council, of the Borough
aforesaid then being, and the said first day of May, in the 32th. year
aforesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid, took Corporal Oath, before the Mayor of the
Borough aforesaid, according to the ancient Custom aforesaid. That he the said
James, would carry him well and honestly, as well toward the Mayor of the
Borough aforesaid, for the time being as toward the other 12. chief Burg. of
the said Borough for the time being, and to them from time to time, would show
Reverence, and the Liberties, and Common profit of the Borough aforesaid, would
maintain, and uphold with his best Counsel and advise. And further to the Lord
the King we Certify, That the aforesaid Borough of Plymouth, is situate so
near to the shore and Sea Coasts, That by reason thereof, and by reason of the
daily meeting there, of Ships and Vessels there coming, as well from the parts
beyond the Seas, as from elsewhere, many ill minded men, as well Allens, within
born, of evil and perverse conversation, contemners of good Government, and
disturbers of the Peace, in the Ships and Vessels aforesaid thither coming, in
the Borough aforesaid, and within the Liberties and Precincts of the same
staying and remaining are daily found, who can hardly be there brought to the
obedience of good Rule and Government, unless the Authority of the Mayor of
the Borough aforesaid for the time being, and of the other Chief Burgesses
aforesaid, with due reverence of the other Burgesses, and Inhabitants of the
said Borough be fortified, and the Persons of the said Chief Burgesses, and of
the Mayor from the contempt of the vulger be preserved. And further to the said
Lord the King we certify, That the aforesaid James Bag, not ignorant of the
premises, little regarding his Oath aforesaid, and the Authority as well of the
Mayor of the Borough aforesaid for the time being, as his late Predecessors
aforesaid, as the other the Chief Burgesses, of the Borough aforesaid, setting
naught by, and laboring, and intending, to bring the same Authority into
contempt. The first day of May, in the year of the Reign of the Lord the King
that now is the 6th, the said James being then one of the Common Counsel of the
Borough aforesaid, and one of the Chief Burgesses of the same Burough, in the
presence of one Robert Trelawny, then being Mayor of the Borough aforesaid,
and of many other of the Inhabitants of the Borough aforesaid, at Plymouth
aforesaid, within the Borough aforesaid contemptuously, and malapartly,
carried himself as well in gesture, as in words toward the Mayor aforesaid; and
then and there, to the aforesaid Robert Trelawny contemptuously, and
scoffingly, without any reasonable cause, these words following openly and
publicly said and spoke; that is to say. You, (the aforesaid Robert Trelawney
intending) are some Prince, are you not? And further to the said Lord the King
we certify, That afterward, that is to say, the first day of February, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is, the 7. the aforesaid, James
Bag continuing his evil disposition, and intention aforesaid, at Plymouth
aforesaid, in the presence and hearing of the aforesaid Robert Trelawny, then
being a Justice of the Peace of the aforesaid Lord the King, within the
Borough aforesaid to be kept, by reason of Mayrolty of the Borough aforesaid,
the year then last past, by virtue of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and in the
presence and hearing of very many other of the Inhabitants of the Borough
aforesaid, openly, publicly, and with a loud voice, without any reasonable
cause, these words following, contemptuously, falsely, and scandalously said and
spoke, that is to say, you, (the aforesaid Trelawny intending) are a Cosening
Knave, whereas in truth, the said Robert Trelawny all his life time honestly,
and from all suspicion of any falsity, fraud, or deceit, lived altogether
unspected, and in the Offices, as well of the Mayriolty, as of Chief Burgess,
of the Borough aforesaid with praise, carried and governed himself; And
further to the said Lord the King, we do Certify, That the 20th. day of
November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King, that now is the
7th. The aforesaid James Bag, continuing his evil disposition, and intent
aforesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid, seditiously, and maliciously, stirred up, and
persuaded one Thomas Shervil then being of the Chief Burgesses of the Borough
aforesaid, That he the said Thomas would join himself with the aforesaid James
Bag in a conspiracy to amove, and depose, One John Battersby, then being
Mayor of the Borough aforesaid, from his Office of Mayriolty, without any
reasonable, or lawful cause; and then and there maliciously* and contemptuously
spoke to the aforesaid Thomas Shervill, of the aforesaid Thomas Battersby,
these words following, that is to say, Master Mayor (the aforesaid John
Battersby intending) carries himself foolishly in this place; And if you will
join with me, we will turn him out of his Mayriolty, and choose a wiser Man in
his place; Whereas in truth, the aforesaid John Battersby, during the whole
time of his Mayriolty aforesaid, in the executing of his Office aforesaid,
carried himself well and discreetly, and with great Integrity and gravity: And
further, to the said Lord the King we Certify, That afterward, that is to
say, the first day of February, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the
King that now is the 8th. the aforesaid James Bagg, continuing in his evil
disposition and intent aforesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid, in the Guild Hall of
the Borough aforesaid, in the presence of one Thomas Fowens, then being Mayor
of the Borough aforesaid, in the presence and hearing, as well of the Chief
Burgesses, as of the other Inhabitants of the Borough aforesaid, scornfully,
and without reasonable cause, spoke to the aforesaid Thomas Fowens, these false
and injurous words following, that is to say; Thou (the aforesaid Thomas
Fowens, then Mayor intending) art an Insolent Fellow, whereas in Truth, the
said THOMAS, in the whole course of his Life, bore himself toward all Men,
Honestly, Civily, and with Praise. And further to the said Lord the King we
certify, that the afterward, that is to say, the first day of August, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is the 9th. at Plymouth
aforesaid, in the presence and hearing of the aforesaid Thomas Fowens, and of
very many other of the Burgesses of the Burough aforesaid, being gathered
together in the Guild Hall of the Burough aforesaid, the aforesaid James Bagg,
continuing his evil disposition and intent aforesaid, diverse contemptible words
of the aforesaid Thomas Fowens, then being Mayor of the Borough aforesaid,
with a loud voice spoke and uttered, upon which, the aforesaid Thomas Fowens,
with mild words admonishing the aforesaid James Bagg, that he would desist from
uttering such contemptible words aforesaid, the aforesaid James Bagg thereupon
then and there, that is to say, the 10th. day of August in the 9th. year
abovesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid, and in the presence and hearing of the
aforesaid Thomas Fowens, then Mayor of the Borough aforesaid, and very many
other of the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the Borough aforesaid, and in
contempt and disdain, of the said Thomas Fowens then Mayor turning the hinder
part of his Body, in an unhumane and uncivil manner toward the aforesaid
Thamas Fowens, scoffingly, contemptuously, and uncivily, with a loud voice,
said to the aforesaid Thomas Fowens, these words following, that is to say,
(come and K^ss) And further to the said Lord the King we certify, that
afterward, that is to say the 20th. day of August, in the year of the Reign of
the Lord the King that now is the 19th. at Plymouth aforesaid, the aforesaid
James Bagg with most arrogant words, threatened the said John Fowens then being
Mayor o^ the Borough aforesaid, without any reasonable cause; and then and
there, to the said John Fowens threatningly and maliciously spoke the words
following, that is to say, I will make thy neck crack. And further to the said
Lord the King we certify, that afterward, that is to say, the third day of May
in the year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is the 12th. A certain
Order, and friendly Instrument of admonition was made by John Scobb Mayor of
the Borough aforesaid, and the greater part of the Chief Burgesses of the same
Borough, in these words, that is to say, The 9th. day of May 1614. the day and
year above written, It was agreed by John Scobb Mayor, and such other of the
Masters here under written, that if Mr. James Bagg the Elder, do not before
the next s^ssions, to be holden within the Borough of Plymouth, Reconcile
himself to the said Mayor and his brethren, for such wrongs as he has
committed against them, and withal faithfully promise to demean himself more
orderly and temperately for the time to come, that then he shall be clean
removed from the Bench, and a new Master chosen in his Room, which Order or
Instrument was made and subscribed by the said Mayor and other of the Chief
Burgesses of the Borough aforesaid. And further to the said Lord the King we
Certify, That the aforesaid James Bagg before the aforesaid next sessions in
the Order aforesaid mentioned, did not make any such reconciliation or promise
of Conformity, as in the Order aforesaid is specified, although full notice of
the aforesaid Order, immediately after the making thereof, and before the
aforesaid next sessions was given to him at Plymouth aforesaid. And further to
the said Lord the K. we Certify, that afterward, that is to say, the 20th.
day of Febr. in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the K. that now is the
12th. the afores. Jam. Bagg, continuing his evil disposition* and in his intent
aforesaid, at Plymouth afores. in the Guild Hall of the Borough aforesaid, in
the presence and hearing of John Scobb, one of the Chief Burgesses of the
Borough aforesaid, And then being a Justice for the keeping of the Peace within
the Borough aforesaid, by virtue of the Letters Patents aforesaid, by reason of
his Mayralty of the Borough aforesaid, the year then next before, and in the
presence and hearing of the then Mayor of the Borough aforesaid, and of diverse
other of the Burgesses and Inhabitants of that Borough, contemptuously these
words following, spoke and uttered of the aforesaid John Scobb, openly, and
publicly, falsely, and scandalously, that is to say, You (the aforesaid John
Scobb intending) are a Knave, whereas the aforesaid John Scobb, honestly, and
with praise carried, and governed himself. And further, to the said Lord the
King we Certify, That afterward, that is to say, the 10th. day of December
last past, then the Mayor of the said Borough, and diverse of the Chief
Burgesses of the Borough aforesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid, being assembled
together in the Almes-house of the said Borough, to require and receive an
Account of the Overseers of the Borough of the Borough aforesaid, as in times
past, and time whereof the Memory of Man is not to the contrary it was used,
the aforesaid James Bag, then and there in the presence and hearing of the said
Mayor, and other of the Chief Burgesses aforesaid, without any reasonable cause
openly and publicly said to the said Thomas Shervill, there then present, and
one of the Chief Burgesses of the Borough aforesaid, and for the space of 10.
years then last past being, these false and scandalous words following; that is
to say, You, (the said Thomas Shervill intending) are a seditious Fellow,
whereas in Truth, the aforesaid Thomas Shervill, always lived not suspected of
any such crime of Sedition, and from time in the Office of Mayor, of the
Borough aforesaid, as in the place and Office of Chief Burgess, Honestly,
Discreetly, and with great Integrity, carried and governed himself. And
further, to the said Lord the King we Certify, That whereas the said Lord the
King, the -- day of January, in the 12th. year of his Reign aforesaid, at
Westminster in the Coun^y of Middlesex, with the Advice of the Lords of his
Privy Council of this his Realm of England, Ordained and Commanded, by public
Proclamation, and by Letters written under the proper Hands of diverse of the
Lords of his Privy Council sealed, That none, nor any person w(...)soever,
should kill, or put to sale any Flesh for Victuals, in the time of Lent then
next following, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And that all
Mayors, and other Head Officers, in Buroughs and Towns Corporate, within this
Kingdom of England, in the beginning of the time of Lent then next coming, or
before, should cause all Victualers, Inn Keepers, Keepers of Ordinary Tables,
and Alehouse-keepers, within the precinct of their Jurisdiction, to be bounden
to the Lord the King by Bond, that they should not d^esse any Flesh for
V^ctuals, all the said time of Lent then next following; And whereas
afterward, that is to say, the 20th. day of February, in the 12th. year
aforesaid, One John Clement, then, and yet Mayor of the Borough of Plymouth
aforesaid, according to the duty of his Place, and in Obedience of the said
Ordinance and Command of the said Lord the King, sent to all the Victualers,
Innkeepers, Keepers of Ordinary Tables, and Alehouse-keepers aforesaid, within
the precinct of the Burough aforesaid, that they become bound by their Writing,
to the use of the said Lord the King, according to the Tenor and Exigency of
the aforesaid Ordinance and Command of the sa^d Lord the King, the due
Execution of the Ordinance aforesaid, in that behalf required and endeavored,
within the Borough aforesaid, The aforesaid James Bagg, well knowing the
premises, and continuing his evil disposition and intent aforesaid, At Plymouth
aforesaid, endeavored and attempted to hinder, and make void the due Execution
of the aforesaid Ordinance and Command of the said Lord the King; And to that
purpose, the same 20th. day of February, at Plymouth aforesaid, to diverse
Inhabitants of the Borough aforesaid, and other of the Kings liege People then
being, and having then and there speech with the aforesaid James Bagg, of and
upon the business aforesaid, openly and publicly spoke and uttered these
words following, that is to say, Master Mayor (meaning the said John Clement)
does more herein than he need, and more than he can well Answer; Meaning, that
the said John Clement, in requiring the aforesaid Victualers, Innkeepers,
Keepers of Ordinary Tables, and Alehouse-Keepers, to become bounden to the use
of the said Lord the King, according to the aforesaid Ordinance and Command of
the said Lord the King, had done more than was needful, and more than he could
well Answer; By reason of which speech, diverse Victualers, Inn Keepers,
Keepers of Ordinary Tables, and Alehouse Keepers, dwelling within the aforesaid
Borough, utterly refused to be bounden to the said Lord the King, according to
the aforesaid Ordinance and Command of the said Lord the King; and farther we
certify, that the aforesaid Mayor and Comminalty of the Borough of Plymouth,
and their predecessors, time whereof the memory of men is not to the contrary,
had and used to have within the Borough aforesaid, a certain Custom of Wine
called Wine-weight, otherwise Wine Wite payable by every Taverner selling Wine
within the Borough afores. of which Custom of Wine aforesaid, the Mayor and
Comminalty from the whole time aforesaid, quietly and peaceably were possessed
of, until the aforesaid Ja. Bagg the 29th. day of Nov. in the year of the Reign
of the said Lord the King that now is the 4th. at ^lym. afores. perfidiously
and maliciously practiced with William Ben^ly and Thomas Lyde being Taverners
and Sellers of Wine within the Borough aforesaid, to them revealing diverse
secret counsels concerning the common profit of the Borough aforesaid; and
them the said William and Thomas then and there persuaded, that they no more
should pay the aforesaid custom of wine called Wine-weight, otherwise
Wine-wite, nor any sum of money for the same to the aforesaid Mayor and
Comminalty, which very day, the 29th. day of November, in the 4th year
aforesaid, the aforesaid James Bagg, being then one of the 12. Chief Burgesses
of common Council of the Borough aforesaid, at Plymouth aforesaid,
perfidiously, and maliciously, spoke to the said William Bently and Thomas Lyde
these words, that is to say, you need not pay the Money, (meaning a certain
Farm by them the said William and Thomas for the Custom aforesaid, before then,
to ^he aforesaid Mayor and Comminalty payable for the Wine-weight, any longer
except you list, for it is not due unto them, By reason of which perfidious and
malicious words, the aforesaid William Bently and Thomas Lyde utterly refused
to pay and yet do refuse, and by reason thereof diverse Strifes, and
Controversies are risen, and hereafter are like to arise, betwixt the aforesaid
William Bently, and Thomas Lyde, and the aforesaid Mayor and Comminalty, for
the Custom of Wine aforesaid, and the Farm aforesaid, to the great damage and
prejudice of the aforesaid Mayor and Comminalty: And further to the said Lord
the King we Certify, that the aforesad James Bagg the first day of May, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord the King that now is the 12th. and diverse other
days and times then before, at Plymouth aforesaid, persidiously said to diverse
Inhabitants of the Borough aforesaid, and to other the liege people of the
said Lord the King upon Communication between them and the aforesaid James Bagg
then before had, of and concerning the liberties, and Privileges of the
Borough aforesaid, that he the said James Bagg would overthrow and make void
the Charter of the Town aforesaid, meaning the Charter aforesaid by the
aforesaid Late Queen Elizabeth to the aforesaid Mayor and Comminalty, as before
is said granted, And that he the said James the liberties and privileges of the
Borough aforesaid, would call in question, and the same Privileges and
Liberties overthrow. And further to the Lord the King we Certify, that
afterward, that is to say, the 17th. day of April now last past, the aforesaid
James Bagg in the said Writ named, for the Causes aforesaid, by the Mayor and
Comminalty of the Borough aforesaid, from the Office of one of the Chief
Burgesse^ and Magistrates of the Borough aforesaid, was amoved, etc. John
^lement Mayor.

SCIRE FACIAS.
Pleas before the Lord the King that now is, in his Chancery at Westminster, in
the County of Middlesex: Hillary Term, in the year of the Lord King JAMES, by
the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, the 3d. and of
Scotland the 39th fol. 1.

The PRINCES Case.
THE Lord the King that now is, sent his Close Writ, to the Sheriff of
Cornwall, directed in these words. JAMES by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King, defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff
of Cornwall greeting; Whereas in the Statute in the Parliament of the Lord
Edward, late King of England the 3d. in the year of his Reign the 11th. at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, holden, made, amongst other things it
was Enacted, by Authority of the said Parliament, That the Eldest Son of the
King of England, who should be Inheritable to the Kingdom of England, should be
Duke of Cornwall, and that the Duchy of Cornwall, should be from thenceforth
to the Eldest Son of the Kings of England, who should be next Heir of the
aforesaid Kingdom. And that the aforesaid Eldest Son of the Kings of England,
should have, and enjoy toward their Maintenance and support of their Princely
State All the whole Duchy of Cornwall, and all Castles, Honors, Lordships,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and all and singular Hereditaments to the said Duchy
belonging or appertaining, or reputed or taken to be part, parcel, or member of
the same Duchy. And whereas, the said late King Edward the 3d. in the
aforesaid Parliament, in the year of his Reign the 11th. aforesaid, by his
certain Charter, with the common Assent and Counsel of the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and others of the said Knigs Council, in the said Parliament called
together; And by Authority of the said Parliament, had given to Edward, then
Earl of Chester, his Eldest Son, the name and Honor of Duke of Cornwall, and
him in the Duchy of Cornwall established: And by the same his Charter with the
common Assent and Counsel aforesaid, gave and granted to the said his Son, in
the name of the Duchy aforesaid, and under the name and Honor of Duke of the
said place, amongst other things, The Castle of Wallingford, with its Hamblets
and members, and the yearly Farm of the Town of Wallingford, with the Honors
of Wallingford, and of St. Walerico, with the Appurtenances, in the County of
Oxford, and other Counties wheresoever the said Honors were. To have, and to
hold to the same Duke, and of him and his Heirs, Kings of England, Eldest Sons
of the same place, Dukes in the Kingdom of England inheritable successively,
together with Knights Fees, Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Hospitals,
Chapels, and with Hundreds, Fishings, Forests, Chases, Parks, Warrens, Fairs,
Markets, Liberties, Free Customs, Wards, Reliefs, Escheats, and Services of
Tenants, as well free, as villains, and all other things to the aforesaid
Castles, Towns, Honors, Lands, and Tenements, howsoever belonging or
appertaining, of the aforesaid King Edward the 3d. and his Heirs for ever. And
the said late King Edward the 3d. by his Charter aforesaid, in Parliament
aforesaid, with the common Consent aforesaid, and by Authority of that
Parliament, the aforesaid Castle of Wallingford, and other the premises with
their Appurtenances, amongst other things to the said Duchy annexed and
united, to remain to the said Durchy for ever, So as from the said Duchy at
any time by no means they be separated, nor to any other, or others, then to
the Dukes of the same place, by the aforesaid late King, or his Heirs should be
given, or any ways granted, so also that to the aforesaid Duke, other Dukes of
the same place, derasing, and to the Son or Sons, to whom the aforesaid Duchy,
by color of the Grants aforesaid it should belong, not appearing, the said
Duchy with the aforesaid Castle, and other the premises being granted, to the
aforesaid late King, or his Heirs, Kings of England, should retorn in the Hands
of him the said late King, and of his Heirs Kings of England to be holden,
until any of such Son, or Sons, of the said Kingdom of England Heirs
successive, should appear (as is aforesaid) to whom successively the said
Duchy with the Appurtenances, the aforesaid late King for him and his Heirs,
granted and would to be delivered, to be holden of the said King, and his Heirs
for ever. And whereas likewise, By a certain Act made in Parliament of the Lord
Henry, late King of England the 8th. holden at Westminster aforesaid, that is
to say, in the second Session of the same Parliament, begun and holden the
12th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord late King Henry
the 8th. the 31th. and by diverse Prorogations continued, until the 25th. day
of May, in the year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the 8th. the 32th.
and from thence holden and continued, until the dissolution of the said
Parliament, the 24th. day of July, in the 32th. year aforesaid, Reciting; That
whereas in the Parliament holden, in the 11th. year of the Reign of the late
King of famous Memory King Edward the 3d. amongst other things established, It
was Enacted and Ordained, That the Eldest Son of the King of England, who
should be Inheritable to this Kingdom of England, should be Duke of Cornwall,
and that the same Duchy of Cornwall, should ever be to the Eldest Son of the
King of England, who should be next Heir of the said Kingdom; And that he
should have and enjoy toward the Mainteinance and support of his Princely
Estate, the whole Duchy of Cornwall, and all Honors, Dominions, Manors,
Lands, Tenements, and all other Hereditaments belonging or appertaining to the
said Duchy, or reputed, or taken to be part, parcel, or Member of the said
Duchy: And for that, The Honor and Castle of Wallingford, in the County of
Berks then was, and long time had been part and parcel of the Inheritance and
Possessions of the said Duke of Cornwall, and reputed and taken to be a member
of the said Duchy; Which Manor and Castle, lay near to the Manor of the said
late King Henry the 8th. of Newelm, otherwise Ewelm, in the County of Oxford,
and was very commodious, decent, and pleasant, of the said late King Henry the
8th. In consideration whereof, and for other urgent causes, the said late King
Henry the 8th. especially moving, It was Enacted and Ordained by the Authory of
the same Parliament, of the said late King Henry the 8th. That the said Honor
and Castle of Wallingford, and all Dominions, Manors, Land, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever they should be, being parts, parcels, or members of
the said Honor and Castle, or appendant, or belonging to the said Honor and
Castle, or to any Lordship or Manor to the same appertaining, or reputed, or
taken to be part or parcel of the said Honor and Castle, or any member thereof,
should be from thenceforth for ever by authority of the said Parliament
severed, disannexed and dismembered from the said Duchy of Cornwall, and should
not be in any manner from thence after reputed, called, accepted, or taken by
the name of the Honor of Wallingford, nor be any part, parcel or member of the
said Duchy of Cornwall: And that the aforesaid Manor of the said King of
Newelm, otherwise Ewelm from thence for ever after should be named, called,
accepted, and be reputed and adjudged to be the Honor of Newelm, otherwise
Ewelm. And that the said late King Henry the 8th. should have and enjoy the
like Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Royalties, and Jurisdictions, as well
in the aforesaid honor of Newelm otherwise Ewelm, as in the aforesaid Manors,
Castle, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, being part, parcel or member of the
said Honor of Wallingford, to all intents and purposes as were in any manner
belonging, apertaining or used in or to the said Honor of Wallingford. And
that the like process, suits and pleas should be for ever holden, received and
should be used in the said Honor of Newline, otherwise Eweline, as at the
first day of the same Parliament were used or exercised in the said Honor of
Wallingford: And that the said late King Henry the 8th. should have to him, his
Heirs and Successors for ever, the said Honor and Castle of Wallingford, and
all Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements and other Hereditaments whatsoever,
appertaining to the said Honor or Castle, or reputed, or taken to be any part
of the possessions, or parcel or member of the said Honor and Castle, from
thence for ever to be severed and divided from the aforesaid Duchy: And that
the said Honor and Castle of Wallingford, from thence for ever should be named
and called the Castle and Manor of Wallingford. And also that the said Castle
and Manor of Wallingford, and all Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
other Hereditaments whatsoever, which then should be belonging or appertaining
to the said Manor, or reputed or taken to be any part, parcel or member
thereof; and all manner of Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Royalties and
Jurisdictions before that used within the said Honor of Wallingford, from
thence for ever should be united, annexed, knit, adjudged, deemed, accepted,
reputed and called part, parcel and member of the said Honor of Newelm,
otherwise Ewelm in the aforesaid County of Oxford: And further it was enacted
by Authority of the aforesaid Parliament of the aforesaid late King Henry the
8th. That all and singular person and persons who then held any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. and of
the most excellent and undoubted Prince Edward, the Son and Heir apparent of
the said late King Henry the 8th. as of the said Honor of Wallingford, or of
any other Lordships or Manors being parcel or member of the said Honor of
Wallingford, from thence for ever after should hold their said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said late King Henry the 8th. his Heirs and
Successors, as of the aforesaid Manor and Castle of Wallingford, or of the
said Lordships or Manors being parcel and members of the said Honor of
Wallingford, parcel of the said Honor of Newelm, otherwise Ewelm, by the said
Rents, Suits, Customs and Services, as they and every of them held, paid, or
did before the making of the said Act of Parliament, and not by more, or other
Rents, Suits, Customs or Services: Saving to every person and persons, Bodies
Corporate, Politic, their Heirs and Successors, and to every of them, other
than the most excellent and undoubted Lord Prince Edward which then was, and
his Heirs, and to any other who from thence for ever should happen to be the
Kings Eldest Son, and new Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom of England, All
such Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Fees, Offices, Annuities, Rents,
Commons, and all other Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, which they, or
any other of them lawfully held, had, could, or ought to have had, if the said
Act of Parliament had never been made; And further, It was Enacted by the
Authority of the aforesaid Parliament, of the aforesaid late King Henry the
8th. That the aforesaid Excellent, and undoubted Prince Edward, which then was,
and every other who from henceforth for ever, should happen to be Eldest Son of
the King, and next Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom, should have, hold, and
enjoy for ever annexed, united and knit, to the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall,
for, and in full Recompense of the aforesaid Honor, and Castle of Wallingford,
and other the premises in the said Act before mentioned, to the said Honor of
Wallingford, then before belonging as part and parcel of the said Duchy of
Cornwall, The Manor of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the
Appurtenances in the County of Cornwall, amongst other things, in such manner
and form, and of such like Estate, as the said Excellent and undoubted Prince,
before the making of the same Act of Parliament, had, held, or enjoyed, the
aforesaid Honor and Castle of Wallingford, and all the premises parcel of the
said Honor. And that all and singular the aforesaid Manors, with all and
singular their Appurtenances, then amongst other limited and assigned, by the
said Act in the aforesaid Parliament of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th.
to the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall, and every of them, from thence for ever,
should be reputed, deemed, adjudged, accepted and taken, by authory of the same
Parliament, as part, parcel, and member of the said Duchy of Cornwall, in such
and the like manner and form, to all purposes and intents, as the said Honor
and Castle of Wallingford, and the members and parcels of the same, were before
the making of the same Act, any Act, Law, Custom, or use to the contrary
notwithstanding, As by the said Act in the aforesaid Parliament of the
aforesaid late K. Hen. the 8th. made amongst other things it more fully
appears. And whereas before, and until the time of the making of the
aforesaid Act of Parliament, made in the afores. Parliament of the afores late
K. H. the 8th. The aforesaid Honor and Castle of Wallingford, and members and
parcel thereof, were part, parcel, and members of the aforesaid Duchy of
Cornwall, according to the form and effect of the aforesaid Charter and Grant
by the aforesaid late King Edward the third with the common assent aforesaid,
and Authority of his Parliament aforesaid (as before is said) made, and as in
the aforesaid Charter are mentioned, and above recited, and the aforesaid
excellent and undoubted Prince Edward in the aforesaid Act made in the
aforesaid Parliament of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. before the time
of making of the aforesaid Act made in the Parliament aforesaid of the
aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. had and enjoyed in the aforesaid Honor and
Castle of Wallingford, and other the premises, parcel of the same Honor, in
such manner and form, and of such estate as is enacted and limited in the
aforesaid Charter, and Grant aforesaid of the aforesaid late King Edward the
third in the year of his Reign the 11th. aforesaid by the Authority of
Parliament made as before is said. And the aforesaid Castle of Wallingford with
the Hamlets and Members thereof; And the aforesaid Honor of Wallingford, with
the Appurtenances in the aforesaid Charter and Grant, by the aforesaid late
King Edward the third, as before is said, made, specified, are one and the
same, and not others or diverse. By virtue of which the said late Prince Edward,
eldest Son of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. and Duke of Cornwall, was
seized of the aforesaid Manors of West Tannton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the
Appurtenances in his Demesne as of Fee, as parcel of his Duchy of Cornwall
aforesaid, according to the form and effect of the aforesaid Act of Parliament;
and he thereof so being seized, the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th.
afterward at Westminster aforesaid died, the said Edward late Prince, being
the Son and Heir of the aforesaid late King Henry the 8th. And the said Edward
late Prince to the said King Henry the 8th. in the aforesaid Kingdom of England
by right of Inheritance succeeded, and King of the aforesaid Kingdom of England
by the name of Edward the 6th. King of England came to be. And afterward the
said Edward the 6. late King of England at Westminster aforesaid dyed without
Heir of his body begotten; the Lady Mary late Queen of England being his Sister
and heir of the said late King Edward the sixth; and the aforesaid Lady Mary to
the said late King Edward the sixth in the aforesaid Kingdom of England by right
of Inheritance succeeded, and became Queen of the aforesaid kingdom of England,
and afterward the said Queen Mary at Westminster aforesaid died without heir
of her body begotten; the Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England, being Sister
and Heir of the aforesaid late Queen Mary; the aforresaid Lady Elizabeth to the
said late Queen Mary in the aforesaid kingdom of England, by right of
Inheritance Succeeded, and became Queen of the kingdom of England: And
afterward, the said Queen Elizabeth at Westminster aforesaid, dyed without
Heir of her Body begotten, We then, and yet being Cousin and Heir to the said
late Queen Elizabeth, and we succeeded the late Queen Elizabeth, in right of
Inheritance, in the same Kingdom of England, and became, and now are King of
England, and now the most Excellent Prince Henry our Eldest Son, now Duke of
Cornwell has requested us, that, whereas, the aforesaid Lady Elizabeth late
Queen of England, by her letters Patents, Sealed with the great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster, the second day of May in the year of her
Reign the 37th. granted at Gellio Merick, then Esquire, now Knight, now
deceased, and Henry Lindley then Esquire, now Knight, the aforesaid Manors of
West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the Appurtenances, to have and to
hold, to them the said Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley, and their Heirs for
ever, as in the Letters Patents thereof more fully it is contained. And whereas
the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia and Landalph to the aforesaid
Duchy (as is said) annexed and united, to the same now Duke by Color of the
gift, grant, and union aforesaid, by the authority of Parliament aforesaid,
belonged, and yet ought to belong, and were member and parcel of the same
Duchy, and yet are, as the said pious Prince and Duke by ways and means
convenient, is ready to show; That we would the said Letters Patents aforesaid,
of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, as before is
said, made, revoke and annull, and the said Manors with their appurtenances
seize into our hands; that we cause the said Manors to the said now Duke, as
members and parcel of the Duchy aforesaid, to have and to hold according to
the form and effect of the gift, grant, and union aforesaid to be delivered:
We willing to do in this behalf what is Just, Command you that by good and
Lawful men of your Bayliwick, you give warning to the aforesaid Henry Lindley
Knight, and John Hele Knight Sergeant at Law, Tenants of the said Manors of
West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, and also to whosoever other or others,
are Tenants of the said Mamors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph or any
of them, that they be before us in our Chancery in 8. days of Saint Hillary
next coming whenever it shall be, to show what for us and themselves they
have or can say, Wherefore the Letters Pattents aforesaid, of the aforesaid
Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the appurtenances (as
before is said) made, ought not to be revoked and annulled, and the said Manors
with the appurtenances into our hands be seized, as before is said, to the now
Duke as members and parcel of the Duchy aforesaid, according to the form and
effect of the gift, grant, and union aforesaid, to have and to hold, to be
delivered, and to do and receive, what our said Court then and there shall
further grant in this behalf, Witness my self at Westminster, the 18th. day of
November in the year of our Reign of England France and Ireland, the third, and
of Scotland the 39th- and now at this day, that is to say, the aforesaid 8
days of Saint Hillary, before the said Lord the King that now is, in his said
Court of Chancery here, comes Edward Coke Knight, Attorney General of the said
Lord the King, that now is, who prosecuteth in his behalf for the said Lord the
King, in his proper person. And Francis Godolphin Knight, being Sheriff of the
County of Cornwell, now sendth here the Writ aforesaid, served and executed, in
form following the 21. day of Dec. in the 3d. year aboves. by virtue of the
writ afores. to him directed that he gave warning by Joh. Edgecombe and Wall.
Blant, good and Lawful men of his Bayliwick, to the afores. Hen. Lindley Knight.
and also the same day and year by the said good and Lawful men, he gave
warning to the aforesaid John Hele Knight, and to one Warwick Hele Knight,
Tenants of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph above
mentioned, to be before the said Lord the King that now is here, at this day,
to show, do, and receive, what that Writ in it requires and demands. And the
aforesaid Henry Lindley Knight, John Hele Knight, and Warwick Hele Knight, the
4th. day of pleas being called, by Richard Wilkinson their Attorney come, and
pray License to Imparl, and it is granted to them, etc. and upon this, day is
given to the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele before the
said Lord the King in the said Court here, that is to say, at Westminster
aforesaid, until in 8. days of the Purification of the blessed Mary then next,
etc. wheresoever, etc that is to say, to the aforesaid Henry, John, and
Warwick, to imparl, and then to answer, etc. The same day is given to the
aforesaid Edward Coke Knight, the Atorney General of the Lord the King that now
is, who, etc. then to be here, etc. At which 8. days from the Purification of
the blessed Lady Mary, before the said Lord the King in the said Court here,
that is to say, at Westminster a^oresaid, come as well the aforesaid Edward
Coke Knight, who, etc. in his proper person, as the aforesaid Henry Lindley,
John Hele, and Warwick Hele, by their Attorney aforesaid, and upon this, the
said Henry, John, and Warwick, by their Attorney aforesaid, pray farther
License thereof to imparl, before the said Lord the King that now is in the
said Court here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, until in 15. days
of Easter then next following, etc. wheresoever, etc. and then to answer, etc.
and have it, etc. and the same day is given to the aforesaid Edward Coke Knight.
the Attorney General, of the said Lord the King that now is, who, etc. then
here, etc. At which 15. days of Easter before the the said Lord the King that
now is in the said Court here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, come
as well the aforesaid Edward Coke Attorney General of the Lord the King that now
is, who, etc. in his proper person, as the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele,
and Warwick Hele by their Attorney aforesaid, and upon this, the aforesaid
Henry, John, and Warwick, by their Attorney aforesaid, further pray Leave
thereof to Imparl before the said Lord the King that now is, in the said Court
here, that is to say, At West. aforesaid, until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity
then next following, wheresoever, etc. And then to Answer, etc. and have it,
etc. And the same day is given to the aforesaid Edward Coke Knight, Attorney
General of the Lord the King that now is, who, etc. then here, etc. At which
Morrow of Holy Trinity, before the Lord the King that now is, in the said
Court, etc. that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, come as well the
aforesaid Edward Coke Knight, Attorney General of the Lord the King that now is,
who, etc. in his proper person, As the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and
Warwick Hele, by their Attorney aforesaid; And upon this, The said Henry, John,
and Warwick, by their Attorney aforesaid, pray further license thereof to
imparl, before the said Lord the King that now is, in the said Court here, that
is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, until the Morrow of All Souls then next
following, wheresoever, etc. And then to Answer, etc. And have it, etc. And the
same day is given to Edward Coke Knight, Attorney General of the Lord the King
that now is, who, etc. then here, etc. At which Morrow of All Souls, before the
Lord the King that now is, in the said Court here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, come as well Henry Hobert Knight, then Attorney General
of the said Lord the King, who for the said Lord the King that now is,
prosecutes in his proper person, as the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and
Warwick Hele, by their Attorney aforesaid, Upon which, the said Henry Lindley,
by his Attorney aforesaid, prays the hearing of the said Writ of Scire Facias
above mentioned, and it is read unto him, etc. Which being read and heard, The
said Henry Lindley says, That neither the aforesaid Letters Patents, of the
aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton,
Trelowia, and Landalph, with the Appurtenances in form aforesaid made, ought to
be revoked or annulled, not the said Manors into the Hands of the said Lord the
King ought to be seized; Because he says, That there is not any such Record of
any such Act of Parliament, of the aforesaid King Ednard the 3d. made, as in
the aforesaid Writ of Scire Facias, above thereof is rendered and specified; Nor
is there any such Record of the aforesaid Charter, by the aforesaid late King
Edward the 3d. by Authority of the Parliament aforesaid above recited and
specified, as in the said Writ of Scire Facias, above is recited and specified,
And this the said Henry is ready to aver, Wherefore he demands Judgment, if
the aforesaid Letters Patents of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the
Manors aforesaid with their Appurtenances, so as before is said made, ought to
be revoked or annulled, or the said Manors with the Appurtenances, to be seized
into the Hands of the said Lord the King that now is, etc. And the aforesaid
John Hele, and Warwick Hele, by their Attorney aforesaid, By Protestation, That
there is not any Record of any such Act of Parliament of the said 11th. year of
Edward, late King of England the 3d. nor that there is any such Record of the
aforesaid Charter, by the foresaid late King Edw^rd the 3d. by Authority of
Parliament aforesaid, as in the said of Writ Scire Facias is mentioned; For
Plea they say, That neither the aforesaid Letters Patents of the aforesaid Lady
Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph,
with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid made, ought to be revoked or
annulled, or the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, be seized into the
Hands of the Lord the King that now is, or any of them ought to be seized, etc.
Because they say, That the aforesaid late Lady Queen Elizabeth, before the
making of the Letters Patents aforesaid, to the aforesaid Gellio Merick, and
Henry L^ndley, was seized in her demesne as of Fee, in the Right of her Crown of
England, of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with
the Appurtenances, in the aforesaid Writ of Scire Facias mentioned and
expressed, and so thereof being seized, The said late Queen Elizabeth, by her
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England sealed, bearing date at
Westminster, in the year of her Reign the 37th. and here in Court brought, In
consideration of the good, true, faithful, and acceptable Service to the
aforesaid Lady the Queen, by her then well-beloved, and faithful Cosen and
Counselor, Robert late Earl of Essex, of the most Noble Order of the Garter
Knight, and Master of her Horse, before that many times done and performed, as
for other good causes and considerations, the said late Lady the Queen then
specially moving; As also at the humble request of the said late Earl of Essex,
of her special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, gave and granted the
Manors aforesaid with their Appurtenances, amongst other to the aforesaid
Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley then Esquires, and afterward Knights, To
have, and to hold the said Manors with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid
Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley, their Heirs and Assigns forever. And the
aforesaid late Lady the Queen, by the same her Letters Patents, granted for
her, her Heirs, and Successors, That the aforesaid Gellio Merick, and Henry
Lindley, their Heirs and Assigns, should have, and enjoy the aforesaid Manors
with the Appurtenances, according to the intent of the said late Queen, in the
said Letters Patents contained, And that the said Letters Patents should be
firm, valid, good, sufficient and effectual in Law against the said Lady the
Queen, her Heirs and Successors, as well in all her Courts, as elsewhere within
the Kingdom of England, without any manner of Confirmations, Licenses, or
Tollerations of the said Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors then forever,
by the aforesaid Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley, or their Heirs or Assigns to
be procured or obtained, Notwithstanding the Statute in Parliament of the Lord
Henry, late King of England the 8th. in the 37th. year of his Reign made,
Concerning the Duchy or Cornwall, and Honor of Newelm, otherwise Ewelm, as in
and by the said Letters Patents, etc. By virtue of which, the aforesaid Gellio
Merick, and Lindley, into the aforesaid Manors with their Appurtenances entered,
and were thereof seized in their demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized,
By their Writing indented, made between the aforesaid late Earl of Essex,
Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley of the one part, and Augustine Steward, and
Michael Corsellis, on the other part, bearing date the 26th. day of December. in
the year of the Rign of the said late Lady Q. Elizabeth the 38th. in the Court
of Chancery of the aforesaid late Queen at Westminster aforesaid, within 6.
Months then next following, according to the form of the Statute thereof made
and provided, in due manner of Record enrolled, as well in Consideration of the
sum 3500. pounds, to the aforesaid late Earl of Essex, by the aforesaid
Augustine Steward, and Michael Corsellis paid, as for 20. shillings to the said
Gellio and Henry, by the aforesaid Augustine and Nicholas likewise paid,
bargained and sold, to the aforesaid Augustine and Michael, the Manors
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, To have, and to hold, to the said Augustine
and Michael, their Heirs and Assigns for ever. By virtue of which Bargain, and
Sale, and Inrollment, and by force of a certain Statute in the Parliament of
the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. the 4th. day of February, in the
year of his Reign the 27th. Of transferring uses into possession, at
Westminster aforesaid holden made, and provided, the aforesaid Augustine and
Michael, were seized of the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his
Demesne as of Fee, And so thereof being seized, The said Augustine and Michael,
in consideration of the sum of 3500. pound, to the aforesaid Augustine and
Michael, by the aforesaid John Hele paid, afterward of the said Manors with
the Appurtenances, enfeoffed them the said John Hele, then Serjant at Law, and
the aforesaid Warwick Hele then Esquire, now Knight, To have, and to hold, to
the said John and Warwick, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the aforesaid John,
to the sole and proper use and behoof of the aforesaid John and Warwick, and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said John* Hele for ever. By virtue of which
Feoffment, The aforesaid John Hele, and Warwick Hele were, and yet are seized
of the aforesaid Manors with the Appurtenances, that is to say, The said John
Hele, in his Demesne as of Fee, and the aforesaid Warwick* in his Demesne as of
Free hold for the term of his life. And the aforesaid John Hele, and Warwick
Hele, further say, That afterward, in and by a certain Act of Parliament of
the aforesaid late Queen at Westminster aforesaid, the 27th. day of October,
in the year of the Reign of the said late Queen Elizabeth the 43th. holden,
made (amongst other) reciting, That whereas, the said late Queen, from the 8th.
day of February, in the year of her Reign the 25th. as well for diverse, and
great sums of Money, as for diverse other several considerations, had bargained,
sold, given and granted, by diverse her Letters Patents, Indentures, or other
Writings under the great Seal of England sealed, or the Seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, or the Seal of the County Palatine of Lancaster, as well to Bodies
Politic, and Corporate, as to diverse and several other Subjects of the said
Lady the Queen, diverse and several Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements* Rents,
Reversions, Services, and other Hereditaments in Fee Simple, Fee Tail, for Term
of Life, Lives, or Years, as by the said several Letters Patents, Indentures,
and other Writings are mentioned and declared; It was enacted by Authority of
the same Parliament, To the intent that the said Letters Patents, Indentures,
and other Writings, should be of good, available, and perfect force and effect,
to all and singular the said late Queens Subjects, according to the true intent
and effect of the same; That as well all and singular Letters Patents,
Indentures, and other Writings, sealed under the great Seal of England, or
under the Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster, or the Seal of the County Palatine
of Lancaster, before then made and granted, by the aforesaid late Queen, for
any sum or sums of Money whatsoever, or for or upon any other considerations
whatsoever, from the aforesaid 8th. day of February, in the 25th. year
aforesaid, as all other Letters Patents, then after by the said late Queen to
be made, for any sum or sums of Money, or other considerations before the last
day of the said then present Session of the said Parliament; And moreover, All
other Letters Patents, within the space of one year then next following, to be
made by force, or according to the true puport or true meaning of a Condition
under the great Seal of England, then in being, for the Sale of the Land of the
said late Queen, to any Body Politic, or Corporate, or to any other person or
persons whatsoever, of any Honors, Castles, Manors, Lordships, Granaries,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Woods, Advowsons, Nominations, Patronages, Annuities, Rights, Interests,
Entries, Conditions, Leases, Courts, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, or of
any other Hereditaments with the Appurtenances, or of any part or parcel
thereof, with or under the Great Seal of England, or under the Great Seal of
the Duchy of Lancaster, or the Seal of the County Palatine of Lancaster, of
whatsoever Kind, Nature, or Quality, they or any of them are, or were reputed,
known, or taken, with the Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, should
be good, perfect, and effectual in Law, and should stand, be taken, reputed,
esteemed, and should be adjudged to be good, certain, perfect, available, and
effectual in the Law, against the said late Queen, her Heirs and Successors,
according to the tenor and effect of the aforesaid Letters Patents and
Indentures, or other Writings, and that the same should be expounded,
construed, esteemed, and should be adjudged most beneficially for those, to
whom the aforesaid Letters Patents, and Grants thereof so are made, the Heirs,
Assigns, Executors, and Administrators of them, according to the words and
purport of the said Letters Patents, Indentures, or other Writings, without any
Confirmations, Licenses, or Tollerations of the said late Queen, her Hei^ or
Successors, any ill naming, ill reciting, or not reciting, of the said Honors,
Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other the premises, or of any part
thereof, or any defect in finding of Office or Inquisition, of and in the
premises, or any part thereof, by which the Title of the said late Lady the
Queen, of and in the premises ought to be found, before the publishing of the
aforesaid Letters Patents, Indentures, or other Writing, or any ill reciting,
or not reciting, of Demises thereof made, as well of Record, as not of Record,
or any ill reciting, or not reciting, or not true mentioning in any such
Lettets Patents, Grants, or Writings of the Estate or Estates of the said late
Queen of Freehold, or Inheritance, of and in the premises, or any part thereof,
to which the said late Queen, after the beginning of her Reign was, or then
after should be entitled, by any Attainder, Escheat, Conveiance or Assurance
whatsoever, and in which Letters Patents, Grants, or Writings, no Estate Tail
then before made, or supposed to be made was recited, or from henceforth should
be, and the Reversion or Remainder thereof expectant, in the said Letters
Patents, Grants, or Writings, granted, or mentioned to be granted, or any
defect of certainty, or ill computing, mistaking, rating, or setting forth of
the yearly value or rate of the premises, or yearly Rents reserved of and for
the premises, or any parcel thereof mentioned or contained in the same Letters
Patents aforesaid, or other Writings, or for that that the premises then were,
or any part thereof valued at a greater or lesser value, in the said Letters
Patents, or Writings, than the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other
premises then were, or were in yearly value, or any misnaming or not true
naming, of Town, Hamblet, Parish, or County where the said Honors, Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Hereditaments, and other the premises, and every part
thereof, or any parcel thereof lay, or were, or any defect of true naming of
the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any parcel thereof, or of the
Nature, Kind, Quality, or Quantity, of the aforesaid Possessions, or
Hereditaments, or of any parcel thereof, or any default of true naming of any
Corporation, or any default of Attornment, Livery, or Seisin, or any ill naming
of any the late Tenants of the aforesaid Honors, Manors, lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, or of any part thereof, so sold, granted, or given, or any ill
naming of any person or persons, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, who any time
before the making of such Letters Patents, were, or then after should be
proprietors of the premises, or any any part thereof to the contrary
notwithstanding, as by the said Act amongst other things it more fully appearh.
And the said John Hele, and Warwick further say, That the said late Queen
Elizabeth never had any Son; And that the aforesaid Gellio Merick, and Henry
Li^dley, were at, and before the time of the making of the said Leters Patents,
so as before is said made, Subjects of the said late Queen Elizabeth, and born
at Westminster aforesaid; All and singular which, The said John Hele, and
Warwick, are ready to aver; Whereupon they demand Judgment, if the said
Letters Patens of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the Manors aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, so as before is said made, ought to be revoked and
annulled, or the Manors aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, or any of them ought
to be seized into the Hands of the Lord the King that now is, etc. And the
aforesaid Henry Hobert Knight, Attorney General of the Lord the King that now
is, who, etc. present in Court in his proper person, As to the aforesaid Plea
of the said Henry Lindley, above in form aforesaid pleaded, for the said Lord
the King says, That the said Henry Lindley, ought not be admitted to plead,
That there is not any such Record of any such Act of Parliament, of the
aforesaid Lord King Edward the 3d. made; Nor that there is any such Record of
the aforesaid Charter of the said late King Edward the 3d. by Authority of
Parliament made, as in the aforesaid Writ of Scire Facias thereof is recited
and specified. Because he says, That the said Lord King JAMES, now King of
England, saw the Inrollment of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, of the said
late King Edward the 3d. and of the aforesaid Charter of the said late King
Edward the 3d. in the Rolls of the Chancery of the King that now is, within his
Tower of London, in the year of the Reign of the aforesaid late King Edward the
3d. the 11th. enrolled, upon Record there remaining. The Tenor of Inrollment of
which Act of Parliament, and Charter aforesaid, the said JAMES, now King of
England, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England sealed, here in
Court by the aforesaid Attorney General of the Lord the King that now is, for
the said Lord the King that now is, now brings in Court, bearing date at
Westminster aforesaid, the 5th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of the
said Lord the King that now is, of England, France and Ireland, the 3d. and of
Scotland the 39th. Exemplified amongst other things, Which Exemplification, as
to the Inrollment of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, and Charter aforesaid
follows in these words. JAMES by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. To All to whom these present
Letters shall come greeting, We have seen the Inrollment of a certain Charter,
bearing date the 17th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of the Lord
Edward, late King of England the 11th. To his well-Beloved, and Faithful,
Edward Earl of Chester, his Eldest Son granted, in the Rolls of our Chancery,
within the Tower of London, remaining of Record in these words. Edward by the
Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, To the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs,
Provosts, Ministers, and all Bailiffs, and his faithful People, Greeting,
Amongst other the tokens of Honor of our Kingdom, we esteemed it the chiefest,
that the Order of Dignities and Offices of our Kingdom be fortified with the
best and strongest Counsels; Therefore there being many degrees of Inheritance
in our Kingdom, where by descent the Inheritance, according to the Law of this
Kingdom, to Coheirs, and Parciners, and for want of such issue, and such like
events, the same came to our Hands; We therefore desiring to beautify our
Kingdom, and in best manner to defend our Kingdom, and the holy Church thereof,
and our Subjects and Kingdoms against the endeavors and Adversaries thereof,
and considering and looking that Peace between us and Subjects be maintained,
and to dignifie the Places of honor of our Kingdom; And taking into our
consideration the person of our well-Beloved, and Faithful Edward, Earl of
Chester our Eldest Son, and taken to Honor the same our Son, the name and
Honor of Duke of Cornwall, with the common consent and counsel of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of our Counsel in this present Parliament
at Westminster, upon Monday next after the Feast of Saint Matthew the Apostle
last past, being assembled, we have given, and made him Duke of Cornwall, and
girt him with a Sword as behooves; And that there may be no doubt hereafter
what, or how much the same Duke, or other Dukes of the same place, who for the
time shall be, in the name of the said Duchy ought to have. Our Will is, that
all in specialty, which to the said Duchy does beloug, be inserted in this our
Charter; Therefore for us and our Heirs, we have given and granted, and by this
our Charter confirmed, to the same our Son under the name and Honor of Duke of
the said Place, The Castles, Manors, Lands and Tenements, and other things
under written, That he the State and Honor of the said Duke might uphold, and
the charges and burdens thereof the better uphold, that is to say, The
Sheriffwick of the County of Cornwall with the Appurtenances, so as the said
Duke, and other Dukes of the same place for the time being, make and appoint
Sheriffs of the said County of Cornwall at their will and pleasures, and to do
and execute the Office of Sheriffs there, as heretofore it used to be done,
without any hindrance of us, or our Heirs forever. As also the Castle,
Borough, Manor, and Honor of Launceston, with the Park there, and other, as
Appurtenances in the County of Cornwall, and Devonshire, The Castle and Manor
of Tremeton, with the Town of Saltesh, and the Park there, and other the
Appurtenances in the said County, The Castle, Borough, and Manor of Tintagel,
with the Appurtenances in the said County of Cornwall, The Castle and Manor of
Restormel, with the Park there, and other the Appurtenances in the said County;
And the Manor of Clymestond, with the Park of Keriballock, and other their
Appurtenances, Tibeste, with the Balywick of Powderhine, and other their
Appurtenances, Twynton with the Appurtenances, Helleston in Kerior with the
Appurtenances, Morsk with the Appurtenances, Tevernaile with the Appurtenances,
Pengkeseth with the Appurtenances, Pe^lyn with the Park there, and other the
Appurtenances, Kellaton, with the Bedelry of Estwyueleshire, and other the
Appurtenances, Helleston in Fryshire, with the Park of Hellesbury, and other
its Appurtenances, Lyskire^^, with the Park there, and other the Appurtenances,
Calistock, with the Fishing there, and other the Appurtenances, and Tatskid
with the Appurtenances, in the said County of Cornwall, And the Town of
Lostwickiell in the said County, with the Mill there, and other the
Appurtenances; And the Prizage and Customs of our Wines, in the said County of
Cornwall, and also the Profits of all the Ports within the same our County of
Cornwall to us belonging, together with Wreck of the Sea, as well of Whales,
and Sturgeon, and other Fishes which do belong to us, by reason of our
Prerogative, and whatsoever belongs to Wreck of Sea with the Appurtenances, in
our said County of Cornwall. And the Profits and emoluments of our County
holden in our County of Cornwall, And Hundreds and Courts in the said County to
us belonging, As also our Stannary in the said County of Cornwall, together
with the Coinage of the said Stannary, and all issues and Profits thereof
arising, And also all the Issues, Profits, and Perquisites, to the Court of
Stannary, and the Mines of the said County, (except only 1000. Marks which to
our well-Beloved, and Faithful, William de Monte acuto, Earl of Salisbury, we
have granted for us and our Heirs, to be taken to him and the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully begotten, of the Issues and Profits of the aforesaid Coinage,
until the Castle and Manor of Tonbridge, with the Appurtenances in the County
of Wilts, To the Manor of Aldebourn, Ambresbury, and VVinterbourn, with the
Appurtenances in the said County, and the Manor of Ca^eford with the
Appurtenances in the County of Dorset, and the Manor of H^ngstrig and
Charleton, with the Appurtenances in the County of Somerset, which our Beloved,
and Faithful John de Warren, Earl of Surrey, and Johan his Wife hold, for the
term of their life, and which after their deaths to us and our Heirs, ought to
return after the decease of the said Earl and Johan, to the aforesaid Earl of
Salisbury, and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten, to the value of
800. Marks by the year, we granted to remain, and 200. Marks of Land and Rent,
which to the said Earl of Salisbury to have in form aforesaid, we granted to
be, provided came to our Hands.) And also our Stannary in the aforesaid County
of Devon with the Coinage, and all Issues and Profits of the same: And also the
Exites, Profits, and Perquisites of the said Court of Stannary, And the Water
of Dertmouth in the said County; And the yearly farm of 20. pound of our City
of Exeter, and the Prizage and Customs of our Wines, in the Water of Sutton, in
the said County of Devon; As also the Castle of Wallingford, with its Hamblets
and Members, and the yearly Farm of the Town of Wallingford, with the Honors
of Wallingford, and De Sancto Walerico, with the Appurtenances in the County of
Oxford, and other Counties wheresoever those Honors were, And the Castle,
Manor, and Town of Berkhamstead, with the Port there, together with the Honor
of Berkhamstead, in the Counties of Hertford, Buck. and Northampton, and other
their Appurtenances, And the Manor of Biflet, with the Park there, and other
the Appurtenances in the County of Surrey. To have, and to hold to the said
Duke, and of him, and his Heirs, Kings of England, Eldest Sons, and Dukes of
the said place in the Kingdom of England, by Inheritance to succeed, together
with Kingly Fees, Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Hospitals, Chapels,
and with Hundreds, Fishings, Forests, Chases, Woods, Warrens, Fairs, Markets,
Liberties, Free Customs, Wards, Reliefs, Escheats, and Services of Tenants, as
we^ Free, as V^lleins, and all other things to the aforesaid Castles,
Buroughs, Towns, Manors, Honors, Stannaries and Coinage, Lands and Tenements,
howsoever and wheresoever belonging or appertaining, of us and our Heirs for
ever, together with 24. pound of yearly Farm, which our well-Beloved and
Faithful John de Merz, to us by the year, for all his life is bound to pay for
the Castle and Manor of Mere, with the Appurtenances in the County of Wilts,
granted to him by us for the Term of his life, to be taken every year by the
Hands of the said John, for the Term of his Life, and with the aforesaid 1000.
Marks yearly, to the aforesaid Earl of Surrey, of the issues of the Coinage
aforesaid, by us so granted after obtained, by him, or his Heirs Males of his
Body to be begotten, seisin of the said Castle and Manor of Tunbridge, and the
Manors of Aldebourn, Ambresbury, Winterborn, Caneford, Hengstrigg, Charleton,
after the deaths of the same Earl of Surrey, and Johan, And the said 200. Marks
Land and Rent to the said Earl of Salisbury, and the Heirs Males of his Body
begotten, so provided, for the proportion of the said Castles, Manors, Lands
and Tenements, with the whole, and particularities to the Hands of the said
Earl of Salisbury, and the Heirs Males of his Body should come; We have
moreover granted, for us and our Heirs, and by this our Charter we have
confirmed, That the Castle and Manor of Knaresburgh, with the Hamblets and
Members thereof, and the Honor of Kneasbough, in the County of York, and other
Counties wheresoever the same Honor should be; The Manor of Istleworth, with
the Appurtenances in the County of Middlesex, which Philippa Queen of England,
our most dear Co^^ort holds for Term of Life; And the Castle and Manor of
Lydeford with the Appurtenances, and with the Chase of Dertmore with the
Appurtenances in the said County of Devon, And the Manor of Bradnests with the
Appurtenances in the said County, which our Beloved and Faithful Hugh de
Andley, Earl of Gloucester, and Margaret his Wife, have for the Life of the
said Margaret, And the said Castle and Manor of Mere with the Appurtenances,
which the aforesaid Johan, so for Life holds by our Grant, and which after
the death of the said Queen, Margaret, and Johan, to us and our Heirs ought to
revert, after the decease of the aforesaid Queen aforesaid, that is to say, the
Castle and Manor of Knaresburgh, with the Honors, Hamblets, and Members
thereof aforesaid, and other their Appurtenances, and the Manor of Istleworth
with the Appurtenances; And after the death of the said Margaret, the said
Castle and Manor of Lydeford, with the said Chase of Dertmore, and other the
Appurtenances, and the Manor of Bradnests with the Appurtenances, and after the
death of the said Johan, the said Castle and Manor of Mere with the
Appurtenances. shall remain to the aforesaid Duke, and of him and his Heirs,
Kings of England, Eldest Sons, and Dukes of the said place, in the Kingdom of
England ^ereditarily, to succed as before is said, To have and to hold,
together with Knights Fees, Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Hospitals,
Chapels, and with Hundreds, Wapentakes, Fishings, Forests, Chases, Parks,
Woods, Warrens, Fairs, Markets, Liberties, Free Customs, Wards, Reliefs,
Escheats, Services of Tenants, as well Free. as Villeins, and all others to the
same Castles, Manors, and Honoars, howsoever and wheresoever belonging or
appertaining, of his likewise, and our Heirs forever; All which Castles,
Buroughs, Towns, Manors, Honors, Stannaries, Coinage, Fine of Exeter, and
Wallingford, Lands and Tenements, as above are specified, together with the
Fees, Advowsons, and all other things aforesaid, to the aforesaid Duchy by our
present Charter, for us and our Heirs, we do annex and unite to the same for
ever to remain. So that from the said Duchy, at no time they be any ways
severed, nor to any one or other than Dukes of the same place, by us, or our
Heirs they be given, or any manner of way granted; So also as that to the
aforesaid Duke, and other Dukes of the same place they do descend, and to the
Son or Sons, to whom the said Duchy, by color of our Grant aforesaid it shall
belong, then not appearing, the said Duchy, with the Castles, Buroughs,
Towns, and all other the abovesaid, to us or our Heirs, Kings of England, shall
retorn in our Hands, and in the Hands of our Heirs Kings of England, to be kept
until such Son or Sons, of the said Kingdom of England Heirs to succeed appear,
as it is said, to whom, then successively, the said Duchy with the
Appurtenances, for us and our Heirs, we Grant, and will, that they be delivered
to hold, as above is expressed. We have moreover, for us and our Heirs, and by
this our Charter we have confirmed to the aforesaid Duke, that the said Duke,
and the Heirs of him, Eldest Sons, Dukes of the same forever, have free Warren
in all the Lordships, Manors, Castles, Lands and other places aforesaid, so as
the said Lands be not within the Pounds of our Forests; And that none enter
into them, to hunt in them, or to take any thing which to Warren appertains,
without the License and Will of the said Duke, or other Dukes of the same
place, upon pain of Forfeiture of 10. pound. Wherefore we Will, and firmly
Command, for us and our Heirs, That the said Duke have and hold to him and his
Heirs, Eldest Sons of the Kings of England, and Dukes of the said place, in the
said Kingdom of Engla. in heritable to succeed, The aforesaid Sheriffalty of
the aforesaid County of Cornwall with the Appurtenances; So that they, and
others, Dukes aforesaid, at their Wills make and constitute, the Sheriff
aforesaid, of the said County of Cornwall, to do and execute the Office of
Sheriff there, as hitherto it used to be done, without the hindrance of us, or
our Heirs forever; As also the aforesaid Castles, Buroughs, Manors, and
Honors of Launfeton, The Castle and Manor of Tremeton, with the Town of
Saltesh, the Castle, Borough, and Manor of Tintagel, the Castle and Manor of
Restornel, and the Manors of Clymeslond, Tebeste, Tewynton, Helleston in
Kerier, Moresk, Tewarnayl, Pengkneth, Pentyn, Rellaton, Helleston in Trigstone,
Vyskiret, Calistock, Talskid, and Town of Lofiwithel with the appurtenances,
together with the Parks, Bayliwicks, Bedelrie, Fishings, and others aforesaid,
in the aforesaid County of Cornwall, and the aforesaid Prisages, Customs, and
profits of Ports aforesaid, together with the said Wreck of Sea, and the said
profits and emoluments with the Hundreds, and Courts aforesaid to us belonging,
and the said Stannary in the said County of Cornwall, together with the Coinage
of the said Stannary, and with all issues and profits thereof arising, And also
the explees, profits, and perquisites, of the Courts aforesaid (except only the
said 1000. Marks, which to our well-Beloved William de Monte acuto, Earl of
Salisbury, wegranted for us and our Heirs, to be taken to him, and the Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten, of the issues and profits of the Coinage
aforesaid, until the said Castle and Manor of Tunbridge with the Appurtenances,
and the said Manors of Aldebourn, Ambresbury, and Winterbourn, with the
Appurtenances, and the said Manor of Hengstrig, and Charleton with the
Appurtenances, which the aforesaid Earl of Surrey, and Johan his Wife, hold for
the term of their Lives, and which after their deaths, to us and our Heirs,
ought to revert, after the deceases of the said Earl and Johan, to the said
Earl of Salisbury, and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten, to the
value of 800. Marks by the year we have granted to remain; And the said 200.
Marks Land and Rent, which to the said Earl of Salisbury, To have in form
aforesaid we granted, come unto our Hand (as before is said) And the said
Stannary in the County of Devon, with the Coinage, and all issues and profits
thereof; And also the explees, profits, and perquisites, of the Court of the
same Stannary, Water of Dertmouth, and the said yearly Farm of 20. pound, of
the said City of Exeter, and the said Prizage and Custom of Wines, in the Water
of Sutton, in the said County of Devon; As also the aforesaid Castle of
Wallingford, with Hamblets and Members thereof, the yearly Farm of the Town of
Wallingford, with the said Honor of Wallingford, and De Sancto Valerico, The
Castle, Manor, and Town of Berkhamstead, with the said Honor of Berkhamstead,
and the Manor of Biflet, with the Parks and other their Appurtenances
aforesaid, together with Knights Fees, Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, Priories,
Hospitals, Chapels, and with the Hundreds, Fishings, Forests, Chases, Parks,
Woods, Warrens, Fairs, Markets, Liberties, Free Customs, Wards, Reliefs,
Escheats, and Services of Tenants, as well Free as Villeins, and all other
things to the said Castles, Buroughs, Towns, Manors, Stannaries, and Coinage,
Lands and Tenements, whatsoever and wheresoever belonging or appertaining, of
us and our Heirs forever, together with said 24. pound Farm, which the
aforesaid John de Mere to us yearly, for his whole Life is bound to pay, for
the said Castle and Manor of Mere, granted to him by us, to hold for the term
of his Life, to be taken yearly by the Hands of the said John de Mere all his
Life; And also with the aforesaid 1000. Annual Marks, to the aforesaid Earl of
Salisbury, of the profits of the Coinage aforesaid, by us so granted, after
obtained by him, or the Heirs Males of his Body begotten, seisin of the
aforesaid Manor of Tonbridge, and Manor of Aldebourn, Ambresbury, Winterbourn,
Caneford, Hengstreg, and Charlton, after the decease of the said Earl of Surrey
and Johan; And the said 200. Marks, of Land and Rent of the said Earl of
Salisbury, and the said Heirs Males of his Body so provided, for the like
proportion of the said Castles, Manors, Lands and Tenements, with the whole,
and particulars, to the Hands of the said Earl of Salibury, or the Heirs Males
of his Body lawfully begotten, should come as aforesaid; And that the aforesaid
Castle and Manor of Knaresburgh, with its Hamblets and Members, and the Honor
of Knaresburgh, And the Manor of Istelworth with the Appurtenances, after the
death of our aforesaid Consort, The Castle and Manor of Lydeford with the
Appurtenances, and with the said Chase of Dertmore with the Appurtenances, and
the Manor of Bradnests with the Appurtenances, after the decease of the
aforesaid Margaret, And the Castle and Manor of Mere with their Appurtenances,
after the death of the aforesaid John de Mere, remain to the said Duke; To have
and to hold to him and his Heirs, Eldest Sons of the Kings of England, and
Dukes of the same place in the Kingdom by Inheritance to succeeed, together
with Knights Fees, Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Hospitals, Chapels,
and with Hundreds, Wapentakes, Fishings, Forests, Chases, Parks, Woods,
Warrens, Fairs, Markets, Liberties, Free Customs, Wards, Reliefs, Escheats, and
Services of Tenants, as well Free as Villeins, and all other things to the said
Castles, Manors, Honors, howsoever and wheresoever belonging or appertaining,
of us likewise, and our Heirs for ever a^ before is said, All which Castles,
Buroughs, Towns, Manors and Honors, Stannaries and Coinage, Farms of Exeter,
and Wallingford, Lands, Tenements, as above are specified, together with
Knights Fees, Advowsons and all other things abovesaid, to the said Duchy by
this our present Charter, for us and our Heirs, we do annex and unite, to the
same to remain forever. So as from the said Duchy, at no time hereafter they
be severed, nor to any person or persons then the Dukes of the same place, by
us or our Heirs they be given, or in any ways granted; So that to the
aforesaid Duke, or other Dukes of the same place they descend, And Son or Sons
to whom the said Duchy, by color of the aforesaid our Grants it behooves to
belong then not appearing, The same Duchy with the Castles, Buroughs, Towns,
and all other things aforesaid, to us, and our Heirs Kings of England shall
revert, in our Hands, and in the Hands of our Heirs to be kept, until such Son
or Sons, in the said Kingdom of England hereditable successively appear, as is
said, to whom successively the said Duchy with the Appurtenances, for us and
our Heirs we grant, and will to be delivered, to be holden as above is
expressed. And that the said Duke and his Heirs, Eldest Sons, Dukes of the said
place for ever, have Free Warren in all the Demesns of the Lands aforesaid,
whilst yet the same Lands are not within the Bounds of our Forests; So as
none enter into those Lands to hunt in them, or to take any thing which to
Warren belongs, without the License and Will of the said Duke, and the other
Dukes of the said place, upon pain of forfeiture 10. pound, as before is said,
These being Witnesses, The most Reverend Fathers John Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England our Chancellor, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, Richard Bishop
of Durham, John de Warren Earl of Surrey, John de Betto Campo Earl of Warwick,
Thomas Wake of Lydel, John de Mowbray, John Darcy of Neuen, Steward of our
House, and others, Given by our Hand at Westminster the 17th. day of March, in
the year of our Reign the 11th. By the King himself and the whole Council in
Parliament. But we, The Tenor of the Charter, Record, and Act of Parliament
aforesaid, at the Request of the well-Beloved and Faithful Thomas Stephens
Esquire, Attorney General of our well-Beloved, and most dear Son, our Eldest Son
Henry, Prince and Duke of Cornwall, caused to be Exemplified by these presents.
In Witness whereof we made these our Letters Patents, Witness my self at
Westminster the 5th. day of March, in the year of our Reign of England, France
and Ireland the Third, and of Scotland the 39th. as by the said Letters Patents
of Exemplification aforesaid here in Court brought more fully appears. And
the said Henry Hobert Attorney General of the said Lord the King that now is,
for the said Lord the King that now is says, and will aver, That the aforesaid
Act of Parliament aforesaid, of the aforesaid late King Edward the 3d. made,
and the aforesaid Charter, by the aforesaid late King Edward the 3d. by
authority aforesaid, of the Parliament of the same late K. Ed. the 3d. made,
And the aforesaid Charter, by the aforesaid late K. Ed. the 3d. by Authority of
Parliament aforesaid made, whereof is the Inrolment aforesaid, and in the
aforesaid Exemplification of the Inrollment aforesaid, as before is said, is
made mention, are one and the same, and not other nor diverse; Whereupon the
said Attorney General of the said Lord the King if that now is, for the said
Lord the King here demands Judgment, If the aforesaid Henry Lindley, to say,
that there is not any such Record of such Act of Parliament aforesaid, of the
aforesaid late King Edward the 3d. Nor that there is any such Record of the
aforesaid Charter, by the said late King Edward the 3d. by Authority of the
Parliament aforesaid, in the Writ aforesaid of Scire Facias specified, against
the said Letters Patents of Exemplification aforesaid, here in Court, by the
said Attorney of the aforesaid Lord the King that now is, for the said Lord the
King now showed forth, ought to be admitted. And further, the said Henry
Hobert, the Attorney General of the said Lord the King that now is, for the said
Lord the King prays that the said Letters Patents of the aforesaid late Queen
Eliz. as unto the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with
the Appurtenances, be revoked and annulled, and that the aforesaid Manors of
West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the Appurtenances, into the Hands of
the said Lord the King that now is, to be taken and seized: And the aforesaid
Henry Hobert, Attorney General of the said Lord the King that now is, who, etc.
As to the said Plea of the aforesaid John Hele, and Warwick Helc, by them above
in form aforesaid pleaded, for the said Lord the King says, That that Plea,
and the matter therein contained, is not sufficient in Law to maintain, That
the aforesaid Letters Patents, of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the
aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, ought not to be
revoked and annulled, or that the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, into
the hands of the said Lord the King that now is, ought not to be seized. To
which Plea in manner and form aforesaid pleaded, The said Attorney General for
the said Lord the King needs not, nor by the Law of the Land is bound to
Answer, And this he is ready to aver; Wherefore for want of a sufficient Plea,
of the said John Hele, and Warwick Hele in this behalf, The said Attorney
General for the said Lord the King demands Judgment, and that the said
Letters Patents of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors
of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the Appurtenances made, be revoked
and annulled, And the Manors aforesaid with the Appurtenances, be taken and
seized into the Hands of the Lord the King, etc. Upon which the aforesaid Henry
Lindley says, That the Plea of the aforesaid Attorney General, for the said
Lord the King that now is, to the Plea of the said Henry Lindley, above by
Replication pleaded, and the matters therein contained, are not sufficient for
him the said Henry Lindley, to say, That there is not any such Record of any
such Act of parliament, of the aforesaid late King Edward the 3d. made, as in
the aforesaid Writ of Scire Facias thereof is recited and specified; Nor that
there is any such Record of the aforesaid Charter, by the said late King Edward
the 3d. by Authority of the Parliament aforesaid made, as in the aforesaid Writ
of Scire Facias thereof above is recited and specified to Bar, And that the
said Henry Lindley, to that Plea in manner aforesaid by Replication pleaded,
needs not, nor by the Law of the Land is bound to rejoyn, And this he is
ready to aver; Wherefore for want of a sufficient Replication in his behalf,
the said Henry Lindley as at first demands Judgment, If the aforesaid
Letters Patents of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors
of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the Appurtenances made, ought to
be annulled, or the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph
with the Appurtenances, or any of them ought to be taken and seized into the
hands of the Lord the King that now is, And the aforesaid John Hele and Warwick
Hele for themselves say, that in as much as they sufficient matter in their
plea aforesaid, by them above pleaded, have alleged, that is to say, the
aforesaid seisin of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors
of West Tauuton, Trelo^ia, and Landalph with the Appurtenances in her demesne as
of Fee, in the right of her Crown of England, and the grant aforesaid, by the
aforesaid Letters Patents of the said late Queen, and the rest of the Matters
by them above pleaded, which the aforesaid John Hele, and Warwick are ready to
ave^, which matter the aforesaid Attorney General of the Lord the King that now
is, does not deny, nor to the same any ways answers, but the same averment
to admit altogether refuses, as at first demand Judgment, if the aforesaid
Letters Patents of the aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth of the aforesaid Manors
of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the Appurtenances made, ought to
be revoked and annulled, or the said Manors with the Appurtenances, or any of
them, in the hands of the said Lord the King that now is, ought to be taken or
seized. And farther for the better information, and to more fully inform the
said Lord the King that now is, and the Court here, of the State of the said
Lord the King that now is, to the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall, and to other
Manors to the said late Duchy any manner of way belonging or annexed, or part
or parcel thereof, The said John and Warwick say, that in the Statute in
Parliament, of the Lord Henry late King of England the 7th. held, at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex the 7th. day of November, in the first
year of his Reign, made, amongst other things ordained, It was enacted and
established by authority of Parliament, that the said Lord King Henry the 7th.
should have, hold, enjoy and possess, to him and his Heirs for ever, from the
21th. day of August then last past, the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall, and all
and singular Honors, Castles, Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Poffessions, Advowsons, and other Hereditaments, with all
and singular their members, and appurtenances, to the aforesaid Duchy
belonging and appertaining, or which were belonging, annexed, reputed or taken,
parcel of the same any time of the Reigns of Henry the 6th. Edward the 4th.
late Kings of England, in as ample and large manner with all liberties,
Franchises, and other things to the same belonging, in like manner, form, and
condition, as the aforesaid Kings or either of them had, held, occupied, used,
or enjoyed, or had held, occupied, was used and enjoyed in the same, in any
time during the said Kings Reigns, as in the Statute aforesaid, in the year of
the Reign of the aforesaid late King Henry the 7th. the first abovesaid,
amongst other things it is more fully contained, and appears: By which the
said King James, now King, was and yet is seized of the rest of the Manors,
Lands, and Tenements, to the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall belonging, by the
aforesaid late Queen Elizabeth not aliened, in his demesne as of Fee, in the
Right of his Crown of England, whereupon they pray that the Court here, take
knowledge and notice of the aforesaid Statute in the year of the Reign of the
aforesaid late King Henry 7th. the first abovesaid made, and of the aforesaid
Statu te of the said Lord the King that now is, to the rest of the Manors,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to the aforesaid Duchy of Cornwall
belonging, they would take and accept, etc. And the aforesaid Henry Hobert
Attorney General of the aforesaid Lord the King that now is, who, etc. as to
that, whereupon the aforesaid Henry Lindley above demurreth in Law, in as much
as, he sufficient matter in Law, for the said Lord the King to bar the
aforesaid Henry Lindley from saying, that there is not any such record of any
such Act of Parliament, of the aforesaid late King Edward the 3d. made, nor any
such Record of the aforesaid Charter by the said late King Edward the 3d. by
authority of Parliament aforesaid, made, as in the aforesaid Writ of Scire
Facias, thereof it is recited and specified, above alleged, which matter the
aforesaid Henry Lindley does not deny, nor to the same any ways answers, but
that averment to admit utterly refuses, the said Attorney General of the said
Lord the King that now is, for the said Lord the King that now is demands
Judgment, and that the aforesaid Letters Patents, of the aforesaid late Queen
Elizabeth, of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph,
with the Appurtenances made, be revoked and annulled, and that the said Manors
with the Appurtenances into the hands of the Lord the King that now is, be
taken and seized, etc. And because the Court of the Lord the King that now is
here, will avise off and upon the premises, before it proceeds to Judgment
thereof, day is given as well to the aforesaid Henry Hobert Knight, Attorney
General of the said Lord the King that now is, who, etc. as to the aforesaid
Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele, before the said Lord the King that
now is, in the said Court here, until in 8. days of St. Hilary next, etc.
wheresoever, etc. to hear their Judgment thereof, because the said Court
hereof, thereof not yet, etc. At which day of 8. days of Saint Hillary, that is
to say, at Westminster aforesaid, come as well the aforesaid Henry Hobart
Knight, Attorney General of the said Lord the King that now is, who, etc. in
his proper person, as the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele,
by their Attorney aforesaid, and upon this the Attorney General of the Lord the
King that now is, as at first demands Judgment, and that the aforesaid
Letters Patents, of the aforesaid Manors of West Taunton, Trelowia, and
Landalph, with the appurtenances in form aforesaid made, be revoked and
annulled, and that the said Manors with the Appurtenances into the hands of the
Lord the King; that now is, be taken and seized, etc. And because the said
Court of the Lord the King that now is, here, will farther avise before that it
proceed to Judgment thereof, day farther is given as well to the aforesaid
Henry Hobert Knight, Attorney General of the said Lord the King that now is, who
etc. as to the aforesaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele, here
until in 15 days of Easter next, etc. wheresoever, etc. to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the said Court of the Lord the King that now is here, thereof
not yet, etc.

SCIRE FACIAS.
Easter Term. 2i. Eliz. R^t. 1. The Record of the Case of Mark Steward, vouched
in Co. 9th. part in Sr. Georege Reynels Case, fol. 99. b.
MEmorandum, that Thomas Bromley Knight, Chauncellor of the Queen, Monday next
after the Morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, this Term before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, by his own hand delivered here into the Court, a certain
Record before the Lady the Queen, had in her Chancery, in these words, Pleas
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, in the Term of Easter, in the year of
the Reign of Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. the 21th. Middlesex. ss. It is manifest,
that the Lord Philip, and the Lady Mary, late King and Queen of England, Sister
of the Lady the Queen that now is, for them, the Heirs and Successors of the
said Lady Queen Mary, by the Letters Patents of them the said late King and
Queen, Philip, and Mary, made under the great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster, the 23th. day of September, in the 3. and 4th. year of the said
late King Philip, and Mary, gave and granted to one Mark Steward genesis the
Office of Sergeant at Arms, of them the said late King and Queen, Philip, and
Mary, attendant upon her Chauncellor of England, for the time being, and made,
ordained, and appointed by the said Letters Patents, him the said Mark, their
Sargeant at Arms, to have and enjoy the said Office, to the said Mark, for the
Term of his life: and that the said King Philip, and Queen Mary, for them, the
Heirs and Successors of the said Queen Mary, by the same Letters Patents, gave
and granted to the said Mark, for the exercising and occupying the said office
aforesaid, the wages and Fee of 12. pence by the day, To have, hold, and
receive yearly the said wages, and Fee of 12. pence to the said Mark, for the
Term of his life, of the Issues and profits of the Hamper, of the said late
King Philip, and Queen Mary, by the hands of the Clerk, or Keeper of the
aforesaid Hamper, for the time being, yearly to be paid, as by the said Letters
Patents amongst other, it more fully appears: By color of which Letters
Patents the said Mark was seized of the Office aforesaid, as of Freehold, for
the term of his life; And whereas also, it is found by a certain Inquisition
Indented, taken at Westminster in the County of Middlesex the 24th. day of
June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, the
19th. before Kalph Hurlestone Esquire, John Muthal Esquire, Francis Folyat
Esquire, and John Stratham Gent. By virtue of a Commission of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, to them, and to one John Goodman directed, by the Oaths of
12. men, That the said Mark did not serve in the said Office of Sergeant at
Arms, according to the effect and Tenor of the aforesaid Letters Patents, to
him made, from the 8th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, unto the first day of February then next past,
before the Inquisition aforesaid, but for all that time absented himself from
that Office, as by the said Inquisition returned in the Court of the Chancery
of the said Lady the Queen, as in the files of Record there remaining it
appears: And now at this day, that is to say, the 7th. day of May, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now i^, the 21th. co^eth the
aforesaid Mark Steward, into the Chancery of the said Lady the Queen ^ow is at
Westminster, by Edward Cockel his Attorney, and complains, that ^y re^^on, and
color of the Inquisition aforesaid, himself to be unjustly removed from the
exercising and holding of his said Office aforesaid, Because, By Protestation,
that the said Inquisition is not sufficient in Law, to ^^^^ve him the said
Mark, from the exercising of his Office aforesaid ^o ^^e showing of his right
in this behalf, the said Mark says, that the (...) Lady the Queen that now is,
long after the making of the said Letters Patents, that is to say, the last day
of Nov. in the year of her Reign the (...) at Westminster in the County o^ M^ll
gave li^^ns^^oth ^said Mark, (...) h^^self from the exercising his Office,
during the pleasure of him ^^^ said Mark, until he was commanded by her the
said Lady the Queen that now i^, to serve in his Office aforesaid; By virtue of
which License of the said Lady the Queen, to the aforesaid Mark as before is
said, the said Mark by the whole time of his absence, specified in the
Inquisition aforesaid; And (...) the ^^^ Mark, for further showing of his Right
says, That he now is, and alw^^ ^^om the aforesaid time of removing him from
the Exercising of his Offi^^ aforesaid, was ready, and often time offered
himself to serve in his Office aforesaid, And that as yet from the time of the
License of the said Lady the Queen, of absenting himself to the said Mark made,
the said Lady the Queen that now is, had not commanded him to serve in his
Office aforesaid, Without that, that the said Lady the Queen that now is, has
any other Right or Title, in or to the Office aforesaid, than as before above
it is alleged; And without that, That there is any such Record, besides the
Record of the Inquisition aforesaid, which makes or shows, or can make or set
forth, any Title of the said Lady the Queen that now is, in or to the Office
aforesaid; All and singular which, the said Mark is ready to aver, as the Court
here shall award, and therefore he demands Judgment, and that to the
possession and exercising of his Office aforesaid, together with the Wages and
Fee aforesaid, and to the issues and profits to the said Office due and
belonging, from the time of his removing from the said exercising of his Office
aforesaid be restored, etc. And Gilbert Gerrard, Attorney General of the Lady
the Queen that now is, who prosecuteth for the said Lady the Queen in this
behalf says, That by any thing by the said Mark Steward, above in pleading
alleged, The said Lady the Queen of her Right and Title, in or to the Office
aforesaid, ought not to be barred; Because he says, That the said Lady the
Queen did not give License to the said Mark, to absent himself from the
exercising of his Office aforesaid, at the pleasure of him the said Mark, until
he were Commanded by the said Lady the Queen to serve in his said Office
aforesaid, in manner and form, as the aforesaid Mark in his showing of his
Right, to the Office aforesaid above alleged; And this, the said Attorney of the
said Lady the Queen that now is, for the said Lady the Queen prays, it be
enquired of by the Country; And the aforesaid Mark likewise. Therefore day is
given before the said Lady the Queen that now is, in the Morrow of the
Ascension of our Lord, wheresoever she should be in England, to do and receive
what was just in the premises; And it is commanded to the Sheriff of Middlesex,
That he cause to be here before the Lady the Queen at that day 12. good and
lawful men of the Vicinage of the City of Westminster, who are not of Kindred
or Affinity of the said Mark, To Recognize upon their Oath more fully the truth
of the premises; At which Morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Gilbert Ge^rad, who
prosecutes, etc. as the aforesaid Mark Steward, by John Manning his Attorney.
And the Sheriff retorns the names of 12. whereof none, etc. Thtrefore it is
commanded to the Sheriff, That he do not omit, etc. but that he destrein them
by all their Lands, etc. And that of the Issues, etc. And that he have their
Bodies before the Lady the Q. in 8. days of the Holy ^rinity, wheresoever,
etc. To Recognize in form aforesaid, etc. And the same day is given as well to
the aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who prosecutes, etc. as to the aforesaid Mark
Steward, etc. At which 8. days of the ^oly ^rinity, before the Lady the Queen
at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who prosecutes,
etc. as the aforesaid Mark by his Attorney aforesaid, And the Jurors of the Jury
aforesaid being called, likewise come, And upon this, public Proclamation is
made for the Lady the Queen, as the use is, That if there be any one who will
inform the Justices o^ the Lady the Queen here, the Sergeant at Law of the Lady
the Queen, or the Attorney General of the Lady the Queen, or the Jurors
aforesaid o^ the premises, that he come and should be heard; And Edward
Anderson, one of the Sergeants of the Lady the Queen at Law, to do this offered
himself; By which it is proceeded, to the taking of the Jury aforesaid, by the
Jurors aforesaid now there appearing, who to say the truth of the premises,
chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That the Lord Philip and the
Lady Mary, late King and Queen of England, by their Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England made, bearing date at Westminster the 23th. day of
September, in the years of the Reigns of the said late King and Queen the 3d.
and 4th. Gave and granted to the said Mark, the Office of Sergeant at Arms,
attending upon their Chancellor of England for the time being, and made him the
said Mark their Sergeant at Arms aforesaid, made, Ordained, and Constituted by
the said Letters Patents, for the term of his life, To have, and enjoy the said
Office, to him the said Mark for the term of his life. And moreover, the said
late King and Queen, gave and granted by the Letters Patents aforesaid, for
them, the Heirs and Successors of the said Queen, for the exercising and
holding of the Office aforesaid, the Wages and Fee of 12. pence per diem, To
have, hold and perceive, yearly the said Wages and Fee of 12. pence the day, to
the said Mark for the term of his life, of the issues and profits of their
Hamper of their Chancery, by the Hands of the Clerk or Keeper of the said their
Hamper, and the Heirs of the aforesaid late Queen for the time being, At the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and Easter, by equal portions yearly to
be paid, together with all other Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, Allowances,
and Advantages, to the said Office any way anciently belonging, due and
accustomed. And the said Mark Steward, brings here in Court the Letters Patents
aforesaid, which follows in these words, Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God,
King and Queen of England, Spain, France, both Cicilies, Jerusalem, and
Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Burgondy,
Milain, and Brabant, Earl of Haspurge, Flanders, and Tiroll, etc. To All to
whom these present Letters shall come Greeting; Whereas our most dear Brother
Edward, late King of England the 6th. by his Letters Patents made under the
Great Seal of England, bearing date at Greenwich, the 8th. day of April, in the
4th. year of his Reign, of his special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, as also with the Advice and Consent of his Council, had given and
granted to his well-Beloved Richard Hatchman Gentleman, the Office of his
Serjant at Arms, Attendant upon his Chancellor of England for the time being,
and had made, Ordained, and Constituted by his said Letters Patents, him the
said Richard his Sergeant at Arms, for the term of his life; And moreover, by
his said Letters Patents, had given and granted to the aforesaid Richard
Hatchman, for the exercising and holding the Office aforesaid, the Wages and
Fee of 12. pence by the day. To have, hold, and receive yearly, the said Wages
and Fee of 12. pence by the day, for the term of his life, from the time of the
death of his Serj^^nt at Arms which should next dye, of the issues and profits
of the Hamper of the Chancery, e^^her by the Hands o^ the Clerk, or the Keeper
of the said his Hamper, for the time being, at the Feasts of Saint Michael the
Archangel, and Easter, by equal portions yearly to be paid, with all other
Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, Allowances, and Advantages to the said
Office, any ways anciently due and accustomed, as by the said Letters Patents
more fully appears; And because the said Richard Hatchman, is now willing to
deliver up the aforesaid Letters Patents in our Chancery, to be cancelled;
Which Letters Patents there now are cancelled, as we have certain Knowledge, to
the intent, that we would be graciously pleased to grant to our well* Beloved
Mark Steward Gentleman, other Letters Patents of the premises: We therefore,
taking Consideration of the premises, Of our special Grace, certain Knowledge,
and mere Motion, have given and granted, and by these presents for us, the
Heirs and Successors of the said Lady the Queen, do give and grant to the said
Mark Steward, the aforesaid Office of our Serjant at Arms, Attendant upon our
Chancellor of England, for the time being; And him the said Mark our Sergeant
at Arms, do make, Ordain, and Constitute by these presents, To have, and enjoy
the said Office, to the said Ma^k Steward for the term of his life; And
moreover, we have given and granted, and by these presents for us, the Heirs
and Successors of the said Lady the Queen, we do give and grant to the
aforesaid Mark Steward, for the exercising and holding the Office aforesaid,
the Wages and Fee of 12. pence by the day, To have, enjoy, and perceive yearly
the said Wages and Fee of 12. pence by the day, to the aforresaid Mark for the
term of his life, of the issues and profits of our Hamper of our Chancery, by
the Hands of the Clerk or Keeper of the said our Hamper, and the Heirs of our
said Lady the Queen for the time being, At the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, and Easter, by equal portions yearly to be paid, together with all
other Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, Allowances, and Advantages, to the said
Office any ways anciently due and accustomed, etc. Although the certain
express mention of the premises, or any of them, or of other gifts or grants
by us, or by any of our Progenitors, to the aforesaid Mark Steward, before this
time made in the premises there is not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Provision, or any other thing, cause or matter whatsoever, in any thing
notwithstanding; In Witness whereof, these our Letters we have caused to be
made Patents. Witness our selfs at Westminster, the 23th. day of September, in
the year of our Reigns the third and 4th. By Color of which Letters Patents,
the said Mark Steward well and truly to execute the said Office, was sworn. And
further the said Jurors say, That the last day of November in the year of the
Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 11th. The said Lady the Queen at
the humble Petition and request of the Right Honorable lord, the Earl of
Leicester, and Robert Huyck Doctor of Physic, granted that the said Mark
Steward might absent himself from the exercising of his Office of Sergeant at
Arms, Attendant in his proper person upon her Chancellor of England for the
time being, during the good pleasure o^ the said Mark, until the said Lady the
Queen should command him to serve in his Office aforesaid, as by the deposition
of the said Robert ^uyck, and by a certain Letter, under the proper hand
writing of the said Earl of ^eicester, which we found to be true in these
English words following, here unto the Court to the Jurors aforesaid in
evidence given and showed it more fully appears: The Deposition of which
Robert Huyck follows in these words, That is to say, I was an humble Suter
unto her gracious Majesty about ten years past, that she would license Mark
Steward Sergeant at Arms Attendant upon the then Lord Keeper to give off his
attendance in his own person, to the end he might withdraw himself into the
Country to play the good husband in his own house, so long only as she should
permit him, and not recall him to his former attendance, and the Office should
be served otherwise to her Majesty's contentation, and the Lord Keepers well
liking; the which my Su^e she did very graciously grant me; And after that,
upon the Lord Keepers praising Augustine Steward, I commended him to the Queen
as one very fit to discharge his brothers absence with his attendance. I did
sue to my Lord of Leicester and diverse other of the Lords to speak in my behalf
for the furtherance of the suit, so in the end the Queen said, I do like well,
and am right well content that Mark Steward do cease from his Waiting until We
shall Resolve otherwise. And if his Brother be found sit, he shall serve in his
place during the time of his absence; which Letter subscribed, under the proper
hand writing of the said Earl of Leicester follows in these words. To my very
good Lords the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Chief Justice of England, and to
either of them. ss. After my most hearty commendations to your Lordships: This
Bearer Mark Steward has earnestly besought me to advertise your Lordships of
my knowledge touching her Majesty's leave for the said Stewards not attendance
to his Office of Sergeant-ship: Wherein, this is very true, that about
Michaelmass, as I take it, in the 10th. year o^ her Majesty's Reign, the Court
being then at Windsor, Mark Steward, both himself, and his friends, for that he
had a desire to remain in the County, earnestly traveled with me to be his
mean, for the obtaining of her Majesty's good leave and favor, that without
any prejudice, for not attending, he might at his pleasure so do, and for the
supplying of his place which he had to serve about the late Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal as Sergeant at Arms, he acquainted me with the good liking and
contentation my said Lord Keeper had to have a Brother of his to attend in his
place, To which also I gave my best furtherance afterward: Whereby her Majesty
pleased both to grant her favorable License to Mark Steward for his absence,
and to allow his brother to supply his place, who was accordingly sworn
therein, and many years served the place. Thus much being on my own knowledge
to be true, at his humble and earnest suit, I thought good to advertise your
Lordships, and so do bid your Lordships farewell from the Court, the 21th. day
of May, 1579. your Lordships loving Friend, R. Leicester. And the Jurors
further say, That the aforesaid Augustine Steward, brother of him the said
Mark, the 6th. day of January in the 11th. year abovesaid, at Hampton Court in
the County of Middlesex, by the said Lady the Queen, was admitted, ordained and
constituted, to attend in the place and room of him the said Mark his brother
upon Nicholas Bacon Knight, then being Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and to the said Office for and in the place and room of him the said
Mark well and faithfully to exercise and execute then and there in the presence
of the said Lady the Queen was sworn, as by the Deposition of the said
Augustine Steward, which follows in these words, we find to be true. After
Christmas and before Hillary Term in the 11th. year of her Highness Reign, on
a Sunday or Holiday her Majesty coming from the Closet at Hampton Court was
moved by the Right Honorable deceased Earl of Pembroke for the instituting of
Augustine Steward Sergeant at Arms to attend upon the Lord Keeper, To whom her
Majesty answered, My Lord, he is not to have his brothers Office, but is to be
appointed only to attend in his place for him at such time as his brother shall
be absent; her Majesty making then relation of her favorable License already
granted to Mark Steward to abide in the Country, and to absent himself from her
service at his pleasure, until he should by her Majesty be called again to his
attendance upon the said Lord Keeper: And then the said Augustine was sworn to
attend as is above specified. By color of which the said Augustine Steward in
the absence of him the said Mark Steward his brother, the aforesaid Office of
Sergeant at Arms, attendant upon the Chancellor of England from thence, until
the 20th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is the 18th. used and executed. But whether the said Lady the Queen by word
only, without Writing sealed, can give sufficient License in Law to the said
Mark Steward to absent himself from the exercising of his Office aforesaid, the
Jurors aforesaid are utterly ignorant, and thereof pray the aid and advise of
the Court here in the premises. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, it
shall seem to the Court of the Lady and Queen here, That the said Lady the
Queen that now is can by word only without her writing sealed give sufficient
License in Law to the said Mark to absent himself from the exercising of his
Office aforesaid, Then the said Jurors say, That the said Lady the Queen that
now is gave License to the said Mark Steward to absent himself from the
exercise of his Office aforesaid, during the pleasure of him the said Mark,
until he should be commanded by the said Lady the Queen to serve in his Office
aforesaid, in manner and form as the said Mark, above in pleading alleged. And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, It shall seem to the Court of the Lady the
Queen here, That the said Lady the Qu^en cannot by word only, without her
Writing sealed, give sufficient license in Law to the said Mark to absent
himself from the exercising of his Office aforesaid: Then the Jurors aforesaid
say, That the said Lady the Queen did not give license to the said Mark to
absent himself from the exercising of his Office aforesaid during the pleasure
of him the said Mark until he should be commanded by the said Lady the Queen to
serve in his Office aforesaid. And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here
of giving their Judgment thereof, is not yet avised, etc. Therefore day
thereof is given as well to the aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who prosecutes, etc.
as to the aforesaid Mark Steward, until in 8. days of Saint Michael, before
the Lady the Queen, wheresoever, etc. in state as now, etc. to hear their
Judgment thereof, etc. At which 15. days from Saint Michael, before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who
prosecutes, etc. as the aforesaid Mark by his Attorney aforesaid; And because
the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment thereof are not
yet avised, etc. Therefore further day thereof is given as well to the
aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who prosecutes, etc. as to the aforesaid Mark
Steward, until from the day of Saint Martin 15. days, before the Lady the
Queen, wheresoever, etc. in state as now, etc. to hear their Judgment thereof,
etc. At which 15. days from Saint Martin, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Gilbert Gerrard, who prosecutes, etc.
as the said Mark Steward, by his Attorney aforesaid: Upon which, all and
singular the premises being seen, and fully understood by the Court here, and
mature deliberation being had thereof; the Queens Sergeant at Law, and the
Attorney General of the said Queen being called to it and present, It was
awarded, That the said Office of Sergeant at Arms, holden in the Hands of the
said Lady the Queen, be restored to the said Mark, And that the said Mark
Steward, to the exercising and holding of his Office aforesaid, from which he
was amoved, together with the Wages and Fees thereof to the said Office due and
belonging, from the time of his amoving from the exercising of his Office
aforesaid, hitherto received and withheld, be restored, etc. Saving the
Right of the Queen, if any, etc.

TRESPASS.
Hillary Term, Anno 41. Elizabeth. Rott. 1049. in the COMMON PLEAS, C. ^. part,
Corbets Case. fol. 77. b.
ROwland Corbet, late of Stokefaston, in the County aforesaid Esquire, was
Leicest.
attached to answer to Arthur Corbet Gentleman, of a Plea, wherefore with force
and Arms, the Close of the said Arthur, at Stokefaston aforesaid, he broke, and
his Grass there to the value of 10. pound, growing, with certain Cattle Fedd,
Trod, and Consumed, and other harms to him did, to the great damage of the said
Arthur, and against the Peace of the Lady the Queen that now is, etc. And
whereupon, the said Arthur, by Lawrence Lyter his Attorney complains, That the
said Rowland, the 20th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the
Queen that now is the 40th. with Force and Arms, etc. the Close of him the said
Arthur, at Strokefaston broke, and his Grass there to the value, etc. there
then growing, with certain Cattle, that is to say, with Horses, Cows, Hoggs and
Sheep, fed, trod, and consumed, and other harms, etc. to the great damage, etc.
and against the Peace, etc. Whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has
damages, etc. to the value of 20. pound, And thereof he brings Suit, etc. And
the aforesaid Rowland, by William Evering his Attorney, comes and defends the
force and injury when etc. and as to the force and arms says, that he is in
nothing thereof guilty; And as to the rest of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to
be done, the said Rowland says, That the aforesaid Arthur his Action thereof
against him ought not to have; Because he says, That the Close aforesaid, as
also the place in which it is supposed the Trespass aforesaid to be done, and
the time aforesaid, in which it is supposed the same Trespass to be done, were
20. Acres of Pasture with their Appurtenances, in Stokefaston aforesaid, called
New-Close, and that before the time in which, etc. One Christopher Corbet
Esquire, Father of the aforesaid Rowland and Arthur, was seized of the Manor of
Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, in the County aforesaid, whereof the
aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances in which, etc. are, and
the aforesaid time in which, etc. As also time whereof the Memory of Men is not
to the contrary were parcel, in his Demesne as of Fee; And so thereof being
seized, The said Christopher, before the time in which, etc. that is to say,
the 12th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is the 30th. at Stokefaston aforesaid, By a certain Indenture made
between him the said Christopher* By the name of Christopher Corbet, of
Stokefaston, in the County of Leicester Esquire of the one part, and Richard
Slade, Henry Allin, Thomas Hunt, and George Noon Gentleman, of the other part,
One part of which, sealed with the Seal of the said Christopher, the said
Rowland brings here in Court, whose date is the same day and year; It is
witnessed, That the aforesaid Christopher Corbet, for and in consideration of
Fatherly Love, Zeal and Affection, which he the said Christopher Corbet bore to
the aforesaid Rowland Corbet, Eldest Son of the said Christopher, and for his
Preferment and Advancement, and for the Promotion, Preferment, and
Establishment of Living of the said Rowland, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully
issuing; And for and in consideration of Fatherly Love, Zeal and Affection,
which the said Christopher bore to the said Arthur Corbet his other Son, and
for his Preferment and Advancement of Living; And also for and in consideration
of the great Love, and Affection, and Favor, which he the said Christopher
bore to Francis Corbet, Son of Humphry* Corbet, late of Ratley, in the County
of Warwick Gentleman deceased, his near Cousin and Kinsman, and for his
Preferment and Advancemement, And also for the Establishment, Preservation, and
Continuance of all and singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, of him the said Christopher within the Kingdom of
England, then after in the same Indenture mentioned or contained, in the Name
and Blood of the aforesaid Christopher, and for other good and just causes and
considerations, him the said Christopher moving, By the same Indenture for him
and his Heirs, Covenanted, Granted, Condescended and Agreed, to and with the
aforesaid Robert Slade, Henry Allin, Thomas Hunt, and George Noon, their
Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of them in manner and form,
after in the said Indenture mentioned; That is to say, That he the said
Christo. Corbet, his Heirs and Assigns, And all and every other person or
persons, their Heirs and Assigns, who then stood or were seized, or which from
hence forth for ever should stand and be seized, of and in the aforesaid Manor
of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, in the County of Leicester, and of and
in all other Messuages, Lands, Tenemnets, and Hereditaments whatsoever, of the
aforesaid Christo. Corbet, in the said County of Leicester, of which he the
said Christopher Corbet, then had any Estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, in
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, from thence forth afterward should stand
and be seized, of and in the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston, and all and
singular other the premises with their Appurtenances whatsoever, to the uses,
behoofs, intentions, or purposes; That is to say, of and in the aforesaid Manor
of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, and other the premises whatsoever with
their Appurtenances, in the aforesaid County of Leicester, unto the use and
behoof of the aforesaid Christopher Corbet, during his natural life, without
impeachment of any Waste, and after the decease of the said Christopher Corbet,
Then of and in the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, in
the aforesaid County of Leicester, And of and in all other Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, of the aforesaid
Christopher Corbet, whatsoever, with all and singular their Appurtenances, in
the said County of Leicester, of which, or in which he the said Christopher
Corbet, had any Estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, in possession, Reversion,
or Remainder, To the use of the aforesaid Rowland Corbet, and the Heirs Males
of his Body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue Male, to the use
of the aforesaid Arthur Corbet, and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten, and for default of such issue male, then to the use of the aforesaid
Francis Corbet, Son of the aforesaid Humph. Corbet deceased, and the Heirs
Males of the Body of the aforesaid Francis lawfully begotten, and for default
of such Heirs, then to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the aforesaid
Rowland lawfully begotten, and for default of such Heirs, then to the use of
the Heirs of the Body of the said Arthur lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Heirs, Then to the use and behoof of the Right Heirs of the said
Christopher Corbet for ever, as by the same Indenture amongst other things more
fully appears. By color of which, as also of a certain Act in Parliament of
the Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. at Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, the 4th. day of February, in the year of his Reign the 27th. Of
transferring of uses into possession, holden, made, and provided; The aforesaid
Christopher Corbet, was seized of the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things in his Demesne as of Free hold for the term
of his life, the Remanider thereof in form aforesaid expectant; And the said
Christopher so thereof being seized, The said Christopher afterward, and
before the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the last day of May,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 30th.
abovesaid, at Stokefaston aforesaid, dyed of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid seized; After whose death, and
before the time in which, etc. The said Rowland Corbet, into the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof seized
in his Demesne as of Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his
Body lawfully begotten, the Remainder thereof in form aforesaid; And the
aforesaid Arthur Corbet, claiming the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. of a certain deed of Demise, to him thereof made for the term of
his life, by the aforesaid Christopher the Father, long before the making of
the Indenture aforesaid, between the aforesaid Christopher, and the aforesaid
Robert Slade, Henry Allin, Thomas Hunt, and George Noon, whereas nothing of the
Manor aforesaid with their Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in possession of the
said Authur, by that deed ever passessed, into the aforesaid 20. Acres of
Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. and before the aforesaid time in
which, etc. entered and was thereof possessed, upon whose possession thereof of
the said Arthur, the said Rowland afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid
time in which, etc. into the said 20. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances,
re-entred, and the Close aforesaid, in the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with
the Appurtenances broke, and the grass there then growing with his Cattle
aforesaid did eat, tread and consume, as it was lawful for him to do, And this
he is ready to aver, Whereupon he demands Judgment if the aforesaid Arthur,
his Action aforesaid against him ought to have; Because he says, That well and
true it is, That the aforesaid Christopher was seized of the aforesaid Manor
of Stokefaston aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof the said 20. Acres of
Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. are, and the aforesaid time in
which, etc. as also from the whole time aforesaid were parcel, in his Demesne as
of Fee, And so thereof being seized, the aforesaid 12. day of April, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 30th. abovesaid,
by the said his Indenture for the causes and considerations abovesaid, in the
said Indenture specified, for him and his Heirs covenanted, granted,
condescended and agreed, to and with the aforesaid Robert Slade, Henry Allin,
Thomas Hunt, and George Noon, their Executors and Administrators, and to and
with every of them, in manner and form in the said Indenture mentioned, that is
to say, That the said Christopher Corbet, his Heirs and Assigns, and all and
every other person and persons, their Heirs and Assigns, which then stood and
were seized, or from then after should stand or be seized, of and in the
aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, and of and in all the
aforesaid other Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, of
the aforesaid Christopher Corbet, in the said County of Leicester, of which the
said Christopher Corbet then had any estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, in
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, from thence after should stand and be
seized, of and in the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston, and all the aforesaid
other premises with their Appurtenances whatsoever, to the aforesaid uses,
behoof^, intentions and purposes, and upon and under those Provisions,
Limitations, and Conditions in such manner and form, as afterward in the said
Indenture are named, limited, mentioned, or should be directed, and unto none
other use, uses, behoofs, intents, or purposes, that is to say, of and in the
aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, in the aforesaid County
of Leicester, To the use and behoof of the aforesaid Christopher Corbet during
his natural life, without impeachment of any manner of Waste, and after the
decease of the said Christopher Corbet, of and in the aforesaid Manor of
Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, and of and in all other the aforesaid
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments, of
the aforesaid Christopher, whatsoever, with all and singular their
Appurtenances in the said County of Leicester, of which, or in which, he the
said Christopher then had any Estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, in
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, to the use of the aforesaid Rowland
Corbet, and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such issue, to the use of the aforesaid Arthur Corbet, and the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue Male, Then to the use
of the aforesaid Francis Corbet, Son of the aforesaid Humphry Corbet deceased,
and the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Francis lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Heir, then to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the aforesaid
Rowland lawfully begotten, and for default of such Heir, to the use of the
Heirs of the Body of the aforesaid Arthur Corbet lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Heir, to the use and behoof of the Right Heirs of the aforesaid
Christopher Corbet for ever, as by the same Indenture amongst other things more
fully appears. By color of which, as also by force of the Act aforesaid, of
transferring of uses into possession, the aforesaid Christopher was seized of
the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc.
amongst other things in his Demesne as of Free Hold for the term of his Life,
the Remainder thereof in form aforesaid expectant; And the said Christopher
being thereof so seized, The said Christopher afterward, and before the time
in which, etc. that is to say, the aforesaid last day of May, in the year of
the said Lady the Queen that now is the 30th. abovesaid, at Stokefaston
aforesaid, dyed of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in
form aforesaid seized; After whose death, and before the time in which, etc.
The said Rowland Corbet into the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee Tail, that
is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten, the
Remainder thereof in form aforesaid, as the aforesaid Rowland above has
alleged. But the said Arthur further says, That by the Indenture aforesaid, It
was Conditioned, Covenanted, granted and agreed, by and between the parties
aforesaid to the said Indenture, That if, when, and so often as the aforesaid
Rowland Corbet, or any the Heir Males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten;
Or the aforesaid Arthur Corbet, or any the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten; Or the aforesaid Francis Corbet, Son of the
aforesaid Humphry Corbet deceased, or any the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, should be fully and finally resolved and
determined, and advisedly, determinatly, and effectually devised, concluded and
agreed, or should enter into any Communication, Promise and Covenant
whatsoever, or advisedly, and effectually should attempt, procure, go about, or
should assent, to or for any Act or Acts, thing or things, for or concerning
any Bargain, Sale, Discontinuance, Alien^tion, Conveiance or Assurance to be
had and made, of any of the aforesaid Manors, lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, intailed, or intended, or mentioned to be intailed, or of any of
them, or of any part or parcel of them, whereby any Estate of the premises
aforesaid, recited, intailed, or mentioned to be intailed, or any part thereof
in use or possession mentioned, appointed, limited, or declared by the same
Indenture, can, ought, or could, in any manner, or manners, be undone,
discontinued, barred, altered, o^ determined, and the said Bargain, Sale,
Exchange, Alienation, Devisement, Conclusion, Agreement, Promission,
Communication, Concession, Obligation, Conveiance or Assurance, or any other
open and effectual matter, thing, or Act, should attempt, go about, cause,
procure, command, or willingly, or wittingly, should assent, practice, or
suffer to be attempted, practice in any Act, to put in ure, or to go about, or
to be executed, performed, or to be prosecuted, put in use, or in ure, by
acknowledging of any Note, or Notes, of or for any Fine, or Fines, to be levied
or acknowledged, or by giving of any Warrant, or Warrants, of Attorney, or
Attorneys, for any Recovery or Recoveries, or any Voucher, or Vouchers to be
had, or prosecuted, or by entering into any Warranty, or Warranties, whatsoever,
or by acknowledging of any Warrant for the same, or by any Suit, or bringing of
any Writ or Writs by him, them, or those, or by any of her, or their Assent and
Agreement, or by Assent, by appearance, or otherwise to any Writ or Writs, of
the aforesaid recited premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, or to any
thing in the same, or any of them, or by acknowledging of any Charter, or
Charters, Writing, or Writings, to be enrolled, or by any other Act or Acts,
thing or things, whatsoever in deed, or in Law, whereupon, or by which any
Bargain, Sale, Discontinuance, Allienation, Exchange, or Forfeiture might
follow, or by which, the Estate, Use, or Possession, of the aforesaid recited
premises intailed, or mentioned to be intailed, or any parcel thereof cannot,
ought or could, come, accrue, remain, and descend to be in such manner and
form, as by the same Indenture it is limited, appointed, declared, and
mentioned, and according to the true intent and meaning of the aforesaid
Indenture, That then, and immediately, from and after any such time, and times,
of such procuring, attempting, commanding knowing, assent, practice, promise,
or going about, in manner and form, as above is said, and before such Bargain,
Sale, Discontinuance, Alienation, Exchange, or Forfeiture, had, made,
prosecuted, executed, Committed or done, the said Use and Uses, Estate and
Estates, limited and declared in the Indenture aforesaid, to him or them, who
shall so attempt, cause, procure, command, or voluntarily, or knowingly assent,
practice, or go about, any such Act or Acts, thing or things, to be prosecuted,
or to be executed, or to be performed or done, or put in ure, or shall go about
to be executed, or performed, or put in ure, in form aforesaid declared;
Whereupon, or by which, any Bargain, Sale, Discontinuance, Alienation,
Conveiance, Assurance, Exchange, or Forfeiture, should be had, done, or ensue
thereupon, contrary to the true intent of the Indenture aforesaid, of and in
such, and so much of the aforesaid recited Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments with the Appurtenances, intailed, or mentioned to be intailed, or
intended by the same Indenture, for the which, any of the things or matters
aforesaid, at any time or times, should be attempted, gone about, caused,
procured, commanded, assented, practiced, or the premises, to be executed,
performed, practiced, or put in ure, or gone about to be executed, performed, or
put in ure, contrary to the true intent of the Indenture aforesaid, from time
to time, should cease only as in respect, and having regard to such person, or
persons, so attempting, procuring, causing, commanding, willingly and wittingly
assenting, practicing, permitting, or going about, any Act or Acts, thing or
things, as above it is said, contrary to the effect, and true meaning of the
Indenture aforesaid, in such manner, degree, and condition, as if such person
or persons, Heir or Heirs, so attempting, procuring, causing, commanding,
willingly and wittingly assenting, practicing, permitting, or going about, any
such Act or Acts, thing or things, as above is said, had naturally been dead,
and not otherwise; And then, and in all such cases, the immediate uses of every
of such parcel of the premises, should be immediately to such person, or
persons, by the true intent and meaning of the Indenture aforesaid, If any such
person or persons, should so procure, or procured, attempt, or attempted,
cause, or caused, command, or commanded, should practice, or practiced, should
suffer, or sufferd, go about, or about, should assent, or assented, to or for
any such Act, or Acts, thing, or things, be, or should be naturally dead of
such Estate, and in such like manner and form, and with the Remainder in use
over, and with such like limitations and conditions, as if the said uses had
come, accrued, and been, if the same person, who so should procure, attempt,
cause, command, practice, suffer, go about, or assent, to or for any such Act
or Acts, thing or things to be done, to or immediately before the time of such
procuring, attempting, causing, commanding, practicing, suffering, going about,
or assenting, had been naturally dead, and not otherwise, as by the same
Indenture amongst other things more fully appears. And the said Arthur
further says, That the aforesaid Rowland, of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things in form aforesaid being
seized, One Robert Greenhurst, the 23th. day of January, in the year of the
Reign of the said Lady the Queen, that now is the 36th. by the command,
procurement, and consent of the aforesaid Roll. sued forth out of the Court of
Chanc. of the same Lady the Queen, the said Court of Chancery, then being at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, a certain Writ of the said Lady the
Queen, of Entry Sur Disseisin in the Post, against the aforesaid Rowland
Corbet, ^he Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. among^^
^ther things, by the Name of the Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances,
and 5. Messuages, 500. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 200. Acres of
Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Stokefaston, to the Sheriff of the aforesaid
County of Leicester directed, By which Writ, the said Lady the Queen that now
is, commanded the said then Sheriff of Leicester, That he the said Sheriff the
aforesaid Rowland, that justly, and without delay, herender the said Robert
Greenhurst, the aforesaid Manor of Stokefaston with the Appurtenances, and the
aforesaid 5. Messuages, 500. Acres of Land, 100. Ares of Meadow, 200. Acres of
Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Stokefaston, which then he claimed to be his
Right and Inheritance, and in which the said Rowland had not entry, But after
Disseisin, which Hugh Hunt, thereof unjustly, and without Judgment did to the
aforesaid Robert Greenhurst, within 30. years then last past, as the said
Robert then said; And whereupon, he then complained that the aforesaid Rowland
did him deforce: And if he should not do, etc. and the aforesaid Robert
Greenhurst, should secure him the said Sheriff for the prosecuting of his
claim, Then he summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid Rowland Corbet, that he
be before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, in 8. days of the Purification of the Blessed Mary then
next following, to show why he had not done it, and that the then Sheriff,
should have then there the summons and that Writ, etc. At which 8. days, from
the Purification of the Blessed Mary, before Edmond Anderson Knight, and his
Companions then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here, that is
to say, at Westminster aforesaid, comes as well the aforesaid Robert
Greenhurst, by Thomas Lane his then Attorney, as the aforesaid Rowland in his
proper person; And Willam Turpin Esquire, then Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
returned the Writ aforesaid, to him in form aforesaid directed, in all things
served and executed, that is to say, that the aforesaid Robert Greenhurst,
found Sureties to him the said Sheriff to prosecute his Writ aforesaid, that is
to say, John Do, and Richard Roo, and that the aforesaid Rowland Corbet, was
summoned by John Den, and Richard Fen, upon which, the aforesaid Robert
Greenhurst, by his Attorney aforesaid, in the same Court here, declaring against
the aforesaid Rowland, upon his Writ aforesaid, demanded against the said
Rowland Corbet, the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
the said Writ of Entry specified, as his Right and inheritance, and in which
the said Rowland Corbet had not Entry, but after Disseisin which Hugh Hunt,
thereof unjustly, and without Judgment did to the aforesaid Robert Greenhurst
within 30. years last past, etc. And whereupon he said, That he himself was
seized of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, in the aforesaid Writ of Entry
specified, in his Demesne as of Fee and Right in the time of Peace, in the time
of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking thereof the profits to the value,
etc. And in which, etc. And thereof brought Suit, etc. And the aforesaid
Rowland Corbet, then defended his Right when, etc. And then vouched to warranty
John Howell, who likewise was then present here in Court in his proper person,
and freely the said Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
the said Writ of Entry specified, to him did warrant; And upon this, the said
Robert Greenhurst, then demanded against the said John Howell, then Tenant by
his warranty, the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in the
said Writ of Entry specified in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon he then
said, That he himself was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
in the aforesaid Writ of Entry specified, in his Demesne as of Fee and Right, in
time of Peace, in the time of the Lady the Queen that now is, taking the
Profits thereof to the value, etc. And in which, etc. And thereof then brought
his Suit, etc. And the aforesaid John, Tenant by his Warranty, then defended
his Right when, etc. And then said, That the said Hugh Hunt, did not disseise
the aforesaid Robert Greenhurst, of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, in the aforesaid Writ of Entry specified, as the said Robert, by
his said Writ and Declaration aforesaid above supposes. And of this puts
himself upon the Country, etc. And the aforesaid Robert, then prayed leave to
imparl, etc. And had it, etc. And afterward, the said Robert returned back
hete in the Court of the Bench aforesaid, the self same Term by his Attorney
aforesaid; And the aforesaid John, although he was solemnly called, did not
come back, but in contempt of the Court departed and made default; By which,
then it was granted, that the aforesaid Robert Greenhurst, should recover his
Seisin against the aforesaid Rowland of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, in the aforesaid Writ of Entry specified; And that the said
Rowland Corbet, should have of the Lands of the aforesaid John, to the value,
etc. And that the said John should be in Mercy, etc. And upon this, The
aforesaid Robert demands a Writ of the Lady the Queen, to the Sheriff of the
County aforesaid to be directed, to give him full Seisin of the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in the said Writ of Entry
mentioned, and it is granted to him retornable here, that is to say, at
Westminster aforesaid, from the day of Easter 15. days then next following,
etc. At which day here, that is to say, at Westminster aforesaid, comes the
aforesaid Robert by his Attorney aforesaid, and then the Sheriff of the
aforesaid County of Leicester, That is to say, the aforesaid William Turpin
then here sent, that he by virtue of the Writ to him directed, the 25th. day of
March then last past, gave to the said Robert full seisin of the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in the aforesaid Writ of Entry
specified, as by the Writ he was commanded, as by the Record and Process
thereof in the Court of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here remaining
manifestly appears; By virtue of which Recovery, the aforesaid Robert into
the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. entered and was
thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee; And further, the said Arthur says,
That the Recovery aforesaid, in form aforesaid had, was to the use and behoof
of the said Rowland Corbet, and his Heirs for ever; And that the said Rowland,
the aforesaid time of the Recovery aforesaid, had, or ever after had no issue
of his Body lawfully begotten, After which Recovery, so as before is said had,
in and to the Disinheriting of the said Arthur, of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. And before the aforesaid time in which, that is to
say, the 30th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is the 36th. abovesaid, The said Arthur into the aforesaid Manor of
Stokefaston with the Appurtenancs, whereof, etc. entered and was thereof seized
in his Demesne as of Fee Tail, that is to say, to him and the Heirs Males of his
Body lawfully begotten, By virtue of the Proviso aforesaid, and by force of the
aforesaid Act of transferring uses into possession, the remainder thereof in
form aforesaid expectant, until the aforesaid Rowland, the aforesaid time in
which, etc. The Close aforesaid, in the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. brake, and the grass aforesaid, then and there
growing, with the Cattle aforesaid eat, trod and consumed, against the Peace of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, as he above against him complains. And
this he is ready to aver, Wherefore in as much as the aforesaid Rowland, the
Trespass aforesaid above acknowledges, the said Arthur demands Judgment and
his damages, by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc.
And the aforesaid Rowland says, That the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid
Arthur, in manner and form aforesaid, above by Replication pleaded, is not
sufficient in Law, to maintain the said Arthur to have his Action aforesaid
against him, and that he to that Replication in form aforesaid pleaded, needs
not, nor is bound by the Law to Answer; And this he is ready to aver, Wherefore
for want of a sufficient Replication in this behalf, The said Rowland demands
Judgment, and that the aforesaid Arthur, from having his Action aforesaid
against him be barred, etc. And the aforesaid Arthur, in as much as he
sufficient matter in Law, to have and maintain his Action aforesaid against the
said Rowland, above by Replication has alleged, which matter the aforesaid
Rowland does not deny, nor to the same any ways answers, but that averment
utterly refuses to admit, as at first demands Judgment and his damages, by
occasion of the Trespass aforesaid to him to be adjudged. And because the
Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises before they give
their Judgment thereof, Day is given to the parties aforesaid here until in 8.
days of the Purification of the blessed Mary, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes
as well the said Arthur, as the aforesaid Rowland, by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and
upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, Day is given to
the parties here, until from the day of Faster 15. days, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At
which day comes as well the aforesaid Arthur, as the aforesaid Rowland by
their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, further day is given to the parties here,
until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because
the Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid Arthur, as the aforesaid Rowland, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises before they give their Judement thereof; Day is given to the parties
here in 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the
Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the
aforesaid Arthur, as the aforesaid Rowland, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their Judgment thereof; Day further is given to the
parties here until in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the Justices here thereof not yet; At which day, here comes
as well the said Arthur, as the aforesaid Rowland by their Attorneys aforesaid,
and upon this, the Plea aforesaid being seen, as also the Plea of the aforesaid
Arthur, above by Replication pleaded, and by the Justices here fully
understood; It seems to the same Justices here, that that Plea in manner and
form aforesaid pleaded, is not sufficient in Law to maintain the said Arthur,
to have and maintain his Action aforesaid, against the aforesaid Rowland;
Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid Arthur take nothing by his Writ
aforesaid, but be in Mercy for his false clamor, and that the aforesaid
Rowland thereof go without day, etc. Afterward, that is to say, the 30th. day
of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
42th. The Record and Process of the Plaint aforesaid, with all the same, by
virtue of a Writ of the said Lady the Queen for Correcting Errors, whose date
is at Westminster, the 12th. day of April, in the 42th. year aforesaid, to
Edmond Anderson Knight directed, and the aforesaid Defendant, touching, before
the said Lady the Queen wheresoever, etc. are sent, etc.

TRESPASS.
Easter Term, Anno 21. ELIZABETH, Rot. 58. in the KING'S BENCH, C. 1. part,
Shelleys Case. fol. 88. b.
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say, in Hillary Term Sussex.
last past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came Nicholas Wolf, by
Nicholas Mosley his Attorney; And brought in the Court of the said Lady the
Queen, then there his Bill against Henry Shelley Esquire, of a Plea of
Trespass, and are Pledges of Suit, that is to say, John Do and Ric. Roo, which
Bill follows in these words; that is to say, ss. Sussex ss. Nicholas Wolf
complains of Henry Shelley Esquire, in the Custody of the Marshal of the
Marshalsey of the Lady the Queen, before the Lady the Queen her self being, of
that, That he, the 7th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen that now is of England the 20th. with force and Arms, etc. The
Close and House of him the said Nicholas, called Barhamwick, otherwise
Barhamweek, at Augmering in the County aforesaid, broke and entered, and his
grass there to the value of 100. Marks there late growing, with certain Cattle,
that is to say, Horses, Oxen, Cows, Hoggs and Sheep, fed, trod and consumed,
and other harms to him did, against the Peace of the said Lady the Queen that
now is, to the damage of the said Nicholas, 100. pound, and thereof he brings
Suit, etc And now at this day, that is to say, Wednesday next, after 18. days
of Easter this Term, until which day, the said Henry Shelley had leave to the
Bill aforesaid to imparl, and then to Answer, etc. before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, comes as well the aforesaid Nicholas Wolf, by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the aforesaid Henry Shelley, by Richard Best his Attorney, and the
said Henry does defend the force and injury when, etc. And says, He is not
thereof guilty, And of this puts himself upon the Country, And the said
Nicholas likewise, etc. Therefore a Jury thereof is to come before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, upon Friday next after the Morrow of the Holy Trinity:
And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. Afterward the
Process thereof is continued between the parties aforesaid, of the Plea
aforesaid, by Jurors put thereof between them in respite, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until the day of June, next after 3. Weeks of Easter then
next following, for default of Jurors, etc. At which day, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid,
And the Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, being called likewise come, who to say
the truth of the premises, chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That
long before the time of the Trespass supposed to be done, The Lord Henry, late
King of England the 8th. Father of the Lady the Queen that now is, amongst
other things was seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
the Declaration aforesaid above specified, in his Demesne as of Fee in the Right
of his Crown of England; And the said late King so thereof being seized, before
the time in which, etc. By his Letters Patents with the Great Seal of England
sealed, bearing date at Westminster the 14th. day of May, in the year of his
Reign the 32th. had given, and granted the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things, to Ann Cobham Widow, To have and to hold
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, amongst other things to the
said Ann Cobham and her Assigns, for the term of the life of the said Ann,
rendering therefore to the said late King, his Heirs and Successors, 3. pound,
2. shillings, 8. pence Sterling, at the Court of Augmentation and Revenew of
his Crown, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, yearly to be paid, and
after the decease of the aforesaid Ann, The said late King, by his Letters
Patents, willed and granted, That the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things to one Edward Shelley Esquire, and Johan
his Wife, and to the Heirs of the Bodies of them the said Edward and Johan,
between them lawfully to be begotten; To be holden of the aforesaid late King,
his Heirs and Successors, by the Service of the 20th. part of a Knights Fee;
And yielding therefore yearly to the said late King, his Heirs and Successors,
3. pound, 2. shillings, 8. pence Sterling, at the Court of Augmentation and
Revenew of his Crown aforesaid, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel,
every year to be paid, for all Services and demands whatsoever, to the said
late King his Heirs and Successors, any ways to be rendered, paid, or done.
And if it should happen the said Edward, and Johan his Wife, to dye the without
issue of their bodies lawfully by them begotten, The the said late King willed
and granted by his said Letters Patents, that the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances amongst other things should wholly remain to the right Heirs of
the said Edward Shelley for ever, to be holden of the aforesaid late King, his
Heirs and Successors by the Rent and Services aforesaid for all Services and
demands, as by the said Letters Patents amongst other things more fully
appears: By virtue of which gift and grant, the said Anne Cobham, into the
Tenements aforesaid with their Appurtenances amongst other entered, and was
thereof seized in her Demesne as of Freehold, the remainder thereof in form
aforesaid; And the said Anne so thereof being seized, afterward, and before
the time in which, etc. that is to say the day in the year of the Reign of the
said late King Henry the 8th. At Worminghurst in the said County of Sussex
died. After the death of which Anne, the aforesaid Edward Shelley and Joham his
wife into the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances amongst other things
entered, and were thereof seized in Demesne as of Fee-tail, that is to say, to
them, and the heirs of the body of them the said Edward and Joham, the
remainder unto the said Edward and his Heirs in form aforesaid: And so thereof
being seized the said Edward and Johan had issue of their bodies Henry Shelley
father of the aforesaid Henry Shelley now Defendant his eldest Son, and Richard
Shelley his second Son; which Richard Shelley is yet living, and in full life,
and that the said Edward and Johan being thereof so seized, the said Johan
afterward, and before the time of the Trespass aforesaid died, and the
aforesaid Edward her overlived, and held himself in the Tenements aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee-tail,
the remainder thereof to him and his Heirs for ever, as before is said: And the
said Jurors also say upon their Oaths aforesaid, That the said Henry Father of
the aforesaid now Defendant had issue of his body, lawfully begotten Mary
Shelley his daughter; and that the said Henry Shelley died in the life of the
said Edward his Father: one Anne, then wife of the said Henry being quick and
great with child with the aforesaid Henry Shelley now Defendant in the
Declaration named; And the said Edward Shelley so being thereof seized,
afterward the 25th. day of September in the years of the Reigns of Philip and
Mary late King and Queen the first and second, by his Indenture sealed, with
his Seal bearing date the said day and year first delivered the sixth day of
October then next following, made between him the said Edward Shelley by the
name of Edward Shelley of Worminghurst in the County of Sussex Esquire, of the
one part; and Richard Cooper, and William Marten of the other part, the tenor
of which Indenture follows in these words. ss. This Indenture, made the 25th.
day of September, in the first and second years of the Reigns of our Sovereign
Lord and Lady Philip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England,
France, Neapolis, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of
Spain, and Cicil, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Millain, Burgundy and Brabant,
Earls of Haspuag, Tirol and Flanders; between Edward Shelley of Worminghurst in
the County of Sussex Esquire of the one part, and Richard Cooper, and William
Martin of the other part, Witnesses, That it is fully Covenanted, Granted,
Condescended and Agreed between the said Parties in manner and form following;
That is to say, first the said Edward Shelley for, and upon diverse great and
urgent causes and considerations him moving, does Covenant, Grant, Condescend,
Promise, and Agree for him his Heirs and Executors, to and with the said
Richard Cooper, and William Martin and their Executors by these Presents, That
he the said Edward Shelley shall permit, cause, and suffer the said Richard
Cooper, and William Martin, or the survivor of them, at the proper costs and
charges of him the said Edward Shelley, his Heirs and Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, on this side the Feast of All Saints next ensuing
the date of these presents, to recover against him the said Edward, his Heirs
or Assigns, by Writ of Enter sur Disseisin enle Post, The Manors o^
Worminghurst, Barhamwick, and Fyndon, with the Appurtenances in the said County
of Sussex, and all other his Lands, Tenements, Possessions, and Hereditaments
with the Appurtenances, set, lying and being in Fyndon, Worminghurst,
Barhamwick, Patching, Eastangmering, Westangmering, Wyginholt, Sterington,
Washington, Ashington, Grensted, Ashhurst, Stening, Wilston, Thackham, and
Shopley, in the said County. Except only the Manors of Sillington, and Cobden,
with the Appurtenances, in the said County, and except also, all those Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, called or known by the name of Cobden, Pullets,
Firses, and Palmerishcomb, with all and singular their appurtenances: And the
said Edward Shelley covenanteth, Grants, and Promises by these presents to
and with the said Richard Cooper and William Martin, that at the time of the
said Writ of Entry brought against him of the Premises, and at the time of the
said Recovery had, he the said Edward shall be sole Tenant of the Freehold of
all and singular the said Manors (except before excepted) and that the said
Writ shall be brought and sued against him the said Edward Shelley, of all and
singular the said Manors and Premises (except before excepted) by the name of
the Manor of Worminghurst, Barhamwick and Fyndon with the Appurtenances, and by
the name of 30 Messuages, 10. Tofts, one Water-mill, 2. Culver-houses, 30.
Gardens, 400. Acres of Land, 60. Acres of Meadow, 400. Acres of Pasture, 120.
Acres of Wood, 500. Acres of Firzes and Heath, and eight pound 10 s. of Rent
with the Appurtenances in Fyndon, Worminghurst, Barhamwick, Patching,
Estangmering, Westangmering, Wyginholt, Storington, Washington, Ashington,
Grensted, Ashhurst, Stening, Wilston, Thackham and Shopley, and of the Advowson
of the Church of Worminghurst; and that the said Recovery had of all and
singular the premises, shall be suffered and had, to the uses, profits, behoofs
and intents hereafter specified and declared, and to note other use or intent,
That is to say, Of the said Manor of Fyndon, with the Appurtenances (except
the Park of Fyndon, and except also all those Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments in Fyndon aforesaid, called or known by the name of the Park of
Fyndon) the said Recovery thereof shall stand and be to the only use profit and
behoof of him the said Edward Shelly, and of the Heirs males of his body
lawfully to be begotten; and for lack of such issue, to the use, profit and
behoof of the heirs Males of the body of John Shelley Esquire, sometimes of
Michael Grove deceased, Father of the said Edward, and of the heirs Males of
the body of the said heirs Males, lawfully begotten, and for lack of such Issue
to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said Edward Shelley for ever;
And of the said Manors of Worminghurst, and Barhamwick with the Appurtenances;
and of the said Park of Fyndon, and of all the said Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments called or known by the name of the Park of Fyndon, and of all and
singular other the premises with the Appurtenances comprised, or to be
comprised in the said Writ of Entry, and in the said recovery, it is granted,
condescended and agreed between the said parties, and the said Edward Shelley
covenanteth and grants, That the said Recovery thereof shall be suffered and
had to the only use, profit, and behoof of them the said Edward Shelley, and
his Assigns, for, and during the term of the life natural of the said Edward
Shelley without impeachment of, or for any manner of waste, and after the
decease of the said Edward Shelley then to the only use, profit and behoof of
John Carrel, and John Apsley of Thackham Esquires, and Edward Darkenold of
Slynford in the said County of Sussex Yeoman, and of their Executors and
Assigns for and during the term of 24. years next ensuing, after the decease of
the said Edward Shelley, and after the 24. years ended, then to the only use,
profit and behoof of the Heirs Males of the body of the said Edward Shelley
lawfully begotten; and for lack of such issue, then to the use, profit and
behoof of the Heirs Males of the body of the said John Shelley, sometimes of
Michael Grove, Esquire, deceased, father unto the said Edward Shelley, and to
the Heirs Males of the body of the said Heirs Males last before rehearsed
lawfully begotten, and for lack of such issue, to the use, profit, and behoof
of the right heirs of the said Edward Shelley for ever. And the said Edward
Shelley further Covenanteth, Promises, and grants to and with the said
Richard Cooper, and William Martin, That he the said Edward Shelley shall and
will from time to time, do suffer, procure, make and acknowledge, and cause to
be had, done, suffered, procured and acknowledged, at his own proper costs and
charges, All and every such act and acts, thing and things as shall be devised
or avised by the said Richard Cooper and William Martin or the survivor of
them, as well for the said recovery to be perfectly, surely, and lawfully had
and executed, of all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances by the said Richard Cooper and William
Martin, to the uses, purposes and intents in these Indentures specified
declared, and contained; as also for the further surety, establishment,
execution, perfecting and continuance of all and every the said uses, estates,
and other the premises to be and go according to the Covenants, promises,
Articles, and Agreements in these present Indentures contained: In witness
whereof the parties abovesaid to these present Indentures interchangeably have
set their Seals the day and year first abovesaid. And the Jurors aforesaid
further say upon their Oath, That the Tenements aforesaid in the Indenture
aforesaid excepted, are not the Lands and Tenements in the Declaration
abovesaid specified: And that the aforesaid Edward Shelley so being thereof
seized, The aforesaid Richard Cooper and William Martin the 20th. day of
September in the year of the Reigns of the said late King and Queen the first
and second abovesaid, out of the Court of the said late King and Queen of their
Chancery at Westminster in the County of Middlesex sued forth a Writ of the
said late King and Queen, to the then Sheriff of Sussex directed against the
said Edward Shelley. By which Writ it was commanded the said Sheriff of Sussex,
That he command the aforesaid Edward Shelley that justly and without delay he
render to the aforesaid Richard Cooper and William Martin, the Manors of
Worminghurst, Barhamwick, and Fyndon with the Appurtenances, as also 30.
Messuages, 10. Tofts, one Water-Mill, two Dove houses, thirty Gardens, 400.
Acres of Land, 60. acres of Meadow, 400. acres of Pasture, 120. acres of Wood,
500. acres of Firzes and Heath; and 8 l. 10 s. Rent with the appurtenances in
Fyndon, Wominghurst, Barhamwick, Patching, Estangmering, Westangmering,
Wighenhold, Storington, Ashington, Greensted, Ashurst, Stering, Weston,
Thackham, and Shipley, And also the Advowson of the Church of VVarminghurst,
which he claims to be his Right and Inheritance; And in which the said Edward
had not Entry, But after Disseisin with Hugh Hunt, thereof unjustly and without
Judgment did to the aforesaid Richard and William, within 30. years then last
past, as they said; And whereupon they complained, That the aforesaid Edward,
them Deforced, etc. And unless he should do it; And the aforesaid Richard and
William, him the said Sheriff secured, for the prosecuting of his claim, Then
he summon the aforesaid Edward, that he be before the Justices of them the said
late King and Queen at Westminster, in 8. days of Saint Michael then next
ensuing, to show wherefore he had not done it, and to have there the Summons
and the Writ aforesaid; At which 8. days after Saint Michael, before the
Justices of the said late King and Queen, come the aforesaid Richard Cooper,
and William Martin, by John Bish their Attorney; And the Sheriff, that is to
say, Thomas Saunders Knight, returned that Richard and William, found to the
said Sheriff, Pledges for prosecuting, that is to say, John Do, and Richard
Roo, and that the aforesaid Edward, was summoned by John Den, and Richard Fen.
And the said Edward Shelley, according to his summons aforesaid, to him in form
aforesaid made, by Thomas Ingler his Attorney, came; And upon this, the
aforesaid Richard Cooper, and William Martin, by their Attorney aforesaid,
demanded against the aforesaid Edward Shelley, the Manors of Worminghurst,
Barhamwick, and Fyndon with the Appurtenances, as also 30. Messuages, 10.
Tofts, one Water-Mill, 2. Dove-houses, 30. Gardens, 400. Acres of Land, 60.
Acres of Meadow, 400. Acres of Pasture, 120. Acres of Wood, 500. Acres of Furz
and Heath, and 8. pound, 10. shillings Rent, with the Appurtenances in Fyndon,
Worminghurst, Barhamwick, Patching, Estangmering, Westangmering, Wighenholt,
Sterrington, VVashington, Ashington, Grenested, Asherest, Stening, Wiston,
Thackham, and Shipley, As also the Advowson of the Chutch of VVorminghurst, as
his Right and Inheritance, and which the said Edward had not Entry, but after
Disseisin with Hugh Hunt, unjustly and without Judgment did to the aforesaid
Richard and William, within 30. years then last past, etc. And whereupon they
said, that they themselves were seized of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right, and also
of the Advowson of the Church aforesaid, as of Fee and Right in time of Peace,
in the time of the said late King and Queen, taking the Profits thereof to the
value, etc. And in which, etc. And thereupon brought Suit etc. And the said
Edward, by the aforesaid Thomas Ingler his Attorney, comes and defends his
Right when, etc. And voucheth thereof to warranty Henry Siliborn, who present
here in his proper person in Court, freely the Manors, and Tenements, and Rents
aforesaid, to him does warrant, etc. And upon that, The aforesaid Richard and
William, demanded against him the said Henry, Tenant by his warranty, the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson
aforesaid, in form aforesaid: And whereupon they said, That they themselves
were seized, of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with their
Appurtenances, in their Demesne as of Fee and Right, and also of the Advowson
aforesaid, as of Fee and Right in time of Peace, in the time of the said late
King and Queen, taking thereof the Profits to the value, etc. And in which,
etc. And thereof brought Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Henry, Tenant by his
warranty, defended his Right when, etc. And said, That the aforesaid Hugh did
not disseise the aforesaid Richard and William, of the Manors, Tenements, and
Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances; And also of the Advowson aforesaid, as
the said Richard and William, by their Writ and Declaration above supposed. And
of this put himself upon the Country, etc. And the aforesaid Richard and
William, prayed leave to imparl, and had it, etc. And afterward the said
Richard and William, Returned back hither into Court the same Term, by their
Attorney aforesaid, And the aforesaid Henry, although solemnly called, did not
retorn, but in Contempt of the Court departed and made default. Therefore it
was granted by the Court, in the aforesaid 8. days of Saint Michael, That the
said Richard and William, should recover their seisin against the aforesaid
Edward, of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
And also of the Advowson aforesaid; And that the said Edward should have of the
Lands of the said Henry, to the value, etc. And the said Henry should be in
Mercy, etc. And upon this, immediately the aforesaid Richard Cooper, and William
Martin, in the aforesaid Court, prayed the Writ of the Lord and Lady the Queen,
to the then Sheriff of Sussex to be directed, to give them full seisin of the
Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and also of the
Advowson aforesaid, and the Writ was granted unto them, bearing date the 9th.
day of October, in the years of the Reigns of the aforesaid late King and Queen
Philip and Mary, the first and second abovesaid, Retornable here from the day
of Saint Michael, in one Month then next following; And further the said
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the Tenements aforesaid called,
Rarhamwick, in the Declaration aforesaid specified, and the Tenement aforesaid
called Barhamwick, in the Record of the Recovery aforesaid above mentioned, are
one and the same Tenements, and not others, nor diverse; And that the Recovery
aforesaid was for the intentions in the aforesaid Indenture specified, And that
the said Edward Shelley dyed the 9th. day of October, in the years of the
Reigns of the said late King and Queen the first and second, between the hours
5. and 6. in the Afternoon of the same day; And that afterward, that is to
say, the 19th. day of October then next following, the then Sheriff of the said
County of Sussex, That is to say, Thomas Saunder Knight, by virtue of the Writ
aforesaid, gave full seisin to the aforesaid Richard Cooper, and William
Martin, of the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
and also of the Advowson aforesaid. And further, the aforesaid Jurors say upon
their Oath aforesaid, That one Richard Belchamber, the aforesaid time of the
death of the aforesaid Edward, and at the time of the Recovery aforesaid, and
the Execution thereof, and long before the bringing of the aforesaid Writ of
Entry Sur Disseisin in the Post, was Tenant of the Tenements aforesaid, and
possessed of the Tenements aforesaid in the Declaration aforesaid specified,
for the Term of diverse years then to come, by reason of a Demise thereof made
to the aforesaid Richard Belchamber, by the aforesaid Edward Shelley, long
before the bringing of the aforesaid Writ of Entry Sur Disseisin in the Post.
And afterward, that is to say, the 4th. day of December, in the years of the
Reigns of the aforesaid late King and Queen the first and second, the aforesaid
Henry Shelley, the now Defendant, was born of the said Ann his Mother, late the
Wife of the aforesaid Henry Shelley, Father of the said Henry Defendant, which
said Henry the Father, was the Eldest Son of the aforesaid Edward Shelley. And
that the aforesaid Mary Shelley, was then alive, and in full Life. And that the
aforesaid Richard Shelley afterward, after the Expiration of the said Term of
years, Demised to the aforesaid Richard Belchamber, by the aforesaid Edward
Shelley, as before is said, that is to say, the 9th. day of October, in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is, at Augmering
aforesaid, into the Tenements aforesaid, in the Declaration aforesaid specified
entered, and then and there demised the Tenements aforesaid, in the Declaration
mentioned, to the aforesaid Nicholas Wolf, To have, and to hold to the said
Nicholas, and his Assigns, from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel then
last past, until the end and Term of 21. years, from thence next following
fully to be completed. By virtue of which Demise, The said Nicholas into the
Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed,
until the aforesaid Henry Shelley now Defendant, the aforesaid 7th. day of
November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
20th. aforesaid, with force and Arms, etc. the Close and House aforesaid, brake
and entered, and the Grass aforesaid, with his Cattle, was eaten, trodden, and
consumed, in manner and form, as the aforesaid Nicholas, above against him
declared. And they pray the Advice of the Lady the Queen here, And if upon the
whole matter aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Court of the Lady the Queen
here, That the Entry of the aforesaid Henry, into the Tenements with the
Appurtenances, upon the possession of the said Nicholas, be a good and a lawful
Entry in Law, Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid
Henry is not guilty of the Trespass aforesaid, in manner and form, as the said
Nicholas Wolf now Plaintiff, above in pleading has alleged; And if upon the
whole matter aforesaid, it shall seem to the Court of the Queen here, That the
Entry of the aforesaid Henry Shelley now Defendant, into the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, upon the possession of the aforesaid
Nicholas, be not a good and lawful Entry in Law, Then the Jurors say upon their
Oath, That the aforesaid Henry Shelley now Defendant, is guilty of the Trespass
aforesaid, in manner and form, as the aforesaid Nicholas Wolf above against
him complains. And they assesse the damages of the said Nicholas, by occasion
of that Trespass, above his Costs and Charges by him about his Suit in this
part expended, to 20. shil. and for his costs and charges to 40. shil. And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here, of giving their Judgment thereof
is not yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid until the Morrow of
the Holy Trinity, to ^ear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid;
And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment is
not yet avised of and upon the premises, Day is given to the parties aforesaid,
before the Lady the Queen at WESTMINTER, until Monday next after 8. days of
St. Michael, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here is not yet avised of giving their Judgment of
and upon the premises, Day thereof is given to the parties aforesaid, before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Monday next after 18. days of Saint
Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Wednesday next after 18. days
of Easter, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc. Because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen of giving their Judgment of and upon
the premises is not yet avised, day is given to the parties aforesaid, before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster, upon Friday next after the Morrow of the
Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid. Upon
which seen, and by the Court of the Lady the Queen here, all and singular the
premises fully understood, and mature deliberation thereof being had, For that
it seems to the Court of the said Lady the Queen here upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, That the aforesaid Entry of the aforesaid
Henry Shelley now Defendant, into the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, upon the possession of the said Nicholas, is a good and lawful
Entry in Law; Therefore it is granted, That the aforesaid Nicholas Wolf, take
nothing by his Bill aforesaid, but for his false Clamor be in Mercy, And the
aforesaid Henry Shelley go thereof without day, etc.

TRESPASS.
Michaelmasse Term, Anno 27. and 28. ELIZABETH, in the KING'S BENCH, Rot. 58.
Co. 1. part. Albanyes Case fol. 107.
MEmorandum, That upon Saturday next, after 8. days of Saint Michael Middles.
this Term, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came John Greendon
Gentleman, by William Goldsmith his Attorney, and brought here in the Court of
the said Lady the Queen there, his Bill against Thomas Albany, in the Custody
of the Marshal, etc. of a Plea of Trespass, and are Pledges of Suit, John Do,
and Richard Roo, which Bill follows in these words; ss. Middlesex ss. John
Greendon Gentleman, complains of Thomas Albany, in the Custody of the Marshal
of the Marshalsey, before the Queen her self being, For that, That he the first
day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 27th. with force and Arms, etc. the Close of him the said John, at
Willesdon, broke and entered, and his Grass to the value of 10. pound, there
then growing, with certain Cattle, that is to say, Horses, Oxen, Cows and
Sheep, fed, trod and consumed, and other harms to him did, to the great damage
of the said John, and against the Peace of the Lady the Queen that now is,
whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of 20.
pound, and thereof brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas Albany, comes
by Anthony Felton his Attorney, and defends the force and injury when, and.
And as to the coming with force and arms, and whatsoever is against the Peace
of the said Lady the Queen that now is, says, That he is not thereof guilty,
and of this puts himself upon the Country, And the said John likewise, etc. And
as to the rest of the Trespass supposed to be done, The said Thomas says,
ought not to have or maintain his Action against him, because he says, That
the place in which it is supposed the Trespass aforesaid to be done,
contains, and at the time in which, etc. did contain in it self 20. Acres of
Pasture, with the Appurtenaaces in Willesdon aforesaid; and as to any Trespass
in five Acres, parcel of the said 20. Acres, the said Thomas says, That long
before the time, in which it is supposed the Trespass aforesaid to be done, one
Francis Bunny was seized of the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture, in which, etc.
in his Demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized before the aforesaid time
in which, etc. that is to say, The first day of May in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen that now is, the 20th. by his Deed of Feoffment, here into
Court brought, bearing date the same day and year enfeoffed, one Miles Hilycock
of the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances, in which, etc.
To have, and to hold to the said Miles, and his heirs for ever, to the use of
the said Francis for the term of the life of the said Francis, and after the
death of the said Francis to the use of one David Bunny, and the Heirs of his
body lawfully begotten; and for lack of such issue to the use of Nicholas
Bunny, and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten; and for lack of such issue
to the use of Walter Bunny, and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and
for lack of such issue, to the use of Stephen Bunny, and his heirs for ever; By
virtue of which Feoffment, and by force of certain Act in Parliament of the
Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. at Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, the 4th. day of February, in the year of his Reign the 27th. of
transferring uses in possession, holden, made, The aforesaid Francis was of the
aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances seized in his Demesne as
of Freehold, the remainder thereof after the death of the aforesaid Francis to
the aforesaid David, and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, the remainder
thereof to the aforesaid Nicholas and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten,
the remainder thereof to the aforesaid Walter, and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to the aforesaid Stephen, and his
heirs for ever exptctant: and the aforesaid Francis so of the aforesaid 20.
acres with the appurtenances in form aforesaid being seized, the remainder
thereof to the aforesaid David in form aforesaid expectant: The said Francis
afterward, and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the first day of
May in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 21th.
enfeoffed one Richard Tomson of the aforesaid 20. acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances, To have and to hold to the said Richard his heirs and assigns
for ever. By virtue of which, the said Richard was of the said 20. acres of
Pasture with their appurtenances seized in his Demesne as of Fee, by color
whereof, and for that the said Feoffment was made to the disinheriting of the
said David, the said David in the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Feertail, the
remainder thereof to the aforesaid Nicholas, and the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, the remainder thereof to the said Walter, and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to the aforesaid Stephen, and his
Heirs for ever. And the aforesaid David so thereof being seized, the remainder
thereof in form aforesaid expectant, the said David afterward, and before the
time in which, etc. that is to say, the first day of May in the year of the
Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 22th. at Willesdon aforesaid,
demised the aforesaid five acres of Pasture of the aforesaid 20. acres of
Pasture with the appurtenances, in which, etc. parcel, To one Adam Blunt, to
have and to hold to the said Adam from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel
last past, until the end and term of one year from thence next following and
fully to be complete. By virtue of which the said Adam Blunt into the said five
acres of Pasture with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof possessed, and
the said Adam so being thereof possessed, afterward and before the time in
which enfeoffed the aforesaid Thomas Albany of the said five acres of Pasture
with the appurtenances, To have and to hold to the said Thomas his heirs and
assigns to the proper use and behoof of him the said Thomas his heirs and
assigns for ever. By color of which the said Thomas was of the said five arces
of Pasture with the Appurtenances seized in his Demesne as of Fee: and the
aforesaid John Grendon, claiming the said five acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances, by color of a certain Deed of Demise to him thereof made for
the term of his life by the aforesaid Miles Hitchcock, whereas nothing of the
said five acres of Pasture in the possession of the aforesaid John Grendon by
the said Deed ever passed in the aforesaid five acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances before the time, in which, etc. entered, upon whose possession of
the said John thereof, the said Thomas Albany afterward, that is to say, the
aforesaid time, in which, etc. into the aforesaid five acres of Pasture with
the appurtenances entered, and the grass there then growing, with the cattle
aforesaid fed, trod and consumed, as it was lawful for him to do, and this he
is ready to aver; whereupon he prays judgment, if the aforesaid John Grendon
his action aforesaid against him ought to have or maintain, etc. And as to any
Trespass in the aforesaid 15. acres of Pasture, residue, the said Thomas Albany
says, that the aforesaid John Grendon his Action aforesaid thereof against him
ought not to have or maintain, because he says, That the aforesaid David long
before the Trespass aforesaid, supposed to be done, being seized of the
aforesaid 15. Acres of Pasture in his Demesne as of Fee tail, as before is said,
before the time, in which, etc. that is to say the second day of May in the
year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 22th. aforesaid at
Westminster aforesaid, by a certain Indenture, between the said David and the
aforesaid Thomas Albany made, bearing date the same day and year, and in the
Court of the Chancery of the said Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid
within six months then next following, in due manner of Record enrolled,
according to the form of the Statute in such case made and provided, one part
of which sealed with the Seal of the said David, the said Thomas Albany brings
in Court, bargained and sold to the said Thomas the aforesaid 15. acres of
Pasture, residue, To have and to hold to the said Thomas, and his Heirs for
ever, by color of which Bargain, Sale, and Inrollment, the said Thomas Albany
of the aforesaid 15. acres of Pasture was seized in his Demesne as of Fee; and
the aforesaid John Grendon claiming the said 15. acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances by color of the said Deed of Demise to him thereof made for the
term of his life by the aforesaid Miles Hitchcock, where nothing of the said
15. acres of Pasture in the possession of the said John so passed, into the
said 15. acres of Pastures with the appurtenances before the time in which
entered into the aforesaid 15. acres of Land with the Appurtenances re-entred,
and the grass there then growing with the Cattle aforesaid fed, trod, and
consumed, as it was lawful for him to do; And this he is ready to aver,
whereupon he demands Judgment if the said John Grendon his Action aforesaid
against him ought to have or maintain, etc. And the aforesaid John Grendon,
as well unto the aforesaid first Plea, as to the aforesaid second Plea of the
said Thomas Albany above in Bar pleaded, says, That he for any thing in the
said Pleas before alleged, ought not to be barred from having his Action
against the said Thomas. Because he says, That in the aforesaid Deed of
Feoffment of the aforesaid Francis Bunny in the Bar aforesaid above specified,
It was provided, That if it should happen one Peter Penruddock, to die without
issue Male of his body lawfully begotten, not leaving his wife with Child by
him in the life of the said Francis, That then and from thenceforth it should
be lawful for the said Francis at all times at his will during his natural
life, by his Writing Indented by him the said Francis to that intent made,
sealed and subscribed in the presence of four credible and honest Witnesses at
the least, to alter, change, determine, diminish, or to amplify any use or
uses, limmitations, intentions or purposes, limited, mentioned, or appointed in
and by the aforesaid Deed of Feoffment, made by the aforesaid Francis Bunny as
before is said, or any use or uses of every, of any part or parcel of the
premises, remainder, or remainders, rendition, or renditions, to any person or
persons after the death of the said Francis, as by the said Deed of Feoffment
aforesaid it more fully appears. And that afterward, and before the time in
which, etc. that is to say, The first day of May in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen, that now is, the 23th. at Willesdon aforesaid, the
aforesaid Peter died without issue Male of his body lawfully begotten, and at
the time of his death had not any wife; By which the aforesaid Francis
afterward, and before the time in which etc. that is to say, the 20th. day of
March, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is, the 24th. at
Willesdon aforesaid, By his Indenture between the aforesaid Francis of the one
part, and the aforesaid David Bunny of the other part, sealed, subscribed, and
delivered by him the said Francis to the aforesaid David Bunny in the presence
of John From, William Cuersie, Thomas Waltham, and John Gostles four credible
and honest Witnesses, which Indenture the aforesaid John Grendon, with the seal
of the aforesaid Francis sealed, and with his hand underwritten here in Court
brings, whose date is the same 20th. day of March in the year of the Reign of
the said Lady the Queen that now is, the 24th. abovesaid changed the uses in
the aforesaid Deed of Feoffment above expressed. And by the same Indenture, the
said Francis Covenanted and agreed with the aforesaid David Bunny, that from
thenceforth the said Michael Hitchcock, in the aforesaid Deed of Feoffment
named, and his Heirs and all others who then were, or should be seized of the
aforesaid 21. Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances, in which, etc. should be
seized to the use of the said John Grendon, and his Heirs for ever, as by the
same Indenture more fully appears. By color whereof, and by virtue of the
Statute of transferring of uses in possession made, the aforesaid John Grendon
in the aforesaid 20. Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances, in which, etc.
entered, and was thereof possessed in his Demesne, as of Fee, until the said
Thomas Albany, the day and year abovesaid in the Bill aforesaid above
specified, the Close of the said John Grendon in the aforesaid 20. Acres of
Pasture broke, and his grass to the value, etc. then their growings with his
Cattle aforesaid was fed, trod and consumed, as he above against him
complains; And this he is ready to aver; Whereupon, in as much as the
aforesaid Thomas Albany does acknowledge the Trespass aforesaid in the
aforesaid 20. acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances to be done, The
aforesaid John demands Judgment, and his damages by occasion of the Trespass
aforesaid to be to him adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas Albany says,
That well and true it is, That in the aforesaid Deed of Feoffment of the
aforesaid Francis Bunny, It was Provided, That if it should happen the said
Peter Penruddock, to dye without issue Male of his Body lawfully begotten, not
leaving his Wife with Child of a Son, in the life of the said Francis, that
then, and from thence forth it should be lawful to the aforesaid Francis, at
all times at his will, during his natural life, by his Writing by him the said
Francis, to that intent made, in the presence of 4. Credible and Honest
Witnesses at the least, to alter, change, determine, or amplify, any use or
uses, Limitations, Intentions, or purposes, limited or appointed by the
aforesaid deed of Feoffment, by the said Francis Bunny, as before is said made,
or the use or uses, of any part or parcel of the premises, Remainder or
Remainders, Reversion or Reversions, limited to any person or persons, after
the death of the said Francis; And that afterward, and before the time in
which, etc. the aforesaid Peter dyed without issue Male of his Body lawfully
begotten, the aforesaid Francis, at the time of the death of the aforesaid
Peter, being in full life; But the said Thomas Albany further says, That the
said Francis in the life time of the said Peter Penruddock, that is to say, the
first day of April, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is
the 23th. at Willesdon aforesaid, By a certain Writing indented, made between
him the said Francis of the one part, and the aforesaid Miles Hitchcock, and
Tho. Albany of the other part, one part of which the said Thomas Albany, sealed
with the Seal of the said Francis, here in Court brings, whose date is the same
day and year, renounced, relinquished, and surrendered all manner of such
Liberty, Power, and Authority, which he the said Francis, by force and virtue
of the aforesaid Proviso above recited, or any Liberty in the aforesaid deed of
Feoffment, mentioned and exppressed, of and from the death of the aforesaid
Peter Penruddock, then had or ought to have, of, touching and concerning the
Alteration, Changing, Determination, Diminishing, or Amplifying of such use or
uses, Intentions and Limitations, as are in the said Indenture limited,
expressed, and declared. And further the said Francis, by the said Writing,
Remised, Released, and quit claimed, to the aforesaid Miles Hitchcock, and
Thomas Abany, all the aforesaid Condition, Proviso, Covenant and Agreement
before mentioned, and all and all manner of such Power, Liberty, Authority,
Right, Title or Demand, which the said Franc. after the death of the said
Peter, had or could have, claim or challenge or demand, by force and virtue of
the same Condition and Proviso, in the aforesaid dee^ of Feoffment contained;
So that the said Francis, of and from the death of the aforesaid Peter
Penrudd^^k, should not claim, challenge, demand, exercise, use, or have any
power, liberty, or authority, to alter, change, determine, diminish, or
amplify any use or uses, limitations, or declarations, in the aforesaid deed
of Feoffment contained, expressed, limited or appointed, but that the said
FRANCIS, from the death of the said Peter, of and from all such liberty, power,
and authority, as before is said, should stand and remain, utterly barred,
excluded, and discharged for ever. And further, the said Francis, by that
Writing granted to the aforesaid Miles and Thomas, and their Heirs, that from
thenceforth the aforesaid Condition, Proviso, Covenant and Agreement, and the
aforesaid Power, Liberty, and Authority, should cease and be utterly void, to
all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes; And this he is ready to aver,
Whereupon as at first, he demands Judgment, and that the aforesaid John
Grendon, from having his action aforesaid against him the said Thomas Albany be
barred, etc. And the aforesaid John Grenden says, That the Plea aforesaid, by
the aforesaid Thomas Albany, in form aforesaid above by Rejoinder pleaded, and
the matter in the same contained, is not sufficient in Law, to bar him the said
John Grendon, from having his Action aforesaid against the said Thomas Albany,
To which the said John Grendon needs not, nor is bound any ways by the Law
of the Land to Answer, Wherefore for want of a sufficient Rejoinder in this
Plea, The said John Grendou demands Judgment and his damages, by the
occasion aforesaid to be adjudged unto him, etc. And the aforesaid Thomas
Albany says, That the Plea of him the said Thomas, in manner and form
aforesaid, above by Rejoinder pleaded, and the matter in the same contained, is
good and sufficient in Law, to bar the said John Grendon, from having his
Action aforesaid against him the said Thomas Albany, which Plea, and the matter
in the same contained, the said Thomas is ready to aver, and prove, as the
Court, etc. And because the said John Grendon, to that Plea does not answer,
nor does the same any ways deny. The said Thomas Albany, as at first prays
Judgment, and that the said John Grendon from having his Action aforesaid
against the said Thomas Albany, be barred, etc. And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid, here before the Lady the
Queen at VVestmin. until Thursday next after the Morrow of the Purification of
the Blessed Mary, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here is not yet, etc.

TRESPASS.
Hillary Term, Anno 31o. ELIZABETH, Rot. 65. in the KING'S BENCH, C. 1. part,
Chudleighs Case. fol. 113. b.
MEmorandum, That at another time, That is to say, Hillary Term Devon.
last past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, came William Dillon
Esquire, by Edward Hall his Attorney, And brought here in the Court of the said
Lady the Queen, then there his Bill against John Frayne, in the Custody of the
Marshal of a Plea of Trespass, and are Pledges of Suit, John Do, and Richard
Roo, which Bill follows in these words; ss. William Dillon Esquire,
complains of John Frayne, in the Custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsey of
the Lady the Queen, before the Queen her self being, for that, That he, the
6th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is the 29th. with force and Arms, etc The Close of him the said William,
called Sedan Close, at Tawestock, in the County as aforesaid, brake and entered,
and his grass ^^ere to the value of 5. pound, then and there growing, with his
Cattle, that is to say, with Horses, Oxen, Cows, Hoggs and Sheep, fed, trod and
consumed, continuing the Trespass aforesaid, as to the treading and consuming
the grass from the aforesaid 6. day of November, the year 29th. aforesaid,
until the bringing of this Bill, that is to say, the 8th. day of February, in
the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 30th. diverse days
continuing, and diverse other harms to him did, against the Peace of the said
Lady the Queen that now is, to the damage of the said William 40. Marks, And
thereof he brings Suit, etc. And now at this day, that is to say, Thursday
next after 8. days of Saint Hillary this Term, (until which day the said John
Frayne, had license to imparl to the said Bill, and then to answer,) etc.
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, comes as well the said William
Dillon, by his Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid John Frayne, by John Halstaf
his Attorney, and the said John Frayne defends the force and injury when, etc.
And says that he is not thereof guilty, and of this puts himself upon the
Country, and the said William Dillon likewise, etc. Therefore a Jury was to
come before the Lady the Queen at Westminster upon Tuesday next, after 8.
days of the Purification of the blessed Mary, And who neither, etc. To
Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to the parties
aforesaid here, etc. Afterward the process thereof was continued between the
parties aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid by Jurors put thereof, between them in
respite before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Thursday next after 8.
days of Saint Michael then next following, unless the Justices of the Lady
the Queen to Assizes, in the County aforesaid to be taken assigned, first upon
Monday the 7th. day of July, at the Castle of Exeter in the County aforesaid,
by the form of the Statute, etc. come, for default of Jurors, etc. At which
Thursday next after 8. days of Saint Michael, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid. And the
aforesaid Justices to Assizes, before whom etc. sent their Record before them
had in these words. ss. Afterward the day and place within contained before
Edmond Anderson Knight, Chief Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Bench, and
Thomas Gent, one of the Barons of the Exchechequer of the Lady the Queen,
Justices of the said Lady the Queen to Assizes, in the County of Devonshire,
assigned by the form of the Statute, etc. came as well the within named
William Dillon, by Morris Evans his Attorney, as the aforesaid John Frayne, by
Thomas Felton his Attorney; And the Jurors of the Jury, whereof within mention
is made, being called, some of them, that is to say, John Forse, of Crediton
Gentleman, John Saltern, of Huslow, Nicholas Poynes, of Thornbury, and Robert
Gunter, of Lapford, come and were sworn in the Jury aforesaid; And because the
Residue of the Jurors of that Jury did not appear, Therefore others of the
standers by, by the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, thereto chosen at the
request of the aforesaid William Dillon, and by the command of the Justices
aforesaid were new put to, whose names to the Panel within written are filed,
according to the form of the Statute in that case late made and provided; And
the Jurors so of new put to, that is to say, Anthony Moring, Robert Luxton,
Robert Letheren, Edward VVebber, Thomas Parmiter, Ralph Mare, William Stowell,
and Vincent Spark, likewise being called come, who to say the truth within
contained, with the other Jurors within first impannelled, and sworn to say,
chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, That before the within written
time in which it is supposed, the Trespass within written was done, that is to
say, the 26th. day of April, in the years of the Reigns of the Lord Philip, and
the Lady Mary, late King and Queen of England the 3d. and the fourth, and
before, One Richard Chudleigh, Knight, was seized of the Manor of Hescot with
the Appurtenances in the County aforesaid, whereof the Close within written
with the appurtenances in which it is supposed the Trespass within written to
be done is, and within the time in which, etc. as also time, whereof the memory
of men is not to the contrary were parcel in his Demesne as of Fee; and that the
aforesaid Richard Chudleigh before the aforesaid 26. day of April, in the years
of the Reigns of the aforesaid late King and Queen, Philip and Mary, the third
and fourth abovesaid, had issue of his body lawfully begotten, Christopher
Chudleigh his eldest Son, Thomas Chudleigh his second Son, Oliver Chudleigh his
third Son, and Nicholas Chudleigh his fourth Son: And the said Richard of the
Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. in form aforesaid seized,
the said Richard Chudleigh before the within written time in which, etc. that
is to say, the aforesaid 26th. day of April, in the years of the Reign of the
aforesaid late King and Queen Philip and Mary the third and fourth abovesaid,
by his Indenture Quadripartite sealed with the Seal of the said Richard
Chudleigh, and to the Jurors showed in evidence, whose date is the same day and
year of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances thereof (amongst other
things) en^eoffed, John Sentleger, Knight, Giles Strangeways, Knight, John
VVadham, Esquire, John Gilbert Esquire, Thomas Carew, Esquire, Richard
Bampfield, Esquire, John Ridgeway, Esquire, Robert Fulfood, Esquire, Thomas
Williams, John Eveleigh, Gent. and William Hole, Gent. To have and to hold the
aforesaid Manor with the Appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other things, to
the same John Saintleger, Giles Strangewayes, John Wadham, John Gilbert, Thomas
Carew, Richard ^ampfield, John Ridgeway, Robert Fulford, Thomas Williams, John
Eveleigh and William Hole their Heirs and Assigns for ever, only to such uses
and intents, as in the said Indenture Quadripartite are declared and specified,
That is to say, To the use and behoof of the said Richard Chudleigh and his
heirs of the body of Mary then the wife of the aforesaid Thomas Carew lawfully
to be begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use of the aforesaid
Richard Chudleigh, and his heirs of the body of Elizabeth, then the wife of the
said Rich. Bampfield lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue, to
the use of the heirs of the said Rich. Chudleigh, on the body of Elenor then
the wife of the said Thomas William* lawfully to be begotten, and for default
of such issue, to the use of the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh, and his heirs on
the body of Johan, then the wife of the said John Eveleigh lawfully to be
begotten, and for default of such issue, to the use of the aforesaid Richa^d
Chudleigh, and his heirs on the body of Johann, then the wife of the aforesaid
Giles Strangewayes lawfully to be begotten; and for default o^ such issue, to
the use of the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh, and his heirs on the body of
Lawrence^ then the wife of the aforesaid Robert Fulford, lawfully to be
begotten; and if it should happen the said Richard Chudleigh should die without
issue on the bodies of the said Mary, Elizabeth, Emleme, Johan, Johan, and
Laurencea lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid John Sentleger, and other his
Feoffees, and their Heirs should be seized, of and in the Manor aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things, for and during the term
of 10. years after the death of him the said Richard Chudleigh then next
following to the use and performance of the last Will of the aforesaid Richard
Chudleigh; And after the aforesaid term of 10. ^ears completed and ended, then
the aforesaid John Sentleger, Giles Strangewayes, John VVadham, John Gilbert,
Thomas Carew, Richard Bampfield, John Ridgway, Robert Fulford, Thomas
Williams, John Eveleigh, and William Hole, their Heirs and assigns should
stand and be seized of and in the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances
whereof, etc. amongst other things, to the use and behoof of the aforesaid John
Sentleger, Giles Strangewayes, John ^^adham, John Gilbert, Thomas Carew,
Richard Bampfield, John Ridgeway, Robert Fulford, Thomas Williams, John
Eveleigh, and William Hole their Heirs and Assigns for ever, for and during the
natural life of the before- Christopher Chudleigh his eldest Son, and after the
death of the said Christopher his Son, the aforesaid Feoffees, their Heirs and
Assigns should stand and be seized of and in the Manor aforesaid with the
appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other things to the use and behoof of the
first issue Male of the body of the aforesaid Christopher lawfully begotten,
and the heirs of the body of such first issue, lawfully to be begotten; and for
default of such issue, to the use o^ the second issue Male, by the said
Christopher lawfully to be begotten; and the heirs of the body of such second
issue Male, lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, to the use of the
third issue Male, by the aforesaid Christopher lawfully to be begotten, and the
heirs of the body of such third issue Male lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such issue to the use o^ the fourth issue Male, and the heirs of the
body of such fourth issue male, by the aforesaid Christopher lawfully to be
begotten on the Heirs of the body of such fourth Issue Male lawfully to be
begotten, and for default of such issue, to the use of the fifth issue Male by
the aforesaid Christopher lawfully to be begotten, and the heirs of the body of
the aforesaid 5th. issue male lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such
Issue, to the use of the 6th. Issue male by the aforesaid Christopher Lawfully
to be begotten, and the Heirs of the body of the aforesaid 6th. Issue male
Lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Issue, to the use of the 7th.
Issue male by the aforesaid Christopher Chudleigh Lawfully to be begotten, and
the Heirs of the Body of the aforesaid 7th. Issue male Lawfully to be begotten,
and for default of such Issue, to the use of the 8th. Issue male by the
aforesaid Christopher Chudley, Lawfully to be begotten, and the Heirs of the
body of the aforesaid 8th. Issue male Lawfully to be begotten, And for default
of such Issue, to the use of the 9th. Issue male, by the aforesaid Christopher
Lawfully to be begotten, and the Heirs of the Body of the aforesaid 9th. Issue
male Lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the
10th. Issue male Lawfally to be begotten, and the Heirs of the body of the
aforesaid 10th. Issue male Lawfully to be begotten, And if it should happen the
aforesaid Christopher to die without Issue male of his body Lawfully to be
begotten, then the aforesaid Feoffees and every of them their Heirs and Assigns
should stand and be seized of and in the Manor aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other things, to the use and behoof of the
aforesaid Thomas Chudleigh another Son of the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh, and
the Heirs of his body Lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue to
the use and behoof of the aforesaid Oliver Chudleigh, another Son of the
aforesaid Richard Chudleigh, and the Heirs of his body Lawfully to be begotten,
and for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the
said Richard Chudleigh Knight for ever, as by the said Indenture Quadrupartite
amongst other things more fully it appears, By color of which Feofment, and
by force of a certain Act of Parliament of the Lord Henry late King of England
the 8th. the 4th. day of February in the 27th. year of his Reign at Westminster
in the County of Middlesex of transferring uses in possession there holden,
made and provided, the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh was seized of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances whereof, amongst otherthings as the Law
requires. And the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh of the Manor aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances whereof, etc. so being seited, the same Richard before the within
written time in which, etc. that is so say, the 17th. day of November, in the
years of the Reigns of the aforesaid late King and Queen Philip and Mary, the
5th. and 6th. dyed, and that neither at the time of the death of him the said
Richard Chudleigh, and before the day of the bringing of the Bill within
written, there was any Heir of the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh of the bodies of
any the aforesaid Mary, Elizabeth, Emlem, Johan, and Lawrence, Lawfally
begotten: And that after the death of the aforesaid Richard Chudleigh, and
before the time in which the aforasaid John Sentleger, Giles Strangewaies, John
Wadham, John Gilbert, Themas Carew, Richard Bampfield, John Bridgway, Robert
Fulford, Thomas Williams, John Eveleigh, and William Hole, into the Manors
aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. amongst other things entered, and
were thereof possessed or seized, as upon the whole matter aforesaid, the Law
requires; and so thereof being possessed, or seized, Christopher Chudleigh,
after the death of the aforesaid Richard before the within written time in
which, etc. took to wife Christian Sracheley; and that the aforesaid John
Sentleger, Giles Strangewaies, John Wadham, John Gilbert, Thomas Carew, Richard
Bampfield, John Ridgeway, Robert Falford, Thomas Williams, John (...), and
William Hole, of the aforesaid Manor with the Appurtenances whereof etc.
amongst other things in form aforesaid possessed or being sei^^^, before the
within written time in which, etc. that is to say, The ^ath. day of August, in
the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that n^ was the first, the said
Oliver Chudleigh, then living, and being in full life, by their writing sealed
with their Seals, and to the Jurors aforesaid showed in Evidence, whose date is
the same day and year, freely and without any Consideration amongst other
things, enfeoffed the aforesaid Christopher Chudle^gh, then and before having
notice of the making of the aforesaid Q^^d^up^tite Indenture and of the uses in
the same contained, To have, and to hold the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. amongst other things, To the said Christopher, his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only ^^ and behoof of the said Christopher,
his Heirs and Assigns for ever. By virtue of w^^ Feoffment, The said
Christopher Chudleigh, was seized of the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, amongst other things, as the Law requires. And so
thereof being seized. The said Christopher Chudleigh, before the within written
time in which, etc. that is to say, the 20th. day of September, in the year of
the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the third, had issue of his Body
lawfully begotten, one Stretchl^y Chudley his first Son; And that the said
Christopher Chudleigh, afterward and before the time in which, etc. that is to
say, the 30th. day of May in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that
now is, had another issue of his Body lawfully begotten, that is to say, one
John Chudleigh his second Son; And the aforesaid Christo. Chudleigh, of the
Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form aforesaid being
seized, The said Christopher afterward, and before the within written time in
which, etc. that is to say, the first day of July, in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen that now is the 6th. by his writing indented sealed with his
seal, and to the Jurors aforesaid showed in Evidence, whose date is the said
first day of July, in the 6th, year abovesaid, And afterward, that is to say,
the ^th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen
that now is the 6th. abovesaid, before Robert Dennis Knight, one of the (...)
of the said Lady the Queen, for the County aforesaid, and George (...) Esquire,
Clerk of the Peace of the said County to be kept assigned, ^s the deed of the
said Christopher acknowleledged, and according to the form of the Statute in
such such case made and provided enrolled, in consideration of 220. pound, to
him by one John Chichester Knight, before then paid, bargained, and sold, to
the said John Chichester, the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof,
etc. To have, and to hold to the said John Chichester, his Heirs and Assigns
forever, to the only use and behoof of the said John Chichester his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And that the aforesaid Christopher Chudleigh moreover, before
the within written time in which, etc. that is to say, the 6th. day of July, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 6th.
abovesaid, by his deed sealed with his Seal, and to the Jurors aforesaid showed
in Evidence, whose date is the said 6th. day of July aforesaid, of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. Enfeoffed the aforesaid John
Chichester, To have, and to hold the said Manor with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. To the said John Chichester, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to
the only use and behoof of the said John Chichester, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever. And by the said deed aforesaid, The said Christopher granted for him and
his Heirs, That he and his Heirs, the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. to the aforesaid John Christopher, his Heirs and Assigns, to the
only use and behoo^ of the said John Christopher his Heirs and Assigns, against
all Men would warrant and defend by the said deed, as by the said deed more
fully appears. By virtue of which Fefeoffment, and of which aforesaid Bargain
and Sale, the aforesaid John Chichester, was seized of the Manor aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. as the Law requires; And so living thereof
seized, The aforesaid Christopher Chudleigh aftewards, and before the within
written time in which, etc. that is to say, the first day of October, in the
year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 12th. dyed, being the
aforesaid Stretchly Chudleigh, Eldest Son and Heir of the said Christopher, and
John Chudleigh his second Son. And afterward, and before the time in which,
etc. that is to say, the 7th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the
said ^ady the Queen that now is the 13th. The said Stretchley Chudleigh, dyed
without issue of his Body begotten, the said John Chudleigh, Brother and Heir
of the said Strechley then living, and in full life being, that is to say, at
Tawstock aforesaid, in the County aforesaid; And that the aforesaid John
Chudleigh, after the death of the aforesaid Stretchley his Brother, was and yet
is Heir of the aforesaid Christopher Chudleigh his Father. And the said John
Chudleigh, of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in form
aforesaid being seized, The said John Chichester, before the within written
time in which, etc. that is to say, the 6th. day of September, in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 7th. of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. enfeoffed one Philip Chichester
Gentleman, To have, and to hold the said Manor with the Appurtenances, whereof,
etc. to the said Philip Chichester, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only
use of him the said Philip Chichester, his Heirs and Assigns for ever. By
virtue of which Feoffment, the said Philip Chichester, was seized of the Manor
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. as the Law requires; And that
the Close aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. is, and the within
written time in which, etc. as also from the whole time aforesaid, was
customary Land of the Manor aforesaid, and demised, and demisable by Copy of
Court Roll, of the Manor aforesaid, by the Lord or his Steward, of the Manor
aforesaid for the time being, to any person or persons, who were willing to
take the same for Term of Life or Lives, at the will of the Lord, according to
the Custom of the Manor aforesaid; And the aforesaid PHILIP Chichester, of the
Manor aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. as the Law requires,
etc. Being seized before the time within which, etc. That is to say, the 8th.
day of October, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is
the 15th. At the Court of his Manor aforesaid, then holden at the said Manor of
Hescot aforesaid, of his own delivery the Close aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, amongst other things to the aforesaid John Frayne, granted for
the Term of his Life, at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the
Manor aforesaid; By virtue of which grant, the said John Frayne, before the
time in which, etc. entered, and was thereof seized, as the Law requires. etc.
And so thereof being seized, the said John Chudley, being Heir as before is
said, of the aforesaid Christopher Chudleigh, before the within written time in
which, etc. That is to say, the 11th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of
the Lady the Queen that now is the 28th. in the Manor aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. in and upon the possession of the aforesaid Philip
Chichester, thereof, entered and was thereof possessed, as the Law requires,
etc: And so being possessed, before the within written time in which, etc. that
is to say, the 11th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is, Of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof
enfeoffed the aforesaid William Dillon, To have, and to hold that Manor with
the Appurtenances whereof to the said William Dillon, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever. By virtue of which Feoffment, before the time in which, etc. The said
William Dillon, into the Close aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in which, etc.
in and upon the possession of the said John Frayne thereof entered, and him the
said John Frayne, from his possession thereof expelled and amoved, and was
thereof seized as the Law requires, until the aforesaid John Frayne, the
within written 16th. day of November, into the Close within written with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. in and upon the possession of the said William
Dillon thereof entered, and the Grass then and there growing, with the Gattel
within written, fed, trod and consumed, and continued the same from the
aforesaid 16th. day of November, in the 29th. year aforesaid, until the within
written 8th. day of February, the 30th. year within written; But whether upon
the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, the aforesaid John Frayne,
be guilty of the Trespass within written or not, the Jurors aforesaid are
ignorant; And thereupon pray the Advice and Discretion of the Court, etc. And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the Justices here, That the aforesaid Entry, of the aforesaid John Frayne, into
the Close within written with the Appurtenances, in and upon the possession of
the aforesaid William Dillon, thereof be not a good and lawful Entry in Law,
Then the said Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Frayne, is
guilty of the Trespass within written, as the aforesaid William Dillon above
against him complains. And then they assesse the Damages of the said
William, by occasion of that Trespass, above his costs and charges by him
about his Suit in this part expended, to 4. pence, And for his costs and
charges to 20. shillings. And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form
aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices and Court here, That the
aforesaid Entry of the aforesaid John ^rayne, into the Close within written
with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. in and upon the possession of the
aforesaid William Dillon, thereof be a good and lawful Entry in Law, Then the
said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Frayne is
not guilty of the Trespass within written, as the aforesaid John Frayne within
has alleged. And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet a vised, Day is given to the
parties aforesaid, in state as now before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Friday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment of
and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid in state as
now, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Monday next after one
Month of Easter, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid here in state, as now, before the Lady the Queen
at Westminster, until Friday next after the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear
their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here of their Judgment thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, day is given to the
parties aforesaid in state as now, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Monday next after three Weeks of Saint Michael, to hear their judgment
of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof
not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, is not
yet avised, Day thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid in state as
now before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Saturday next after 8.
days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises,
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties by their Attorneys
aforesaid; And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof is further
given to the parties in state as now before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Saturday next afer 15. days of Easter, to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day is given to the parties in state, as now, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Saturday next after 8. days of the Holy Trinity,
to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid; And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen hereof giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the
parties aforesaid in state as now before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Thursday in the Feast of St. Martin, to hear their Judgment of and upon
the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen thereof not yet, etc. At
which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here
of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, further
day is given to the parties aforesaid in state, as now before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Tuesday next after the Morrow of the Purification
of the blessed Mary, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because
the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Further day is
given to the parties aforesaid in state as now, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, until Wednesday next after 15. days of Easter, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof is further given to the
parties aforesaid in state, as now, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster,
until Friday next after the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment of and upon
the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. At which day before the Lady the Q. at West. come the parties aforesaid by
their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day is given
to the parties aforesaid in state, as now, before the Lady the Que. at
Westminster, until Monday next after 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their
Judgment thereof because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. Before which day, the Plea aforesaid was adjorned, by the Writ of the said
Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen, until from the
day of Saint Michael, in one Month then next following, wheresoever, etc. At
which day the Plea aforesaid was further adjorned by another Writ of the said
Lady the Queen of Common Adjornment, before the said Lady the Queen, until the
Morrow of All Souls then next following, At the Castle of Hertford, At which
day, before the Lady the Queen at the Castle of Hertford, come the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the
Queen of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day
thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid in state as now, before the
Lady the Queen, at the Castle of Hertford, until Tuesday next after 8. days of
Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. Before which day, the
Plea aforesaid was adjorned, by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common
Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen, in 8. days of Saint Hillary at
Westminster, At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, further day is given to the parties in state as now, before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Wednesday next, after 15. days of Easter,
to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, further day is given to the parties
aforesaid in state as now, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until
Friday next after the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, further day is given to the parties aforesaid in state as now,
before the Lady the Queen at VVestminstrr, until Tuesday next after 8. days of
Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. Before which day, The
Plea aforesaid was adjorned by the Writ of the Lady the Queen of Common
Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen, until the day from Saint Michael, in one
Month then next following, At the Town of Saint Alban, in the County of
Hertford, At which day the Plea aforesaid by another Writ of the said Lady the
Queen of Common Adjornment, was adjorned before the said Lady the Queen, until
the Morrow of All Souls then next following, at the aforesaid Town of St.
Alban, At which day before the Lady the Q. at the aforesaid Town of St. Alban,
come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court
of the Lady the Queen here, of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises
is not avised, further day is given to the parties aforesaid in state as now,
before the Lady the Queen, at the aforesaid Town of Saint Alban, until
Wednesday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment of upon
and the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. Before which day, the Plea aforesaid was adjorned, by another Writ of
Common Adjornment, before the Lady the Queen, from the aforesaid Town of Saint
Alban, until the said 8. days of Saint Hillary, at Westminster aforesaid, At
which day before the Lady the Queen at VVestmin. come the parties aforesaid, by
their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, further day
thereof is given to the parties aforesaid in state as now, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Wednesday next after 15. days of Easter, to hear
their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day further is given to the parties
aforesaid in state as now, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until
Friday next after the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westmin. come the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the
Que. here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised,
further day is given to the parties aforesaid in state as now, before the said
Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Tuesday next after 8. days of Saint
Michael, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of
the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid,
And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of
and upon the premises is not yet avised, day thereof is further given to the
parties aforesaid before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Thursday
next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof, etc.
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid by their
Attorneys aforesaid. Upon which, all and singular the premises being seen, and
by the Court of the Lady the Queen here well understood, and diligently looked
into, and mature deliberation being thereof had, because it seems to the
Court of the Lady the Queen that now is here, That the aforesaid Entry of the
aforesaid John Frayne into the Close within written, with the Appurtenances in
which, etc. in and upon the possession of the aforesaid William Dillon thereof
is a good and lawful Entry: It is granted, That the aforesaid William Dillon
take nothing by his Bill aforesaid, but for his false clamor be in mercy, etc.
And the aforesaid John Frayne, thereof go without day, etc.

TRESPASS.
Trinity Term, Anno 24. ELIZABETH. Rot. 928. in the COMMON PLEAS, Co. 2. part.
Thoroughgoods Case, Fol. 5. b.
WIlliam Cole late of Great Paringdon in the County aforesaid, Gent. Essex.
was attached to answer to William Thoroughgood of a Plea, wherefore with force
and arms, the Close and House of him the said William Thoroughgood at great
Paringdon he brake, and his grass there to the value of 20. l. growing, with
certain cattle trod and consumed, and other harms to him did to the grievous
damage of him the said William Thoroughgood, and against the Peace of the Lady
the Queen that now is, etc. And whereupon, The said William Thoroughgood by
William Aylesbury Attorney, complains, That the aforesaid William Cole the
12th. day of October, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now
is the 23. with force and arms, the Close and House of him the said William
Thoroughgood at great Paringdon aforesaid brake, and his grass to the value,
etc. there late growing, with certain cattle, that is to say, Horses, Cows,
Hogs and Sheep, fed, trod and consumed, the Trespass aforesaid as to the
feeding, treading and consuming of the grass aforesaid, from the aforesaid
12th. day of October in the 23th. year abovesaid, until the day of the bringing
of this Writ Original of him the said William Thoroughgood, that is to say, the
6th. day of November then next following, diverse days and terms continuing,
and other harms, etc. To the grievous damage, etc. and against the Peace, etc.
and whereupon he says, he is the worse, and has damage to the value of 40. l.
and thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid William Cole by Thomas
Reynolds his Attorney comes and defends the force and injury when, etc. And
as to the coming with force and arms, he says, That he is not guilty thereof;
and of this puts himself upon the Country; and the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood likewise. And as to the rest of the Trespass aforesaid, above
supposed to be done, The said William Cole says, That the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, ought not to have his Action against him, because he says, That
the Close and House aforesaid, as also the places in which it is supposed the
Trespass aforesaid to be done, are, and at the time of the Trespass aforesaid,
above supposed to be done, were one Message and two Acres of Meadow with the
Appurtenances called Nichols Tenement in great Paringdon aforesaid, which
Tenements, with the apturtenances are, and the aforesaid time of the Trespass
aforesaid, above-supposed to be done, were the soil and Freehold of him the
said William Cole; for which, the aforesaid William the aforesaid time in
which, etc. the Close and House aforesaid as his Close, and soil, and Freehold
of him the said William, into the same Message, and two Acres of Meadow with
the appurtenances brake and the grass of him the said William Cole there of his
own there growing with his Cattle did feed, tread and consume as it was lawful
for him to do; And this he is ready to aver, whereupon he demands Judgeme^t,
whether that the aforesaid Will. Thoroughgood his action aforesaid against him,
ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid William Thoroughgood says, That he for
any thing before alleged from having his Action aforesaid ought not to be
barred, because he says, That the Close and house, and also the places in
which the Trespass aforesaid, whereof he above makes complaint, was, are, and
at the time of the Trespass aforesaid done, were one Message called Burrowes,
8. Acres of Land, called the great West field, four Acres of Land called
Diggins Holme, and six Acres of Land called Grove field with the Appurtenances
in great Paringdon aforesaid, others then the aforesaid Message, and two Acres
of Meadow with the Appurtenances called Nichols Tenements in the Bar of the
aforesaid William Cole above specified, and this he is ready to aver, wherefore
in as much as the said William Cole to the Trespass aforesaid in the Tenements
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances new assigned over, does not Answer; the
aforesaid William Thoroughgood demands Judgment and his damages by occasion
of that Trespass to be to him adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid William Cole, as
to any Trespass in the aforesaid Tenements now assigned, supposed to be done,
he says, That the aforesaid William Thoroughgood his action against him ought
not to have, because he says, That long before the aforesaid time of the
Trespass aforesaid above supposed to be done, That the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, was seized of the said Tenements with the Appurtenances new
assigned in his Demesne as of Fee; and so thereof being sized, before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. A Fine was Levied in the Court of the Lady the
Queen, that now is here, that is to say, at Westminster in 8. days of St.
Hillary in the 10th. year of her Reign, before James Dyer, Richard Weston, John
Welsh and Richard Harper, then Justices, and afterward from the day of Easter
in 14. days then next following, granted, and recorded, before the same
Justices, and other the Queens faithful peuple then and there present, between
William Chicken and Elizabeth his wife Plaintiffs, and the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood and Agnes his wife Defendants, of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances amongst other things, by the names of one Message, one Garden,
45. Acres of Land, 5. Acres of Meadow, 10. Acres of Pasture, and four Acres of
Wood with the Appurtenances in great Paringdon and Avydon, whereof a Plea of
Covenant was sued between them in the said Court here, That is to say, that the
aforesaid Will. Thoroughood and Agnes his wife acknowledged the Tenements
aforesaid to be the Right of the said William Chicken, as those which the said
William and Elizabeth had of the gift of the aforesaid William Thoroughgood
and Agnes, and them remised and quit claimed from them the said William and
Agnes, and their Heirs to the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth, and the
Heirs of the said William forever, which Fine in form aforesaid levied and
had, was levied, to the use of the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth, and
the Heirs of the said William forever. By virtue of which Fine the aforesaid
William Chicken and Elizabeth were seized of the Tenements aforesaid, that is
to say, The said William Chicken in his Demesne as of Fee, and the aforesaid
Elizabeth in her Demesne as of Freehold for the term of her life. And the said
William and Elizabeth so thereof being seized, before the aforesaid time in
which, etc. Of the said Tenements with the Appurtenances enfeoffed one Edward
Turner Esauire, To have to him and his Heirs for ever. By virtue of which
Feoffment the aforesaid Edward was of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances seized in his Demesne of Fee, By which, the said William Cole as
servant to the said Edward, and by his Commandment, the aforesaid tim in which,
etc. the Close and House aforesaid, as the Close and House, soil and Freehold
of the said Edward his own, brake, and the grass aforesaid, as the proper grass
of him the said Edward in the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, new
assigned then growing, with his Cattle aforesaid, fed, trod, and consumed, as
it was lawful for him to do: And this he is ready to aver; whereupon, he
demands Judgment, if the aforesaid William Thoroughgood his Action aforesaid
against him ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, as to
the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid William Cole to the Trespass aforesaid in
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances of new Assignment done above in
Bar thereof pleaded, says, That he for any thing in the said Plea before
alleges from the having his action aforesaid, ought not to be barred: Because
he says, That the aforesaid Fine was had and levied to the use and behoof of
the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth, and the heirs of the said
William, upon the Condition that the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth,
and the Heirs and Assigns of the said William Chicken, well and truly should
deliver and pay to the said William Thoroughgood and Agnes and their Executors
and Assigns, 8 l. of good and lawful money of England, and four Quarters of
Malt at the Mansion house called Barrowes in Paringdon aforesaid yearly during
the natural lives of them the said William Thoroughgood and Agnes, and the
longer liver of them, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Feast
of the Anunciation of the blessed Mary the Virgin by equal portions; and also
upon condition, That the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth, and their
Heirs or Assigns should pay to the said William Thoroughgood and Agnes, their
Executors, Administrators, or assigns, 76. l. 13. s. and 4. d. of like lawful
money of England, at the aforesaid Mansion house called Barrows, in form
following, that is to say, at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel in the
year of our Lord God, 1568. three pound, six shillings eight pence; and so at
the Feast of St. Michael the Archangels at the Mansion House aforesaid three
pound six shillings eight pence yearly, until the aforesaid sum of seventy
six pound 13. s. and 4. d. should be fully satisfied and paid; and for the not
payment doing and performing of the aforesaid Conditions, according to the true
intents and meanings of the same Condition, the aforesaid Fine, and other the
conveyance aforesaid to be made, were to the use and behoof of them the said
William Thoroughgood and Agnes as in their former estate, by color of which
Fine, the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth were seized of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Apurtenances of new assigned amongst other things, that is
to say, the aforesaid William in his Demesne as of Fee, and the aforesaid
Elizabeth in her Demesne as of Freehold for term of her life, upon the
Conditions aforesaid; And further the said William Thoroughgood, by
Protestation, that the said William Chicken and Elizabeth did not pay, do or
perform any thing according to the form and effect of the Conditions aforesaid,
For Plea says, That the aforesaid William Chicken and Elizabeth, or either of
them, did not pay, or either of them pay to the said William Thoroughgood and
Agnes, or either of them 3. l. 6s. 8d. of good and lawful money of England, at
the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, on the year of the Reign of the said
Lady the Queen, that now is the 18th. Which to them at the said Feast of St.
Michael, they ought to have paid according to the form and effect of the
aforesaid first Condition, by which, the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, by
virtue of the Fine aforesaid, and by force of a certain Act in Parliament of
the Lord Henry late King of England, the 8th. at Westminster, the fourth day
of February in the year of his Reign the 27th. holden, made and provided of
transferring uses in possession, was seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with
the Appurtenances of new assigned amongst other things in his Demesne as of Fee;
and in the Tenements aforesaid of new assigned, entered, and the aforesaid
William Cole, the day and year in the Declaration aforesaid above specified,
with force and Arms, etc. the Close and House of him the said William
Thoroughgood in the aforesaid Tenements of new assigned, broke, and the grass
aforesaid there then growing with his cattle aforesaid was fed, trod and
consumed, as he the said William against him complains; and this he is ready
to aver: Wherefore, in as much as the said William Cole, does acknowledge the
Trespass aforesaid in the same Tenements of new assigned, done as abovesaid,
The said William Thoroughgood demands Judgment and his damages, by the
occasion of that Trespass to be to him adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid William
Cole by Protestation, That the Fine aforesad was not levied to the use of the
said William Chicken and Elizabeth upon the Conditions aforesaid, as the
aforesaid William Thoroughgood above alleges, For Plea says, That after the
Fine aforesaid Levied, that is to say, the second day of September in the year
of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is the 18th. at Great Paringdon
aforesaid, the aforesaid William Thoroughgood by his Writing of the Lease,
which the said William Cole with the Seal of the said William Thoroughgood
Sealed here in Court brings, whose Date is the same day and year, by the name
of William Thoroughgood of Hansdon in the County of Hertford, Yeoman, Remised,
Released, and for him and his Heirs for ever, quit, claimed, to the aforesaid
William Chicken by the name of William Chicken of Hansdon aforesaid, Yeoman,
All and all manner of Conditions, Entries, for Conditions broken, and demands
whatsoever from the beginning of the World unto the day of the Date of the said
Writing of Release; and this he is ready to aver, whereupon as at first he
demands Judgment; and that the aforesaid William Thoroughgood be barred from
having his Action aforesaid against him, etc. and the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood says, That he is a Layman, and unlearned, and that at the time of
the making of the Writing of Release supposed to be done, diverse arrerages of
the aforesaid yearly payments, above recited in form aforesaid, to be paid were
behind, and that the aforesaid Writing of Release, was then read and declared
to him, as a Writing of Acquittance of all arrerages of moneys, to him in form
aforesaid to be paid, then to the said William Thoroughgood, being behind and
not paid only: By which the said William Thoroughgood, believing that Writing
to be a Writing of Acquittance, of the arrerages of the moneys aforesaid only,
sealed and delivered the said Writing, to the aforesaid William Chicken, and
said William Thoroughgood says, That the said Writing in Court here brought,
containing in self, him the said William Thoroughgood, to have Remised,
Released, and for him and his He is for ever quit claimed, to the aforesaid
Wiliima Chicken, all, and all manner of Conditions, Entries for Conditions
broken, and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the world, until the day
of the date of the said Writing of Release, is not his Deed; And he prays
that this may be enquired of by the Country; And the aforesaid William Cole
likewise, Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff, that he cause to come from
the day of the Holy Trinity, in 3. Weeks 12. etc. By whom, etc. And who
neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. Afterward the process
was continued between the parties aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid, by Jurors
put between them in respite here, until this day, that is to say, the Morrow of
Saint Martin, in the year of the Reign of the Lady the Queen that now is 25th.
And now at this day, come as as well the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, as
the aforesaid William Cole, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the Jurors
thereof impannelled likewise come, who to say the truth of the premises,
chosen, tried, and sworn, say upon their Oath, that the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, is a Layman, and unlearned, and that diverse arrerages of the
yearly payments aforesaid, to the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, the
aforesaid time of making of the aforesaid Writing of Release were unpaid, And
also that the said Wriging of Release, at the time of the sealing thereof, was
not read to the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, But after one Thomas Ward,
had begun to read that Writing to the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, One John
Ward snatched that Writing out of the hands of the aforesaid Thomas, before he
had read the first line thereof, saying to the aforesaid William Thoroughgood,
these words following; Good Man Thoroughgood, you are a man unlearned, and I
will declare it unto you, and make you understand it better, than you can by
hearing it read; And afterward the aforesaid John Ward, declared the
aforesaid Writing of Release, to the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, in these
words following; Good Man Thoroughgood, the effect of it is this, That you do
release to William Chicken, all the arrerages of Rent that he does ow you, and
no otherwise, and then you shall have your Land again, meaning the Tenements
aforesaid of new assigned, To which the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, then
answered in these words following, that is to say, If it be no otherwise I am
content, And upon that, The said William Thoroughgood, giving credit to the
words of the aforesaid John Ward, then and there sealed the said Writing of
Release, and delivered it to the aforesaid William Chicken. But whether upon
the whole matter, in form aforesaid found, The said Writing of Release be, and
in Law ought to be adjudged the deed of the aforesaid William Thoroughgood or
not, the Jurors aforesaid are utterly ignorant; And thereof pray the Advice of
the Justices and the Court here, And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in
form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices here, that the Writing is
not, nor ought in Law to be adjudged the deed of the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid
Writing of Release, is not the deed of the aforesaid VVillliam Thoroughgood, as
the said William above allegeth, and they assesse Damages of the said William
Thoroughgood, by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid above his costs and
charges by him in this part about his Suit expended to 20. shillings, and for
his costs and charges to 12. pence, And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in
form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices here, That the Writing
aforesaid of Release, is the deed of the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, as the
aforesaid William Cole above has alleged, Then the said Jurors say upon their
Oath, That the said Writing of Release, is the deed of the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, as the said William Cole above has alleged. And because the
Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the premises, before they give
their Judgment thereof, Day is given to the parties aforesaid, here until in
8. days of Saint Hillary, to here their Judgment thereof, because the same
Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, here comes as well the
aforesaid William Thoroughgood, as the aforesaid William Cole, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Justices here will further avise
themselves of and upon the premises, before they give their Judgment thereof,
further day is given to the parties aforesaid, here from the day of Easter 15.
days, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof
not yet, etc. At which day here comes as well the aforesaid William
Thoroughgood, as the aforesaid William Cole, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Justices here will further avise themselves of and upon the
premises, before they give their Judgment thereof, Day further is given to the
parties aforesaid, here until the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At
which day here comes as well the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, as the
aforesaid William Cole, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And upon this, The
premises being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood, It is granted,
That the aforesaid William Thoroughgood, shall recover against the said William
Cole, his damages to 21. shillings, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid
assessed, as also 23. pound, 19. shillings, to the said William Thoroughgood,
at his Request for his costs and charges aforesaid, by the Court of Increase
adjudged, which damages in the whole do amount to 25. pound, and that the
aforesaid William Cole be taken, etc.

TRESPASS.
Easter Term, Anno 310. ELIZABETH. Rot. 115. in the COMMON PLEAS, C. 2. part,
Baldwins Case. fol. 18.
CCristopher Marton, late of Marton, in the County aforesaid Esquire, was York.
Attached to answer Anthony Baldwin of a Plea, wherefore with force and Arms,
the Close of him the said Anthony, at Marton he brake, and his Corn there to
the value of 10. pound, there late growing, with his Feet trod and consumed,
and other harms to him did, to the grievous damage of him the said Anthony, and
against the Peace of the Lady the Queen that now is, etc. And whereupon the
said Anthony, by Robert Somervile his Attorney, complains, That the aforesaid
Christopher, the 10th. day of September, in the year of the Reign of the Lady
the Queen that now is the 30th. with force and Arms the Close of him the said
Anthony, at Marton broke, and his Corn, that is to say Oats, to the value, etc.
then there late growing, with his Feet trod and consumed, And other harms, etc.
Whereupon he says that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of 20.
pound, and thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the aforesaid Christopher, by
William Barton his Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury when,
etc. And as to the force and Arms he says, that he is thereof not guilty; And
as to the rest of the Trespass aforesaid supposed to be done, The said
Christopher says, That the aforesaid Anthony, his Action against him ought not
to have, Because he says, That the Close aforesaid, as also the places in
which it is supposed the Trespass aforesaid to be done, are, and the aforesaid
time in which it is supposed the Trespass aforesaid to be done, were 10. Acres
of Land called Bromfield, with the appurtenances in Marton aforesaid, which 10.
acres of Land with the appurtenances, are the Soil and Freehold of the said
Christopher, And that the said Christopher, the aforesaid time in which, etc.
the Close aforesaid, as his own Close, Soil, and Freehold of him the said
Christopher, in the said 10. acres of Lands with the appurtenances brake, and
the Corn there, as his own Corn there growing in the aforesaid 10. acres with
the Appurtenances, as in his own Soil and Freehold there trod and consumed, as
it was lawful for him to do, and this he is ready to aver, Whereupon he
demands Judgment, if the aforesaid Anthony, his Action aforesaid against him
ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid Anthony says, that he by any thing
before alleged, ought not to be barred from having his Action aforesaid,
Because he says, That the Close aforesaid, as also the places in which the
Trespass aforesaid above complaineed of was done, are, and the time aforesaid
of the Trespass aforesaid done, were, 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances,
called Scarhill Set, and VVatersey Mire, in Marton aforesaid, others than the
aforesaid 10. acres of Lands, called Bromfield, with the Appurtenances, in the
Bar of the said Christopher above specified, And this he is ready to aver,
Wherefore in as much as the aforesaid Christopher, to the Trespass aforesaid,
in the aforesaid 4. acres of Lands with the Appurtenances, above new assigned,
done, does not answer, The said Anthony demands Judgment, and his damages,
by occasion of that Trespass to be to him adjudged, etc. And the aforesaid
Christopher, as to any Trespass in the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the
appurtenances new assigned, above supposed to be done, says, that he thereof
is not guilty, as the aforesaid Anthony against him complains, And of this
puts himself upon the Country, And the aforesaid Anthony likewise, Therefore it
is commanded to the Sheriff, That he cause to come here in the Morrow of the
Holy Trinity, 12. etc. by whom, etc. And who neither, etc. To Recognize, etc.
Because as well, etc. At which day here come the parties, And the Sheriff sent
not the Writ, etc. Therefore as at first it is commanded to the Sheriff, That he
cause to come here from the Holy Trinity, in 3. Weeks, 12. etc. To Recognize in
form aforesaid, etc. At which day, the Jurors between the parties aforesaid, of
the aforesaid Plea between them were put in respite here until this day, that
is to say, in 8. days of Saint Michael then next following, unless the
Justices of the Lady the Queen to take Assizes, in the County aforesaid
assigned, by the form of the Statute, etc. Upon Monday the 14th. day of July
last past, at the Castle of York, in the said County should first come, And now
here, at this day, come as well the aforesaid Anthony, as the aforesaid
Christopher, by their Attorneys aforesaid, and the aforesaid Justices to
Assizes, before whom, etc. sent here their Record in these words; Afterward
the day and place within written within contained, before John Clench, one of
the Justices of the Lady the Queen to Pleas, before the Queen her self to be
holden assigned, And Shomas Walmesly, one of the Justices of the said lady the
Queen of the Bench, Justices of the said Lady the Queen to Assizes, in the
County of York to be taken assigned, by the form of the Statute, etc. came as
well the within named Anthony Baldwin, as the aforesaid within written
Christopher Marton, by their Attorneys within mentioned, And the Jurors of the
Jury, whereof within is made mention, some of them, that is to say, William
Wharton, of Dunkeswick Gentleman, Adam VVyre, of Ayrton Yeoman, John Brown, of
Pathorn Yeoman, Ralph Walker, of Bolton Gentleman, Thomas Preston, of
Whengille Yeoman, and Henry Laycock, of Felliface Yeoman, come, And the Jurors
aforesaid are sworn; And because that the rest of the Jurors of that Jury did
not appear, Therefore others of the Standers by, to this chosen by the Sheriff
of the County aforesaid, are at the request of the said Anthony, and by the
Commandment of the Justices new added, whose names to the Panel within written
are filed, according to the form of the Statute in such case made and provided,
And the Jurors so a new added, now appearing, that is to say, Gabriel Green,
William Newby, John Hawton, John Brorcey, John Craven, and WILLIAM RICHARDSON,
come, who to say the truth of the within contained, together with theother
Jurors aforesaid first impannelled, and sworn, to say, chosen, tried, and
sworn, say upon their Oath, That before the within written time in which it is
supposed the Trespass within written to be done, The aforesaid 4. acres of Land
with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. were parcel of the possessions of the
late Monastery, or Priory of Bolton in Craven; and that one Richard late Prior
of the Priory, or Monastery aforesaid, was seized of one Tenement, Message or
Farm, called Vngthorpe in the Parish of Marton in Craven, whereof the aforesaid
four Acres of Land with the Appurtenances within new assigned are, and the
within written time, in which, etc. were parcel in his Demesne as of Fee in the
Right of his Monastery aforesaid; and so thereof being seized, The said late
Prior, with the assent of the Covent of the same place, the 26. day of December
in the year of the Reign of the Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. the
25th. By an Indenture sealed with the Common Seal of the aforesaid Prior and
Covent, to the Jurors in evidence showed, demised the aforesaid Tenement,
Message and Farm whereof the within written 40. Acres of Land with the
appurtenances then were, and yet are parcel, to one Hugh Baldwin, and Agnes his
Wife, To have and to hold, to the said Hugh Baldwin and his Assigns from the
date of the Indenture aforesaid unto the end and term of 31. years fully to be
ended, By virtue of which Demise, The said Hugh and Agnes in the aforesaid four
Acres of Land with the appurtenances in which, etc. entered and were thereof
possessed, the Reversion thereof to the aforesaid Prior and his Successors: And
the aforesaid Hugh and Agnes of the aforesaid four Acres of Lands, with the
appurtenances in which, etc. for the Term aforesaid being possessed, the
Reversion thereof to the aforelate Prior in form aforesaid ezpectant; By a
certain Act in Parliament of the said late King Henry the 8th. at Westminster
in the County of Middlesex, the 28th. day of April, in the 31. year of his
Reign begun, and continued until the 28th. day of June then next following, and
there then holden amongst other things it is Ordained and established by the
said late King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the
said Parliament assembled: That the said late King should have, hold, possess,
and enjoy to Him, his Heirs, and Successors, all and singular such late
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Houses of Friars, and
other Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses and places of what kinds, natures,
qualities, or diversities of Habits, Rules, Professions, or Orders, they or any
of them were named, known, or called, which after the fourth day of February in
the year of the Reign of the aforesaid late King the 27th. were dissolved,
suppressed, renounced, relinquished, forfeited, given up or by any other means
came to his Highnese, and by the same Authority and in like manner should have,
hold, possess and enjoy all Scites, Circuits, Precinctts, Manors, Lordships,
Grainges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions,
Services, Woods, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, Rectories, Appropriated
Vicaridges, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons, Nominations, Patronages, Annuities,
Rights, Interests, Entries, Conditions, Commons, Leets, Courts, Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, and other whatsoever Hereditaments which appertained,
or belonged to the said late Monasteries, Abbathies, Priories, Nunneries,
Colleges, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
Houses and Places, at the time of the aforesaid dissolution, suppressing,
renouncing, forfeiting, giving up, or by any other manner of means came to the
said Kings Highness, after the 4th. day of February, above mentioned. And
further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That not only all the
singular the aforesaid late Monasteries, Abbathies, Priories, Nunneries,
Colleges, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
Houses and Places, Scites, Circuits, Precincts, Manors, Lordships, Grainges,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services,
and all the singular other the premises, from thence immediately, and presently,
but also all other Monasteries, Abbathies, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges,
Hospitals, Houses of Friars, and all and singular other Ecclesiastical and
Religious Houses, which hereafter should happen to be dissolved, suppressed,
renounced, relinquished, forfeited, given up, or by any other means came to the
Kings Highness, And also all Scites, Circuits, Precincts, Manors, Grainges,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Woods, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, Rectories approprate, Viccarages, Churches,
Chapels, Advowsons, Nominations, Patronages, Hundreds, Rights, Interests,
Entries, Conditions, Leets, Courts, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and
other Hereditaments whatsoever, were belonging or appertaining to them or any
of them, whersoever, and as soon as they should be dissolved, suppressed,
renounced, relinquished, forfeited, given up, or by any other means come to the
Kings Highness, should be vested and adjudged by Authority of the same
Parliament, in the very actual, and real seisin and possession of the said late
King, his Heirs and Successors for ever, in state and condition as then they
were, And as if all the said Monasteries, Abbathies, Priories, Nunneries,
Colleges, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
Houses so dissolved, suppressed, renounced, relinquished, forfeited, given up,
or came to the Kings Highness as aforesaid, as also the aforesaid Monasteries,
Abbathies, Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, and
other Religious and Ecclesiastical Houses and Places, which then after should
happen to be dissolved, suppressed, renounced, relinquished, or given up to his
said Highness, Scites, Circuits, Precincts, Manors, Lordships, Grainges, and
other the premises whatsoever, in the said Act of Parliament specially, or
particularly, recited or expressed, by express Names, Words, Faculties and in
their Natures, Kinds, and Qualities, as in the said Act amongst other things
more fully it appears. And the said Jurors further say upon their Oath
aforesaid, That the aforesaid Monastery, or Priory, of Bolton aforesaid, after
the aforesaid 4th. day of February, in the 27th. year aforesaid, that is to
say, the 11th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of the said late King the
31th. aforesaid was dissolved. By Color of which Dissolution, and by force of
the Statute aforesaid, That aforesaid late King was seized of the aforesaid
Monastery, or Priory of Bolton aforesaid, and of the Reversion of the aforesaid
4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, amongst other things in his Demesne as
of Fee, in the Right of his Crown of England; And that the aforesaid Message
and Tenement called Vngthorp, and the aforesaid 4. acres of Lands with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. At the time of the Dissolution aforesaid, were
parcel of the possessions of the aforesaid Monastery, or Priory; And the said
late King, so thereof being seized, the 3d. day of April, in the 33th. year of
his Reign, By his Letters Patents, sealed with the Great Seal of England, to
the Jurors aforesaid showed in Evidence, Gave and Granted unto Henry, late Earl
of Comberland, all the aforesaid Tenement, Message, and Farm with the
Appurtenances, called Vngthorp, whereof the within written 4. acres with the
Appurtenances adjoining, were, and yet are parcel, To have, and to hold to the
said late Earl, his Heirs and Assigns for ever. By Color of which Letters
Patents, The said late Earl was amongst other things seized of the Reversion of
the aforesaid Tenement, Message, and Farm with the Appurtenances, whereof the
aforesaid 4. acres of Lands with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. then were,
and yet are parcel in his Demesne as of Fee, And the aforesaid Hugh and Agnes,
for the aforesaid Term of years, in form aforesaid being possessed, the
Reversion thereof to the aforesaid Earl, and his Heirs expectant, the aforesaid
Hugh, dyed of the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in which,
etc. in form aforesaid possessed, And the aforesaid Agnes, overlived him the
said Hugh, and was of the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in
which, etc. possessed by way of Survivor, etc. And the aforesaid Agnes, so
being thereof possessed, the Reversion thereof to the late Earl, in form
aforesaid expectant, The said late Earl, made, sealed, and delivered a certain
Indenture, as his deed, of the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. amongst other things, The Tenor of which
follows in these words. This Indenture, made the 10th. day of September, in
the year of the our Lord God 1545. and in the seven and thirtieth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Henry by the Grace of God, King of Eng. France and
Ire. defender of the faith, etc. and in the earth the supreme Head of the
Church of Engl. and Ire. Between the Right Noble Lord Henry, Earl of
Comberland, Lord of the Honor of Shipton, Lord of Westmerland, and Vestion of
the one part, And Agnes Baldwin, or Vngthorp Widow, and Anthony Baldwin of the
other part, Witnesses; That the same Earl for the sum of 58. pound, 13.
shillings, and 4. pence Sterling, at the day of the Date hereof, by the said
Agnes and Anthony, paid to the said Earl, whereof the said Earl acknowledges
himself to be truly contented and paid, and the said Agnes and Anthony, their
Heirs and Executors, thereof, and of every part thereof to be discharged and
acquitted for ever, Has Covenanted, Granted, and to Farm Letten, and by these
presents covenanteth, grants, demiseth, and lets to Farm to the said Agnes
and Anthony, and to the Heirs of the same Anthony, The said Tenement, Mese, or
Farm, called Vngthorp, in the Parish of Marton in Craven, in the County of
York, together with the Closures, Feedings, Pastures, arable Lands, Meadows,
Woods, Waters, Common of Pasture, in the Moors of East and West Marton, Common
of Turbury, with free passage to and fro the same Common of Easton, to a Ground
or Meadow called Tadholm, lying in the demesne Closes of Marton Hall, and all
Houses, Barns, Boons, and Buildings, to the same Tenement or Farm called
Vngthorp belonging, or in any wise heretofore appertaining, now and of old time
being of the only yearly Rent of 53. shillings, and 4. pence; To have, and to
hold the same Tenement or Farm called Vngthorp, with all and singular the
premises with the Appurtenances, to the same Agnes and Anthony, and to the
Heirs of the same Anthony, from the date hereof to the end and Term of 99.
years, next and immediately following, and fully to be complete and ended, and
so from 99. years to 99. years, until such time as 300. years be spent, fully
finished and expired, without impeachment of any manner of Waste, in and as
ample, free, and large manner as ever Nicholas Simson, Hugh Baldwin, and the
said Agnes Baldwin, or any other Tenant or Farmer of the said Tenant or Mease,
of Vngthorp, with all the singular the premises with the Appurtenances, ever
occupied, or might have occupied the same without interruption, let,
disturbance, denial, contradiction, or resistance of the same Earl, or of his
Heirs and Assigns, or of any other Officer, Farmer or Farmers, of the same
Earls of the Manor or Capital Mese called Marton Hall, for the time being, or
of any other, at or by Will, Assent, Consent, or furtherance of the same Earl,
his Heirs and Assigns; And further, the said Agnes and Anthony, Covenanteth and
Grants, by these presents for them and the Heirs of the said Anthony, to and
with the same Earl, that they the same Agnes and Anthony, and the Heirs of the
same Anthony, shall yearly during the said Term, at the Feast of Saint Michael
the Archangel, and within 40. days after, for certain urgent considerations,
content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid to the said Earl, his Heirs
and Assigns, as well a Penny separately by it self, as 5. shillings 4. pence
Sterling, in a gross and entire sum if it be asked, for the which payment of
the said single Penny, and of the said 5. shil. 4. pence, The said Earl
covenanteth, and grants for him, his Heirs and Assigns, to and with the said
Agnes and Anthony, to discharge and save harmless from time to time all the
said Land and Tenements. And the said Agnes and Anthony, and the Heirs of the
same Anthony, as well of and from the payment of the said penny, as for the
payment of the sum of 4. shillings 4. pence, as of all other Suits, Exactions,
Boons, Gressions, Fines, Customs, and all other Impositions or Demands
whatsoever they be, concerning the same Message or Tenement, called Vngthorp,
and all other the premises with the Appurtenances, during the said Term now
granted, or any time hereafter by force of this Indenture to be granted, by the
Earl and his Heirs, as well against our Sovereign Lord the King and his Heirs,
as against all other person or persons whatsoever they be; And further the said
Earl covenanteth, to and with the said Agnes and Anthony, by these presents,
That the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns, shall at the end and Term of 300
years, make, or cause to be made, to the Heirs or Assigns of the said Anthony,
a like Demise and Lease of the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
premises with the Appurtenances, if it be asked, for so many more years as is
contained in this Lease, And the same Lease to be of like force, effect, and
strength in the Law, as this present is, without any Covin, Fraud, Collusion,
Denyer, or male Engine, but truly, and faithfully, according to the true puport
and meaning of these presents, In witness whereof the parties abovesaid to
these Indentures, interchangeably have set their Seals the day and year
abovesaid. And the said Jurors further say upon their Oath, That no license or
seisin of the Tenements aforesaid, or any part thereof was delivered to the
aforesaid Agnes and Anthony, or to any of them upon the Indenture aforesaid;
And that the aforesaid Agnes and Anthony, had and held the Tenement, Mese, and
Farm aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof the aforesaid 4. acres with the
Appurtenances, in which, etc. are, and then were parcel, as the Law in this
case requires; And the said Agnes and Anthony, so having and holding the
Tenement, Message, and Farm aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof the 4.
acres in which, etc. are, and then were parcel, the said Agnes, the last day of
October, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the
5th. at Marton aforesaid, in the County aforesaid dyed, And the aforesaid
Anthony her overlived, and continued the possession of the Tenements, Message,
and farm aforesaid with the Appurtenances, whereof the aforesaid 4. acres of
Land with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. are parcel, and took the profits
thereof, and had, occupied, and held the Tenement, Message, and Farm
aforesaid, whereof the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in
which, etc. with the Appurtenances, are parcel of such estate and interest, as
the Law in this case requires; And he having, occupying, and holding the
Tenement, Message, and Farm aforesaid, whereof the within written 4. acres of
Land are parcel, The aforesaid Henry, late Earl of Cumberland dyed, having
issue George, now Earl of Cumberland, his Son and Heir, And the said George
Earl of Cumberland, entered into the Tenements aforesaid, And afterward, that
is to say, the 17th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady
the Queen that now is the 24th. enfeoffed the aforesaid Christopher Marton, of
the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, To have to the said
Christopher and his Heirs for ever. And that the aforesaid Anthony, at the time
of the making of the Feoffment aforesaid, and after that Feoffment made
hitherto continued possession, as well of the aforesaid 4. acres of Land with
the Appurtenances, as of the Message and rest of the Tenements, and Farm
aforesaid, But yet the Jurors further say, That before the Feoffment aforesaid,
the aforesaid Rent to the aforesaid Henry, late Earl of Cumberland, and his
Heirs, by the Indenture aforesaid granted, as well to the aforesaid Henry, Earl
of Cumberland in his life, and after the death of him the said late Earl, to
the aforesaid George, now Earl of Cumberland, as to the aforesaid Christopher
Marton, after the Feoffment aforesaid, by the aforesaid Anthony was paid. And
the said Jurors further say upon their Oath, That the said Christo. the day and
year in the Declaration above specified, entered into the aforesaid 4. acres of
Land with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. upon the possession of the
aforesaid Anthony, and the Oats within written, then there with his Feet trod
and consumed, as the aforesaid Anthony within against him complains. But
whether upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form
aforesaid found, The aforesaid Entry of the aforesaid Christopher, in the
aforesaid 4. acres of Land with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. be a good and
lawful Entry or not, the said Jurors are utterly ignorant, And thereof pray the Advice and Judgment of the Justices of the Court here; And if upon the whole
matter aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall
seem to the Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid Entry, of the aforesaid
Christopher, be not a good and lawful Entry in Law, in the aforesaid 4. acres
of Land, upon the possession of the said Anthony, Then the said Jurors say upon
their Oath, That the aforesaid Christopher is guilty of the Trespass, in the
aforesaid 4. acres of Land within new assigned, as the aforesaid Anthony within
against him complains. And then they assesse the damages of the said Anthony,
by occasion of that Trespass, above his costs and charges by him about his Suit
in this behalf expended, to 20. shillings, and for his costs and charges to 40.
shillings; And if upon the whole matter aforesaid, It shall seem to the
Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid Entry, of the aforesaid
Christopher, in the aforesaid 4. acres of Land new assigned, upon the
possession of the said Anthony, is a good and lawful Entry in Law, Then the
said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid Christopher is not guilty
of the Trespass within written, in the within written 4. acres of Land within
new assigned; And because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon
the premises, before that they give their Judgment thereof, Day is given to
the parties aforesaid, here until in 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the said Justices here thereof not yet, etc. At
which day come as well the said Anthony, as the aforesaid Christopher by their
Attorney aforesaid; and upon this, all and singular the premises being seen,
and by the Justices, etc. fully understood, It is granted that the aforesaid
Anthony recover against the aforesaid Christopher his damages to 3. l. by the
Jurors aforesaid in form aforesaid Assessed; as also 11. l. 6. s. 8. d. to the
said Anthony at his request, for his costs and charges by the Court here of
increase adjudged; which damages in the whole amount to fourteen pound, six
shillings and eight pence; and that the aforesaid Christopher be taken, etc.

TRESPASS.
Michaelmass Term, Anno 36. and 37. ELIZABETH. Rot. 136. in the KING'S BENCH,
Co. 2. part. Tookers Case, Fol. 62.
MEmorandum, that at another time, that is to say, in the Term of Easter Devon.
last past, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster came William Rud by
Michael Bland his Attorney, and brought here in the Court of the said Lady the
Queen that now is, then there, his Bill against Edward Tooker in the custody of
the Marshall, etc. of a Plea of Trespass; and are Pledges of Suit, that is to
say, John Do, and Richard Roo, which Bill follows in these words. ss. Devon.
ss. William Rud complains of Edward Tooker, in the custody of the Marshall of
the Marshal-Sea of the Lady the Queen before the Queen her self; for that he
the first day of April, in the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth now
Queen of England, the 36th. with force and Arms, etc. the Close and house of
him the said William called Bertonland, otherwise, the Barton of Sprecombe at
Morthoe in the County aforesaid, broke and entered, and his grass of the value
of an hundred Marks, in the Close aforesaid, then late growing, with certain
Cattle, that is to say, with Horses, Oxen, Cows, Hogs and Sheep, fed, trod, and
consumed, and other harms to him did, against the Peace of the said Lady the
Queen, that now is, to the damage of the said William an hundred pound, and
thereof brings suit, etc. And now at this day, that is to say, Wednesday
next after eight days of Saint Michael this Term, until which day the
aforesaid Edward had leave to impart to the said Bill, and then to Answer, etc.
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, comes as well the aforesaid William
by his Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid Edward by John Halstaff his
Attorney: And the said Edward defends the force and injury when, etc. and
says, that he is not thereof guilty, and of this puts himself upon the County,
and the aforesaid William likewise, etc. Therefore it is commanded the Sheriff,
that a Jury come before the Lady the Queen at Westminster Friday next after 15.
days of St. Hillary, etc. and who neither, etc. to recognize, etc. Because as
well, etc. the same day is given to the parties aforesaid there, etc.
Afterward the Process is continued between the parties aforesaid of the Plea
aforesaid by Jurors thereof betwixt them put in respite, of the Plea aforesaid,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Wednesday next after 15. days
of Easter then next following, unless the justices of the Lady the Queen to
Assizes, in the County aforesaid to be taken assigned, first upon Monday the
10th. day of March, at the Castle of Exeter, in the County aforesaid, by form
of the Statute, etc. come for want of jurors, etc. At which day before the Lady
the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And the aforesaid justices to Assizes, before whom, etc. sent their
Record before them had in these words; ss. Afterward the day and place within
contained, before Edmond Anderson Knight, Chief justice of the Lady the Queen
of the Bench, and Thomas Walmesley, one of the justices of the said Lady the
Queen of the Bench, justices of the said Lady the Queen to Assizes, in the
County of Devon to be taken assigned, by form of the Statute, etc. come as well
the within named William Rud, by Erasmus Ford his Attorney, as the within
written Edward Tooker, by Thomas Clayton his Attorney. And the jurors of the
jury, whereof within mention is made, being called, some of them, that is to
say, David Matacot^ of Saint Giles, John Hayman of Shelbere, John Hooper of
Westdown, Richard Clyeff of Chanford, John Bow of the same, and John Hole of
Drew Steinton came, and are sworn in the said Jury; And because the rest of the
Jurors of the said Jury did not appear, Therefore others of the standers by, by
the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, chosen at the request of the said William
Rud, and by the Command of the justices before of new are added, whose names in
the Panel within written are filed, according to the form of the Statute in
such case late made and provided; And the Jurrors so new added, that is to say,
George Snell, John Barnacott, John Shate, George Slade, William Killard, and
Christopher Cheek, being called likewise came, who to say the truth of the
within contained, together with the other Jurors aforesaid, first impanelled
and sworn, chosen, tried, sworn, say upon their Oath, That before the within
written time in which it is supposed the Trespass within written to be done,
one Joh. Arundell Esquire. was seized of the Teneme^ts within written with their
Appurtena^ces, in which it is supposed the Trespass within written to be done,
in his demesne as of fee, and so thereof being seized, Afterward and before the
within written time in which, etc. that is to say the third day of July in the
year of the Reign of the Lord Henry late King of England the 8th. the 30th
Demised to one John Tooker, and to the within named Will. Rud, the Tenement
within written, with the Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other things, To
have and to hold to the said John Tooker, and William Rud for the term of their
lives, and the life of the longest liver of them, the said John and William, By
virtue of which Demise, the said John Tooker and William Rud were seized of the
Tenements within written, with the Appurtenances in which, etc. in their Demesne
as of Freehold for the term of the lives of them the said John and William, and
the longest liver of them; and so being thereof seized, and the said John
Arundel of the Reversion of the Tenements within written, with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. being seized, the said John Arundel afterward and
within the time in which, etc. At Morthoe within written of such estate died
seized; after whose death, the Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other things descended to one John
Arundel, Knight, as Son and Heir of the aforesaid John Arundel; By which, the
said John Arundel, Knight, was seized of the aforesaid Reversion of the
Tenements within written with the Appurtenances in which, etc. in his Demesne as
of Fee, and so thereof being seized, afterward, and before the within written
time in which etc. that is to say, the 20th. day of September in the year of
the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 10th. At Morthoe within
written, by his writing Indented, one part of which sealed with the Seal of the
said John Arundel, Knight, was showed to the said Jurors in evidence, whose
date is the same day and year gran^ed the Reversion of the Tenements within
written with the Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other things to the same
Edward Tooker for the term of his life, when after death, surrender or
forfeiture of the aforesaid John Tooker, and William Rud it should happen, as
by the said Writing Indented amongst other things more fully appears, To
which grant of the Reversion of the Tenements within written with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other things to the same Edward by the
aforesaid John Arundel, Knight, in form aforesaid made, the aforesaid John
Tooker being Tenant of the Tenements aforesaid within written with the
Appurtenances in which, etc. for the term of his life jointly with the
aforesaid William Rud, afterward and before the within written time, in which,
etc. At Morthoe within written to the aforesaid Edward thereof Attorned and
agreed, By color of which Grant of the Reversion aforesaid, and of the
Attornment and Agreement aforesaid, the aforesaid Edward was seized of the
Reversion of the Tenements within written, with the Appurtenances in which,
etc. as the Law requires, as of Freehold for the term of his life, and so
thereof being seized, and the aforesaid John Tooker and William Rud of the
Tenements within written with the Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other
things being seized, The said John Tooker afterward, and before the within
written time in which, etc. that is to say, the 14th. day of December in the
year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 31th. at Morthoe
aforesaid, made to the said Edward Tooker a certain Writing of Surrender of the
Tenements within written with the Appurtenances in which, etc. amongst other
things, which to the Jurors aforesaid was showed, the Tenor of which follows
in these words. To all Christian people to whom this present writing shall
come: I John Tooker of Morthoe in the County of Devon, Yeoman, sends greeting
in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas, I the said John Tooker, and William Rud
do hold jointly for term of their lives, and the life of the longest liver of
them, All the Capital Message and Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments called
Barton Lands in the Manor of Sprecombe, or parcel of the said Manor, and all
those Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments with the Appurtenances in Hokesmil,
with the Pasture of Hokeswood, and Common of Pasture upon Hokesdown, parcel of
the said Manor, of the Demise and grant of John Arundel, Esquire, as by the
Deed of Demise and Grant thereof made by the said John Arundel at large and
plainly it does and may appear: Now know ye, that the said John Tooker, for
diverse and sundry causes and considerations him moving, does by these presents
su^render and yield up unto Edward Tooker the son of the said John Tooker to
whom the Reversion of all and singular the premises is granted, and does
belong, or the term of the life of the said Edward, All his Estate, Title, and
Interest, in and to the premises, and in and to every part and parcel thereof,
in as large and ample manner, as he the said John Tooker can or may surrender
the same. In Witness whereof the said John Tooker, to these presents has set
his Seal, Given the 14th. day of December, in the 31th. year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God of England, France and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. And further the said Jurors say upon their
Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid John Tooker afterward, and before the
within written time in which, etc. At Morthoe aforesaid dyed, And that the said
Edward, afterward, that is to say, the within written first day of April, in
the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 36th.
aforesaid, claiming to have and occupy the Tenements within written with the
Appurtenances, in which, in Common, with the said William Rud, by virtue of the
aforesaid Writing of Surrender, by the aforesaid John Tooker, in form aforesaid
made, into the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in which, etc.
entered, and the Grass within written to the value, etc. in the Close aforesaid
then growing, with the Cattle within written fed, trod, and Consumed, as the
aforesaid William Rud against him complains. But whether upon the whole
matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, The aforesaid Entry of the said
Edward, into the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. be
a good and lawful Entry in Law or not, the Jurors aforesaid are utterly
ignorant; And thereof pray the Advice and Consideration of the Court, etc. And
if upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to
the Justices and Court here, That the aforesaid Entry of the aforesaid Edward,
in the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. in and upon
the possession of the said William Rud, be not a good and lawful Entry in Law,
Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath, That the aforesaid Edward Tooker is
guilty of the Trespass within written, as the said W. Rud above against him
complains. And assess the damages of the said William Rud, by that occasion
above his costs and charges by him about his Suit in that behalf expended, to
6. pence, and for his costs and charges of 20. shillings. And if upon the whole
matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Justices and
Court here, That the aforesaid Entry of the aforesaid Edward, in the Tenements
within wrtten with the Appurtenances, in which, etc. in and upon the possession
of the aforesaid William, be a good and lawful Entry in Law, Then the said
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Edward is not guilty
of the Trespass within written, as the said ^dward above against him allegeth;
And because the Court of the said Lady the Q. here of giving their Judgment of
and upon the premises is not yet avised, day is given to the parties aforesaid,
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Friday next after the Morrow of
Holy Trinity to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until
Thursday next after the Morrow of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
Lady the Queen hereof giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queeen
at Westminster, until Friday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear
their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until
Friday next after 18. days of Easter, to hear their Judgment of and upon the
premises, because the said Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties
aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet
avised, further day is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, until Friday next after the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to
hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, at Westminster aforesaid,
come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court
of the said Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the
premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the parties
aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until Saturday next after
8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment o and upon the premises,
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof yet, etc. At which day
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here of
giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, day thereof
further is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, until Monday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to
hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof is further
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until Wednesday next after 18. days of Easter, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day further thereof is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until
Friday next after the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment of
and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. AT which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
said Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is
not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the parties aforesaid, before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until Monday next after 8. days
of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the
Lady the Queen at Westminminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving
their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further
is given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until Monday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of and
upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until
Wednesday next after 18. days of Easter, to hear their Judgment of and upon
the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet,
etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westmin. aforesaid, come the
parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the
Lady the said Queen here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is
not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the parties aforesaid, before
the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until Friday next after the Morrow
of the Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof, because the Court of the
Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen
at Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Wesminster
aforesaid, until Monday next after 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, before the Lady the Queen at West.
aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And
because the Court of the said Lady the Queen here of giving their Judgment of
and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is given to the
parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westmin. aforesaid, until
Tuesday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen
of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day
thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at
Wesminster aforesaid, until Wednesday next 18. days of Easter, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their Judgment thereof,
because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day
before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid,
by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen
here of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day
thereof further is given to the parts aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, until Tuesday next after 8. days of Saint Michael, to
hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady
the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until Wednesday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the said Lady the Queen of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until Wednesday next after 18. days of Easter, to hear their
Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen
here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof further is
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid, until Friday next after the Morrow of the Holy Trinity, to hear
their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the
Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at
Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys
aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lady the Queen here of giving their
Judgment of and upon the premises is not yet avised, Day thereof is further
given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lady the Queen at Westminster, until
Thursday next after 8. days of Saint Michael, to hear their Judgment of and
upon the premises, because the Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not
yet, etc. At which day before the Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, come
the parties aforesaid, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of
the Lady the Queen of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises is not
yet avised, Day thereof is further given to the parties aforesaid, before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, until Wednesday next after 8. days
of Saint Hillary, to hear their Judgment of and upon the premises, because the
Court of the Lady the Queen here thereof not yet, etc. At which day, before the
Lady the Queen at Westminster aforesaid, come the parties aforesaid, by their
Attorneys aforesaid; Upon which, all and singular the premises being seen, and
by the Court of the Lady the Queen here fully understood, and mature
deliberation being had thereof, Because it seems to the said Court of the
said Lady the Queen, and the Justices here, That the aforesaid Entry of the
aforesaid Edward, into the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
which, etc. in and upon the possession of the said William thereof, is a good
and lawful Entry in Law; Therefore it is granted, That the said William take
nothing by his Bill aforesaid, but for his false clamor he be in Mercy, etc.
And the aforesaid Edward go thereof without day, etc.

TRESPASS.
Trinity Term, Anno 70. of King JAMES, Rot. 2612. in the COMMON PLEAS, C. 9.
part, The Earl of Shrewesburies Case, fol. 42.
RObert Spencer, late of Maunsfield in the County aforesaid Esquire, and Brownl.
Thomas Woodward, late of Maunsfield in the Couty aforesaid Gentleman, were
attached to Answer to Roger Earl of Rutland, of a Plea, Wherefore, Whereas, The
Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England, the 14th. day of July, in the 42th. year
of her Reign at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, By her Letters Patents,
sealed with the Great Seal of England, had given and granted to the said Earl,
from the time of the full age of the said Earl of 21. years, To the Term, and
for and during the Term of his natural life, The Office of Steward of the
Lordships or Manors of her the late Queen of Maunsfield, in the County
aforesaid, and Bolsover, and Horseley, in the County of Derby, with the Wages,
Fees, to the said Office anciently due and accustomed, To have, and yearly to
receive the said Wages, during the Term aforesaid, of the Issues, Profits,
Farms, and Revenews of the aforesaid Lordships or Manors, by the Hands of the
Farmers, Receivers, or any other Occupiers thereof for the time being, at the
Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel and Easter, by equal portions, Together
with all other Profits, Rights, Commodities, Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences, and Emoluments to the said Offices arising, or in any ways
belonging; And whereas, the said Earl before the making of the said Letters
Patents, that is to say, the 19th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of
the aforesaid late Queen the 40th. had attained unto his full age of 21 years,
and by virtue of the Letters Patents aforesaid, was seized of the aforesaid
Office of Steward, of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield as of Freehold, for the
Term of his life; And the same Offine from the aforesaid 14th. day of June, in
the year of the said Lady the Queen the 42th. aforesaid, for one whole year
then next after, well and faithfully had executed, and the Wages, Fees, and
Profits to the aforesaid Office of Steward of the aforesaid Manor of
Maunsfield, of old due and accustomed, by that time had had and received, The
aforesaid Robert and Thomas, intending manifoldly to molest him the said Earl,
and him the said 'Earl to disturb from the Execution of the aforesaid Office of
Steward, of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield, and him the said Earl of the
Wages, Fees, and Profits, which by reason of the execution of the said Office,
which he could and might of Right to have and receive, wholly to frustrate and
hinder, of his own wrong, without any Right of lawful authority, without the
leave of the said Earl, the 16th. day of February, in the year of the Reign of
the said late Queen the 44th. at Maunsfield aforesaid, The aforesaid Office of
Steward of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield aforesaid exercised, and from
thence hitherto do exercise and occupy, and all and singular the Wages, Fees,
Commodities, and Profits to the said Office due and by reason of the exercising
of the Office aforesaid, within the Manor aforesaid, of right belonging, to
their own proper use, had and received, and the said Eearl to exercise the said
Office within the aforesaid Manor aforesaid, and the Wages, Fees, Commodities
and Profits, to the said Office of right to have and receive, with force and
Arms, then and there hindered, and yet do hinder, and other harms to him did,
to the great damage of him the said Earl, and against the peace of the said
Lord the King that now is, etc. And whereupon the said Earl by John Muscott his
Attorney complains, for that, whereas the aforesaid late Queen, the 14th. day
of June, in the year of the Reign the 42th. abovesaid, at Westminster
aforesaid, by her aforesaid Letters Patents, which the said Earl under the
great Seal of England Sealed, here in Court brings, whose date is the same
day and year, had given and granted unto the said Earl, from the time of the
full age of the said Earl of 21 years, to the term, and for and during the
whole term of the natural life of him the said Earl, the aforesaid Offices of
Steward of the aforesaid Lorsships, or Manors of the aforesaid late Queen of
Maunsfield, Bolsover, and Horsley, with the Wages, and Fees to the said Offices
of old due, and accustomed, to have and receive yearly the said Wages during
the term aforesaid, of the Issues, Profits, Farms and Revenues, of the said
Lordships, or Manors, by the hand of the Farmers, Receivers, or other Occupiers
of the same for the time being, at the aforesaid Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel and Easter, by equal portions, tegether with all other Profits,
Rights, Commodities, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Appurtenances, and Emoluments,
to the said Offices belonging, or any ways appertaining; and whereas the said
Earl before the making of the aforesaid Letters Patents, that is to say, the
19th. day of November, in the year of the Reign of the aforesaid late Queen the
40th. aforesaid, had attained unto his full age of 21. years, and by virtue of
the Letters Patents aforesaid, was seized of the aforesaid Office of Steward,
of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield as of his freehold for the term of his
life, and that Office from the aforesaid 14th. day of June, in the year of the
Reign of the aforesaid late Queen the 42th. abovesaid, for one whole year then
next following, well, and truly had exercised, and the Wages, Fees, and
Profits, to the aforesaid Office of Steward, of the aforesaid Manor of
Maunsfield, from of old due, and accustomed, for that time had had, and
received, the aforesaid Robert, and Thomas, endevoring him the said Easl from
the exercising of the said Office of Steward of the aforesaid Manor of
Mauasfield greatly to disturb, and the said Earl of the Wages, Fees, and
Profits, that is to say, of 100. s. yearly to be paid, for the exercising of
the afores office of Steward, and of the the ancient Fees due for the entering
of playnts and pleas, for Coppies of Court Rolls, for Replevins, for proving of
Wills, for granting of administrations of all persons whatsoever, dying within
the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield, for the entering of surrendors, and admission
of all Tenants whatsoever, of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield, for the Entry
of of the Fealty of all Tenants of the said Manor of Maunsfield, which of right
he ought or might have, and receive, utterly to frustrate and hinder, of his
own wrong. without any right or Lawful authority, without the leave of him the
said Earl, the aforesaid 16. day of February, in the year of the Reign of the
said late Queen the 42th. abovesaid, at Maunsfield aforesaid, the aforesaid
Office of Steward, of the said Manor of Maunsfield exercised, and from thence
hitherto do exercise, and enjoy, and all and singular Wages, Fees, Commodities,
Profits, to the said Office due, and by reason of the exercising of the said
office, within the Manor of Maunsfield aforesaid of right belonging, to their
own use had and took, and the said Earl to exercise the said Office within the
aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield, and the Wages, Fees, and Profits to the said
Office of right belonging, and from the whole time whereof the memory of Man is
not to the contrary, to have and take, with force and Arms, then and there
hindered, and as yet does hinder, and other harms to him, etc. to the great
damage, etc. and against the peace, etc. and whereupon he says that he is the
worse, and has damage to the value of 100. pound, and thereof brings suit,
etc. And the aforesaid Robert, and Thomas, by William Cragg their Attourny
come, and defend the force and injury when, etc. and say that they are not
guilty of the Trespass aforesaid, as the aforesaid Earl above against them
complains, and of this put themselves upon the Country, and the aforesaid
Earl likewise, therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff that he cause of come
here from the day of the Holy Trinity in 3 weeks 12, etc. by whom, etc. and who
neither, etc. to recognize, etc. because as well, etc. Afterward the day and
place within contained, before Peter Warberton one of the Justices of the Lord
the King of the bench, and Thomas Foster another of the Justices of the said
Lord the King of the Bench, Justices of the said Lord the King to Assizes, in
the County of Nottingham, to be taken by form of the Statute, etc. come as well
the within named Roger Earl of Rutland, as the within named Robert Spencer and
Thomas Woldwood by their Attorneys within contained. And the Jurors of the Jury
whereof within is made mention being called, some of them, that is to say
Edward Bold of Holloughton Esquire, Edward Coppinger of Francfield Esquire,
George Hutchinson of Balford Gent. Francis Hollingworth of Stapleford Gent.
William Gresley of the same, Nicholas Hamond of Lound Gent. Anthony VVhitwell
of VVeyston Gent. Joh. Sturtevant of Calverton Gent. Richard Griggs of Gringly
up the Hill, and John Seywell of Normanton against Plumtree come, and are sworn
Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, and because the rest of the Jurors of that Jury
did not appear, therefore others of the standers by, chosen by the Sheriff of
the County aforesaid, at the request of Roger Earl of Rutland, and by the
command of the Justices aforesaid, of new are added, whose names are fyled to
the Panel within written, according to the form of the Statute in such case
made and provided, and the Jurors of new added, that is to say, John Hutten and
John Templemem likewise come, who to say the truth of the premises, with the
other Jurors aforesaid first impannelled, chosen, tried and sworn, say upon
their Oath; That the Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England, was seized in her
demesne as of Fee, in right of her Crown of England, of and in the Manor of
Maunsfield in the County of Nottingham, and of and in the Manor of Bolsover,
and Horsley in the County of Derby, and so thereof being seized, the 14th. day
of June tn the year of her Reign the 42th. By her Letters Patents, under the
great Seal of England sealed, and to the Jurors aforesaid showed in evidence,
granted to the aforesaid Earl of Rutland, from the time of the full age of the
said Earl of 21 years, to the term, and for and during the whole term of the
natural life of him the said Earl, the office of Steward of the Lordships or
Manors aforesaid, with the Wages and Fees to the said Office, of old due and
accustomed, as in the said Letters Patents is contained, the Tenor of which
follows in these words. Elizabeth by the Grace of God, of England, France and
Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these present Letters
shall come Greeting; Know ye, that we of our special Grace, and of our certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, have given and granted, and by these presents for
us, our Heirs, and Successors, do give and grant to our Well Beloved Cousin,
Roger Earl of Rutland, the Office of Constable of our Castle of Nottingham, and
Keeper o^ the Gates of the said Castle, as also the Office of Steward, Keeper,
Guardian, and Chief Justice of our Forest of Sherwood, and our Parks of
Billow, Birkland, Romwald, Owseland, Folwood, Beskwood, and Clipson, with their
Aupurtenances in the said County of Nottingham, and him the said Roger Earl of
Rutland, Constable of our Castle aforesaid, and Keeper of the Gates of the said
Castle, as also Steward, Keeper, and Justice Itinerate of the Forests and Parks
aforesaid, we ^o make, ordain, and constitute by these presents, giving and
granting to the said Roger Earl of Rutland, by the Tenor of these presents,
full power and authority, All, and all manner o^ Pleas, Quarrels, and Causes
within the Forest and Parks aforesaid, or any of them arising, according to the
Law and Custom of the Forest to hear and determine. To have, enjoy, use, and
exercise, the Offices aforesaid and every of them, To the aforesaid Roger Earl
of Rutland, by him, or by his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, from the time of
the full age of 21. years, of the same Earl, to the Term, and for and during
the whole Term of the natural life of the said Roger Earl of Rutland, together
with power in the said Offices to make and appoint all Officers of old due and
accustomed, and for the exercising and occupation of the Office aforesaid, we
give and grant by these presents to the aforesaid Roger Earl of Rutland, the
Wages and ^ee of 40. Marks by the year, from the time of the full age of 21.
years of the said Earl, to the Term, and for the whole natural life of the said
Earl of Rutland; As also an Annuity or yearly Rent of 9. pound, from the time
of the full age of the said Earl, to the Term, for and during the whole Term of
the natural life of the same Earl of Rutland, for the Wages or Stipends of 9.
Foresters, assigned by him the said Earl, to keep the Forest aforesaid, To be
taken and yearly to be received, the said Wages and Fee of 40. Marks, from the
Treasury of us, our Heirs and Successors, at the Receipt of our Exchequer at
Westminster, by the Hands of our Treasurer or Chamberlains, or an^ o^ their
Hands for the time being, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel and
Easter, by even portions. And also the said Annuity or yearly Rent of 9. pound,
for the Wage and Stipend of the aforesaid Roger Earl of Rutland, from the time
of the full age of 21. years of the said Earl, to the Term, and for and during
the whole Term of the natural life of the same Earl of Rutland, from the
Treasury of us, our Heirs and Successors, at the Receipt of our Exchequer,
arising by the Hands of our Treasurer and Chamberlains, or any of them for the
time being, or from our Meadows near the Castle of Notington aforesaid, called
the Kings Meadows, and of the profits of Pannage and Herbage of our Park of
Beskwood, as also of all the Rents and profits of the Forest aforesaid coming
o^ growing, by the Hands of the Bailiffs, Farmers, Receivers, or other
Occupiers of the said Meadows, out of the Rents and profits aforesaid, or any
of them for the time being, at the Feasts aforesaid, by equal portions; We also
give, and for us, our Heirs and Successors, we grant to the said Roger Earl of
Rutland, from the time and full age of 21. years of the same Earl, to the Term,
and for and during the whole Term of the natural life of the same Roger Earl of
Rutland, The Office of Steward of our Lordships or Manors of Maunsfield,
Bolsover, and Horseley, with the Wages and Fees to the said Office, of old due
and accustomed to be taken, To have, and yearly to take the said Wages during
the Term aforesaid, of the Issues, Profits, Farms and Revenews of the said our
Lordships, or Manors of Maunsfield, Bolsover, and Horseley, or any of them, by
the Hands of the Farmer, Receivers, or other Occupiers of the same, or any of
them for the time being, at the said Feasts of Saint Michael the Archangel, and
Easter, by equal portion, together with all other Profits, Rights, Commodities,
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Emoluments, to all and singular
the said Offices, with other the p^emises or any of them coming, or any ways
belonging, and as fully, freely, and wholly, and in as ample manner and form as
Thomas Manners Knight, or John Manners Esquire, or John late Earl of Rutland,
or before in Edward late Earl of Rutland deceased, or before them Thomas and
Henry, late Earls of Rutland deceased, Anthony Brown, or Richard Southwell
Knights deceased, or any other, or other Officer or Officers aforesaid, or any
of them, before this time occupied, had, and perceived, or ought to have had
and received, in and for the same or any of them. And moreover, of our further
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, we have given and granted, and by
these for us, our Heirs, and Successors, we give and grant to the aforesaid
Roger Earl of Rutland, The Office of Keeper of our Park of Nottingham, with all
and singular Wages, Fees, Profits, Commodities, and Emoluments whatsoever, to
the Office aforesaid due and accustomed, or belonging, in as ample manner and
form as the aforesaid Thomas Manners Knight, or John Manners Esquire, or the
aforesaid John or Edward, late Earls of Rutland now deceased, or before them
one Richard Manners, or Francis Leak Knight now deceased, or any other or
others, Officer or Offices aforesaid, exercised, had and took, To have, use,
and exercise, the Office aforesaid, to the said Roger Earl of Rutland, by him,
or his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, from the time of the full age of 21.
years, of the same Earl, to the Term, and for and during the whole Term of the
natural life of the said Roger Earl of Rutland, together with the Wages, Fees,
Profits, Commodities, Advantage, and Emoluments whatsoever, to the said Office
of old due and accustomed, or part, or by reason thereof by any person
whatsoever, before taken and had, by the Hands of the Receivers, Farmers,
Bailiffs, Occupiers, or our Officers, for the time being, of the Issues,
Revenews, and Profits of the same, at the Feasts of Easter and Saint Michael
the Archangel, by equal portions to be paid. Which Offices and Fees, and all
and singular the premises above by these presents, given and granted by our
Letters Patents under our Great Seal of England made, bearing date at
Westminster the 23th. day of July, in the year of our Reign the 23th. to one
John Manners Esquire, during the minority of the aforesaid Roger Earl of
Rutland, lately were given and gran^ed, Which To. Earl of Rutland is now of
full age, as we have certain Knowledge, Willing, and also firmly enjoining, and
commanding by these presents to all and singular our Officers, Ministers, and
Subjects, as well within Liberties as without, by the Tenor of these presents,
That to the said Roger Earl of Rutland, and to his Deputy or Deputies in all
the premises to be done, executed, they be aiding, and assisting, as it ought
to be, Notwithstanding that express mention, of the true yearly value, or of
the certainty of the premises, or any of them, or of other gifts or gants by
us, or by any of our Progenitors, to the aforesaid Roger Earl of Rutland,
before this time made, are not in being, or any other Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Provision, or Restraint to the contrary thereof before this had, made, done,
ordained, or provided, or any other thing, cause, or matter whatsoever, in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be
made Patents. Witness my self at Westminster, the 14th. day of June, in the
year of our Reign the 42th. And that the said Roger Earl of Rutland, before the
making of the said Letters Patents, that is to say, the 10th. day of November,
in the year of the Reign of the aforesaid late Queen the 40th. came unto his
full age of 21. years, By virtue of which Letters Patents aforesaid, he was
seized of the aforesaid Office of S^eward, of the Manor of Maunsfield
aforesaid, in the Declaration above specified, as of Freehold for the Term of
his life, and that the aforesaid Roger Earl of Rutland, at the time of the
making of the said Letters Patents, did exercise the Office of Steward of the
aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield, in the Declaration aforesaid mentioned, by his
Deputies, and not by himself in his own person. And that afterward, that is to
say, the 17th. day of December, in the year of the Reign of the said late Queen
Elizabeth the 44th. The said late Lady the Queen of the said Manor of
Maunsfield, sO as before is said being seized, By her Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England sealed, bearing date the same day and year, and to the
Jurors aforesaid in Evidence showed, had granted the aforesaid Manor of
Maunsfield, amongst other things to William Hamond, and Ralph Catterell, To
have, and to hold the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield with the Appurtenances, to
the aforesaid William Hamond, and Ralph Cotterell, their Heirs and Assigns for
ever. By virtue of which, the aforesaid William Hamond, and Ralph Cotterell,
into the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield with the Appurtenances, entered and were
thereof seized in their Demesne as of Fee, And that the aforesaid William
Hamond, and Ralph Cotterell, so thereof being seized, Afterward, that is to
say, the 23th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth,
late Queen of England the 44th. abovesaid, By their certain Indenture, bearing
date the same day and year, and afterward, that is to say, the 27th. day of
the same Month of January, in the year 44th. aforesaid, before the said Lady
the Queen in her Chancery, of Record enrolled, for and in Consideration of 10.
shillings to the said William and Ralph, By the Right Honorable Gilbert Earl
of Shrewesbury, and Mary his Wife, paid, granted, aliened, bargained and sold,
the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Earl
of Shrewesbury, and Mary his Wife, To have, and to hold the said Manor with the
Appurtenances, to the aforesaid Earl of Shrewesbury, and Countess, and to
their Heirs for ever. By virtue of which, as also by force of an Act in
Parliament of the Lord Henry, late King of England the 8th. in the year of his
Reign the 27th. holden, made, the aforesaid Earl of Shrewesbury, and Countess,
were of the aforesaid Manor of Maunsfield with their Appurtenances, seized in
their Demesne as of Fee; And the Jurors further say upon their Oath aforesaid,
That the aforesaid Earl of Shrewesbury, and Countess, so as before is said
being seized, Afterward, that is to say, the 16th. day of February, in the
year of the Reign of the said late Queen the 44th. in the Declaration above
specified, One Simon Stern, then being Deputy of the aforesaid Earl of
Rutland, for the exercising the said Office of Steward of the aforesaid Manor
of Maunsfield, came to the Town of Maunsfield, to the usual place there, where
the Court of the Manor of Maunsfield aforesaid was commonly holden and kept, to
keep the Court Baron of the said Manor of Maunsfield aforesaid, And the
aforesaid Thomas Woodward, came thither to keep the Court of the said Manor, as
Steward for the aforesaid Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury, and that the aforesaid
Thomas Woodward, as Steward of the aforesaid Earl of Shrewsbury, and the
aforesaid Simon Stern, as Deputy of the aforesaid Earl of Rutland, to the place
aforesaid, both together came, And the said Simon Stern, as Deputy of the said
Earl of Rutland, Commanded the Bailiff of the same Manor to make Proclamation
for the holding of the Court Baron of the said Manor, by him the said Simon
Stern, as Deputy of the aforesaid Earl of Rutland then to be holden; And the
aforesaid Thomas VVoodward, as Steward of the aforesaid Earl of Shrewsbury,
likewise Commanded the Bailiff of that Manor that he make Proclamation for the
holding of the Court Baron of the Manor aforesaid, by him the said Thomas
VVoodward, as Steward of the aforesaid Earl of Shrewsbury, But no Court then
was holden, but by the said Thomas VVoodward it was then adjorned, And from
thence until the bringing of the aforesaid Original Writ, The aforesaid Thomas
VVoodward, and Steward of the aforesaid Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury, kept the
Courts of the Manor aforesaid, and always from thence he the said Thomas
Woodward, and the aforesaid Robert Spencer, Received all the Fees belonging to
the Steward there, as they became due; And if upon the whole matter aforesaid,
by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It sahll seem to the Court
here, that the aforesaid Robert Spencer, and Thomas VVoodward, are guilty of
the Trespass within written, Then the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid,
That the aforesaid Robert Spencer, and Thomas Woodward, are guilty of the
Trespass within written, as the said Roger Earl of Rutland within against them
complains. And then they assesse the Damages of the said Roger Earl of
Rutland, above his costs and charges by him about his Suit in this behalf
expended, to Forty pound, and for his costs and charges to Twelve pence; And if
upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, It shall seem to the Court here, that the aforesaid Robert Spencer, and
Thomas Woodward, are not guilty of the Trespass within written, Then the
Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Robert Spencer, and
Thomas Woodward, are not guilty of the Trespass within written, as the said
Robert and Thomas within have alleged; And because, etc.

TRESPASS.
Michaelmass Term, Anno 10. of King JAMES, Rot. 574. in the KING'S BENCH, Co.
10. part. The Case of Suttons Hospital, Fol. 1.
MEmorandum, that at another time, that is to say, Trinity Term, Middle.
past, before the Lord the King at Westminster, come Simon Baxter Gent. by
George Cuppledick his Attorney, and brought here in the Court of the said Lord
the King then and there his Bill against Richard Sutton Esquire. and John Law
Gentleman, in the custody of the Marshal, of a Plea of Trespass, and are
Pledges of Suit, John Do, and Richard Roo, which Bill follows in these
words. ss. Middlesex ss. Simon Baxter Gentleman, complains of Richard Sutton,
and John Law, in the Custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsey, being before the
King himself, For that, That they, The 30th. day of May, in the year of the
Reign of the Lord JAMES, now King of England the 10th. with force and Arms, the
Close and House of him the said Simon, that is to say, A Capital Message with
the Appurtenances, called, The late dissolved Charter House besides
Smith-Field, at the Parish of Saint Sepulcher, in the County aforesaid they
brake and entered, and other harms to him did, against the Peace of the Lord the
King that now is, to the damage of the said Simon 40. pound, and thereof he
brings Suit. And now at this day, That is to say, Friday next after 8. days
of Saint Michael this Term, until which day, the aforesaid Richard and John,
had license to imparl to the said Bill, and then to answer, etc. before the
Lord the King at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Simon by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the said Richard and John by Thomas Heyward their Attorney, And
the said Richard and John defend the force and injury when, etc. And say that
they are not guilty, and of this put themselves upon the Country, and the said
Simon Baxter likewise; Therefore a Jury was to come thereof before the Lord the
King at Westminster, Saturday next after 8. days of Saint Hillary, And who
neither, etc. To Recognize, etc. Because as well, etc. The same day is given to
the parties aforesaid, of the Plea aforesaid, by Jurors were put by them in
respite, until Monday next after the Morrow of the Purification of the blessed
Mary then next following, for default of Jurors, etc. At which day before the
Lord the King at Westminster, come as well the aforesaid Simon Baxter, as the
aforesaid John Sutton, and John Law, by their Attorneys aforesaid, And the said
Jurors being called, come, who to say the truth of the premises, chosen, tried,
and sworn, say upon their Oath, That one Thomas Sutton Esquire, long before the
time in which the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be done, was seized of and
in all those Manors and Lordships of Southminster, Norton, Little Hallingbury,
otherwise Hallingbury Bowchers, and Muchstanbridge, in the County of Essex,
with all and singular Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever. As also
of, and in all those Manors, and Lordships of Bustingthorp, otherwise
Buslingthorp, and Dunnesby, in the County of Lincoln, with their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances whatsoever; And of and in all those Manors of
Salthorp, otherwise Saltrop, otherwise Halthrop, Chilton, and Black-grove, in
the County of Wilts, with their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances. And of and
in all those Lands, and Pastures called Black-grove, containing by estimation
200. Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Black-grove, and Wroughton, in
the County of Wilts. And of and in all those Manors of Mihenden, otherwise
Missenden, otherwise called the Manors of Mussenden, in the Parish of
Wroughton, Lydepard, and Tregose, in the said County of Wilts, with all and
singular their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances; and of all that Manor of
Elcomb, and Park called Elcomb Park, with the Appurtenances in the said County
of Wilts. And of and in all that Manor of Wattlescote, otherwise Wigglescote,
otherwise Wiggetscete with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And
of and in all that Manor of Wescot, otherwise Wescet, with the Appurtenances
in the said County of Wilts. And of and in all those Lands and Pastures,
containing by estimation 100. Acres of Land, and 60. Acres of Pasture in
Wigglescot, and Wroughton in the said County of Wilts. And of and in all that
Manor of Vscot, with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And of and
in all those two Messuages, and 1000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Pasture,
300. Acres of Pasture, and 300. Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances in
Broadhinton, in the said County of Wilts. And of and in all those Manors and
Lordships of Camps, otherwise Campes-Castle, otherwise called Castle- Camps
with the Appurtenances, situate, lying, being, and extending into the Counties
of CAMBRIDGE and ESSEX or either of them, or elsewhere in the Kingdom of
ENGLAND. And also of and in all that Manor of Balsham in the County of
Cambridge, with all and singular Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever.
And also of, and in all and singular those Messuages and Lands, situate, and
being in the Parish of Hackney, and Tottingham, in the County of Middlesex,
with their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, which Message, was
lately purchased of Will. Bowper Knight, and the said Lands in Tottenham now
are, or late were in the Tenure or Occupation of William Benning Yeoman. And
of, and in all and singular Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Services, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of
Churches, and Hereditaments of the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, whatsoever,
situate, lying and being in the said Counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts,
Cambridge, and Middlesex, or any of them, with all and singular their Rights,
Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever in his demesne as of Fee. And the said
Jurors further say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Thomas Sutton so
thereof being seized, before the time in which, that is to say, At the 4th
Session of Parliament begun and holden by Prorogation at Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex, the 9th. day of February, in the year of the Reign of our
Lord James by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. the 7th. and of Scotland the 3d. and there continued until
the 24th. day of July then next following, and then prorogued until the 16th.
day of October then next following, amongst other things, it was Enacted and
established by Authority of the same Parliament, as follows in these words.
Humbly beseeches your Majesty, Your Loyal and dutiful Subject, Thomas Sutton
of Bedsham, in the County of Cambridge Esquire, That it may please your most
excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, To Enact, Ordain, Establish, And be it
Enacted, Ordained, and Established by the Authority aforesaid, That in the Town
of Hallingburn, otherwise called Hallinborn Bowchers, in the County of Essex,
there may be builded and erected, at the Costs and Charges of your suppliant,
one meet, fit, and convenient House, Buildings, and Rooms, for the abiding, and
dwelling of such number of poor People, Men, and Children, as your suppliant
shall name by limit and appointment to be lodged, harbored, abide, and be
relieved there. And for the abiding, dwelling, and necessary use of one
Schoolmaster, and Usher, to instruct the said Children in Reading, Writing,
and the Latin and Greek Grammar. And of one Divine and godly Preacher, to
instruct and teach all the rest of the same House in the knowledge of God, and
his word. And of one Master to govern all these persons, of, in, or belonging
unto the same House. And that the same shall and may be called, The Hospital of
King James, founded in Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the humble
Petition, and at the only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire; And that
the Right Reverend Father in God, Richard now Archbishop of Canterbury, and
his Successors Archbishops there; Thomas Lord Ellesmore, Lord Chancellor of
England, and such as after him shall succeed to be Lord Chancellors, or Lord
Keepers of the Great Seal of England, for and during the time they shall so
continue, or be in the same Office; Robert Earl of Salisbury, Lord High
Treasurer of England, and such as after him shall succeed to be Treasurers of
England, and such as after him shall succeed to be Treasurers of England, for
and during the time they shall continue or be in the same Office; The Reverend
Father in God, Lancelot Bishop of Ely, and his Successors Bishops there;
Richard Bishop of Rochester, and Dean of the Cathedral Church of Westminster,
and his Successors of and in the same Deanery; Sir Thomas Foster Knight. one of the
Justices of your Majesty's Court of Common Pleas usually holden at Westminster,
Sir Henry Hobart Knight, your Majesty's Attorney General, John Overal Doctor of
Divinity, Dean of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, and his
Successors Deans there, Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of your
Majesty's Court of Chancery, Thomas Fortescue, Thomas Paget, Geffrey
Nightingale, and Richard Sutton Esquires, John Law, and Thomas Brown Gent. and
such others as shall be from time to time for ever hereafter chosen and
nominated in and to the places and steads of such of them as shall decease by
your suppliant during his life; and after his decease by the most part of them,
which them shall be Governors of the said Hospital, to be and succeed in, and
to the place and places of him and them deceasing, shall and may be the
Governors of the said Hospital, and of the Members, Goods, Lands, Revenews, and
Hereditaments of the same, at all times hereafter for ever: And that the same
Governors and Hospital, shall for ever hereafter stand, and be incorporated,
Established, and founded in name, and indeed, a body Politic and Corporate to
have continuance for ever, By the name of the Governors of the Hospital of King
James, founded in Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the humble Petition,
and at the only Costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire; And that they the
said Governors may have a perpetual Succession, and that by that name, they and
their Successors, may for ever have, hold and enjoy, the Manors, Lordships,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, without any
License of pardon for any alienation of them, or any of them, and without any
License of, or for Mortmain, or any other Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding, That is to say, your Suppliants Manors, and Lordships of
Southminster, Norton, little Hallingbury, otherwise Hallingbury Bowchers, and
Much Stambridge in the County of Essex, with all their, and every of their
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever: And all those your supplyants
Manors, and Lordships of Baslingthorp in Dunnesby in the County of Lincoln,
with theirs and either of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever.
And also all those your supplyants Manors of Salthope, otherwise of Saltrop,
Chilton, and black grove, with their and every of their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And all those your supplyants Lands,
and Pasture grounds called Black-grove, containing by estimation 200. Acres of
Pasture with the Appurtenances in Black-grove, and Wroughton, in the said
County of Wilts. And all that your supplyants Manor of Mihenden, otherwise
called Miganden, in the parishes of VVroughton, Hygerd, and Tregoce, in the
said County of Wilts. And all that your spply^nts Manor of Elcombe, and the
Park called Elcombe Park, in the said County of Wilts. And all those your
supplyants Manor of Vvitlescot, otherwise called VVigglescot, otherwise called
VViglescote, otherwise called Webescete, in the County of Wilts. And all those
your supplyants Lands, and Pastures, called VVescete, with the Appurtenances in
the said County of Wilts. And all that your supplyants Manor of VVescote,
otherwise called VVescete, with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts.
And all those your supplyants Lands, and Pastures, containing by estimation,
100. Acres of Land, and 60. Acres of Pasture in VVigliscot and VVroughton, in
the said County of Wilts. And all that your supplyants Manor of Offcote with
the Appurtenances, in the said County of Wilts. And all those your supplyants
two Messuages, and 1000 Acres of Land. 2000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of
Meadow, and 300. Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Brodelinton, in the
said County of Wilts. And also all those your supplyants Manors and Lordships
of Camps, otherwise called Camps, otherwise called Campes-Castle, otherwise
called Castle Camps, situate, lying, being, and extending in the Counties of
Cambridge, and Essex, or in either of them, or elsewhere, within the Realm of
England. And also all that your supplyants Manor of Balsham, in the County of
Cambridge, with all and singular the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances
thereof, whatsoever. And also all that your supplyants Message and Lands,
situate, and being in the Parishes of Hackney, and Tottenham, in the County of
Middlesex, or in either of them, with their, and either of their Rights,
Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, which said Message, was late purchased
of Sir William Bowper Knight, and the Lands in Tottenham now are, or late
were, in the tenure or Occupation of William Benning Yeoman. And also all and
singular the Manors, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, and Services,
Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of Churches, and Hereditaments,
of your supplyants whatsoever, situate, lying and being, within the said
Counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridge, and Middlesex, or any of them,
with all and every of their Rights, Members, and appurtenances whatsoever. And
also all your supplyants Letters Patents, Indentures, Deeds, Evidences, Books,
and Writings concerning the premises, or any of them. And all such Commissions,
Warrants, Vouchers, Actions, Suits, Entries, Benefits, and Demands, as shall
and may be had, by any person or persons, upon, or by reason of them, or any of
them, except those your supplyans Manors and Lordships of Littlebury, and
Hadstock, in the said County of Essex, and except all your suppliants Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in Littelbury, and Hadstock aforesaid, or either
of them; And that the said Governor and their successors, by the same name,
shall and may have power, ability, and capacity to demise, lease and grant
their Possession and Hereditaments, and every of them, to take, acquire, and
purchase, and to sue, and be sued, and to do, perform and execute, all and
every other Lawful Act and thing, good, necessary, and profitable for the said
Incorporation, in as full and ample manner and form, and to all intents,
constructions, and pu^poses, as any other Incorporations, or body politic or
corporate, fully and perfectly, founded and incorporated, may do. And that the
same Governors, and their successors for the time being, may have, and use a
common Seal, for the making, granting, and demising of such their demises and
Leases, and for the doing of all and every other thing, touching, or in any
wise concerning the said Incorporation. In which Seal, shall be engraven the
Arms of the said Thomas Sutton your supplyant. And also that it may be further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, and be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That your supplyant during his life, and the said Governors and
their Successors, for the time being, or the most of them, after his decease,
shall, and may have, full power and Lawful authority, to break, alter, and
change the said Seal, and that your Orator during his life, and the said
Governors and their Successors, for the time being, or the most part of them,
after his decease, shall and may have full power and authority, to nominate and
appoint, and sball and may nominate and appoint, when, and as often as he and
they shall think good, such person and persons, as he and they shall think
meet, to be Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor Men, and Poor
Children, and Officers of the said Hospital; and when any of them by Death,
Resignation, Deprivation, or otherwise shall become void, shall and may, within
one month then next after such avoydance, by writing under the said common
Seal, nominate and appoint one or more Learned, discreet, and meet men and
persons, to be Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor men, Poor Children,
and Officers, in the places of them so deceasing, resigning, or otherwise
becoming void, and that in case the said Governors and their successors, for
the time being, or the most of them, shall not within one month after such
avoydance, make such nomination and appointment as aforesaid, that then, and so
often, and in every such case, from and after the decease of your said Orator,
it shall and may be Lawful to your Majesty your Heirs and Successors, by your
Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England, to nominate and appoint some
meet, godly, and Learned men, in and to the places void by such default of the
said Governors and their Successors for the time being, or the most part of
them, as is aforesaid, and that it shall, and may be Lawful to, and for the
said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor men, and Poor Children, and
Officers of the Hospital, to remain, assemble, be and Cohabit together, in the
said House, Buildings, and Hospital, And that it may be further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, and Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that your
said supplyant during his life, and that the said Governors and their
successors for the time being, or the most part of them, after his decease,
shall and may have full power and authority under the said common Seal, to
make, ordayn, set down, and prescribe such Rules, Statues, and Ordinances, for
the Order, Rule, and Government of the said Hospital, and of the said Master,
Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor men, Poor Children, and Officers, and
their successors, and for their and every of their stipends, and allowances, as
to your said supplyant during his life, and the said Governors and their
successors, for the time being, or the most part of them, after his decease,
shall seem meet and convenient. And that the same Orders, Rules, Statutes, and
Ordinances, so by him, them, or any of them made, set down, or prescribed as
aforesaid, shall be, and stand, in full force and strength in Law, the same not
being repugnant nor contrary to your Majesty's Prerogative royal, nor to the
Laws or Statures of this your Majesty's Realm of England, nor to any
Ecclesiastical Canons of the Church of England, then in force and use. And that
your said supplyant during his life, and the said Governors and their
successors, for the time being, or the most part of them, and such of them as
your said supplyant shall thereto nominate and appoint, shall and may after the
decease of your said suppliant, have power and authority to visit the said
Hospital, and to Order, reform and redress all disorders and abuses in and
touching the Government and disposing of the same, And further to censure,
suspend, and deprive the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor men,
Poor Children, and Officers for the time being, and every or any of them, as to
him and them shall seem Just, fit and convenient, so always as no Visitation,
Act, or thing, in, or touching the same, be had, made or done, other than by
your supplyant during his life, or the said Governors and their successors,
for the time being, or the most part of them, after his decease, or by such of
them as your supplyant shall hereunto nominate and appoint. And also that it
may be farther enacted by the authority aforesaid, and be it enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that that the said Preacher and Minister of the Word of
God, which shall be placed in the said Hospital, to and for the uses and
purposes aforesaid, from time to time hereafter shall and may enter into, have,
hold, and enjoy, the Rectory and Parsonage of Hallingbury aforesaid, in, and to
his own proper use and behoof, for and during so long time as he shall be
Preacher, and Minister there, without any other Presentation, or Admission,
Jnstruction, or Induction. And that no Lease shall hereafter be made of the
said Parsonage or of any part or portion thereof, other than such as shall
determine and end when and as soon as any such person shall be the Preacher or
Minister of and in the said Hospital, when the same Lease shall be made, shall
cease, and resign, leave, or be put out and removed from his said place of
Preacher or Minister of the said Hospital, Saving always, and reserving to
your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and to every other person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, their Heirs and Successors, other than your
suppliant and his Heirs, and the person and persons from whom the same were
purchased, and their Heirs, claiming only as Heirs, all such Estate, Right,
Title, Condition, Claim, Possession, Rents, Services, Commons, Demands,
Actions, Remedies, Recoveries, Terms, Interests, Forfeits, Commodities,
Advantages, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which they or any of them shall and
may, have, or of Right ought to have, of, in, to, or out of the premises, or
any of them, or any part thereof, as if this Act had never been had or made,
Other than Fine or Fines, of or for any Alienation of the premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, And other their Respits of Homage, or Fines for not payment
of Respits of Homage, at any time hereafter to be demanded, And other than
Title and Right of Liberty or Liberties, to enter into the same or any one of
them, for or by reason of any Statute hitherto made, for, concerning, or
against any Alienation in Mortmain, as by the said Act amongst other things it
appears. And further the said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That
Thomas, then and now Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household,
before the aforesaid time in which, etc. was seized of and in a certain Capital
Message or Mansion House, called or known by the name of Howard House,
otherwise called, The late dissolved Charter House, besides Smithfield,
situate, lying and being in the County of Middlesex, with all and singular
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances to the same belonging and appertaining, And
all that Orchard and Garden with the Appurtenances, thereunto likewise
belonging and appertaining, and of and in all that parcel of Land with the
Appurtenances, commonly called Pardon Churchyard, and of all those two
Messuages or Tenements, and two Closes of Land with the Appurtenances thereunto
belonging, commonly called Welbech, situate, lying and being in the said County
of Middlesex, whereof the aforesaid Capital Message with the Appurtenances, in
the Declaration aforesaid mentioned is, and the aforesaid time in which it is
supposed the Trespass aforesaid above to be done, as also time whereof the
Memory of Men is not to the contrary, was parcel, in his Demesne as of Fee, And
so thereof being seized, The said now Earl of Suffolk, before the time in
which, etc. That is to say, at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, By his
certain Indenture, between him the said now Earl, by the name of the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of the most Honorable
Household of the Lord the King, and Theophilus Lord Howard, Son and Heir
apparent of the said Earl of Suffolk, and Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey,
and William Lord Howard of Naward, in the County of Cumberland of the one part,
and the aforesaid Thomas Sutton of Balsham in the County of Cambridge Esquire
on the other part made, and within 6. Months then next following, in the Court
of the said Lord the King of Common Pleas, at Westminster aforesaid, then
being in due manner of Record Enrolled, according to the form of the Statute in
such case made and provided, one part of which, as well with the Seal of the
aforesaid Thomas now Earl of Suffolk, as with the Seals of the aforesaid
Theophilus Lord Howard, Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, William Lord Howard,
sealed, to the Jurors aforesaid in Evidence showed, bearing date the same day
and year, For and in consideration of 13000. pound of good and lawful Money of
England, by the said Thomas Sutton, to the aforesaid Thomas Earl of Suffolk, in
Hand paid, Bargained, and Sold, All and singular the premises with the
Appurtenances, being called, The late dissolved Charter House, besides
Smithfield, in the said County of Middlesex, whereof, etc. to the said Thomas
Sutton, To have, and to hold, to him and his Heirs for ever, to the only use
and behoof of the said Thomas, his Heirs and Assigns for ever; The Tenor of
which Indenture follows in these words. This Indenture made the 9th. day of
May, in the 9th. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the Grace of
God King of England, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. and of
Scotland the 44th. Between the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord
Chamberlain of the Kings Majesty's most Honorable Household, The Right
Honorable Theophilus Lord Howard, Son and Heir apparent of the said Earl of
Suffolk, The Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and the Right
Honorable William Lord Howard, of Naward in the County of Cumberland of the
one part, and Thomas Sutton of Balsham, in the County of Cambridge Esquire on
the other part, Witnesses, That the said Right Right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Suffolk, Theophilus Lord Howard, Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and William
Lord Howard, for and in consideration of the sum of 13000. p. of good and
lawful Money of England, to the said Thomas Earl of Suffolk, in Hand paid before
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said Thomas Sutton, well
and truly satisfied, contented, and paid, whereof and wherewith they and every
of them acknowledge themselves fully satisfied, contented, and paid, and
thereof and every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit, exonerate, and
discharge the said Thomas Sutton, his Heirs, Executors, and Administators, and
every of them by these presents, Have granted, Aliened, Bargained, Sold,
Conveied and Confirmed, And by these presents, do for them and their Heirs,
fully, clearly, and absolutely, grant, alien, bargain, fell, convey and
confirm, unto the said Thomas Sutton, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that
Capital Message or Mansion House, commonly called or known by the name of
Howard House, otherwise called, The late dissolved Charter-Houso, besides
Smithfied, situate and being within the County of Middles. with all and
singular the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances thereunto belonging and
appertaining, And all that Orchard and Garden with the Appurtenances, thereunto
likewise belonging and appertaining, and all that parcel of Land and Ground
with the Appurtenances, commonly called Pardon Church yard. And all those two
Messuages or Tenement, and two Closes of Land and Ground with the Appurtenances
thereunto adjoining, commonly called Welbech, situate, lying and being in the
said County of Middlesex, And also all and singular Messuages, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Courts, Folds, Curtilags,
Yards, Orchards, Gardens, Shops, Sellars, Sollers, Closes, Enclosures, Waste
Grounds, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Fruits, Profits, Alterages, Ways,
Waters, Rents, Reversions, Services, Waises, Strayes, Goods of Felons, Outlaws
and Fugitives, and all other Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Jurisdictions,
Profits, Emoluments, Commodities, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances whatsoever,
by what name or names soever they be called or known, to the said Capital
Message or Mansion House, called Howard House, or the late dissolved
Charter House, besides Smith-field, and other the before mentioned premises,
and in every or any of them, lying, belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
to or with the same, every, or any of them usually held, occupied, or enjoyed,
or accepted, or reputed, taken, known, demised, used, or letten as part,
parcel, or Member of them or any of them, and also the Reversion and
Reversions, Remainder and Remainders whatsoever, of all and singular the
premises with the Appurtenances, And all Rents and yearly Profits whatsoever,
reserved upon any Demise, Lease, Estate, or Grant, Demises, Leases, Estates, or
Grants, heretofore made or granted of the before mentioned premises, or any
part or parcel thereof; And also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use,
Possession, Reversion, Remainder, Claim, and Demand whatsoever, of them the
said Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Theophilus Lord Howard, Thomas earl of Arundel and
Surrey, and of William Lord Howard, and of every of them, of, in, or into the
said Capital Message, or Mansion House called Howard House, or the late
dissolved Charter House besides Smith-field, and other the before mentioned
premises, or of, in, or to, every, or any part or parcel hereof. And further
the said Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Theophilus Lord Howard,
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and William Lord Howard, for the
considerations aforesaid, Have Granted, Bargained, Sold, and by these presents,
do grant, bargain, and sell unto the said Thomas Sutton, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, All and every the Deeds, Charters, Evidences, Writings, Counterpains
of Lease and Leases, Indentures, Exemplifications, Letters Patents, Transcrips
of Fines and Recoveries, Terrers, Court Rolls, Surveis, Presentiments,
Boundaries, Escripts, and Minuments whatsoever, touching, or in any wise only
concerning the said Capital Message or Mansion House, called Howard H. or the
late dissolved Charter-H. besides Smith-f. To have and to hold the said Houses,
Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Closes, Enclosures, Tenements, Hereditaments, and
all other the premises before, or in or by these presents bargained and sold,
or mentioned, intended, or meant to be bargained and sold, and every part and
parcel thereof with their Appurtenances, unto the said Thomas Sutton his Heirs
and Assigns for ever to the sole, only, and proper use and behoof of him the
said Thomas, his Heirs and Assigns for ever more, absolutely without any manner
of Condition, Redemption, or Revovation in any wise. And the said Thomas Earl
of Suffolk, his Heirs, and the said Capital Message or Mansion House, called
Howard House, or the Charter House, and all and singular other the before
mentioned premises, with all their, and every of their Appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said Thomas Sutton his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, in manner and form aforesaid, against him the said Thomas Earl of
Suffolk, and his Heirs, and all and every other person or persons, claiming,
by, from, or under him, shall and will warrant, and for ever more defend by
these presents. And the said Theophilus Lord Howard, and his Heirs, the said
Capital Message or Mansion House called Howard House, or the Charter House,
and all and singular other the before mentioned premises, and every part
thereof with the apputenances, unto the said Thomas Sutton his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, in manner and form aforesaid against him the said Theophilus
Lord Howard, and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons,
lawfully claiming, by, from, or under him, shall and will warrant, and for
evermore defend by these presents. And the said Thomas Earl of Arundel and
Surrey, and his Heirs, the said Capital Message or Mansion House, called
Howard House, or the Charter House, and all and singular the before mentioned
premises, and every part and parcel thereof with the Appurtenances, unto the
said Thomas Sutton, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in manner and form
aforesaid against him the said Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and his
Heirs, and all and every other person and persons, lawfully claiming, by, from,
or under him, shall and will warrant, and for ever more defend by these
presents. And the said William Lord Howard, and his Heirs, the said Capital
Message or Mansion House called Howard House, or the Charter House, and all
and singular other the before mentioned premises, and every part and parcel
thereof with the Appurtenances, unto the said Thomas Sutton his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, in manner and form aforesaid, against him the said William
Lord Howard, and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons,
lawfully claiming, by, from, or under him, shall and will warrant, and for ever
defend by these presents. In witness whereof, the parties above named to these
present Indentures interchangealy have set their Hands and Seals, the day and
year above written, 1611, as by the same Indenture, dated as before is said
appears. All and singular whichpremises, by the Indenture aaforesaid, in form
aforesaid Bargained, are known and vulgarly called, and at the time of the
Bargain aforesaid, were known by the name of the late dissolved Charter House
besides Smith field. By color of which Bargain, Sale, and Inrollment
aforesaid, As also by force of a certain Act in Parliament of the Lord Henry,
late King of England the 8th. at Westminster aforesaid, the 4th. day of
February, in the year of his Reign the 27th. Of transferring uses in
possession, to be holden, made, and provided, The same Thomas Sutton, in all
and singular the bargained premises, called the late dissoved Charter House
besides Smith field, with the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. entered and was
thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee, And so thereof being seized, The Lord
JAMES, now King of England, the 22th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of
the said Lord the King now of England, etc. the 9th. abovesaid, at Westminster
aforesaid, made his Letters Patents, sealed with his Great Seal of England, and
to the Jurors aforesaid showed in Evidence, The Tenor of which follows in
these words. JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland Defender of the Faith, etc. To All to whom these presents shall come
Greeting. Whereas, At the last Session of Parliament last past, One Act was
made and passed, Entitled an Act to confirm and enable the Erection and
Establishment of and Hospital, a Free Grammar School, and sundry other godly
and charitable Acts, done, and intended to be done and performed, by Thomas
Sutton Esquire, as by the same Act of Parliament more at large it does and may
appear. And whereas since the said Act, The said Thomas Sutton has purchased,
to him as his Heirs, of our Right Trusty, and Well-Beloved Cousin and Counselor
Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of our Household, A great and large
Mansion House, commonly called the late dissolved Charter House besides Smith
field, together with diverse Houses, Buildings, Courts, Yards, Gardens,
Orchards, Closes, and other Hereditaments, to or with the same Mansion House,
used, or enjoyed, or reputed as part, parcel, member, or belonging thereunto,
within our County of Middlesex; Which Mansion house, and other the premises,
the said Thomas Sutton, does conceive to be a more fit and commodious House and
Place, to place, erect, and found the said Hospital and Free School, and other
the godly and charitable uses aforesaid, then in Hallingbury, otherwise
Hallibury Bowchers, in the said Act mentioned, And to that end, the said Thomas
Sutton has been an humble Suter unto us, That we would be graciously pleased
to give License, Power, and Authority, unto him the said Thomas Sutton, to
found, erect, and establish, an Hospital and Free school, and other the godly
and charitable uses by him intended, in the said House called the late
dissolved Charter House besides Smith field, in our said County of Middlesex,
And to incorporate the Governors hereafter named, to be a Body Corporate and
Politic, and to have perpetual succession for ever, in fact, deed, or name,
And by such name of Incorporation as is hereafter mentioned, to have full
authority, and lawful capacity and ability, to purchase, take, hold, receive,
and have, to them and their Successors for ever, Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Annuities, Pensions, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, as well of us,
our Heirs and Successors, as of any other person or persons whatsoever, for the
better maintenance of the said Hospital, Free School, and other godly and
charitable uses aforesaid. Know ye therefore, That we graciously affecting so
good and charitable a work, of our princely disposition, and care for the
furtherance thereof, and of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, Have given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents do give,
grant, and confirm, for us, our Heirs and Successors, unto the said Thomas
Sutton, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and to every of
them, full Power, License, and lawful Authority, at all times hereafter, at
his, and their Will and Pleasure, to place, erect, found, and establish, at or
in the said House called the late dissolved Charter House besides Smith field,
and other the premises within our said County of Middlesex, One Hospital-House,
or place of abiding, for the finding, sustentation, and relief of poor, aged,
maimed, needy, and impotent people, As also, that the said Thomas Sutton,
during his life, and after his death, the Governors hereafter named, and their
Successors, and the Survivors or Survivor, of them, his, and their Successors
for ever, And the Governors hereof for the time being, and their Successors,
shall have full Power, License, and lawful Authority, at his o^ their Wills and
Pleasures, respectively from time to time, and at all times hereafter, to place
therein such Master, or Head of the said Hospital, and numbers of poor peole,
Men and Children, and such other Members and Officers of the said Hospital, as
to him the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and after his death to the said
Governors and their Successors, and to the Survivors or Survivor of them, and
to his and their Successors, and to the Governors thereof for the time being,
and their Successors, shall seem convenient. And further, we of our special
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, Have given, granted, and confirmed,
and by these presents do give, grant, and confirm, unto the said Thomas Sutton,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and to every of them, at
his, or their Wills and Pleasures, full Power, License, and lawful Authority,
at all times hereafter to place, erect, found, and establish, at or in the said
House, called the late dissolved Charter House besides Smith field, and other
the premises in our County of Middlesex, One Free School, for the instructing,
teaching, maintenance, and education of poor Children or Scholars, And that
the said Thomas Sutton, during his life, and after his decease, the Governors
hereafter named and their Successors, and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
and his, and their Successors for ever, and the Governors of the said
Hospital, for the time being and their Successors, shall have full Power,
License, and lawful Authority, at his or their Wills and Pleasures, from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, to place therein such number of poor
Children or Scholars, as to him the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and
after his decease, to the said Governors and their Successors, and to the
Survivors or Survivor of them, and his and their Successors, and to the
Governors of the said Hospital for the time being, and their Successors shall
seem convenient. And also one godly and learned Preacher, to teach and preach
the Word of God to all the said persons, poor People, and Children, As also one
learned, able, and sufficient person to be the Schoolmaster of the said
School, and one learned, able, and sufficient person to be the Usher thereof,
to teach and instruct the said Children in Grammar. And further, we of our said
special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have ordained, constituted,
assigned, limited and appointed, and by these presents for us, our Heirs and
Successors, do ordain, constitute, assign, limit and appoint, That the said
House and other the premises, shall from henceforth for ever hereafter, be,
remain, continue, and be converted, employed, and used for an Hospital, and
House and Place, for the abiding, sustentation, and relief of such number of
poor People, Men and Children, as the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and
after his death, the Governors hereafter named and their Successors, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Successors, and all and every
the Governors of the said Hospital for the time being, and their Successors,
shall name, assign, limit, or appoint to be lodged, harbored, abide, and to be
maintained and relieved there, and for the abiding, dwelling, sustentation, and
relief of such number of poor Children, as the said Thomas Sutton during his
life, and after his death the Governors hereafter named and their Successors,
and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Successors, and the
Governors of the said Hospital for the time being, shall from time to time
name, assign, limit or appoint, to be lodged, harbored, abide, and to be
maintained and relieved there, And for the abiding, dwelling, sustentation, and
finding of one Schoolmaster, one Usher, and one Preacher as is aforesaid, and
of one Master or Head of the said House and Hospital. And that it shall and may
be lawful, to and for the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor
people, Children, Men, and Officers of the said Hospital, or therein to be
placed for the time being, to assemble, be, remain, abide, and cohabit together
in the said Hospital; And that the said Hospital shall for ever hereafter be
incorporated, named and called, the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Charter House within the County of Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and only
costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire. And the same Hospital and Free School,
by the name of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House within
the County of Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of
Thomas Sutton Esquire. We do firmly by these presents, for us, our Heirs and
Successors, erect, found, establish, and confirm, to have continuance for ever.
And for the better maintenance and continuance of the said Hospital and
Free School, and the said godly and charitable uses, intents and purposes, and
that the same may have and take the better effect, and that all and every the
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments,
Goods and Chattels, granted, conveied, assigned, devised, willed, limited and
appointed, for the maintenance, sustentation, and relief of the persons
aforesaid, in the same Hospital may be the better governed, used, employed, and
bestowed for the mantainance of the persosn in the said Hospital for the time
being, to have continuance for ever; We Will, Ordain, and do appoint, assign,
limit and name, and for us, our Heirs and Successors, do grant and ordain by
these presents, That there shall be for ever hereafter 16. persons, who shall
be called Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the
Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House within the County of
Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, And for that purpose we have elected, nominated, ordained, assigned,
constituted, limited and appointed, and by these presents do for us, our Heirs
and Successors, elect, nominate, ordain, assign, constitute and appoint, The
Right Reverend Father in God, George now Arch Bishop of Canterbury, our trusty
and Well-Beloved Counselor, Thomas Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England,
our trusty and Well-Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Robert Earl of Salisbury,
Lord High Treasurer of England, John the elect Bishop of London, Lancelot now
Bishop of Elie, Sir Edward Coke Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Thomas Foster Knight, one of our Justices of our Court of Common Pleas, Sir
Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet our Attorney General, John Overal, now Dean of
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, George Mountain, Dean of the
Collegiate Church of Westminster, Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of
our Court of Chancery, Jeffery Nightingale Esquire, Richard Sutton Esquire,
John Law Gentleman, Thomas Brown Gentleman, and the Master of the Hospital of
King JAMES, founded in the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, At
the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of the said Thomas Sutton
Esquire, and such person and persons as shall be from time to time Master or
Masters of the said Hospital, for and during such time as they shall be Master
or Masters thereof, to be the first and present Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and that they, and the
Survivors of them, and such as the Survivors or Survivor of them, from time to
time, Elect, and Choose to make up the number of 16. when, and as often as any
of them, or any of their Successors shall happen to decease, or to be removed
from being Governors or Governor thereon, shall be incorporated, and have a
perpetual succession for ever, in Deed, Fact, and Name, and shall be one Body
Politic and Corporate; And that the said persons and their Successors, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Successors, and such as shall
be elected, and chosen to succeed them as aforesaid shall be incorporated,
named, and called, by the name of the Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, And them by the name of
Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital of
King JAMES, founded in the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, At
the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, One
Body Corporate and Politic, by that name to have perpetual succession for ever
to endure; We do by these presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, really
and fully incorporate, make, erect, ordain, name, constitute, and establish;
And that by the same name of the Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, they, and their Successors,
and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and his and their Successors, and the
persons to be elected and chosen as aforesaid, shall for ever hereafter be
incoporated, named and called, and shall by the same name have perpetual
succession for ever, And that they by the same name be, and shall be, and
continue persons able and capable in the Law from time to time, and shall by
that name of Incorporation, have full Power, Authority, and lawful capacity and
ability, to purchase, take, hold, receive, enjoy, and have to them and their
Successors for ever, as well Goods and Chattels, as Manors, Lands, Teneme^ts,
Rents, Reversions, Annuities, and Hereditame^ts whatsoever, as well of us, our
Heirs and Successors, as of the said Th. Sutton, his Heirs, Executors, or
Assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever; And also that the said
Governors for the time being, and their successors, shall have full power, and
Lawful authority, by the aforesaid name of Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital of King James, founded in
Charterhouse, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only
Costs and Charges, of Thomas Sutton Esquire, to sue, and be sued, implead, and
to be impleaded, to answer, and to be answered unto, in all manner of Courts
and Places that now are, or hereafter shall be, within this our Realm, or
elsewhere, as well Temporal, as Spiritual, in all manner of Suits whatsoever,
and of what nature and kind soever, such Suits or Actions be, or shall be, in
the same and as ample manner and form, and to all intents, constructions, and
purposes, as any other person, or persons, Bodies politic, or corporate, of
this our Realm being persons able in Law may do. And furthermore We will, and
grant, by these presents, for us, our Heirs, and Successors, unto the said
Governors for the time being, and their successors, that they and their
successors, shall have and enjoy for ever a Common Seal wherein shall be
engraven the name and Arms of the said Thomas Sutton, whereby the said
Corporation shall or may Seal any manner of Instrument touching the same
Corporation, and the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, Rents, Revenues, Annuities,
and Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, and other things, thereunto belonging, or
in any wise touching or concerning the same: Nevertheless, it is our intent and
meaning, that the Governors, for the time being, and their successors, nor any
of them shall do, or suffer to be done at any time hereafter, any Act, or thing
whereby, or by means whereof, any of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Annuities, or Hereditaments of the said Corporation, or any Estate,
Interest, Possession, or Property, of, or in the same, or of any of them, shall
be conveyed, Vested, or Transferred, in or to any other whatsoever contrary to
the true meaning hereof, only than by such senses as are hereafter mentioned,
and that in such manner and form as is hereafter expressed, and not otherwise.
And that such construction shall be made upon this Foundation and
Incorporation, as shall be most beneficial and availeable for the maintenance
of the Poor, and for the repressing and of all Acts and devises to be mentioned
or put in Ure, contrary to the true meaning of the presents: And therefore our
will and plasure is, and so for us, our Heirs, and successors, we do ordayn,
that the said Governors for the time being, or their successors, or any of
them, shall not make any Lease, Grant, Conveyance, or estate of any the Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which shall exceed the number of 21. years,
and that either in possession, or not above two years before the end or
expiration, or determination of the estate or estates in posseffion, whereupon
the accustomable yearly rent, or more by the greater part of five years, next
before the making of any such Lease reserved, due, and payable, shall be
reserved and yearly payable during the continuance of every such Lease; And
also we do ordayn, grant, and appoint by these presents, for us, our Heirs, and
successors, that so often, and whenever any one or more of the said
Commissioners for the time being, or any other Governor or Commissionor that
shall be chosen hereafter, shall fortune to depart his life, or to be removed
from his or their place, of Governor or Governors, that then and so often the
residue of the said Governor or Governors, and their successors, shall be,
continue and remain incorporate, by the name of the Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospital of King James, founded in
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble petition and only
costs and charges, of Thomas Sutton Esquire, to all intents, constructions, and
purposes, according to to the true meaning of these presents, as if all the
said Governor and Governors, had continued, and that then and so often, it
shall be Lawful for the rest of the Governors, or the greatest number of
them, to elect, nominate, choose and appoint, one or more meet person or
persons, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, into the
Room and place, or Room and Places, of every such Governor or Governors,
which shall so depart this life, or be removed, which person and persons, so
nominated, elected, chosen, and agreed upon, by the said Governors or the
greater number of them, shall be, and shall be taken and reputed, to be from
the time of his and their election, to be from thenceforth together with the
others Governors of the said Hospital. And after this manner to proceed,
whenever and as often as need shall require. And the same election to be made
within two Months, that any of the said Governor or Governors shall depart
this Life, or be removed, and that the aforesaid Thomas Sutton during his life,
and after his decease the said Governors for the time being, or the more part
of them, shall have full power and authority, to nominate assign, appoint, and
shall and may name, assign, and appoint, when, and as often as he and they
shall think good, such number and numbers, of person and persons, as he and
they shall think convenient, to be Poor men, Children, and Scholars, Master,
Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Members, Officer, and Officers, of, or for the
said Hospital, as he the said Thomas Sutton, during his life, and after his
decease, the Governors for the time being, and their successors, or the more
part of them, shall think meet and convenient, nevertheless, if the Rents,
Reversions or Profits, of all or any of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditataments, Goods, or Chattels, at any time to be granted and conveyed, to
the said Governors of the said Hospital, and their successors, for the
maintenance of the people in the said Hospital, shall happen to increase, or to
be raised, or augmented to a better or greater yearly value, theu formerly the
same was, or that the Rents, Revenues, and Possessions of the said Hospital,
shall be further increased by the determination of any former estates in any of
the said possessions of the said Hospital otherwise, that all and every such
increase shall be employed to the mayntenance of more and other poor people to
be placed in the said Hospital, or to the further augmentation of the
allowances of those persons that for the time being, shall be in the said
Hospital according, to the true Intent, and meaning of these presents, and
shall not be converted or employed to an private use. And also we do by the
presents, for us our Heirs and successors will grant, and ordayn, that when
soever and as often as any of the said places or Rooms, of any of the said
Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, or Usher, Poor men, or Children, Scholars,
Members, or Officers, or any of them shall happen to become void by Death,
Resignation, Deprivation, or otherwise, that then and so often it shall and may
be Lawful for the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and after his death, for
the said Governors for the time being, and their successors, or the most part
of them, within one Month after such avoydance, by writing under the Seal of
the said Thomas Sutton, during his life, and after his death, by the siad
Governors for the time being, and their successors, under their Common Seal,
to nominate and appoint other meet person and persons, in the Rooms, place and
places, of them and every of them so deceasing, resigning or otherwise becoming
void, and if in case the said Governors and their successors, for the time
being, or the most part of them, shall not within two Months after such
avoidance, nominate, assign, and appoint, as is aforesaid, that then and so
often, and in every such case, from and after the death of the said Thomas
Sutton, it shall be Lawful for us, our Heirs and successors, by Letters
Patents, under the Great Seal of England, or Privy Seal, to nominate and
appoint, meet Person, and Persons, to all and every such Office, Rooms, Place,
and Places as shall remain void for the time aforesaid, by the default of the
said Governors and their successors, as is aforesaid. And we do further of our
special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, for us, our Heirs, and
successors, give and grant, that the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster,
Usher, Poor Men, Children, Scholars, Members, and Officers of the said
Hospital, and every of them shall be allowed, ordered, directed, visited,
placed, or displaced, by the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and after his
death by the said Governors, and their successors, and the most part of them,
according to such allowances, Rates, Statutes, and Ordinan^ns as shall be
appointed, set forth, made, devised, or established, by the said Thomas Sutton
during his life in writing under his hand and Seal, and after his death, by the
Governors for the time being, and their successors, or the more part of them
under the said Common Seal: And further we have given and granted, and by these
presents do give and grant to the said Thomas Sutton, during his life, by
writing under his hand and Seal, and to the said Governors, and their
successors, for the time being, or the more pare of them after his decease,
under the said Common Seal, to make, set down, and appoint, such Rates,
Statutes, and Ordinances, for the Rule, Government, and well ordering of the
said Hospital, and of the Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor People,
Children, Scholars, Members and Officers, for the time being, and for their and
every of their Wages, 'Stipends, and allowances, for and toward their or any
of their Mayntenance and Relief, as to the said Thomas Sutton during his life,
and after his decease to the said Governors and their successors, for the time
being, or the more part of them, shall seem meet and convenient. And that the
same Orders, Rates, Statutes and Ordinances, so by him, them, or any of them,
to be made, set down, and prescribed, as aforesaid, shall be and stand in
force, and strength in Law, to all constructions, intents, and purposes, the
same not being repugnant to our Prerogative Royal, nor contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm of England, nor unto any Ecclesiastical Canons or
Constitutions of the Church of England, which then shall be in force. And that
for the better Government of the said Hospital, the said Thomas Sutton during
his life, and after his decease, the said Governors, for the time being, or
the most part of them, or such and so many of them as the said Thomas Sutton
shall by his writing under his hand and Seal thereunto assign, appoint and
nominate, shall and may, after the decease of the said Thomas Sutton, have full
power and Lawful authority to visit, order, and punish, place or displace the
Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor People, Sholars, Members, and
Officers of the said Hospital, and every of them, and to order, reform and
redress all and every the disorders, misdemeanors, offenses, and abuses, in
the persons aforesaid, and every of them, or in the said Hospital or
Free School, or in or touching the Government, Order, and disposal of the same.
And to censure, suspend, deprive, and displace the said Master, Preacher,
Schoolmaster, Usher, Poor People, Scholars, Members, and Officers, and all and
every or any of them, as to him the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and
after his death, to the said Governors for the time being, and their
successors, or the more part of them, or to such and so many of them as the
said Thomas Sutton, by his writing under his hand and Seal, shall thereunto
assign, nominate and appoint, as shall to him or them respectively seem fit,
just, and convenient, so allwaies, that no visi^ation, act, or thing, in or
touching the same, be had, made or done, by any person or persons, during the
life of the said Thomas Button, other than by the said Thomas Sutton, and after
his death by the said Governors for the time being, and their successors, or
the more part of them, or by such or so many of them, as the said Thomas
Sutton, by his writing, under his hand and Seal, shall nominate and appoint
thereunto. And we of our further special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, and by our supreme power and authority, for us, our Heirs, and
Successors, do will, ordayn and grant, that the said Hospital, and the Master,
Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, Members and Officers, and all other the persons
to be placed in the said Hospital, sball for ever hereafter be excepted and
freed of and from all visitation, punishment, and correction to be had, used,
or exercised, in or upon them, or any of them, by the ordinary of the Diocese
for the time being, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, other than by
the said Thomas Sutton during his life, and after his decease by the said
Governors for the time being, and their successors. And further know ye, that
we for the considerations aforesaid, of our special grace, certain knowledge,
and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant to the said Governors of the Lands, possessions and Goods of the
Hospital of King James, founded in Charterhouse, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble petition and only costs and charges, of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, and their successors for ever, our special License and free and
Lawful liberty, power, and authority, to get, purchase, receive, and take to
them and their successors for ever, for the maintenance sustentation, and
relief of all and every the person and persons to be placed in the said
Hospital, of, and from the said Thomas Sutton, his Heirs and assigns, the said
great and large Mansion House, commonly called Charter House besides
Smithfield, together with all the Houses, Buildings, Courts, Yards, Gardens,
and other Hereditaments lately purchased by the said Thomas Sutton, of the said
Thomas Earl of Suffolk; and all those his Manors, and Lordships of
Southminster, Norton, little Hallingbury, otherwise Hallingbury Bowchers, and
Much Stambridge in the County of Essex, with all their, and every of their
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever: And also all those Manors, and
Lordships of Baslingthorp and Dunnesby in the County of Lincoln, with their and
every of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever. And also of all
those his Manors of Salthorpe otherwise Saltrop, otherwise Halthrope, Chilton,
and Black-grove, in the County of Wilts, with their and every of their Rights,
Members, and Appurtenances. And also all those his Lands, and Pasture grounds
called Black-grove, containing by estimation 200. Acres of Pasture with the
Appurtenances in Black-grove, and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And
also all that his Manor of Missenden, otherwise called the Manors of Missenden,
in the Parishes of VVroughton, Lydyard, and Tregoce, in the said County of
Wilts, with all his Rights, Members, and Appurtenances, And all that his Manor
of Elcombe, and the Park called Elcombe Park, with the Rights Members and
Appurtenances, in the said County of Wilts. And all that his Manor of
VVit-lescot, otherwise VViglescot, otherwise VViglescete, with the
Appurtenances in the County of Wilts. And also all that his Manor VVescote,
with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And also all those his
Lands, and Pastures, containing by estimation, 100. Acres of Land, and 60.
Acres of Pasture with the Appurtenances in VVigliscot and VVroughton, in the
said County of Wilts. And all that his Manor of Offcote with the Appurtenances,
in the said County of Wilts. And also all those his two Messuages, and 1000.
Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of Meadow, and 300. Acres of
Wood, with the Appurtenances in ^rodehinton, in the said County of Wilts. And
also all those the Manors and Lordships of Camps, otherwise Campes-Castle,
otherwise called Castle Camps, with the Appurtenances, situate, lying, being,
extending in the Counties of Cambridge, and Essex, or in either of them or else
where within the Realm of England. And also all that his Manor of Balsham in
the County of Cambridge, with all and singular the Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances thereof whatsoever. And also all those his Messuages and Lands,
lying and being in the Parishes of Hackney, and Tottenham, in the County of
Middlesex, or either of them, with their, and every of their Rights, Members,
and Appurtenances, thereof whatsoever, which late Message, was lately
purchased of Sir William ^owper Knight, and the said Lands in Tottenham, are
now, and late were in the Tenure or Occupation of William ^enning Yeoman. And
also all and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of
Churches, and Hereditaments, of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever, situate,
lying and being, within the said Counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridge,
and Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every of their Rights, Members,
and appurtenances whatsoever, or any such and so many, and such part of the
said Manors, Advowsons, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, or any part
thereof, as the said Thomas Sutton shall seem meet. And also all Letters
Patents, Indentures, Deeds, Evidences, Bonds, and Writings concerning the
premises, or any of them, which shall be so given and granted by the said
Thomas Sutton, to the said Governors and their Successors. And all such
Commissions, Warrants, Vouchers, Actions, Suits, Entries, Benefits, and
Demands, as shall and may be had, by any person or persons, upon, or by reason
of them, or any of them, except all his Manors or Lordships of Littlebury, and
Haddestock, with. the Appurt. in the County of Essex aforesaid, or in either of
them, though the premises or any of them, be holden of us immediately in Chief,
or by Knights service, or otherwise howsoever, And without License or Pardon
for Alienation of them, or any of them, the Statute of Mortmain, or any other
Act, Statute, Ordinance, of Provision to the contrary notwithstanding. And also
we do give and grant, like License, Power and Authority to the said Thomas
Sutton his Heirs and Assigns, to give, grant, and assure unto the said
Governors and their Successors, for the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid,
And all and every the said great and large Mansion House, commonly called the
Charter House, besides Smithfield, together with the Houses, Buildings, Courts,
Yards, Gardens, Orchards, Closes, and other Hereditaments lately purchased of
the said Thomas Earl of Suffolk, all those his Manors and Lordships of
Southminster, Norton, Little Hallingbury, otherwise Hallingbury Bowchers, and
Much Stanbridge in the said County of Essex, with all their and every of their
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsosoever. And also all those his Manors
and Lordships of Bustingthorp, otherwise ^^stingthorp and Dunnesby, in the
Countyof Lincoln, with their and every of their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances whatsoever. And all th^^e his Manors of Salthorp, otherwise
Saltrop, otherwise Ha^^horp, Chilton, ^^d, (...)gr^ve, in the County of Wilts,
with their and every o^ their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances. And also all
those his Lands, and Pasture Grounds called Blackgrove, containing by
estimation 200. Acres of Pasture, with their Appurtenances in Blackgrove and
Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And also all that his Manor of
Misenden, otherwise called the Manor of Misunden, in the Parishes of Wroughton,
Lidyard, and Tregose in the said County of Wilts, with all his Rights, Members,
and Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And also all those Manors of
Wescote, otherwise Wescote, with the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts.
And also all those his Lands and Pastures, containing by estimation 100. Acres
of Land, and 60. Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Wiglescate and
Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And all that his Manor of Vsscote, with
the Appurtenances in the said County of Wilts. And also all those his two
Messuages, 1000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of Pasture, 300. Acres of Meadow
and 300. Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Broadhinton, in the said
County of Wilts. And all those his Manors and Lordships of Camps, otherwise
Camps Castle, otherwise called Castle Camps, with the Appurtenances situate,
lying and being, and extending into the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or in
either of them, or elsewhere, within the Realm of England. And also all that
his Manor of Balsham, in the County of Cambridge, and all and singular the
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances thereof, whatsoever. And also all those his
Messuages and Lands, situate, lying and being in the Parishes of Hackney, and
Tottenham, in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them, with their, and
either of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, which said
Message, was lately purchased of Sir William Bowyer Knight, and the Lands in
Tottenham now are, or late were, in the Tenure or Occupation of William
Benning Yeoman. And also all and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Reversions, and Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods,
Advowsons, Patronages of Churches, and Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sutton,
wheresoever, situate, lying and being within the said County of Essex, Lincoln,
Wilts, Cambridge, and Middlesex, or any of them, with all and every their
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever, or and such, and so many, and
such part of the said Manors, Advowsons, Tenements and Hereditaments, or of any
part thereof, as the said Thomas Sutton shall think meet. And also all Letters
Patents, Indentures, Deeds, Evidences Bonds and Writings, concerning the
premises, or any of them, which shall be so given and granted by the said
Thomas Sutton, to the said Governors and their Successors, and all such
Conditions, Warrants, Vouchers, Actions, Suits, Entries, Benefits and demands,
as shall be, or may be had by any person or persons, or by reason of them, or
any of them, (except all his Manor and Lordship of Littelbury, and Haddestock,
with the Appurtenances in the said County of Essex aforesaid) or in either of
them, though the premises or any of them be holden of us immediately in Chief,
or by Knights service, or otherwise howsoever, and without any license or
pardon for Alienation of them or any of them, the Statute of Mortmain, or any
other Act, Statute, Ordinance, or Provision whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding. And our further Will and Pleasure is, And we do by these
presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, ordain, and strictly charge and
command, That whatsoever, and as often as any of the Churches, Parsonages,
Viccarages, Chapels, or other spiritual livings, the Advowsons, Patronages, and
Donations, whereof are hereby meant, or mentioned to be licensed, to be given
by the said Thomas Sutton, to the said Governors and their Successors, for and
toward the maintenance of the said godly and charitable use shall happen to
become void, or presentative, or presentable, or to be given, or collated unto,
by the Death, Resignation, or Deprivation of any Incumbent or Incumbents of
them, or any of them, or by any other means howsoever, That then and so often
the said Governors for the time being or their Successors, or the greater part
of them or the time being, shall present, prefer, and collate thereunto, such
meet and sufficient persons, as they shall think fit. Nevertheless, our full
meaning and direction is in this, and so we do by these presents, for us, our
Heirs and successors, ordayn and declare, that such and so many of the Scholars
which shall from time, be brought up, and taught in the said Hospital, and
every of them, as shall after be fully qualified and become meet, to take upon
them, or any them, the charge of the said Churches, Parsonages, Viccarages,
Chapels, or other spiritual livings aforesaid, shall as near as may be, from
time time, be by the said Governors and their Successors, presented,
preferred, and collated thereunto, before any other person or persons
whatsoever, avoiding as much as may be the giving of more Benefices than one,
to any one Incumbent; And to the end, that all supition of indirect dealing,
which might hereafter be used, or put in practice by the aforesaid Governors
or their Successors, or any of them, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
these presents, may be prevented and taken away; Our Will and Pleasure is, And
we do by these presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, ordain, and
straightly command and charge, That the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and other the premises which at any time hereafter shall be
given, granted, or conveied for the maintenance of the said godly and
charitable uses, before in these presents mentioned, in or any part or parcel
of them, or of any of them, shall at any time hereafter be leased, demised,
granted or conveied, to them the said Governors or their Successors, or to any
of them, or to any other person or persons whatsoever, for or to the use,
benefit, and behoof of the said Governors or of their Successors, or any of
them, although express mention of the clear yearly value, and certainty of the
premises or of any them, or of any other gifts or grants, by us or any of our
Progenitors or Predecessors, to the said Thomas Sutton heretofore made is not
made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or Restraint to
the contrary notwithstanding. In Witness whereof we have caused these our
Letters to be made Patents; Witness our self at Westminster, the 22th. day of
June, in the 9th. year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland the 44th. as by the said Letters Patents more fully appears. And
further the said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said Thomas
Smith, of all and singular the premises aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in
form aforesaid being seized, The said Thomas Sutton afterward, and before the
aforesaid time in which, etc. That is to say, the 30th. day of October, iin the
year of the Reign of the Lord JAMES, that now is of England the 9th. abovesaid,
made a certain Writing sealed with his Seal, bearing date the same day and
year, and to the Jurors aforesaid showed in Evidence, to one John Hutton Clerk,
The Tenor of which Writing follows in these words. To All to whom this
present shall come, Thomas Sutton of Balsham, in the County of Cambridge
Esquire sends Greeting; Whereas it pleased the Kings most Excellent Majesty
that now is, by his Highness Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster the
22th. day of June, in this present 9th. year of his Reign over England, upon
the humble Suit of the said Thomas, to give License, Power and Authority, to
him the said Thomas Sutton, to place, found, and erect an Hospital and
Free School, in the House called the late dissolved Charter House besides Smith
field, in the County of Middlesex, And like License, Power and Authority, for
him the said Thomas Sutton, at any time during his life, to ordain, appoint,
and place a Master of the said Hospital, And that the said Hospital should be
called by the name of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House,
within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs and
charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire. And where furthermore, by the said Letters
Patents, The Master of the said Hospital, for the time being, is ordained, and
appointed, to be one of the 16. Governors, of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews
and Goods of the said Hospital; And that the same 16. Governors, are by the
said Letters Patents, incorporate to purchase, and take Lands to them and their
Successors for ever, for the maintenance of the said Hospital, by the name of
the Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital
of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at
the humble Petition, and the only costs and Charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire,
as by the said Letters Patents (amongst other things) more at large may appear;
By reason whereof, there must be a Master made, before such time as the said
Thomas Sutton can convey the Lands intended by the said Thomas Sutton to be
conveied for the maintaiance of the said Hospital unto the said Governors,
according to the said Letters Patents; Now the said Thomas Sutton, minding the
performance of the said charitable Act, has according to the power given him
by the said Letters Patents, and by these presents does place, nominate,
constitute and appoint, his Right trusty, and Well-Beloved John Hutton Clerk,
the first and present Master of the said Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, To have, and to hold the said
Office, Room, and place of Master of the said Hospital, to him the said John
Hutton, from henceforth during the good will and pleasure of the said Thomas
Sutton; In witness whereof, the said Thomas Sutton has put his Hand and Seal,
dated the 13th. day of June, in the year of the Reign of our said Sovereign
Lord JAMES, by the Grace of God King of England, France and Ireland, defender
of the Faith, etc. And of Scotland the 45th. And further the Jurors aforesaid,
say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, of all and
singular the premises aforesaid, in form aforesaid being seized, Afterward,
and before the time in which, etc. that is to say, the first day of November,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is of England, etc.
the 9th. abovesaid, made a certain Indenture between him the said Thomas Sutton
of Balsham, in the County of Cambridge Esquire of the one part, And the Right
Reverend Father in God, George lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord
Chancellor of England, The Right Honorable Robert Earl of Salisbury, Lord High
Treasurer of England, The Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of London,
The Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Lord Bishop of ^lie, Edward Coke Knight,
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Thomas Foster Knight, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, Henry Hobert Knight and Baronet, the Kings
Attorney General that now is, John Overal, Dean of the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul in London, George Mountain, Dean of the Collegiate Church of Westminster,
Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of the Chancery, Jeffery Nightingale
Esquire, Richard Sutton Esquire, John Law Gentleman, Thomas Brown Gentleman,
and John Hutton Clerk, By the name of the Reverend Father in God, George Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England, Robert
Earl of Salisbury, Lord High Treasurer of England, The Reverend Father in God,
John Lord Bishop of London, The Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Lord Bishop
of Elie, Edward Coke Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Thomas
Foster Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, Henry Hobert
Knight and Baronet, Attorney General of the Lord the King, John Overal, Dean of
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London, George Mountain, Dean of the
Collegiate Church of Westminster, Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of
the Court of Chancery, Jeffery Nightingale Esquire, Richard Sutton Esquire,
John Law Gentleman, Thomas Brown Gentleman, and John Hutton Clerk, Master of
the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition and at the only costs and charges of Thomas
Sutton Esquire, the first and present Governors of the Lands, Possessions,
Revenews, and Goods of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter
House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs
and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, of the other part made, and within 6.
Months then next following, that is to say, the 4th. day of November, in the
year of the Reign of the Lord JAMES, now King of England the 9th. abovesaid, in
the Court of Chancery of the Lord the King that now is, at Westminster
aforesaid, then being in due manner of Record enrolled according to the form of
the Statute in such case made and provided; And whereof one part, sealed with
the Seal of the said Thomas Sutton, to the Jurors aforesaid was showed in
Evidence, bearing date the same day and year. The Tenor of which Indenture
follows in these words. This Indenture made the first day of November, in the
year of our Lord God, 1611. and in the years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
JAMES, by the Grace of God, of England, France and Ireland, defender of the
Faith, etc. that is to say, of England, France and Ireland the 9th. and of
Scotland the 45th. Between Thomas Sutton of Balsham in the County of Cambridge
Esquire of the one part, And the most Reverend Father in God, George now Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, The Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England, The Right
Honorable Robert Earl of Salisbury, Lord High Treasurer of England, The Right
Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of London, The Right Reverend Father
in God, Lancelot Lord Bishop of Elie, Sir Edward Coke Knight, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, Sir Thomas Foster Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, Sir Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet Attorney General of our
Sovereign Lord the King, John Overal, Dean of the Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul in London, George Mountain, Dean of the Collegiate Church of Westminster,
Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of our Court of Chancery, Jeffery
Nightingale Esquire, Richard Sutton Esquire, John Law Gentleman, Thomas Brown
Gentleman, and John Hutton Clerk, Master of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded
in the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition,
and only costs and charges of the said Thomas Sutton Esquire, the first and
present Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the
Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Chater-House, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire of the other part, Witnesses; That whereas, It has pleased the Kings
most Excellent Majesty that now is, By his Highness Letters Patents, bearing
date at Westminster the 22th. day of June, in this present 9th. year of his
Highness over England, upon the humble Suit of Thomas Sutton, to give License,
Power and Authority, to him the said Thomas Sutton, to place, erect, found and
establish, at or in the said House, called the late dissolved Charter House
besides Smith-field, within the said County of Middlesex, One Hospital, House
or place of abiding, for the finding, sustentation, and relief of poor, aged,
maimed, needy, and impotent people: As also to place, found and establish, at
or in the said House, One Free School, for the instructing, maintenance, and
education of poor Children or Scholars, And that the said Hospital, should ever
after be incorporated, named and called, The Hospital of King JAMES, founded in
the Chater-House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, And that he the said Thomas
Sutton during his life, and after his death, the Governors and their
Successors for ever, should have full Power, License and Authority, to ordain,
appoint, and place therein a Master, a Preacher, a Schoolmaster and Usher, and
such number of poor people, Scholars and Officers, as they should think meet,
And in default thereof, his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, And where
likewise our said Sovereign Lord the King Majesty, by the said Letters Patents,
has incorporated the said Lord Arch Bishop, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer,
John Bishop of London, Bishop of Elie, Sir Edward Coke Knight, Sir Thomas
Foster Knight, Sir Henry Hobert Knight and Baronet, John Overal, George
Mountain, Henry Thursby, Jeffery Nightingale, Richard Sutton, John Law, Thomas
Law, Thomas Brown, and the Master of the said Hospital, for the time being, by
the name of Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the
Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton
Esquire; And moreover, has hereby granted License, as well to the said
Governors and their Successors, to have, take, and purchase, as also License
and Authority to the said Thomas Sutton his Heirs and Assigns, to give, grant,
and assure unto the Governors and their Successors, for the better continuance
of the said Hospital and Free school for ever, and for the better maintenance
of the Master, Preacher, School Master, Usher, and such number of poor people,
Scholars and Officers, of and in the said Office for ever, as shall be therein
placed as aforesaid. And all and every the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Advowsons, and Hereditaments, hereafter herein mentioned to be
granted or conveied, as in the said Letters Patents amongst other things more
at large may appear; Since which said Letters Patents, The said Thomas Sutton,
has by his Deed under his Hand and Seal, bearing date the 13th. day of October
last, ordained and appointed the said John Hutton, to be the first present
Master of the said Hospital, according to the purport, Tenor, and true meaning
of the said Letters Patents. And the said Tho. Sutton, being minded in his life
time to perfect the said godly and charitable act himself, and not to leave it
to be per^ected after his death by others, This Indenture therefore witnesses,
That the said Tho. Sutton, for and in consideration of the continuance of the
said Hospital and Free School for ever hereafter, and for the better
maintenance of the said Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor people,
Scholars and Officers, for ever hereafter, with the Rents, Revenews, Issues,
Commodities and Profits, of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Advowsons, and Hereditaments hereafter in these presents mentioned, to be
conveied, and for and in consideration of the sum of 5. pound, of lawful Money
of England, by the said Lord Archbishop, and other the Governors aforesaid
paid, which said sum of 5. pound, he the said Thomas Sutton confesses, and
acknowledges himself to have received of the said Governors, and thereof does
acquit and discharge the said Governors for ever by these presents, And in
consideration of the yearly Rent of 12. d. of lawful Money of England, hereafter
in and by these presents reserved to the said Thomas Sutton and his Heirs; And
for diverse other good and reasonable considerations him especially moving,
(according to the said License of the Kings Majesty, to him the said Thomas
Sutton in that behalf given) Has bargained, sold, granted, and confirmed and
conveied, and by these presents does for him and his Heirs, bargain, sell,
give, grant, confirm and convey, unto the said Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenews, and Goods of the said Hospital of King JAMES, founded in
the Charter House, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition, and
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, and to their Successors for
ever, All that the Mansion House, commonly called the Charter House besides
Smith-field, in the said County of Middlesex, And all and singular the
Messuages, Houses, Courts, Yards, Gardens, Orchards, Closes, and other
Hereditaments within the County of Middlesex, lately purchased by the said
Thomas Sutton, of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, And all those
his Manors and Lordships of Southminster, Norton, Little Hallingbury, otherwise
Hallingbury Bowchers, and Much Stanbridge in the County of Essex, with all
their and every of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances whatsoever. And
also all those his Manors and Lordships of Bustingthorp, otherwise Baslingthorp
and Dunnesby, in the County of Lincoln, with their and every of their Rights,
Members, and Appurtenan. whatsoever. And all those his Manors of Salthorp,
otherwise Saltrop, otherwise Halthorp, otherwise Halstrop, Chilton, Black
grove, Vsscot, Misenden, otherwise Misenden, Waklescot, otherwise Wiglescot,
otherwise Wiglescet, VVescote, o^herwise Wescete, and Elcomb, in the County of
Wilts, with their and every of their Rights, Members, and Apurtenances. And all
those his Lands and Pasture Grounds, called Black grove, containing by
estimation 200. Acres of Pasture, with their Appurtenances in Black grove and
Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And also all those Lands and Pastures,
containing by estimation 100. Acres of Land, 60. Acres of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Wiglescote and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts. And
also all those his two Messuages, and 1000. Acres of Land, 2000. Acres of
Pasture, 300. Acres of Meadow, and 300. Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances
in Broadhinton, in the said County of Wilts. And all those his Manors and
Lordships of Camps, otherwise Camps Castle, otherwise called Castle Camps,
with the Appurtenances, situate, lying and being, and extending into the
Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or either of them, or elsewhere within the
Realm of England. And also all that his Manor of Balsham, in the County of
Cambridge, with all and singular the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances
thereof, whatsoever. And all those his Messuages and Lands, situate, lying and
being in the Parishes of Hackney, and Tottenham, in the County of Middlesex, or
in either of them, with their, and either of their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances whatsoever, which said last mentioned Message, was lately
purchased of Sir William Bowyer Knight, and the Lands in Tottenham now are, or
late were, in the Tenure or Occupation of William Benning Yeoman. And also all
and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, and Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of
Churches, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and other Hereditament;
whatsoever of the said Thomas Sutton, situate, lying and being, or to be had,
taken, and enjoyed, within the said County of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridge,
and Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every their Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances whatsoever. And all Letters Patents, Indentures, Deeds, Charters,
Extents, Court Rouls, and other Writings, Minuments, and Evidences whatsoever,
concerning the premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them, or any
of them, Except, and allwaies foreprized out of these presents, the Manors or
Lordships of Little Hallingbury, and Haddestock, or either of them, or to the
said Manors of Little Hallingbury, and Haddestock, or either of them belonging
or appertaining, To have, and to hold the said Mansion House, called the
Charter House, besides Smithfield, And all and every the said Manors,
Lordships, Messuages, Parks, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Services, Advowsons,
Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, and Herediataments, and all other the
premises, with their and every their Members and Appurtenances, (except before
excepted) unto the said Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenews and
goods of the said Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the Charter House within
the County of Middlesex, At the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of
Thomas Sutton Esquire, and their Successors for ever, upon special trust and
confidence, That all and singular the Rents, Issues, Revenews, Commodities and
profits of all and singular the said Manors, Houses, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the premises with their Appurtenances, shall be for
ever hereafter from time to time, truly, faithfully, and wholly distributed,
converted, and employed by the said Governors and their Successors, to and for
the maintenance and continuance of the said Hospital and Free School, and of
the Master, Preacher, Schoolmaster, Usher, poor people, Scholars and Officers,
of and in the said Hospital and Free School, for the time being, and at all
times hereafter, and from time to time for ever, according to the true intent,
purport, and meaning of the said Thomas Sutton, and according to the Tenor and
purport of the said Letters Patents, and of these presents, and to none other
trust, use, confidence, interest, purpose, or employment whatsoever. Yielding
and paying therefore yearly unto the said Thomas Sutton and his Heirs, the
yearly Rent of 12. pence, at the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John the
Baptist yearly to be paid, And when, and as of often as the said yearly Rent of
12. pence, shall be behind and unpaid, at any Feast whereon the same ought to
be paid, That then, and so often, It shall be lawful for the said Thomas Sutton
and his Heirs, into the pemises, and into every or any part or parcel thereof,
to enter and distrem, and the distress and distresses there taken, to take,
lead, and carry away, and with him and them to detein, until he and they be
satisfied of the said Rent, and the Arrerages thereof if any may be. In
witness whereof, the parties first above named, to these present Indentures
interchangeably have set their Hands and Seals the day and year first above
written. And further the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That
the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, of the aforesaid premises with the Appurtenances,
in the County of Middlesex, as before is, said being seized, The said Thomas
Sutton, after the aforesaid Indenture, of Bargain and Sale of the premises with
the Appurtenances, whereof, etc. by the aforesaid Thomas Earl of Suffolk, to
the aforesaid Thomas Sutton made, and after the Inrollment of the aforesaid
Indenture, and before the Letters Patents aforesaid, by the said Lord the King
that now is, as is said made, and before the aforesaid Indenture made, Between
the aforesaid Thomas Sutton of the one part, And the aforesaid George
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primiate and Metropolitan of all England, and others
of the other part, bearing date the first day of November, in the year of the
Reign of the Lord the King that now is the 9th abovesaid, Appointed one Richard
Bird, to be Porter of the said Message, called the late dissolved
Charter House besides Smith-field, of the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, which
Richard Bird, continued Porter of the said Message, after the said Indenture
made, Between the aforesaid Thomas Sutton of the one part, and the aforesaid
George Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the other part, bearing date
the aforesaid first day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord
the King that now is the 9th. abovesaid until the death of the said Tho.
Sutton. And further, the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the said
Thomas Sutton afterward, and before the time in which etc. that is to say, the
second day of November, in the year of our Lord 1611. made his Testament and
last Will in Writing, amongst other things as follows in these words. And my
Will and meaning is, That unless the said Sir Francis Popham, and the said
Lady Ann his Wife, do or shall give to mine Executor or Executors, A general
Acquittance or Release, to the elect above mentioned, That then as well the
said Legacy of 2000. Marks, so willed to be given to the said Sir Francis
Popham, and Ann his Wife, as also the other several Legacies given and
bequeathed to every of the said Children of Sir Francis Prpham and the Lady his
Wife, shall remain and be to the use of mine Executor or Executors, to be
wholly disposed and given by them, within one whole year after my decease,
yearly to the mending of the Highways, and partly to poor Maids Marriages, and
partly to the Releasing of poor men that lie in Prison for Debt, and partly to
the poor people of my intended Hospital, when it shall please God it be
established and erected. Also, I give for and toward the building of my
intended Hospital, Chapel, and School-house, the sum of 5000. pound. Item, I
give unto the Treasury and Storehouse of my intended Hospital to begin their
Stock with, and to defend the Rights of the House 1000. pound, of lawful
English Money. And I give to every one of my Feoffees, whom I have put in trust
about my intended Hospital, to whom I have not given any thing in this my Will,
the sum of 26. pound, 13. shillings, and 4. pence, of lawful Money of England,
as by the said Testament and last Will more fully appears. And further the
Jurors say, upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid Thomas Sutton
afterward, and before the aforesaid time in which, etc. that is to say, the
12th. day of December, in the year of the Reign of the Reign of the said Lord
the King that now is the 9th. abovesaid, at Hackney in the County of Middlesex,
dyed without issue of his Body lawfully begotten, And that the aforesaid Simon
Baxter now Plaintiff is, and at the time of the death of the said Thomas
Sutton, was Cousin and next Heir of the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, that is to say,
Son and Heir of Dorothy, the only Sister of the said Thomas Sutton. And
further the Jurors aforesaid, say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Richard Sutton, and John Law, afterward and before the time in which, etc.
claiming as two Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of
the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in Chater House, within the County of
Middlesex, at the humble petition and only costs and charges, of Thomas Sutton
Esquire, in the names, and to the use of them who are named Governors as
aforesaid, into all and singular the premises with the Appurtenances, called
the late dissolved Charter House besides Smith-field, whereof, etc. entered and
were thereof seized as the Law requires, upon the possessions of which,
Richard Sutton, and John Law, thereof afterward, and before the time in which,
etc. the aforesaid Simon Baxter, into the said premises with the Appurtenances,
whereof, etc. entered and was thereof seized as the Law requires; Upon the
possession of which Simon Baxter thereof, the aforesaid Richard Sutton, and
John Law, the aforesaid time in which, into the premises aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, whereof, etc. claiming as two Governors of the Lands,
Possessions, Revenews and Goods of the Hospital of King JAMES, founded in the
Chater-House At the humble Petition, and only costs and charges of Thomas
Sutton Esquire. in the names, and to the use of those who are called Governors as
before is said, re-entred, as the aforesaid Simon Baxter against them
complains. And further, the Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Richard Sutton, and John Law, in the aforesaid Act of Parliament of
the 7th. year of King JAMES abovesaid, and in the aforesaid Letters Patents of
the said King, and in the aforesaid Indenture of, Bargain and Sale, made
between the aforesaid Thomas Sutton of the one part, and the aforesaid George
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the other part, bearing date the first
day of November, in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is
the 9th. abovesaid named, And the aforesaid Richard Sutton, and John Law now
Defendants, are one and the same persons, and not others nor diverse. And that
the aforesaid Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Robert Earl of Salisbury, the Reverend
Father Lancelot Bishop of Elie, Thomas Foster, Henry Hobert, John Overal,
Henry Thursby, Jeffery Nightingale, Richard Sutton, John Law, and Thomas Brown,
in the aforesaid Act of Parliament of the 7th. year abovesaid named, and in the
aforesaid Letters Patents of the said Lord the King, and in the aforesaid
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, made to George Arch Bishop of Canterby and
others, are one and the same persons, and not others nor diverse. And that the
most Reverend Father in God, George Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord
Ellesmere, Robert Earl of Salisbury, John Bishop of London, Lancelot Bishop of
Elie, Thomas Foster, Henry Hobart, John Overal, George Mountain, Henry Thursby,
Jeffery Nightingale, Richard Sutton, John Law, and Thomas Brown, in the
aforesaid Letters Patents of the aforesaid Lord the King mentioned, and in the
aforesaid Indenture of Bargain and Sale made, between the aforesaid Thomas
Sutton of the one partt, and the aforesaid Reverend Father in God, Gerrge Arch
Bishop of Canterby, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Robert Earl of Salisbury, John
Bishop of London, Lancelot Bishop of Elie, Edward Coke, Thomas Foster, Henry
Hobart, John Overal, George Mountain, Henry Thursby, Jeffery Nightingale,
Richard Sutton, John Law, Thomas Brown, and John Hutton of the other part, are
one and the same persons, and not others nor diverse. And that all the Manors,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the aforesaid Act of Parliament of the
7th. year abovesaid, and in the aforesaid Letters Patents by the aforesaid Lord
the King, to the aforesaid Thomas Sutton granted, and in the Indenture
aforesaid of Bargain and Sale made, Between the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, and
the aforesaid George Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and others, (except the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, called the late dissolved Charter House besides
Smithfield, purchased of the aforesaid Thomas Earl of Suffolk) mentioned, are
one and the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and not others
nor diverse. And that the aforesaid Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, called
the late dissolved Charter House besides Smithfield, in the aforesaid Indenture
of Bargain and Sale made, Between the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, and the
aforesaid Thomas Earl of Suffolk, and others, bearing date the 9th. day of May,
in the year of the Reign of the said Lord the King that now is the 9th.
abovesaid, and in the aforesaid Letters Patents of the aforesaid Lord the King,
to Thomas Sutton aforesaid, and in the aforesaid Indenture of Bargain and Sale,
between the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, and the aforesaid Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and others likewise named, whereof, etc. are one and the same
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and not others nor diverse. And that the
aforesaid Thomas Sutton, in the aforesaid Act of Parliament of the 7th. year
abovesaid named, and in the Writing aforesaid to John Hutton aforesaid made, is
one and the same person, and not others nor diverse. And that the aforesaid
George Mountain, at the time of the making of the aforesaid Letters Patents of
the aforesaid Lord the King, was, and now is Dean of the Church collegiat at
Westminster, And that the aforesaid George Mountain, in the said Letters
Patents of the said Lord the King named, and the aforesaid George Mountain, in
the aforesaid Indenture of Bargain and Sale, by the aforesaid Thomas Sutton, to
the aforesaid Geo. Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and others, as before is said
made, named, is one and the same person, and not other nor diverse. And that the
aforesaid John Hutton, in the aforesaid Writing named, and in the aforesaid
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, of the aforesaid Tho. Sutton named, is one and
the same person, and not other nor diverse. But whether upon the whole matter
aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, The aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law,
be guilty of the Trespass aforesaid or not, the said Jurors are utterly
ignorant. And pray the advice of the Court here, etc. And if upon the whole
matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Court here,
That the aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, are guilty of the Trespass
aforesaid, as the said Simon Baxter against them complains, Then they assesse
the damages of the said John Baxter, by occasion of that Trespass of costs and
charges by him about his Suit in his part expended to one penny, and for his
costs and charges to 12. pence. And it upon the whole matter aforesaid, by the
Jurors aforesaid, in form aforesaid found, It shall seem to the Court here,
That the aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, are not guilty of the Trespass
aforesaid, Then the said Jurors say upon their Oath aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, are not thereof guilty, as the aforesaid
Richard Sutton and John Law above for them have alleged. And because the Court
of the Lord the King here is not yet avised of and upon the premises, day
thereof is given to the parties before the Lord the King at Westminster, until
Wednesday next after 15. days of Easter, to hear their Judgeme^t of and upon
the premises, because the Court of the L. the K. here thereof not yet, etc. At
which day before the Lord the King at Westminster. come the parties aforesaid, by
their Attorneys aforesaid, And because the Court of the Lord the King here is
not yet avised of giving their Judgment of and upon the premises, day thereof
is further further given to the parties aforesaid, before the Lord the King at
Westminster, until Friday next after the Morrow of Holy Trinity, to hear their
Judgment thereof, because the Court of the Lord the King here thereof not yet,
etc. Upon which, The premises by the Court of the Lord the King that now is
here seen, and all and singular the premises fully understood, and mature
deliberation being thereupon had, For that it seems to the Court of the Lord
the King that now is here, upon the whole matter aforesaid, in form aforesaid
found, That the aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, are not guilty of the
Trespass aforesaid, as the said Richard Sutton and John Law above for them
have alleged; It is granted that the aforesaid Simon Baxter, take nothing by
his Bill aforesaid, but for his false clamor thereof be in mercy, etc. And that
the aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, go thereof without day, etc. And
that the aforesaid Richard Sutton and John Law, recover against the aforesaid
Simon Baxter 24. pound, for their costs and charges by them about their defense
in this part expended, to the said Richard Sutton and John Law, with their
assent by the Court of the Lord the King here, according to the form of the
Statute in such case late made and provided adjudged; And that the aforesaid
Richard Sutton and John Law have Execution thereof, etc.

WASTE.
Hillary Term, 340. ELIZABETH, in the COMMON PLEAS, Rot. 2380. Co. 4. part.
Hyndes Case, Fol. 68.
ELizabeth Hynde, was summoned to Answer to Richard Libb Esquire, of Oxon.
a Plea, Wherefore, Whereas of the Common Counsel of the Realm of the Lady the
Queen of England, it is provided, That it shall not be lawfor any one waste,
spoil, or destruction to do in Lands, Houses, Woods or Gardens, to him demised
for Term of life or years, The said Eliza. of Lands and Woods in Goring and
Whitchurch, which she holds for Term of years, of the demise of Robert
Garrard, of the aforesaid Richard, of the Assignment of William Haw, who those
to the said Robert demised, for the said Term thereof made, to the said Richard
did waste, spoil, and destruction, to the dissenherisin of him the said
Richard, and against the form of the Provision aforesaid, etc. And whereupon
the said Richard, by Thomas Lane his Attorney says, That whereas the aforesaid
William Haw, was seized of a Message called Haw Place, 200. Acres of Land, 10.
Acres of Meadow, 100. Acres of Pasture, and 50. Acres of Wood, with the
Appurtenances in Goring and Whitchurch aforesaid, in his Demesne as of Fee, And
so thereof being seized, the 4th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of
the said Lady the Queen that now is the 28th. at Goring aforesaid, By Indenture
between the aforesaid William Haw, of Haw Place, in the Parish of Goring, in
the County of Oxon. Yeoman of the one part, and the aforesaid Robert Garrard,
by the name of Robert Garrard of Hedsor, in the County of Buckingham Gentleman
made, One part of which, sealed with the Seal of the aforesaid Robert, the said
Richard here in Court brings, whose date is the same day and year, demised to
the said Robert, the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, Except (during
the life of Agnes Haw, Mother of the said William) such part of the Message
aforesaid parcel of the premises, Orchard and Garden, One Close called Reaves
Dean, and one Close called Bell Close, and one Orchard, called the Orchard
Pedel, parcel of the premises, which the said Agnes then occupied, and then
had, taken, and agreed, to receive for her Dower, of, in, and for the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, To have, and to hold the said Tenements with
the Appurtenances, (except before excepted) to the said Robert and his Assigns,
from the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God then last past, until the end and
Term of 16. years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended, By virtue of which Demise, the said Robert in the Tenements aforesaid
with the Appurtenances, above in form aforesaid demised, entered and was thereof
possessed, and so thereof being possessed, the 20th. day of August, in the year
of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that now is the 29th. at Goring
aforesaid, granted all his Estate, Interest, and Term of years, which he had
then to come, of and in the aforesaid Tenements with the Appurtenances, above
in form aforesaid demised, to the aforesaid Elizabeth Hynde, By virtue of which
grant, the aforesaid Elizabeth, into the said Tenements with the Appurtenances,
above in form aforesaid demised, entered and was thereof possessed, And the
aforesaid Elizabeth, being thereof so possessed, and the aforesaid William
Haw, of the Reversion thereof in form aforesaid being seized, the said William,
the 7th. day of March, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is the 30th. at Goring aforesaid, By his Indenture of Bargain and Sale,
made between him the said William of the the one part, and the aforesaid
Richard of the other part, one part of which, sealed with the Seal of the said
William, the said Richard here in Court brings, whose Date the is same day and
year, and in the Court of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here at
Westminster, in Easter Term, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen the 30th. abovesaid, before the then Justices of the said Lady the Queen
of the Bench here, as the deed of the said William Haw, by him the said William
acknowledged, and within 6. Months then next following, that is to say, the
same Easter Term, in due manner in the said Court of Record enrolled, according
to the form of the Statute in such case made and provided, for and in
consideration of 120. pound to the said William, by the said Richard before
that time paid, bargained and sold to the said Richard, amongst other things
the Reversion aforesaid, To have and to hold to him and his Heirs for ever, By
Color of which Bargain and Sale, and Inrollment aforesaid, and by force of a
certain Statute made in the Parliament of the Lord Henry late King of England
the 8th. holden at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, the 4th. day of
February, in the year his Reign the 27th. Of transferring of uses into
possession, the aforesaid Richard was and yet is seized of the Reversion
aforesaid, in his Demesne as of Fee, And the said Richard so thereof being
seized, and the aforesaid Elizabeth of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, to her in form aforesaid granted being possessed, The said
Elizabeth did waste, spoil, and destruction of the Lands, that is to say, in
digging in 10. Acres of Land, in Goring aforesaid, parcel of the Tenements
aforesaid to the aforesaid Robert demised, 100. loads of Clay, taking for the
price of every load of Clay thereof 8. pence, and cutting down, and selling of
the Woods, also in a certain Wood called Heighgrove, containing 10. Acres of
Wood, with the Appurte. in Goring aforesaid, and parcel of the Tenements
aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the said Robert above in form aforesaid
demised, 20. Oaks, the price of every Oak 5. shillings, through the said whole
Wood here and there growing, and in a certain other Wood called the Hedge Row,
lying in Goring aforesaid, near the aforesaid Wood called Heighgrove, in Goring
aforesaid, parcel of the Tenement aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in form
aforesaid, to the aforesaid Robert demised, 40. Oaks, the price of each of them
6. shillings, through the said whole Wood here and theregrowing, and in a
certain Coppice, called Home Coppice, in Goring aforesaid, parcel of the
aforesaid Tenements with the Appurtenances, to the said Robert in form
aforesaid above demised 100. Oaks, price of each of them 10. shillings, in the
said Coppice called Home Coppice, late growing here and there, And in 20. Acres
of Pasture called the Hanging, in Goring aforesaid lying there, bebetwixt a
certain Close called High grove hill, and another Close called Dicker grove
hill, that is to say, parcel of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances,
to the aforesaid Robert in form aforesaid demised, 10. Oaks, price of each of
them 6. shillings, Six Ashes, price of each of them 5. shillings, and 10.
Beeches, price of each of them 6. shillings, in the aforesaid 20. Acres of
Pasture likewise, late here and there growing, and in a certain Hedge, of a
certain Close called Home field, in Whitchurch aforesaid, that is to say,
parcel of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, to the aforesaid
Robert, in form aforesaid demised, lying near unto a Wood called Hawes Coppice,
3. Oaks, price of each of them 10. shillings, and one Beech, price 10.
shillings, and in a certain other Hedge, of the Close aforesaid called Home
field, in VVhitchurch aforesaid, that is to say, parcel of the Tenements
aforesaid, to the aforesaid Robert, in form aforesaid demised, lying near to
the aforesaid Wood called Home Coppice, 10. Oaks, price of each of them 20.
shillings, and also in suffering the sprouts of the Roots of 20000. other
little Oaks, called Oakesciapling, of 20000. Beeches, and 200. Ashes, to the
value of 20. pound, in the said Wood called Heigh grove, and 10000. of other
little Oaks called Oakesapling, 10000. of Beeches, and 100. of Ashes, to the
value of 20. pound, in the aforesaid Wood called the Hedge Row, and 10000. of
Oaks, 10000. of Beeches, and 200. of Ashes, in the aforesaid Coppice called
Hawe Coppice, by the said Elizabeth through the whole Woods here and there
growing, to be cut, and to be eaten and utterly destroyed and wasted with
Cattle, to the dissenherisin of the said Richard, and against the form of the
Provision aforesaid, Whereupon he says he is the worse, and has damage to the
value of 200. pound, and thereof he brings Suit, etc. And the the aforesaid
Elizabeth, by Ralph Burges her Attorney, comes and desendeth the force and
injury when, etc. And whatsoever, etc. And says that the aforesaid Richard his
Action against her ought not to have, Because she says, That well and true it
is, That the aforesaid William Haw, was seized of the Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee, and being thereof so seized, the
aforesaid 4th. day of January, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the
Queen that now is the 29th. abovesaid, By his Indenture, demised to the
aforesaid Robert the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, (except before
excepted) To have, and to hold, to him and his Assigns, from the aforesaid
Feast of the birth of our Lord then last past, until the end and Term of the
aforesaid 16. years, then next following and fully to be complete and ended. By
virtue of which demise, the aforesaid Robert into the Tenements aforesaid with
the Appurtenances, above in form aforesaid demised, entered and was thereof
possessed, and so thereof being possessed, the aforesaid 20th. day of August
abovesaid, granted all his Estate, Interest, and Term of years, which he had
then to come, of and in the aforesaid premises, with the Appurtenances, above
demised, to the aforesaid Elizabeth Hynde, By virtue of which grant, the
aforesaid Elizabeth into the aforesaid Tenements with the Appurtenances above
demised, entered and wa^ thereof possessed, as the aforesaid Rich. by his
Declaration above supposeeth: But the said Elizabeth further says, That the
said Elizabeth, of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, above
demised, in form aforesaid being possessed, and the said William Haw, of the
Reversion thereof, being seized in his Demesne as of Fee, after the aforesaid
7th. day of May, in the 30th. year aforesaid, and before the aforesaid
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, Between the aforesaid William of the one part,
and the aforesaid Richard of the other part made, in the Court of the Lady the
Queen of the Bench, in form aforesaid was enrolled, A Fine was levied in the
aforesaid Court of the Lady the Queen of the Bench here, that is to say, at
WESTMINSTER aforesaid, from the aforesaid day of Easter in 15. days, in the
year of her Reign the 30th. abovesaid, before Edmond Anderson, Francis Windham,
William Periam, and Francis Rodes, then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of
the Bench, and other of the said Lady the Queens liege People then there
present, Between the aforesaid Richard, by the name of Richard Libb Gentleman
Plaintiff, and the aforesaid William Haw, and Ellen his Wise Deforceants, of
the Tenements aforesaid, above in form aforesaid demised, amongst other things
by the name of One Message, One Cottage, Two Gardens, 70. Acres of Land, One
Acre of Meadow, 10. Acres of Pasture, 60. Acres of Wood, and 10. Acres of Furz
and Heath, with the Appurtenances in Goring and Whitchurch aforesaid, in Maple
Decam in the County aforesaid, whereupon a Covenant was summoned betwixt them
in the said Court, that is to say, that the aforesaid Williliam and Ellen,
acknowledged the Tenements aforesaid to be the Right of him the said Richard,
as those which the said Richard had, of the gift of the aforesaid William and
Ellen, and them remised and quit claimed, from them the said William and Ellen
and their Heirs, to the aforesaid Richard and his Heirs for ever, And further
the said William and Ellen, granted for them, and the Heirs of the said
William, that they warrant to the aforesaid Richard and his Heirs, the
aforesaid Tenements with the Appurtenances, against all men for ever, as by the
said Fine here in Court of Record Remaining more fully appears: Which Fine,
in form aforesaid had and levied, was to the use of the aforesaid Richard and
his Heirs, After which Fine, so as before is said levied, that is to say, the
20th. day of April, in the year of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen that
now is the 30th. aforesaid, the aforesaid Indenture to the aforesaid Richard,
as before is said made, before the aforesaid Justices of the said Lady the the
Queen of the Bench here was enrolled. And the said Elizabeth further says,
That she to that grant of the Reversion of the Tenements aforesaid with the
Appurtenances, above as before is said demised, by virtue of which Fine
aforesaid, the aforesaid Richard did not attorn or agree, And this she is ready
to aver, Whereupon she demands Judgment, if the aforesaid Richard his Action
aforesaid against her ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid Richard says, That
the aforesaid Plea of the aforesaid Elizabeth above in Bar Pleaded, and the
matter in the same contained, is insufficient in Law to bar him the said
Richard, to have his Action aforesaid against the aforesaid Elizabeth, And that
he to that Plea in form aforesaid pleaded needs not, nor by the Law of the
Land is bounden to Answer, And this he is ready to aver, Wherefore for want of
a sufficient Plea in Bar in this behalf made, the aforesaid Richard demands
Judgment, and his damages by the occasion of the Waste aforesaid to be to him
adjudged. And the aforesaid Elizabeth, in as much as she has alleged
sufficient matter in Bar, of the Acton aforesaid which she is ready to aver,
which matter the aforesaid Richard does not deny, nor to the same any ways
answers, but to that averment altogether refuses, demands Judgment, and
that the aforesaid Richard be barred from having his Action aforesaid against
her, etc. And because the Justices here will avise themselves of and upon the
premises before they give their Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties
aforesaid, here until from the day of Easter 15. days, to hear their Judgment
thereof, because the same Justices here thereof not yet, and.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
AButtals of Acres set forth, Folio. 271 Action upon the Case for turning the
Course of a water from a Mill, 1 Upon Assumpsit, by a Woman Ex^cutrix to pay
money; upon forbearance not to molest her, 7 Act of Parliament special, to erect
and found an Hospital 368. with the particulars of a foundation, 368. 369
Adjornment of an Assize, and for what Cause, 18, 19 Of Pleas, 18, 22, 161, 232,
257, 337 Of the Term, 161, 232, 257, 337, 338 Agreement to pay Rent, if it
amount to an Attornment, 271 Aid, 266 Administration of goods committed, 72, 73
Alien born, one born in Scotland since 1 Jac. nor Alien, 10 Amoveas Manum, 190
Arrests, upon the Sabbath day, 148 whereupon Arrest the Sergant is to show his
Mace, etc. 148, 149 Arbitrament, 25 Attornment, 271 Two Joints for life, upon a
grant of the Reversion, one attorneth, and good, 354, 355 Of one Joyntment, is
the Attornment of both, 354 Audita Querela, the form of it, 21 To discharge the
party out of Execution, being taken upon a Capias ut laga^um after ju^gement,
21, ^2 Aver^ment, 190, 20^, 213, 217, 226, 266 2^0 ^26 Of Plea, 10, 24 26 Where
it is Collateral of a thing out of the deed, ^3 Authority, of the Presid^nt and
^ensors of the College of Physic^ans in London, and the extent of it 131 Where
it does not extend to Doctors of Physic in the Vniverslties, 134, 135 Avowry,
220, 237, 238, 259, 268 For Arrerage of a Rent charge, granted by Tenant in
tail ^n remainder, 222 The taking of an Ox for a Heriot, 269 For Arrerages of
Rent, 271
B.
BAil, 220, 153 Bar, 11, 12, 144, 154, 163, 221, 251, 252, 269, 271, 19^, 233,
238, 241, 242, 301, 345 Fine annd Rec^^ery by Tenant in t^il is a Bar of a
Rent granted by him in the remainder, 224 In Avowry, 260 In Audita Querela, 22
In Dower, 31, 32, 33 A grant of the King, a Bar in a Sc^re Facias to repeal
Letters P^^ents, 287 288 In Trespass, 307, 324, 340 Of Conusance, 252 Bargain
and Sale, 119, 288, 325, 154 Of Lands to the Queen, 160 Of Lands to Uses 171,
172 By Tenant in tail, 170 Of aterm for years 73 Of the Charter House, and of
Lands belonging to it, 372, 373, 374 Of Deeds, Charters, and Evidences, 374 Of
Lands to the Governors of an Hospital, 390, 391, 392 Where it shall not relate
to avoid a Fine, 398, 399
C.
CErtificate, of the Causes of disfranchising a Citizen, or Burgess, and
removing him from his place and Office, 274, to 279 Conditions, to stand to an
Award, and Arbitrament, 25 Not to alien a Term for years, 70 Where broken,
because the thing is not done within convenient time, 161 Where broken, because
the part^ has dissabled himself to perform it, 161 Not to alien, or
discontinue Lands intailed, 311, 312, 313 Color 308, 325 Common Recovery, 244,
312 The form of pleading it, 41, 59, 320, 86 141 Uses of it declared by a deed
subsequent to the Recovery, 12 In the Court of Hustings in London, in a Writ of
Right Patent, 57, 58 Where a Bar of an Estat(...)l, 42, 43 By Tenant in tail,
an(...) Release with warranty where shall bind the issue in tail, 138, 139,
140, 141, 142 Upon a Writ of Right Patent, 138 Suffered by Tenant in tail, 312,
313 To Uses, 86, 87, 88, 89, 139 Considerations, 86 What good to ground an
Assumpsit upon, 6, 7 What good to raise Uses, 39, 40, 102, 308 Confess and
avoid, 215, 223 Confirmations, 255 Of the King of a Lease, in consideration of
service done, 71 Consultations, 220 Plea for it, 215 Continuances, 5, 18, 36,
50, 62, 78, 91, 96, 105, 120, 121, 144, 161, 173, 174, 179, 208, 227, 236, 249,
257, 264, 270, 299, 314, 322, 328, 336, 344, 355, 356, 357, 358 Covenants to
stand seized to the use of himself in tail, remainder to the Queen, 38, 39, 307
To levy a Fine, 82, 164, 100, 201 To stand seized to Uses, 171, 193, 195 To
deliver Evidences, 55 To free Lands from Incombrance, 56 That the Rents shall
continue payable to the bargainee and his Heirs, 56 To make further assurance,
57, 3^9 To make a Jointure, 99 To suffer a Recovery to Uses, 318 That an Estate
tail upon an Alienation shall cease, as if Tenant in tail were dead without
issue, 311 To make Leases in Reversion, 350 Conusance, made by Bailiffs for
Arrerages of Rent, 251 Countermand, Of an Arbitrament, and what words are a
good countermand of it, 25, 26 Count. In Dower, 32 In a Formedon in Discender,
137 Costs, le Incrementa, 3, 51, 63, 67, 105, 250, 258, 264, 268, 344, 352
D.
DAmages, In an Action upon the Case, 3 5, 8 Declarations, In an Action upon
the Case for diverting a Water course, 1 In Assumpsit, to pay money upon
forbearance not to molest, 7 In Andita Querela, 22 In Debt upon an Escape
against a Sheriff, 44 In Debt, 25, 27, 34 In Ejectione Firm, 51, 69, 77, 82,
92, 52, 97, 106, 121 In an Action of false Imprisonment, 126 In an Action for
proceeding against the Queens Prohibition, 214, 215 In a Replevin, 220, 233,
239, 259, 265 268 In a second Deliverance, 250, 251, 270 In Trespass, 306, 316,
324, 329, 339, 345, 352, 360 366 In Trespass, for disturbing him to execute his
Office: Ut and Armis, where good, 361, 362 In Waste, for cutting down and
destroying of Woods, 395, 396 Defense, 25, 27, 33, 40, 46, 70, 80, 122, 137,
251, 265, 268, 271, 324, 339, 352, 361, 3^6 Deeds, Of Confirmation of a Rent,
255 A Deed read to a Man illiterate, in other words than it is, shall not bind
him, 343, 344 Of appointment of a Master and Governor of the Lands of an
Hospital, 387 Debt, 25, 27, Against Executors. For Rent, 37 Against the Sheriff
for an Escape of one in Execution 44 Departure, 143 Devises, 30 31 To Executors
to perform his Will, till his Son come of the Age of 21. years, 94 Upon
Condition to perform his Will, with several limitations over to other persons
to that purpose, 110, 112, 113 Of Lands to his Wise, upon Condition to bestow
the profits to charitable uses, 158, 159. And she to have the profits during
her life, discharging the said uses, 158, 159 Of Lands to superstitious uses,
where void, 107, 108, 109 Of a Term to Executors, 155 Of a Term, 2^1 Of Lands
to one for life, the remainder to the next right He^r of Tenant for life, 234
Dissability, 9. And what shall be a good Plea in Dissability, 9 Dies datus, 11.
In Assize, 150, 172 D stringas, 156 Dower, where not barred by a Release, 31,
32, 33
E.
ECclesiastical Court, where they refuse to allow Plea in discharge of Tithes,
214 Ejectione Firm, 54, 69, 79, 92, 97, 106, 121 Entry, where congeable, 95
Where for a forfeiture by Tenant for l^fe a Joyntress, 104 For a forfeiture by
a Devis^e, upon Condition for a condition broken, 159 Escape, ^^ here letting a
Prisoner at large is escape, 49 Errors, Upon a Judgment in Debt upon an
Escape, 51 Where assigned, where not, 66 Assigned for the Queen by her Attorney
General, 176, 177, 17^ Exemplification, Of the Charter of 11. E. 3. Of the
Kings grant of the Lutchy of Cornwall, to the Prince, 291 to 297
F.
FAlse Imprisonment, 126 Feoffments, 117, 252, 269, 324, 341 Upon consideration
to make a Jointure to the Wife, 99 By a Feoffee to use: where it destroys
contingent ^ses, 331 To uses, 107, 221, 330, 331. Contingent uses, 333 Upon
Condition to pay a Rent to be void upon tender, 252 Of a Manor, 27^ Of a House
and Lands where the livery and seisin is not good, nothing passes, 260, 261,
262, 263 Fessments, Contingent uses destroyed by Fests, though the Feoffee has
notice of the uses in contingency, 333 Levied of Lands, after a Bargain and
Sale first made thereof (though the deed be afterward enrolled) shall stand
good, 399, 400 Fines levied, 81, 83, 100, 101, 201, 202, 223, 239, 240, 242,
340 Of Lands levied to the King, and his Heirs Males of his Body 164 Upon
Condition, 341. till money be paid Of an Advowson, 224 By Tenant for life, and
he in the remainder, where no forfeiture, but a grant of their Estates, 239,
240 Fine, Where paid for a contempt, 162 Forfeiture, When by Tenant for life,
who comes in a Vouchee upon a common-recovery, 59, 60, 66 By a Woman Joyntress,
upon a Lease made contrary to the Statute of 11. H. 7, cap. 20. 140 Where
Tenant for life, the Tenant in tail, enfeoffees him in the reversion; it is a
forfeiture, and devests the remainder, 334 Formedon, 136
G.
GAvel Kind, 189 Grants, Of a Rent charge by Tenant in Tail in th Remainder,
222 Of a Rent for life, with clause of distress, 251 That a Condition, and
power to revoke uses shall cease, 328 Of a Copy hold estate, by a Disseisor not
good, 335 A Grant of Lands to (...)d his Heirs Habendum: to him and his Heirs
for years: the Habendum is void, 349, 350 Of a Reversion upon a Lease for life
to two, and one attornes, 354. Grants of the King, 117, 166, 167, 316, 317, Of
the Office of a Sergeant at Arms, 390 Ex gracia speciali certa scientia, and
mero motu, 117, 118 Of a Chauntry, 118 In Fee Farm, 118 Non Obstantes, in the
Kings Grants, 118, 119 Of a Ward and Wardship, 190 Of the Office of Steward of
his Manors and Lands, to an Infant, from his full age for years, 360, 362 Good
from a Day past, 361
H.
HAbere Facias seisinam, 246, 321 Habendum, in a deed of Grant where it shall
be void, where not, 349, 350 Hospital foundation, and erection of it, and
giving Lands to it; with all particulars, touching a legal foundation, 376, 377
I.
Ioynture to the Wife, with remainders over, 99, 100 Indentures, Declaring uses
upon recovery, 15 Of Bargain and Sale of a Message and Lands, 55 Of uses with
Power of Revocation, and to limit new uses, 195, 197 Of Covenant to suffer a
common recovery to uses, 318, 319 Incorporation, Of Governors of an Hospital,
with the particulars incident to such an Incorporation, 377, 378, 379, 380
Indictments, Of Murder, and the form of it, 144, 145 Must be certain in all
points and circumstances, 146, 149, 150, 151, 152 Not of the Accessory, before
the principal be attainted, 152 Of Declaration of new uses, or to a power of
revocation 200, 201 Information, Of Intrusion upon the Queens possession, 153,
162 Inquisitions, 185 Intitling the King to seize upon default of executing an
Office, 301 Imparlance, 2, 8, 46, 80, 107, 191, 215, 285, 286, 316, 329 Issue
joined, upon seisin of services, 266 Judgment, 209 Where it is Concessum,
where Conside ratum est, 3, 5, 8, 20, 63, 97, 101 In an Action upon the Case,
3, 5, 8 In an Assize, 20 In Debt, upon Escape against a Sheriff, 50 In
Ejectione Firm 63, 105 Given against the Queen, 175, 218, Reversed, 184 In a
Replevin, 232, 237, 257, 264 In Trespass, 315, 323, 339, 352 Jurisdiction of
Courts. In what cases Jurisdiction belongs to the Ecclesiastical Court, in what
to the Common Law, 210, 219 Suit in Ecclesiastical Court, for not paying a Tax
for the Repair of a Church, 219 Ecclesiastical Judges refuse to allow a plea,
219 Justification, Where not in an Action of False Imprisonment, 133, 134
L.
LEases, 210, 259 Of Lands with a stock of Cattle, 210 By a Bishop confirmed by
the Dean and Charter, Of a Rectory Tithes, etc. 70 Livery and Seisin, where
good, where not 264 License Of the King to be absent from executing an Office
for a time, 301 Of the King to found and erect an Hospital, London, The Custom
there to demise their Lands, 53 The Custom there for levying of Plaints and the
manner of Entry of them, and where, 147, 148
M.
MIsnosmer, Of a Borough incorporated, by name Majoris and Burgensium, Burgi de
Lynn: And in an Obligation to them made, the word ^urgesse is ommitted, 28
Monstrans de droit, 185, 301
O.
OBligation, Oyer demanded of it, 134 Office Trove, 166, 186, 187, found by
^scheator ought to be returned, 177
P.
PAtents, and Letters Patents, 123, 167 Of Incorporation of a Borough, and by
what name they shall take, or be sued, 28 Of the King of concealed Lands what
shall pass, 25 Of Incorporating the College of Physicians in London, 127, 128,
129 Of Creation of the Prince Duke of Cornwall, and gift of Lands to the
Duchy, with a particular of the Lands, 280, 281, 290. to 296 Of the King, of
License and the founding and erecting an Hospital, with all the particulars
concerning the same, 375, 376, 377 Pleadings, Null tiel record of Capias ut
Ligatum, 21, 22 Non est factum, 27 Of an Act of Parliament for incorporating a
Burough, 28 Nihil debet, in Debt against a Sheriff upon Escape, 46 In nullo est
erratum, upon a Judgment in Debt against a Sheriff upon an Escape, 50 Of not
guilty in part, 126 Of a Descent, 137 Of an Attainder, 165 Of a Fine, a
Recovery in Bar of a Rent, granted by him in the remainder in tail, 224, 225,
226 Null tiel, Record of an Act of Parliament no plea, 286, 287, And no plea,
against a Charter of the King enrolled, 287, 290 Of License of the King, to
absent for a time for the executing of an Office, 301, 302 Pledges, de
prosequend. 5^, 69, 79, 92, 106, 138, 209, 220, 352 Prescription, in a
Watercourse, to a Mill where it extends to a new built Mill, 1 To be
discharged of payment of Tithes, 210 To be discharged of Taxes, for repayr of
the Church, 218 Postea returned, 53, 58 Prohibition, 209, 217
Q.
QUo Minus, 51
R.
REatachment granted upon an Assize, 19 Rents granted for life upon a Fine
levied with a Nomine paenae, 102 Charge granted by Tenant for life, and he in
the Remainder for life with warranty, 246 Releases, 137 By a Woman Guardian by
Nucture of all Action, nec non, of her Dower to him in the Reversion, 31, 32
General where it shall bind and e cour, 36 Of Errors, 68 With Warranty, 137 Of
damages recovered, 232 A Deed of Release read to a Man illiterate in other
words, (as a general Release) where it was intended but an Acquittance for Rent
only, shall not bind, 343 Replication, 14, 33, 135, 156, 173 Replevin, 220,
233, 237, 250, 265, 276 Retorn of the Sheriff, 23 Of a Writ of Summons and
Attachment in an Assize, 20 Remainder of a Term, and of the Residue of years,
the difference, 72, 73 74 Revocation of uses of part of the Lands before
settled, 198. with power to sell them for payment of Debts, ibid. Of letters
Patents, and the Lands to be seized into the Kings Hands, 285 Power of Revoking
uses, and to limit new uses, 326, 327 Where a Power of Revocation is extinct,
and by what Act extinct, 327
S.
SCire Facias, to show why Letters Patents granted by the King should not be
repealed, 285 Sheriffs delivery over of Prisoners to the new Sheriff, 49
Seisin, Of one service, where it shall be of another, 266, 267 Of Homage is
Seisin of Fealty, 367 What shall be said to be a good Seisin of services 267,
268 Of Fealty and Suit where good, of other services, 267 Statutes of 34. H. 8.
Of 27. H. 8. of uses, 193. 221, 239, 253, 288, 308 13, 42, 57, 84, 115, 172,
332, 347, 375 Of 34. H. 8. Cap. 20, 42 Of 31. E. 3. Of Errors, 63, 64, 65, 175
Of 1. E. 6. Of Chauntries, 116 Of 1. Eliz. Of incorporating the College of
Physicians in London, 129, 130, and to whom it extends not, 135 Of 11. H. 7.
Cap. 20. 140. Of E. 6. of ^ithes 212. Of 11. E. 3. Of reation of the Prince
Duke of Cornwall, 280 Of uniting of Lands to the Duchy of Cornwall, 282, 283 Of
43. Eliz. Of Confirmation of Letters Patents, 289 Of 1. H. 7. Of Confirmation
of the Charter of 11. Ed. 3. of the Duchy of Cornwall. 298 Of 19. H. 7. Of
Attainder of Edward Earl of Warwick, 165 Of 28. H. 8. A special Act for giving
Lands to the King, 169 Of 31. H. 8. Of Monasteries, 347 Surrender, Two joints
for life; and one surrendreth to him in the Reversion, 354
T.
TAles de circumstantibus, 47, 53, 80, 98, 122, 157, 261, 262, 330, 346, 353
Taxes, Imposed for the repair of a Church. 219 Tenures, 187, 265, 268, 271,
272, By Knights service, 187 By Heriot service, 268 Traverse, 14, 172, 155 Of
Null tiel Recovered, 156 Trespass, 306, 315, 323, 315, 329, 339, 345, 352, 356,
366 New Assignment in 340 For hindering one to execute his Office; and receive
the profits of it, 361
V.
VErdict, special in Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit, 5 Special, 15, 47,
72, 73, 81, ^3, 99, 107, 123, 157, 234, 262, 302, 303, 304, 305, 316, 343, 346,
347, 353, 354, 361, 362, 367 Uses, Declared by Indenture dat. after the
Recovery suffered, 11, 199 Not raised to the Queen upon a general consideration
without averment, 82 Upon a Fine levied, 82, 83, 84, 103, 239 Uses contingent,
destroyed by a Feoffment, 333, 334 Contingent, once destroyed, shall never
Revive, 334, 335
W.
WAste, against an Asignee of Lessee for years for waste done, in cutting down
of Woods, 395 Brought by Barganee of a Reversion, 396 In cutting down Trees,
and the value of the Trees, 397 Warranty, 81, 83, 242, 239 Voucher to Warranty,
4 Where Collateral shall bind the issue in tail, 137, to 141 Descends upon an
Infant, where it shall not bind, 335, 336 Several Warranties by several
persons, 174, 175 Wills, 203, 235, 236, 94, 107, 157, 3^3 Declaring what Lands
shall be set forth for the Queen^ 3d. part, and what shall descend to the Heir,
204 Declaring what Lands shall be for payment of Debts; and what the Wife shall
have in recompense of delivering up of her Jointure, 204 Of Thomas Sutton,
founder of the Hospital of Charter House London, 393, Withernam, 250, 258 Writ
of Assize of Novel Disseisin. 9 Writ of Entry Sur Dissin. in the Post, 12 Writ
of Resummons in Assize. 19 Writ of Exigent, 23 To the Sheriff to do Execution
upon a Judgment, 48 Of Droit Patent in London, 58 Writ of Error, and the form
of it, 63, 64, 182, 183 Writ of Formedon, 136, 137 Writ of Enquiry of Dmaa, es,
249 258 Of Restitution of a man to the place, and Office of a Burgess, 293
ERRATA.
PAge 34. Line 7. read Coo. 2. part, p. l. 2. for whole, r. why, p. 46. l. 26.
for be, r. by, p. 52. l. 30. r. neither, etc. p. 52. l. 37. r. Knight, p. 62.
l. 19. after Arts add is, p. 67. l. 7. r. reversed, p. 47. l. 47. r. 3d. for
6th. p. 80. l. 25. r. Fenner, p. 82. r. Turbnrvile, r. Melcum, p. 98. l. 10. r.
Sarum, p. 156. r. Barham, p. 162. l. 23. r. Alton, p. 186. l. 36. r. Indentd,
p. 242. l. 4^. r. Sur.

The NAMES of the CASES.
Actions upon the Case.
LUtterils Case, Pasc. 43. Eliz. B. R. rott. 566. fol. 1. Slades Case, Hill.
38. Eliz. B. R. fo. 3. William Bains Case, Hill. 8. Jam. rott. 1112. p. 6.
Assize.
Calvin's Case, Trin. 6to Jacobi, p. 9. Dowmans Case, M. 26. Eliz. rott. 144. p.
11.
Audita Querela.
Doctor Druries Case, P. 8. Jac. rott. p. 20.
Debt.
Vineiors Case, Tri. 7me: Jacobi, rott. 2629. p. 24. The Case of the Mayor and
Burgesses of Lynn, Trin. 10. Jac. rott. 2413. p. 27. Mausers Case, Pasc. 26.
Eliz. rott. 1608. p. 34. Wisemans Case, Trin. 27. Eliz. C. B. rott. 1354. p.
37. Westbies Case, Hill. 34. Eliz. B. R. rott. 169. p. 44:
Dower.
Edward Althams Case, Tr. 8. Jac. in C. B. p. 30.
Ejectione Firm.
Sir William Pelthams Case, Mich. 31. Eliz. in Sacc. p. 51. The Rector of
Cheddingtons Case, M. 39. Eliz. rott. 551. Binghams Case, M. 43. Elz. rott.
144. in B. R. p. 92. Borastons Case, Hill. 29. Eliz. rott. 790. B. R. p. 79.
Sir George Browns Case, Hill. 36. Eliz. rott. 440. B. R. p. 97. Adams and
Lamberts Case, Hill. 40. Eliz. rott. 748. B. R. p. 106. Arthur Legates Case,
Mich. 10. Jac. C. B. p. 121.
False Imprisonment.
Doctor Bonhams Case, M. 6. Jac. Co. R. p. 126
Formedon.
Lincoln College Case, M. 38. Eliz. rott. 82. C. B. p. 126.
Indictments.
Mackallies Case, 8. Jac. at Newgate, p. 154. The Lord Sanchars Case, p. ^49.
Informations.
Porters Case, 34. Eliz. in Sacc. p. 153. The Case of Alton Woods, Tr. 37.
Eliz. in Sacc. p. 161.
Monstrans de Droit.
Digges Case. Pasc. 40. Eliz. in Cancel. p. 185.
Prohibition.
The Bishop of Winchesters Case, Pasc. 38. Eliz. in B. R. rott. 628. p. 209.
Jefferies Case, M. 32. Eliz. rott. 447. B. R. p. 217.
Replevin.
Capels Case, Mich. 23. Eliz. C. B. rott. 1160. p. 220. Archers Case, Tr. 36.
Eliz. rott. 1676. C. B. p. 233. Bredons Case, Tr. 38. Eliz. rott. 183. in C. B.
p. 237. Ann Mayowes Case, Hill. 35. Eliz. rott. 469. B. R. p. 250. Bettisworths
Case, Pasc. 36, Eliz. rott. 731. C. B. p. 258. Bevils Case, Mick. 28. Eliz.
rott. 1739. p. 265. John Talbots Case, Tr. 7 Jac. rott. 3661. C. B. p. 268.
Henry Connies Case, Tr. 6o Jac. rott. 1611. C. B. p. 270.
Restitution.
James Baggs Case, Trin. 12. Jac. rott. 22. B. R. p. 273.
Scire Facias.
The Princes Case, Hill. 3. Jac. p. 820. Mark Stewards Case, Pasc. 21. Eliz. p.
300.
Trespass.
Corbets Case, Hill. 41. Eliz. rott. 1049. C. B. p. 306. Shellyes Case, Pasc.
21. Eliz. rott. 58. B. R. p. 315. Albanies Case, Mich. 28. Eliz. B. R. rott.
58. p. 323. Chudleighs Case, Hill. 31. Eliz. B. R. p. 329. Thorough goods Case,
Trin. 24. Eliz. rott. 928. p. 339. Baldwins Case, Pasc. 31. Eliz. rott. 115. p.
345. Tookers Case, Mich. 37 Eliz. rott. 136. B. R. p. 359. The Earl of
Shrewesburies Case, rott. 2612. p. 356. The Case of Suttons Hospital, Mich. 10.
Jac. rott. 574.
Waste.
Hyndes Case, Tr. 34. Eliz. rott. 2380. p. 395.
FINIS

