A DETECTION OF THE Court and State OF ENGLAND DURING The Four Last REIGNS And
the INTER-REGNUM.

Consisting of Private Memoirs, etc. With Observations and Reflections. AND AN
APPENDIX, discovering the present State of the Nation.

Wherein are many SECRETS never before made public: As also, a more impartial
Account of the CIVIL WARS in England, than has yet been given.

In Two Volumes.

By ROGER COKE, Esquire.

The Third Edition very much corrected: With an Alphabetical Table.

London, Printed for Andr. Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhill.
MDCXCVII.

AN APOLOGY TO THE READER.
THAT Man has lived long enough, who has outlived the Love and Piety he owes to
his Native Country: by my Native Country I do not mean the fertile and pleasant
Soil of Britain; nor the sweet and temperate Climate of it; nor the manifold
Varieties which it naturally abounds with for the use and conveniences of
humane Life; nor yet the pleasant and excelling Rivers which water it; nor the
noble Havens, and abundance of most open Ports, from which it supplies other
Parts of this our habitable Globe, with the super-abundance of those
Commodities wherein it excels, and whereof the Inhabitants of those Parts stand
in need; and where the Waters flow, as well as ebb, as if they invited the
World to trade with us, as well as we with them: But by my Native Country, I
mean the Constitutions and Laws of the English Monarchy, which have continued
for near Nine hundred Years, viz. since King Egbert made a Decree, that laying
aside the Names of Britains and Saxons, the whole Nation of that part of
Britain under his Dominion, should be called England.

Under these Constitutions and Laws have all English Men ever since, without
any Act of their own Will, been born in Subjection, and by them have been
protected in their Lives, Liberties and Estates; and to govern by these
Constitutions and Laws, have been the Claims of our Hereditary Monarchs, who
have ever since governed England; and though the Succession of the Kings of
England have been often changed in the Saxon, Danish and Norman Race of Kings,
yet these Laws and Constitutions have been ever since preserved,
notwithstanding the Attempts of many of the Kings of the Norman, and I may say
of the Scottish Race too, to have subverted them, which, I believe, is more than
can be said of any other Monarchy in the World, out of Britain: So that in our
English Government, the Constitution and Laws of it are as well the Rules of
the King's Dominion, as of the Subject's Allegiance to the King; and when the
Majesty of the King is arrayed in Judgment, Justice, and Mercy, then for his
Subjects to resist him is High Treason in this World, and Damnation in that to
come: and, I think, I may truly say, no People in the World are more Honourers
of their Kings, yet more jealous of preserving their Constitutions and Laws
than the English; whereby they have preserved their Government, now France and
Spain, whose Government was like ours, have lost theirs.

But when the Kings of England will not make the Laws and Constitutions of
England to be their Will, but their Will differing from these to be the Laws
and Constitutions of it; then a divided Dominion will necessarily follow, and
it will be impossible for the Subject to obey both: The King hereby puts
himself out of God's Protection, whose Vicegerent he is in governing by the
Laws, and misplaces his Majesty which is founded in the Honor, Love and
Obedience of his Subjects, upon Minions and Favorites, whose Servant he makes
himself; and these shall be the first who shall forsake him, when any Adversity
shall come upon him. Our Chronicles give Instances hereof in the Reigns of King
John, Hen. 3. Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. And the design of this Treatise is to show
the Consequences that have been produced hereby in the Reigns of the Kings of
the Scottish Race.

In this regular Monarchy, the Kings of England do not abrogate old Laws, or
impose new, or raise Moneys from the Subject above the Revenues of the Crown,
without Consent in Parliament; and hereby the Kings of England reign in the
Love and Obedience of their Subjects, and are freed from the Imputation of
Tyranny in Sanguinary Laws, and from Oppression in the Taxes granted in
Parliament, which no absolute Monarch is; and are more absolutely obeyed in
both than any absolute Monarch, who makes his Will the Law of his Subjects.

The Division of the Will of a King of England, does not only distract the
Allegiance of his Subjects, so that the divided Will of the King must
necessarily prevail over the Laws and Constitutions of it, or these prevail
against the divided Will, for both are incompatible, and cannot subsist
together: But this Distraction gives Life and Motion to the ambitious Humor of
Malcontents, who are impatient as well of Regal Government, as of submitting
to the Laws and Constitutions of it. And I submit my self to the Judgment of
any Impartial Reader, if this Divided Will in the Prince did not give that Life
and Motion to the Ambition of the Factions in England, Scotland and Ireland,
which not only raised Civil Wars in all of them, but brought destruction upon
K. Charles the First, as well as the Laws and Constitutions of them. However I
will take Notice of the Loyalty of the English Nation both to K. James the
first, and K. Charles the first, that tho these Kings were foreign born to our
Laws and Constitutions, yet it patiently submitted to their Usurpations for
above 35 Years; whereas when King Charles the first thought he had wholly
subdued this Kingdom to his Will, and endeavored to have done the same in
Scotland, (his Native Country) the Scots would not endure it so many Weeks as
the English had done Years, but rose against it first in Tumults, after in open
Arms; and the discontented Parties in England joining with them, however
disjoined from one another, brought on those Civil Wars in all the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, which procured Destruction to the King, as well
as the Kingdoms.

In writing this History, I cannot say with the noble Baptista Nani, I have any
Command from my Prince, or any other to do it; neither will I pretend to such
great Advantages as he had gratis, by a free access to the Records, and most
secret Counsels of my Country; tho I must not say, I have been wholly destitute
of some, for else such an Undertaking would render me guilty of the highest
Arrogance; but what those have been, I judge not pertinent here to relate, they
will best appear by the Work it self: Yet I can say with Nani, that I have not
suffered my self to be defiled with Partiality (which has so prevailed in all
the Writers of the late and present Times that I have seen) but passing by the
Privilege of venerable Antiquity, which to a face of Truth has another close
adjoining, that of Falsehood, I have chosen to expose my self to Trial, and
perhaps to Reproof, and that I might render a Testimony of Authority to
Posterity, to write the Story of the present Age, to the Age it self. And I am
not only induced hereto by the Authority of so noble an Historian, but by the
Reason of History: For many Accidents and Circumstances, which are no part of
the Records of Time, and which soon die and are forgotten, are so interwoven in
History, as to make it entire, and of one piece, and which not only enliven it,
and create pleasure in reading of it, but without them History becomes
disjointed, and is made up of broken pieces.

And I can, in part, say with the noble Nani, and in his own words, That to
compose Histories is sacred, and not to be undertaken but with an upright Mind,
and undefiled Hands; and for that Cause, the Memory of them was consigned to
the Temple, under the faithful Custody of the Chief Priests, as the Witness or
Trust of those that went before, and the Treasure of those that should come
after; not to be handled but as a Religious Thing, and with great Caution. In
sum, the Historian taking to himself an absolute Dictatorship, nay an Authority
more than Human, over Times, Persons and Actions, governs Fame, measures
Deserts, penetrates Intentions, discloses Secrets; is with an undistinguished
Arbitriment over Kings and People, the Judge of Ages past, and Master of those
to come; Absolves or Punishes, Deceives or Instructs. Whence, not without
Reason, the Pen of Writers may be compared to the Lightning, which striking out
but one Letter from the Name Aesar in the Tuscan Tongue is a God. See Suet. c.
97. in the Life of Augustus.
Caesar Augustus, made him a God; because Praise is a thing so tender, that one
Dash makes Illustrious, and a little Blot Infamous; and the Censure of the
World thereupon is so severe, that it either consecrates to Eternity, or
proscribes to Infamy. For my self I know not what else to wish, but that every
one would take upon him to read this Work with the same disinterested and
innocent Mind with which I have wrote it, confining my Confidence in this one
thing, that the present Age will not be so unjust to me, nor so ungrateful to
Posterity, as to deny me the Opinion of Sincerity.

It was Nani's Felicity to write the Stories of the Times, when the Prudence of
the Venetian Senate, not only preserved their State from the Tumults of War,
wherein Christendom was engaged, but in a great measure was Arbitrator of it:
So that the Wars which Nani writes of, were like Thunder afar off; yet herein
Nani expatiates his Story in a short time, scarce 30 Years, into a large
Volume; whereas, without looking after any thing abroad, but what relates to my
Story, I am contracted to the unhappy Story of my Native Country, to show from
what Causes such a Train of Consequences have followed; that England, which
before was the Balance which turned the Scale of the Affairs of Christendom to
that side it inclined, not only fell from this envied Height, and became the
most despisable of all other States, but sunk into the most miserable State of
Abject and Pity.

I am the rather induced to write the Story of these Times, because the
Hackney-Writers of them (at least those I have seen) have not only taken things
in the midst, without assigning the Causes; but being interested Parties, their
Writings have been either fulsom Flatteries, or Invectives against one another,
tending to the fixing of the Distempers of the Parties, without regard to the
Public, or assigning the Cause of the Distempers: But herein I except the
Collections of Mr. John Rushworth, who, tho interested in the Factions of the
late Times, has so faithfully delivered them over to Posterity; and I could
have wished, (tho I know not from whence he had it) that he had not mentioned
in that part of King James his Speech to the Parliament 18 Jac. that the
Parliament is made up of the three States, the King, the Lords and Commons: and
this is the main part of his Collections which Franklin and Nalson so carp at;
yet both these differ not only from one the other in reciting it, but from the
Record of Parliament, for I have perused them with it, according to the Copy
which Mr. Petit has taken.

For my part, I can truly say; that as I never complied with any of the
Factions in the late, or present Times; so my Ancestors stood firm to the Laws
and Liberties of the Nation, and were Sufferers, both before, and in the late
Troubles and Civil Wars: and in these Circumstances, I am less disposed to
favor or f^atter any Party, than another who is interested in any one of them.

I expect it will be objected against me, that in writing this History, I have
sometimes been transported into an Heat unbecoming an Historian: I answer, that
it may happen a Man may be angry, and not sin, especially when the Offense
relates to the Dishonor of God, the King, or the public Destruction or
Distraction of the Country, where Men are protected in their Lives, Liberties
and Fortunes; but if I have erred herein, I shall but be in the number of
Lactantius, who wrote the Relation of the Death of the persecuting Emperors of
the Christians; and of Suetonius and Tacitus.

It was the unhappy Fate of Europe, that the Miseries and Calamities which
succeeded the Divided Will of the four Kings of the Scottish Race, from the Laws
and Constitutions of this Nation, were not terminated within the Limits of the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, but were the occasion of the first
Rise, and growing Grandeur of France, through the boundless Ambition of
Cardinal Richlieu, and the present French King, both by Sea and Land, as well
to the Terror of Christendom, as of these Nations: and this Story will, in some
measure, trace the Steps of them.

This Treatise, I suppose, will displease two sorts of Men, whom I will never
take care to please: One, who exalt the Divided Will of the Prince above his
Royal Capacity in governing by the Constitutions and Laws of the Kingdom: The
other, those which are impatient under Regal Government, and the Constitutions
of this Kingdom.

I have been more particular herein, because notwithstanding the Calamities
which this Divided Will of the King had brought upon the Nation in the late
Civil Wars, and after; yet after the Restoration of King Charles the 2d, the
Nation was more fiercely rent into Divisions, under the Names of Whig and Tory,
than it was before the Wars; and these last having the Dominion of the Press,
and Favor of the Court, made it their business to irritate and provoke all
others not of their Faction; and if any opposed them by Writing, when they
could not answer, to persecute them for printing without a License, tho not
unlawful in it self, yet unlawfully printed.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE General History of England, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, from the
earliest Accounts of Time, to the Reign of his present Majesty King William.
Taken from the most Ancient Records, Manuscripts, and Historians. Containing
the Lives of the Kings, and Memorials of the most Eminent Persons both in
Church and State. With the Foundations of the Noted Monasteries, and both the
Universities. Vol. I. By James Tyrrel, Esquire Fol.

A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers: Containing an Account of the Authors
of the several Books of the Old and New Testament; and the Lives and Writings
of the Primitive Fathers; An Abridgment and Catalogue of all their Works, etc.
To which is added, A Compendious History of the Councils, etc. Written in
French by Lewis Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon. In seven Volumes. Fol.

An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate in Matters of Religion, etc.
8o.

All sold by Andr. Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil.

INTRODUCTION.
WHEN King James became King of England, the Kingdom of France was bounded on
the North with the British Sea, from la Bresle on the East, where this River
which parts Normandy from Boloignois discharges it self into the Sea, and in
the Latitude of 50 Degrees. North, and 5 Min. from whence West and by South it
extends it self to Portsal in Bretaign, about 340 Miles distance, and in the
Latitude of 48 Degrees; and North and by East from la Bresle to Calais, which
lies in the Latitude of 50 Degrees, 40 Minutes.

From Portsal to the South, inclining into the East, upon the Bay of Biscay,
France extended it self to St. Jean de Luz, which is the Frontier to Spain in
the Latitude of 44 Degrees; and from St. Jean de Luz, East and by South, it
extended it self along the Pyrenean Hills to Perpignian in the Country of
Rosillion, in the Latitude of 42 Degrees. 30 Min.

From Perpignian on the South to Piedmont, on the East toward the North, it
was bounded by the Mediterranean, Sea, and from Calais on the North; the
Eastern parts of France to the South were bounded by the Spanish Netherlands,
Lorain, Alsace, the State of Geneva, Savoy and Piedmont. The Continent was near
threefold more than England, including Wales.

Before the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella in the Year 1474. Spain was divided
into six Kingdoms, whereof four were Christian, viz. the Kingdoms of Castile
and Leons, Arragon, Navarre and Portugal; and two Mohammedan, viz. Granada and
Murcia. But when K. James came to be King of England, all these Kingdoms were
united under Philip the 3d, King of Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella having
conquered the Kingdoms of Granada and Murcia, after Isabella's death Ferdinand
conquered Navarre, and Philip the 2d claimed and conquered Portugal in 1584.
after the Death of Don Sebastian, who was overthrown and slain by the King of
Fez and Morocco in 1580. All these Kingdoms thus united were greater than
France by about. Spain thus united, is a Peninsula, having on the North-East
and South-East the Pyrenean Hills; on the North-East is Fontarabia, and on the
South-East Cape de Creux; the rest of Spain is environed by the Bay of Biscay
on the North, by the Atlantic Ocean on the West and South to Gibralter, and to
the North-East by the Mediterranean Sea from Gibralter to Cape de Creux.

The North of Spain, viz. the North of Biscay and Galicia, is in the Latitude
of 44 Degrees North; and the South parts of Andaluzia and Granada in the
Latitude of 36 Degrees, 30 Minutes: but the extent of Spain about the middle
Region of it from East to West, is more than from North to South, being near 14
Degrees, 20 Minutes in Longitude.

The Isle of Britain is the greatest of Europe, it may be of the World, for
ought is certainly known, at least none comparable to it, except Madagascar or
St. Laurence, and Japan, if it be an Island. The North of it is in the Latitude
of 58 Degrees North, the South-East in 51 Degrees, and toward the West
inclines into the Latitude of 50 Degrees. It Is bounded on the South by the
Channel, or British Sea; on the East by the German Ocean; on the North by the
Deucaledonian Ocean, and on the West by the Verguvian.

Britain is divided into two Kingdoms, England and Scotland, England including
Wales, above greater; but incomparably a better and more fertile Soil, and a
more temperate Climate, in a Northern Climate, lying South of Scotland.

The Kingdom of Scotland has several Islands depending upon it on the North
and West; on the North is a Knot of Islands, or Rocks, called The Orcades, I
cannot tell whether they be distinguished by Names; but on the North of these,
in the Latitude from 60 Degrees to 61 Degrees, lies Shetland, or Shotland,
which the Romans called Vltima Thule; and on the West are the Hebrides, the
most considerable of them are the Isles of Mul, Sky, and Lewis.

Besides Ireland, and the Isles of our Western Plantations; the Isle of Man,
which lies between Lancashire and Ireland; the Isle of Anglesey, which lies
between Wales and Ireland; the Isles of Wight, Garnsey and Jersey, which lie in
the British Sea between England and France; and the Sorlings, or Isles of
Silly, a Knot of Islands about a Degree West of the Lands-end of Cornwall, are
in the Dominion of the Kingdom of England.

Ireland is a Kingdom and Island, depending upon the Kingdom of England,
greater than Scotland, and near as big as England, excluding Wales, and is near
of an Oblong Figure, unless the Province of Munster inclines toward the West,
near a Degree into the South. The North of Ireland lies in the Latitude of 55
Degrees, 30 Minutes North; and the South-East in the Latitude of 52 Degrees, 30
Minutes; and the South-West in the Latitude of 51 Degrees, 40 Minutes: the
breadth from East to West is near 4 Degrees, 20 Minutes Longitude.

Ireland, on the North, is bounded by the Deucaledonian Ocean on the East by
St. George's Channel, on the South by the Atlantic Ocean, and on the West by
the Verguvian Ocean.

It will much conduce to open the Design of the ensuing Treatise, if we look
back to the Dissolution of the Roman Western Empire, and see what Kind of
Government succeeded in the Kingdoms of Spain, France and England, and so take
a view of the Causes of the Ruin of the Western Empire: and herein I shall
follow Helvicus his Christian Vulgar Era.

As Britain was the first Country which received the Christian Faith, so
Constantine the Great, the first of all the Christian Roman Emperors, was born
a Britain, and became Emperor in the year of Christ 306. A Prince who, as he
excelled in Christian Piety, so was he adorned with all Moral Virtues requisite
in so great a Prince; and being zealously addicted to propagate the Christian
Faith and Religion, he chiefly intended these above all other things; but
herein he met with great Opposition: nor could he attain these Ends, without
shaking the Strength and Foundation of the Constitutions of the Empire.

For in propagating the Christian Faith and Religion, Constantine was not only
opposed by Dioclesian, Maxentius and Maximin, (who were Emperors before him)
but by his Copartner Licinius in War; and the Christians, if they had been all
of one piece, were not sufficient to support the Empire against the far more
numerous Gentiles and Jews. Add hereto, that in the Rage of the late
Persecution under Dioclesian, Maximinian, Maximin and Maxentius, the Christians
were so sore persecuted, that excepting their Faith and Piety for Christianity,
they were unfit for any Civil or Military Employment; but so far were the
Christians from being of one Piece, that they were rent into the Sects and
Factions of Marcionists, Montanists, Novatians, Donatists and Sabellians; and
in the 10th Year of Constantine, Arius broacht his blasphemous Opinion of our
Savior's not being God from all Eternity, being the Year of Christ 316.

We do not read that the Romans, before the Empire became Christian, ever made
War upon any Nation upon the Account of Religion; and though there were many
Sects among them of different Opinions concerning their Gods, and their
Attributes, and of God's Prescience, Fate, and the Liberty and Necessity of
Human Actions, yet the different Sects never went farther than Brawls, and
endless Contentions with one another; they never upon that Account made any
Schism or Separation from the public Worship and Service of their Gods
prescribed by the Laws of the Empire.

And as among the Gentiles, so among the Jews, tho the Opinions of the
Pharisees, Sadduces and Esseans were as wild and extravagant as those of the
Heathens, yet these were never esteemed by them to be Acts of Jewish Religion,
nor upon that Account did they dispense or separate themselves from the public
Worship and Service of God prescribed by Law.

Whereas the different Sects of the Christians not only baptized their fond and
wicked Opinions, many of which were the same with those of the Gentiles, by the
Name of Religion; but took occasion from thence to separate and disjoin
themselves from the Communion, or public Worship and Service of God prescribed
by public Authority: So as Constantine had a very difficult Task to govern the
Empire in this distracted State, not only of the Gentiles, but of the
Christians. But since Religion is the highest Act of Piety, Devotion and
Gratitude, which Man can return to God for his having preferred Man in his
Creation and Generation above all other Creatures, in giving him not only
Dominion over them, but much more by enduing Man with an intellectual and
reasonable Soul, capable of eternal Happiness; and since Religion is not only
mistaken in the Name and Exercise, but made at this time as much a
Stalking-horse to cover Men's Pride, and fantastical Opinions, as it was in
Constantine's time, and since, to the Scandal of Christianity, I hope the
Reader will not lose his Time in understanding the difference between Christian
Faith and Christian Religion, and herein what is to be ascribed to God, and
what is the Duty of Man.

Christian Faith is a firm Belief and Reliance upon God's Promise revealed in
the Old and New Testament, to the end that Man by his Faith, and Obedience to
the Precepts which God requires of him herein, may be made capable of Eternal
Happiness, from which he was fallen by the Disobedience of our first Parents; so
as Christian Faith is the Effect of God's mere Grace and Favor to Man, wherein
Man is only passive in believing in God thus revealing himself, and submitting
to the Precepts which God requires in the Scriptures.

Christian Faith does not absolve Man from any of the Moral Duties which God
requires of him by the Law of Nature; but more strictly obliges Man to them,
not only in his Speech and Actions, but forbids all Immoral Thoughts and
Intentions; so that Christian Faith is so far from being incompatiable with
humane Peace and Society in this World, that Man is more obliged hereto by it,
than by the Law of Nature.

Christian Religion is a conjoining of two or more in honoring and praising
God for the public Blessings they enjoy by God's Favor, both as being by his
Grace and Goodness received into the Communion of Christ's Congregation, as
also being protected in their Lives and Fortunes in their several Societies and
Governments: So that Christian Religion is the Act of the Will of Man in
conformity to Christian Faith; and Christian Faith and Religion differ, as
Man's Understanding and Reason: God made Man without any Act of Man's Will, an
intellectual Creature, to inform all his future Intentions, Speech and Actions;
and it is the Will of Man to intend, speak, and act reasonably, or conformable
to his Understanding. So that tho Christian Faith be the same in all Countries
and Places, yet Christian Religion must necessarily be different in different
Countries and Places, as God, in his Providence, is pleased to govern the World
in them.

Thus the Children of Israel were obliged to join together in celebrating God's
Honor and Praises, for his Deliverance of them out of their Egyptian Bondage,
and for his immediate Government of them, and prescribing them Laws for the
Support of this Government, and for God's revealing himself to them in the Old
Testament; which other Nations to whom God had not thus revealed himself, and
thus governed, could not do.

So all Christian Countries and Kingdoms are as well obliged to join together
in honoring and praising God for the public Benefits they receive in being
protected in every Government in their Lives and Fortunes in this World, as
well as in being received by God's special Grace and Favor into the Communion
of Christ's Congregation: But God's Providence in governing the World being
after different manners, in diverse Places, so must the Religion, or the manner
of celebrating God's Praises, be differing in them. In England we are obliged
to honor and praise God, that we enjoy God's Blessings by Laws peculiar to
this Nation, and by being delivered from the Popish Conspiracy in 1605, etc.
but other Nations which do not partake with us herein, cannot join herein with
us, nor we with them.

Religion, or the conjoining of Men in honoring and praising God for the
public Benefits they equally receive from God, is the highest Duty incumbent
upon Man: for tho God by a peculiar Providence foresees, and provides for all
Men in several manners, it may be, not for two alike in all the World, and also
for these in daily Varieties; yet Men are secured in these particular Blessings
by the public Laws and Governments of the different Places wherein they
inhabit.

Christian Religion being a conjoining of many in celebrating God's Praises,
and in Prayers for God's continuing his Mercies and Blessings; these Praises
and Prayers are supposed to be uniform and foreknown, that all who meet, may
join with one Voice and Mind in them: and therefore S. Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. exhorts Timothy, that first of all, (as for the highest Duty of
Christians) Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made
for all Men, especially for Kings, and all in Authority under them (tho at this
time not only the Roman Emperors, but all Kings, and those in Authority were
Heathen and Idolaters) that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty: for this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the
Truth; for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus. If therefore by Divine Precept or Command from God,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and Thanksgiving be to be made for
Heathen Kings and Magistrates, much more are Christians obliged to make all
these for Christian Kings and Magistrates.

All Kingdoms consist in the mutual Office of Commanding and Obeying, so that
it is as well the Duty of Kings, and those who are in Authority to command, as
it is of the Subjects to obey; and no Obedience can be, where there is no
Command to which it is due; for where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, or Omission.

Tho these Offices be distinct in their Relations, to the Governors and
Governed, yet the Rules of these Offices are the same, and common to both, so
as that they ought to be foreknown, as well to those in Authority to command,
as those who are subject to them; these Rules are the Laws and Constitutions of
every Kingdom and Country, which unite them into one Incorporeal, or
Intelligible Body; and under these is Mankind in different Places, in diverse
manners, maintained in Society and Concord.

The Offices of Commanding and Obeying, are not only restrained to Moral Speech
and Actions, but extend to Religious; for the Fear of God is the beginning of
Wisdom, as well in all public as private Actions: So that all Civil Nations to
whom God had not revealed himself, however they misplaced their Deities in
Osyris, Isis, Jupiter, etc. worshipped their Gods in public manner, and had
those Rites and Ceremonies which were performed by separate Persons ordained
thereto.

As God governs the World, and all Creatures in it, so does he govern the
Kingdoms in the World, and has-set fatal Periods to them, as well as to the
Life of Man, and all other Creatures: yet as he has not in vain given Laws to
Man to govern his Intentions, Speech and Actions by, and made him to subsist in
the Labor of his Body, and Cares of his Mind, or both; so has he not in vain
commanded all Kingdoms and Nations to honor and serve him, and to live justly
and peaceably with one another: and under these only can Kingdoms and Nations
hope for Peace, and God's Blessing upon them.

So that it is not the extent of the Territories of Kingdoms and Nations which
is the Strength of them, but the number of People in them: nor is it their
well-peopling only, but their Unity in Religion and Civil Government; for by
these, small Dominions increase upon others, which are in Distraction and
Dissension: and where Kingdoms or Nations become distracted or divided, either
in Religion or Civil Government, they become, how great soever they be, so much
more enfeebled, and tending to outward and intestine Dissolution, as these
shall be more.

These Discords in Religion and Justice, have their Beginnings oft-times from
Kings, and those in Authority, and often from the Subjects. It was Solomon's
Wives, 1 Kings 11. that turned away his Heart from the Religion which God
commanded, which was the Cause, ver. 11. that God rent his Kingdom of Israel
from him, and gave it to his Servant Jeroboam; and it was Jeroboam's Idolatry
which distracted the Israelites into Factions, which in time brought the
Babylonish Captivity upon them, from which they never returned.

And as Discords in Religion often arise from Kings, and those in Authority,
which enfeeble the Strength of Kingdoms and Nations, so does the Oppression,
and Injustice of Kings, and Magistrates, when they are not God's Ministers for
their Subjects good, make Kings Instruments of their vile Ends to the damage of
their Subjects: Thus Rehoboam to humor his Favorites bred up with him,
preferred them before his Subjects, and threatened to oppress them more than his
Father did; whereby he lost the Dominion of ten of the twelve Tribes of Israel,
not only from himself but from his Father's House for ever; and became so poor
and feeble, that the King of Egypt took Jerusalem, and made Spoil of all the
wonderful Riches, which his Father had left him. It was Ahab's Covetousness and
Injustice in the Murder of Naboth, and seizing his Vineyard, that God not only
disinherited his Posterity, but rooted them out from the Face of the Earth; 1
Kings 21. 21.

And as this Discord in Religion and Justice may begin with the King, and those
in Authority, so it may from those subject to them. It was the People contrary
to God's immediate Command forsook the Religion and Worship which was commanded
them, and set up the Molten Calf to be adored and worshipped, Exodus 32. and it
was the People which twice conspired to depose Moses from ruling over them,
Numbers 16. which brought so great a Destruction upon them.

I do not question, but it was the intolerable Tyranny and Oppression of
Dioclesian, Maximinian, Maximin and Maxentius, as well as their horrible
Persecution of the Christians, so livelily described by Lactantius, which gave
so great a Reputation to the Christians, and made Constantine's Passage to the
Roman Empire more desirable, not only by the Christians, but even by the
Gentiles. Nor was the Roman Empire at any time of a greater extent, unless
under Trajan, than when Constantine became sole Emperor.

Whereas this Roman Empire in the Body of it, was never in so distracted and
feeble a State; for tho Constantine, in regard of the Excellency of his natural
Disposition, was universally acknowledged Emperor, yet above all things
endeavoring the Propagation of Christian Faith and Religion, and by his own
Authority, without the Concurrence of the Senate, he granted an universal
Toleration of Religion to all Sects of Christians, as well as Jews and
Gentiles, and not only discharged the Christian Clergy, which by the
Constitutions of the Empire (when they were not otherwise persecuted) were
subject to give their Attendance upon defraying the Lustral Sacrifices, and
watch and ward for Security of the Pagan Temples; but made the Christians
capable of receiving Legacies, and of all public Employments, so as the
Christians were not only in an equal, but better Estate than the Gentiles, and
upon all occasions had the Preference of Constantine's Favor.

But however this displeased the Gentiles, it did not content all sorts of
Christian Heretics, and Schismatics, who were so obstinate in their Opinions,
that all the Endeavors Constantine could use, would not reconcile them: For
besides the Nicene Council, he called four more, viz. at Gaul, Ancyra, Neo
Caesarea, and Laodicea. But when the Heretics and Schismatics would not
submit to these, Constantine restrained them from the Privileges he before
granted them, and left them in the same state they were before he became
Emperor, yet not subject to further Persecution.

This was so far from redressing the Factions, that they became more bitter
against the Orthodox Christians than they were before, and the Gentiles
countenanced the Heretics and Schismatics herein, so that in many Places were
Tumults and Disorders; and many bitter Invectives, even against Constantine
himself, were uttered by them. So that the whole Body of the Empire was rent
and torn into Parties and Factions, and Constantine's time wholly taken up
about them, to the necessary neglect of the more important Affairs of the
Empire.

To this state did the devilish Pride of these Heretics and Schismatics
reduce the Roman Empire; I say devilish Pride, for they were not content to
submit, as Christ's Servants, to obey him in those plain and easily
intelligible Precepts of the Gospel, but like Lucifer would be wise in
understanding our Savior's glorious Attributes, which as they are
incomprehensible to Humane Understanding, so without invading God's
Prerogative, which he has not communicated to any Creature, no Man ought to
enquire into them: and this Misery attends all the wild and extravagant
Opinions, not only of the Christians, but of all the Sects of other
Philosophers (or rather Sophisters) about God and his Attributes, that being
founded in their Fantastic Brains, they will submit to no Rule which God
requires of Man to determine them, and so they continue in endless Contention
and Confusion.

These Heretics and Schismatics not content to be Copartners with our
Savior in his Attributes, extended their blasphemous and extravagant Opinions
into the Objects of Religion (which neither the Jews nor Gentiles ever did) a
Lie in diametrical Contradiction; for Religion is a public Conjunction of Men
in celebrating God's Praises for the public Blessings they alike received from
God; whereas these for the Love-sake Opinion of their own Conceits, disjoined
themselves from celebrating God's Praises for the Benefits they alike received
from God, as Christians: How could the monstrous Opinions of the Marcionists,
Manichees, Novatians, Arians, Sabellians, and Donatists, absolve these from
joining with their fellow Christians, in giving God Thanks for their Conversion
to the Christian Faith, and for their wonderful Deliverance by Constantine,
from the Rage and Persecution of Dioclesian, Maximinian, Maxentius and Maximin?

This was the Gratitude and Piety which these Men returned to God and
Constantine for their Deliverance: and if they made things thus bad in
Constantine's Reign, they made them much worse after his Death; for
notwithstanding all the pious Endeavors of Constantine to the contrary, the
Arians, above all other Sects, had overspread the Face of the Roman Empire,
and his Son Constantius became an Arian, and not only revoked the Privileges
which his Father had conferred upon the Orthodox Christians, and preferred the
Arians (if they were worthy to be called Christians) before them, but by
several Councils at Tire, Antioch and in the East, (for Constantine divided the
Empire between his three Sons, Constantine, Constantius and Constans, and the
Eastern Empire was given to Constantius) revoked all the Decrees of the Nic^^^
Council.

Nor was the Empire in a much better Condition in the West, for Arianism had
overspread the Western as well as the Eastern Empire; and though Constans were
not a Persecutor of the Orthodox Christians, as his Brother Constantius was,
yet Liberius, the Bishop (or, if you please, the Pope) of Rome, was an Arian;
and one Felix became a Competitor with him in his Bishopric, or Papacy. In
this Hurly-burly stood the Roman Empire after the Death of Constantine, wherein
Civil and Military Discipline became neglected till the Reign of Julian the
Apostate, which was but 24 Years after the Death of Constantine.

Julian (who succeeded Constantius) put the Case further than the Arians, for
they would allow our Savior's Divinity to exist to Eternity, though they
denied it from Eternity; whereas Julian would not allow him to be a Prophet;
and for the short Time of his Reign, he made it his Business to restore
Paganism; and to that end revoked all the Powers and Privileges Constantine had
granted the Christians, and granted a general Indulgence to all Sects of the
Christians, yet recalled all exiled Bishops, whether Catholic, or Heretic, so
that there was a Confusion among them in the Execution of their Offices; but in
all the countenanced the Heretics against the Orthodox.

However Julian being a Martial Prince, and the Persians having in these
Confusions of the Roman Empire, made Invasions upon it; Julian raised a great
Army, and marched against Sapores, the King of Persia: but in this Expedition
Julian died, having reigned but one Year, and eight Months, to whom Jovian
succeeded, who was a zealous Orthodox Emperor: but the Gentiles under Julian
disliking Jovian, and the Christians being in Feuds and Factions, Jovian was
forced to make an inglorious Peace with Sapores, and delivered up the City of
Nisibis to him. However Jovian restored the Orthodox Christians to the
Privileges and Immunities which Constantine had granted them, and left the
Pagans and Heretics to themselves: But Jovian's short Reign, being but seven
Months and odd days, could perfect no great matter.

To Jovian, Valentinian succeeded, who took his Brother Valens to be his
Colleague; Valentinian was zealously Orthodox, and Valens fierce sa an Arian:
Valentinian granted a general Indulgence of Liberty to Pagans, and all sorts of
Heretics, but favored the Orthodox: But Valens denied Liberty of Religion, to
the Orthodox, though he granted it to all other Sects and Heretics, and also
to the Pagans.

In the third Year of the Reign of Valentinian and Valens, Valentinian made his
Son Gratian a Co-partner in the Empire; and having reigned 11 Years died,
leaving his Sons Gratian and Valentinian Emperors, but Valens died three Years
after him, viz. Ann. 378. and no mention is made of his Issue.

By this time Arianism had overspread the Face of the Eastern Empire, and was
so established that the Orthodox Christians were forced to exercise their
Religion in obscure Conventicles; besides the Vise, or West Goths, though
Arians, had overrun Thrace, even to the Gates of Constantinople.

Gratian was Orthodox, and in this distracted Estate of the Eastern Empire, was
sore pressed upon by the Germans in the Western; so that he judged his younger
Brother Valentinian no ways qualified to restrain the warlike Progress of the
Goths, or settle the Eastern Empire; and therefore chose Theodosius for his
Colleague. Theodosius was a Spaniard by birth, as well as Trajan, a most devout
and Orthodox Christian, and a most valiant and expert Soldier: so that as
Trajan was the most glorious and august of all the Heathen Emperors, so was
Theodosius (at least after Constantine) the most renowned of all the Christian
Emperors; yet it was his Fate that he should see his Native Country to be the
first that fell in the Ruin of the Roman Western Empire.

Theodosius was made Emperor in the Year 379, and forthwith raised an Imperial
Army, and marched against the Goths, and gained several signal Victories over
them; and in the Year 380 entered in Triumph into Constantinople, where he found
it a much more difficult Task to re-establish the Orthodox Christians than to
vanquish the Goths: for the Arians above 40 Years had been possessed of the
Revenue belonging to the Church; their Churches rich and splendid, and their
Service magnificent; and the Orthodox being poor, and out of Possession of any
Churches, or Revenue, it was impossible to redress these in an instant, but by
degrees; so that it was ten Years before Theodosius could re-establish the
Orthodox Clergy, and suppress the Arian.

In the mean time, viz. Ann. 381, the next Year after Theodosius settled at
Constantinople, Alaricus, King of the West Goths, (who were Arians) marched
through Maesia, now called Hungary, Germany, and Gaul, into Spain, and without
any Fighting, or Siege, that we read of, took Possession of the greatest part
of Spain: So much was the ancient Roman Warlike Discipline neglected, while the
Christians were in these Feuds and Discords among themselves; so that Spain
which held the longest Wars against the Romans of all their Conquered Dominions
in Europe, was the first that was rent from the Roman Empire, without a Sword
drawn in its Defense.

But Spain was too great to be wholly possessed by the Goths, so that about 40
Years after Alaricus had possessed himself of the other parts of Spain,
Gundericus King of the Vandals, Anno 410, marched quite through the Body of the
Roman Western Empire, and without any interruption, pierced to the most remote
South-West part of Spain, called Baetica, and there planted themselves, and
called it Andaluzia, or Vandaluzia, or the Country of the Vandals.

I have been a little more particular in setting down the Causes of the Ruin of
the Roman Western Empire, that the Occasions of the like might be avoided in
the other parts of Christendom, as well to avoid the like Consequences, as the
Scandal to Christianity thereby; and the rather, because that the fond Opinions
which are broached in these times, are as extravagant and wild, as those in the
time of Constantine, and after; and Men as obstinate in them, and so conceited
of them, that they make them the Objects of their Religion; and think
themselves thereby discharged from joining with other Christians, in
celebrating Praises and Thanksgiving to God, for the public Benefits they
alike partake.

St. Paul truly calls the Brawls among the different Sects of the Grecian
Philosophers, vain Philosophy; because they tended to no Edification, or
Benefit, but caused endless Contentions and Discords; and was never more
offended than when the Christians became distracted into Sects, I am of Paul,
another of Apollo, a third of Cephas, etc. whereby the Unity of Christians was
rent into endless Feuds and Factions.

And as the Dogmatizing of these Philosophers (or rather Sophisters) was vain,
and tended to no good, but ill, so are the Analyticks, Topics, Physics and
Metaphysics of Aristotle, and all the Disqui^tions and Distinctions of the
Schoolmen, about the Attributes of God, Angels and Saints, etc. and tend to no
Edification: For I say that by no Rule, or Method of Aristotle's Logic, was
ever any Progression of Learning in any one Proposition in any Art, or Science;
if another can show it, it lies on his part, for I deny it; and I will be
particular herein.

Clavius in his Scholium upon the first Proposition of Euclid's Elements,
endeavors to demonstrate it by Aristotle's Logic, in three Syllogisms, and
two Corollaries, (such as they are) and then leaves it not only unconclusive,
but says by this way it cannot otherwise be done; and therefore not only he,
but all other Mathematicians, not only in their Comments upon Euclid, but all
other Mathematical Learning, rejects this way of Reasoning, and betakes himself
to what he had said before in his Demonstration of it. As if all Light of
Reasoning were so shut up in Claviu; his Brain, that because he does not see,
the rest of Mankind must be blind; and what is that way of Reasoning that he
betakes himself to, but by hudling the Principles of Geometry into Confusion,
without order or method of Reasoning, to make a Conclusion, like a Dutch
Reckoning of Altem-al? From hence it is, that there is no Method or Order of
reasoning observed in Geometry, whereby this noble Science is rendered so
perplexed, that of ingenious Men, not one in twenty can understand it, and no
Reason is given of any one Proposition of our most useful Vulgar Arithmetic,
whereby it becomes crampt up to some few Rules, without further possibility of
progress.

And I say if Aristotle's Logic be of no Use in Scientifical and Demonstrative
Learning, then cannot it be in dialectical and probable; for if any of the
Premises of a Syllogism be but probable, or uncertain, the Conclusion will be
less probable and more uncertain, from whence endless Confusion and Discord
will follow, but never any rational Knowledge: and from hence it is there are so
many Sects among the Peripateticks, which are derived from Aristotle, as
Branches from the Trunk of a Tree, as Clavius truly observes in his Preface of
the Nobility and Excellency of Mathematical Learning, and we shall have
Occasion to say more hereof hereafter.

I would not have carped at Aristotle or Clavius herein, if I did not
understand that not only Geometry and Numbers, but all Mathematical Learning,
might be taught by one Method of Reasoning, intelligible by Youth in their
early Years; and that without Algebra, Square or Cube Roots of surd Numbers,
might be extracted without Error; whereby all those surd Propositions in
Mathematics, which before could only be resolved Geometrically, may be so
Numerically; and also how in Navigation to find out the Variation of Longitude
in any different Latitude, if an Account be given of the Sailing; which I say
is impossible to be done by Trigonometry, and the Tables of Sines, Secants, and
Tangents; and to find out the Center of any Circle, in any two different
Latitudes, and variation of Longitude given, and the Arch of Distance: Nor is
this Method of Reasoning restrained to Mathematical Learning, but may be in
other, as has been showed in The Reasons of the Decay of the Strength, Wealth
and Trade of England, and The Increase of the Dutch Wealth, Strength and Trade,
etc.

How much better then were it for the Nobler, and better sort of Youth, to be
instructed in their Mother-Tongues in this Learning, wherein every Proposition
would beget a new Knowledge, which may be useful to them in their future
Conversation and Business, than to lose their whole Youth in learning Greek and
Latin, which they rarely ever after make use of, which they might, if that time
had been employed in learning Welsh and Irish; and instead of being instructed
how to deal and converse justly, to be imposed upon by the Sophistry of
Aristotle, which is of no Use to them in their Conversation and Business, and
excites them into endless Brawls and Contentions not only in civil but
religious Affairs?

Having given an Account of the Reasons of the Ruin of the Roman Western
Empire, and how like our Case is to that of the Empire in its Declension; It Is
time to take a view of the State of the Goths and Vandals, after they had
planted themselves in Spain: and herein I observe, that though the Romans as
well as Grecians, esteem all other Nations barbarous but themselves, yet the
Government of them was equal, if not better than either; for it was a Regular
Monarchy, wherein the King did not govern by an absolute despotick Power, but
by established Laws; nor could they make new, nor alter the old, or raise
Money, without the Consent of the States of their Kingdoms, and this continued
for many Hundred Years after: how many of the Kingdoms in Spain lost these
Privileges, is too long to be inserted here; yet at this Day the Kingdom of
Arragon retains them: So that the King of Spain never speaks to them as King of
Castile.

In the Reign of Honorius and Arcadius Ann. 408. about five Years before
Gundericus entered Spain, Attila King of the Huns overrun the Empire, and
pierced into Gaul with a huge Army, against whom Honorius sent Ecius, (the
greatest General of his time) with an Imperial Army, which was raised in all
parts of the Empire; so as Ecius was forced to withdraw the Roman Legions in
Britain to oppose Attila, nor did they ever return more; so that the poor
Britains being enured to no warlike Discipline, but only to serve their
imperious Masters, easily became a Prey to the Picts and Scots, and so were in
a more servile State than when they were under the Romans. To redeem themselves
from which, they called the English Saxons to their Assistance, who used them
worst of all, and expelled the whole Race of them out of that part of Britain,
now called England.

But this is observable, That as in these Times the rest of the Roman Empire
was overspread with Arianism, so was that part of Britain subject to the Roman
Empire, overspread with Pelagianism; and here observe the Justice of God upon
them, that these Men who ascribed to themselves a Power of Salvation, without
God's special Grace and Favor to them, should not be able to save themselves
from their Enemies, but be either slaughtered by them, or expelled their Native
Country upon the Earth.

The Saxons which conquered the Britains were Heathen, yet was their
Government, as well as that of the Goths, a Regular Monarchy, and so continued
in all the Dynasties of their Kings, and yet is continued notwithstanding the
several Attempts of many of the Kings of the Norman, and the Scottish Race to
the contrary.

About ten Years after Ecius recalled the Roman Legions out of Britain, viz. in
418. Pharamond entered Gaul, and conquered some part of it, which he called
France, after the Name of the Franks; and Pharamond was Heathen; and so was
Meroveus his Successor, and Childerick his Son; and so continued till about the
Year 490, when Clovis was converted to Christianity: of whom Messeray glories
that he was the only King in the World, which was not Infidel, or Heretic.

However, the Government of the Franks, as well as the Goths and Saxons, was a
Regular Monarchy, till the Reign of Charles the 7th, about the Year 1430. which
was above a thousand Years after the Franks planted themselves in Gaul.

If we look back into the Reign of Henry the 2d of England, we shall find him,
it may be, the greatest of all the Western Kings, and Lord, if not of the
greatest, yet best part of France, as he was Duke of Normandy and Aquitain in
Right of his Wife Eleanor, Aquitain having the Ocean on the West, and Normandy,
the British Sea on the North.

But this Dominion did not last long, for King John, Henry's Son, and John's
Son Henry the 3d endeavoring to usurp a more than Legal Authority over their
Subjects, caused such a Ferment and Discord in the Kingdom; and this lasted
near 70 Years, that the Kings of France in the mean time took all Normandy, and
the greatest part of Aquitain from the English.

When King James became King of England, Henry the 4th was French King, having
composed by Force and Clemency the Civil Wars, which had raged near 40 Years
all over France; and in the Year 1597, made Peace with Spain, which was about 5
Years before King James became King of England: and here let us take a view of
Spain.

Though Spain were 1/3 greater than France, when King James came to the Crown
of England, yet France was, I believe, fivefold better peopled, and generally a
more fruitful Country: How this came to pass it is fit to look back upon the
Cause of the Sterility of Men in Spain, and their abounding in France.

Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of Castile and Arragon, about the Year
1490, having conquered the Kingdoms of Granada and Murcia; and against their
Faith given to the Moors, brought in the Inquisition upon them, the greatest
part of the Moors forsook their Country, and thereby left the Kingdoms of
Granada and Murcia, so much less peopled: and Ferdinand and Isabella being
addicted to the Roman Religion, established manifold Bishoprics and Religious
Houses in these Kingdoms of both Sexes; and the Pope though he pleases to make
Marriage a Sacrament, yet forbids it to the Clergy, and other of both Sexes who
take upon them a Religious Life; whereby as the Moors leaving Spain, unpeopled
it at present, so future Generations became so much less replenished by how
much more People took upon them a Religious Habit.

But this Mischief did not stop here, for Philip the 2d (great Grandson of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and a most bigoted Prince to the Romish Superstition)
brought the Inquisition upon the Converted Moors, which drove them out of Spain
to the farther unpeopling of it; and my Lord Bacon says, that many of these
poor converted Moors became as persecuted in their Exile for their Religion, as
if they had continued in Spain: And this Mischief further followed, not only to
Spain but to Christendom; for the exiled Moors having no other Habitation and
Means of Living, set up their Trade of Piracy in Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli,
within the Straits, and in Sally without, whereby they have been a Plague to
all other Christians, as well as Spaniards, who trade into the Straits and
Afric, and other Southern Countries, ever since.

About the time that Ferdinand and Isabel conquered Spain, Columbus discovered
the West Indies; and Hornando Cortez siding with one part of the Indians, which
were at War against the other, and thereby becoming Conqueror of those he
fought against, he got incredible Wealth, with a Discovery of the Rich Mines in
Mexico.

The Blaze of this quickly flew all over Spain, so that the Spaniards expected
Mountains of Gold in running out of Spain into America, and therefore near half
Spain ran into America, to seek new Adventures there; the covetous Spaniard not
considering the Strength and Glory of every Country consists in the well
peopling and governing of it; and that Desolation is the End of all God's
Judgments upon any Country.

Here note, that no Art or Science comes to pass by Fate, Inspiration or
Chance, but by Education, Learning, Conversation and Experience in Arts; and
therefore wherever People are thin, they are rude, ignorant, poor, heathenish,
and idle, and of little Use to their Country; and also where the generality of
the People of any Country, be not employed in Labors to supply other Men, they
become a Burden to the Country to maintain them: so that Spain in this state
not only lost their ancient Virtue and Military Discipline, but the Inhabitants
being more religious and idle People than in any other part of the World,
became hereby not only the feeblest of all other Countries, but the poorest;
and notwithstanding the Millions of Treasure which were yearly imported into
Spain, yet it could not support the Luxury of the Religious, and maintain the
poor idle Persons in it.

But Spain could not contain the bloody Superstitious Rage and Tyranny of
Philip, but he endeavored to have brought in the Inquisition and Castilian
Government into the Netherlands, which were Provinces more rich and abounding
with People, and had more great and populous Towns, than any other part of the
known World of like Bigness, and the Inhabitants of a warlike Constitution:
these Countries were made free by Charles, Philip's Father, from their
dependence upon France; for after Charles had taken Francis the first,
Prisoner, it was one of the Articles for his Enlargement, that he should remit
the Fealty which those Countries paid him.

The Fleming (for so the Inhabitants of these Provinces were generally called
from Flanders the greatest of them) did not as the Moors, run out of their
Country, but stoutly stood upon their Liberties and Privileges, and rose up in
Arms in defense of them: and these Wars continuing above 80 Years, not only put
the Kings of Spain to a greater Expense than the Revenues of those Provinces,
and the Returns of the Plate Fleets from America could support; but after all,
above seven of these Provinces rent themselves quite from the Dominion of
Spain, and erected themselves into a Free State: nor till the Duke of Bavaria
became their Governor, would the Kings of Spain trust the Inhabitants of those
which continued in their Subjection, with Arms to defend themselves against the
French, whereby the Government of those Countries became more chargeable to
Spain than it could support; yet so weak, that they could not resist the
Insults of the French, nor the revolted Provinces: and in this State Spain
stood when King James became King of England, and so continued (except the
Tru^e made in 1609) till the Treaty at Munster in 1648.

It has been observed in the Treatises of the Reason of the Decay of the
Strength, Wealth and Trade of England, and also of the equal Danger of the
Church and State etc. of England, how much the State of England resembles that
of Spain; for if the Excursion of the Spaniards into America, so much
dispeoples Spain, so does the Excursion of the Inhabitants of England into our
American Plantations, and in repeopling Ireland, dispeople England; and if the
Inquisition in Spain be a Bar to keep out Supplies in Spain for their Expense
into America, so is the Law against naturalizing of Foreigners here in England.

It is true, no Law, or Usage in England, forbids Marriage to any, for
supplying future Generations, yet I Will leave it to the Reader to judge, if, as
the Case stands in England, it be not worse than if Marriage were forbidden to
the ordinary and meaner sort of People in England; for in all the Countries of
England more poor Children are born, than can be employed in Rural or Country
affairs, and their poor Parents have not means to bind them Apprentice in
Market Towns and Corporations, which exclude all other from Trading with them,
but those which have been bound Apprentice, and served their Apprenticeship:
nay the 5th Act of Eliz. c. 4. excludes all from being bound Apprentices, but
the Children of Freemen, or such whose Parents had 40 Shill. per Ann. and by
the Act of Eliz. 31. 7. no Cottages shall be built in Country Villages, which
shall not have 4 Acres of Ground annexed to them, which poor Laborers cannot
do; so that the poor Children not being permitted to inhabit in Country
Villages, and excluded out of Market Towns and Corporations, are forced either
to fly their Country, or to be Tapsters, Ostlers and Drawers, Alehouse-keepers,
or Strong-Water-Sellers, if they can get a License: so little was the Interest
of the Nation understood heretofore; for the Strength and Wealth of every
Nation is founded in the Number and Industry of the Natives; and therefore to
neglect to instruct Youth how to employ themselves, or to debar any Man from
the Benefit of his honest Employment, is not only unjust but impolitick.

And as these Corporations in excluding other Men are unjust and impolitick, so
are they dangerous to the Government otherwise, as they are Marks of Faction
and Distinction in it; and as they make themselves to be the only Freemen in
them, whereby they exclude the rest of the Nation: Now let us see what a Sort of
Men these are which claim these Prerogatives over the rest of the Subjects of
the Nation, but generally a Sort of Shopkeepers, Retailers, and wholesale Men,
who neither labor, nor are otherwise of any Use to the Government; but by the
Prerogatives of their Freedom, set what Price they please upon the Labor of
poor Artificers, (who are the Soul of the Nation) and impose what Rates they
please to the Buyers of these again of them; whereby their Riches arise from
the Oppression of the Labourer, while they are idle, and by imposing upon the
Nobility, Gentry, and others in selling: whereas it is said, and I believe it,
that in Holland a Retailer, (or if you will a Forestaller) is not permitted,
unless to them who are reputed honest, and by Misfortune are fallen into Decay;
so that as London grows rich by its Freedom of Trade with the Nation, so
Amsterdam, and other Towns in Holland grow rich by foreign Trade.

The Act, 3 Jac. c. 6. is of better Authority than any thing I can say, and
more livelily describes the manifold Mischiefs and Abuses both to the King and
Kingdom, which attended our foreign Trades by Companies, exclusive to other
Subjects of the Nation: I Will only therefore observe this in it, which the Act
does not; That these Companies who manage foreign Trades exclusive to other
Men, are more tyrannous and injurious to their fellow Subjects than any of
their Enemies are, as has been showed in the East India and African Companies,
and hereby have no reason to expect any Assistance from the Nation to support
them, against the Insults of the Dutch and French upon them; for why should the
Nation assist them, who have rent themselves from the Nation, and are more
Enemies to it than any other?

But over and above these unhappy Accidents, which so highly contributed to the
weakening of the Spanish Monarchy, we may add another, that proved no less fatal
and destructive, and that was Queen Elizabeth's destroying their invincible
Armada in the Year 1588. and her sacking and Burning of Cales in 1595. wherein
was destroyed such an incredible Mass of Wealth that the Spaniards never after
were formidable either by Sea or Land; and this was so much the more, by how
much Philip the 3d proved to be a weak, effeminate Prince, wholly governed by
Favorites.

Having taken a View of England and Spain, and compared the State of them,
we'll see how they stand in reference to France which lies between them, and so
becomes a neighboring Nation to them both: France tho it be not threefold
greater than England, yet it is manifoldly more peopled in that Proportion, and
more abounding with great, rich, and populous Towns; and tho it be not an
Island, yet it has the British Sea on the North, the Atlantic Ocean on the
West, and the Mediterranean Sea on the South; so that in its Situation, it is
better placed for Trade, than if it had been an Island, having Spain, the
Spanish Netherlands, Lorain, Germany, Savoy and Italy to trade to by Land.

Henry the 4th of France, after he had subdued the Popish League, and made a
Peace with the Spaniard at Vervins in 1597, secured the Murmurs of the
Reformed, by the famous Edict of Nants; and being a Prince not less prudent in
Counsel than victorious in War, as well to divert the French from their
mutinous and quarrelling Humor, as to increase the Riches of France, gave all
imaginable Encouragement to the Inhabitants in Manufactures, the Principles
whereof abound more in France, than any other Country, except England; yet
added to them the breeding Silkworms, and by the lively Ingenuity of the
French, improved Silk-Manufactures above any other Country.

Here take notice of the Benefit which arises to any Nation by the Employment
of People in Manufactures, above other Countries, where the Inhabitants are not
employed: For, suppose a Million of People in France were thus employed, and
those yearly earned 20 l. per Ann. the Employment of these People are twenty
Millions Benefit yearly to France, and this Money generally distributed among
the Workmen; and whatever of these Manufactures are vended in foreign Trade,
these will be so much an enriching to it; whereas if these had not been
employed, they would have been at least five Millions a Year burden to it, and
France would have been in so much a worse State to have supported them; whereas
if the People be not employed, as in Spain, the Distribution of the Treasure
out of the Indies is not only unequally distributed, but the Charge of
maintaining the Religious and idle Persons, most miserable and intolerable.
Let Us now see the State of England, by the 5th Act of Eliz. c. 4. excluding the
English Natives, not Freemen, from working in Market Towns and Corporations:
we'll take a very modest Estimate herein; and suppose but 10000 yearly (scarce
one in a Parish) be excluded, so that hereby the Nation loses their Employment,
this at 20 l. per Ann. will be 200000 pounds a Year loss to the Nation, besides
the Charge of maintaining them, if they do not fly out of the Kingdom, for want
of Subsistence in it; and I pray what does the wholesale and Retail Trades of
Shopkeepers in them, contribute to the Support of this, or of what Benefit are
they otherwise to the Nation?

Henry the 4th having thus employed the Natives of France, and having few
Plantations to exhaust it, tho France drove no foreign Trade by Sea, yet by
permitting the English, Dutch, Swedes, Danes and Hamburghers to trade into
France by Sea, and the Germans by Land, it is scarce credible, after the long
Civil Wars in France, in the Space of but 13 Years (for it was no longer
between the Peace at Vervins in 1597, and his Death) what incredible Treasure
he amassed, if so great an Author as Messeray did not affirm it; whereupon he
nourished a Design of new modelling all the Western Parts of Christendom,
(except Britain and Ireland, which he knew would not hinder him in it) and
Messeray did not doubt but he had means enough to have accomplished it, if he
had lived; but when his Foot was in the Stirrup to have accomplished this,
Ravillac put a full Stop to his Career.

Yet France had in it no Mines of Gold or Silver, no more than England has;
and the Treasure which England acquires, is by the Vent of our Woollen
Manufactures, and our Lead and Tin; and so much more as the Natives are less
employed in these, and these are less in foreign Trade, by restraining the Vent
to English Men, and more to English Companies, so much less Treasure will the
Nation acquire, and the Natives be less employed.

As France thus abounds in People more than either England or Spain, whereby
they acquire such vast Wealth above them, by permitting Foreigners to trade
with them; so are the French Nobility (which include the Gentry) of a warlike
and aspiring Temper; and if this had not usually excited them into intestine
Broils and Tumults, as Secretary Trevor observes, all their Neighbor Nations
could not have set bounds to their ambitious Humor.

But the Prosperity of France no ways daunted Queen Elizabeth, so that Henry
the 4th designing to build some great Men of War at Breast, she forbid the
King's making any further Progress in it, or she would fire all the Ships in
his Harbors, whereupon this great Hero desisted; nor would she permit the
Dutch to build any great Ships, but she would have an account of them; and so
having the Brill, Ramakins and Flushing, the Keys of the Rivers of the Maes and
Scheld, in her Hands, she died with an uncontrouled Dominion of the Seas, and
Arbitress of Christendom: and in this State King James took Possession of the
Crown of England, with all its Dependences, to which he added that of Scotland,
whose Reign is now ripe to be exposed.

A DETECTION OF THE Court and State of England, During the Reign of King JAMES
I. etc.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
A Better View may appear of this Reign, if we look back to the Beginning of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and compare it with that of this King's Reign,
when he came to join the Crowns of England and Ireland to that of Scotland, and
thereby became the greatest Monarch that governed England since King John,
except it was in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, and some time of the Reign of
Henry the Sixth, when Normandy, and so great a part of France, was subdued to
the Dominion of the Crown of England.

This Kingdom was never in so low an Ebb of Reputation, and so dangerous a
State both at home and abroad, as when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, her
Father, Brother and Sister in debt, and the Navy Royal neglected and out of
Repair; yet the Revenues of the Crown, besides the Court of Wards and the
Duchy of Lancaster, I say, the Profits of the Kingdom were but 188179 l. 4 s.
[See Sir Robert Cotton' s Means of the Kings of England, p. 3.] the Kingdom
imbroiled in intestine Heats in Religion, and Philip the second of Spain
aspiring to an unlimited Dominion in and out of Europe; Calais, notwithstanding
the united Interest of England with Spain, but some Months before lost to the
French; and Francis the Dauphin of France, in right of his Wife Mary, Queen of
Scotland, laying claim to the Crown of England.

Whereas when King James came to be King of England, the Kingdom was in entire
Peace within, and in a Martial State, and full of Honor and Reputation abroad;
the Royal Navy not only Superior to any other in the World in Strength, but in
good Repair; few Debts left charged upon the Crown: yet if the Exchequer were
not replenished with Money, the King received Three entire Subsidies, and six
fifteens of the 4 Subsidies, and eight Fifteens granted to the Queen for
suppressing the Irish Rebellion, and carrying on the War against Spain some
Months before, though both the Rebellion, and War with Spain ceased that Year
he became King; the Customs for supporting the Navy, more than fivefold they
were in the Beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and above two Millions
and four hundred Thousand Pounds due from the States of Holland (or the United
Netherlands;) but how the States became discharged of it, it is fit to premise
it there, and how it became due to Queen Elizabeth, and so to the Crown of
England.

Queen Elizabeth though she refused to accept of the Sovereignty of the United
Provinces, when she took them into Protection, after the Expulsion of the Duke
of Anjou, and the Death of the Prince of Orange; yet she entered into a Treaty
with the States, Anno 1585. wherein it was agreed, That the Dutch should repay
her all the Moneys which she should expend for their Preservation, with
Interest at 10 per Cent. when the War was ended with Spain; and that two
English, whom the Queen should name, should be admitted into their Council of
State, and for Security whereof the Dutch should deliver up to her Flushing,
Rammekins, and the Brill, which were the Keys of their Country.

Upon this Agreement the Queen, for the Dutch's further Encouragement, gave
them License to fish upon the Coast of England, which she denied them when they
continued in their subjection to King Philip; and removed the Staple of the
English Woollen Manufactures from Antwerp, in the Power of the King of Spain,
to Delf, in the Dutch Power; and it is scarce credible, how in so short a time
after, viz. scarce thirteen Years, the Dutch entertaining all sorts of People,
who were persecuted upon the Account of not submitting to the Papal
Usurpations, (called Religion) swelled their Trade and Navigation, not only in
Europe but in the East and West Indies.

The Queen considering this Increase of the Dutch Trade and Navigation was as
much to the lessening of the English; and being provoked by the Ingratitude of
the Lovestein Faction, whereof one Olden Barnevelt was the Head (a Fellow as
factious and turbulent, as ungrateful) by whose Counsel another Assembly was
erected at Amsterdam, called The Convention of the States General, wherein they
managed all the secret and important Affairs of their State, and out of which
they excluded the English:

The Queen, I say, highly incensed at the Ingratitude of this Faction, which
now governed all in Holland, and yet continuing to support them at the Charge
of 120000 l. per Ann. as Camden observes in his Eliz. Reg. Ann. 1598, signified
to the States her Intention of making Peace with the King of Spain; which if
she did, it would be impossible for them to continue their War with Spain, and
recover their Cautionary-Towns from the Queen.

Hereupon the States sent my Lord Warmond (as they called him) as their humble
Supplicant to the Queen, and in the lowest Posture of Humility acknowledged
themselves obliged to her for infinite Benefits; and that as her Majesty
excelled the Glory of her Ancestors in Power, so she excelled them in Acts of
Piety and Mercy, but pleaded Poverty for not repayment of the Money the Queen
had expended for their Preservation, (they might have said their Exaltation.)
The Queen in Answer to them said, she had been often deceived by their
deceitful Supplications, and ungrateful Actions, and Pretense of Poverty, when
their Power and Riches confuted them; and that she hoped God would not suffer
her to be a Pattern to other Princes to help such a People, who bear no
Reverence to Superiors, nor take care for the Advantage, Reputation or Safety
of any but themselves. The Dutch were confounded at the Queen's Answer,
submitted themselves to such Terms as the Queen should lay upon them; and the
Queen wisely considering if she should cast them off, Henry the 4th of France,
who the last Year, viz. 1597, had concluded a Peace with Spain at Vervins, by
the Interposition of the Pope's Nuncio, and sought to be Protector of the
States, whereby the Queen would not only be in danger to lose their Dependence,
but the Moneys she had expended in their Support, they (the Queen and States)
came to this Agreeement.

1. That upon an Account stated, there was eight Millions of Crowns, or two
Millions Sterling due to the Queen, for which they were to pay Ten per Cent. so
long as the War lasted.

2. That during the War they should pay the Queen one hundred thousand Pounds
yearly, and the Remainder when Peace with Spain was concluded, and then to have
their Cautionary Towns surrendered back to them.

3. That till this Agreement was performed, the States were to pay Fifteen
hundred English in Garrison in them. We leave this Agreement here till we hear
more of it hereafter.

There were but thirteen Months between this King's Birth and Reign, his Mother
being deposed to make Room for his coming to be King; and by this Title he
reigned twenty Years in his Mother's Life, and during that time he never made
use of her Name in the Coin of Scotland, nor in any Proclamation or Law, and
after her Death, continued his Reign by this Title to his dying Day: which was
inconsistent with the Flatteries which his Favorites buz'd continually in his
Ears, That he was King by inherent Birthright, and that he held his Crown from
God alone: and so pleasing was this Doctrine to him, that above all other
things he set himself upon it, not only in magnifying himself herein, in his
Speeches in Parliament, but in his Writings against Bellarmine and Peron
against the Pope's deposing Kings.

In his Infancy and Minority the Regents and Nobility made Havoc of the Crown
and Church Revenues, so as when he came to Age, he had but little left to
support his Crown and Dignity; but by how much he became lessened hereby, the
Nobility became so much greater, and to support themselves, held a
Correspondence with Queen Elizabeth, who tho she countenanced the Nobility, yet
she allowed the King a yearly Pension of 4000 l. per Ann. (I have heard and
believe it) in his Minority, and 10000 l. per An. after he came to age, and
hereby kept both the King and Nobility depending on her.

As the Nobility, in his Minority, made him so poor, so the Kirk-party justled
him in his Throne, by making themselves a distinct Table from the Secular or
Temporal Power, not only in Matters purely Spiritual, but in holding General
Assemblies and all Matters which related to what they pleased to call The
Kingdom of Christ; and were so zealous, I will not say Rude, herein, that they
made it a Duty incumbent upon the Temporal Power, to pass the Acts of their
General Assemblies into Laws: And, in truth, they expressed but little Civility
to the King, in whatsoever they applied themselves to him, as if it were his
Duty to do whatsoever they would have him, and without his Consent; and even to
cross him, would ordain Fasting-days, and sometimes upon Sundays: And hating
Episcopal Government, it was very troublesome to the Regents, in his Minority,
as well as to the King, to retain the Name of a Bishop, after they assumed to
themselves the Power. Queen Elizabeth was no better Friend to this Kirk-party
than the King, though she winkt at it, and was the more provoked against it, by
Knocks his Book which he wrote against Gynarchy; and from hence it was King
James took the easier Impression of Flatterers, and was so zealous a Defender
of Bishops, that in a Conference at Hampton Court, in the first Year of his
Reign, he held it for a Maxim, No Bishop, no King.

The Tears which all true English shed for the Death of Queen Elizabeth, who
died the 24th of March, 1602. were soon wiped off, by the Accession of King
James to this Crown, the ancient Feuds between the Nations of England and
Scotland were reconciled; and John Stow in his Annals of the first of this
King, gives a particular Account of his most magnificent and joyful Reception
day by day from Berwick to London, yet with this Blot in his Scutcheon, that
when he came to Newark, he first discovered his Disposition to Arbitrary
Government; for being told that one had cut a Purse at Newark, the King without
any Legal Process, or the Defense of the Party, signed a Warrant to the Sheriff
of Lincolnshire to hang him, which was executed accordingly.

This put no Check to the Jollity of the People, but the nearer he came to
London, the greater was the Concourse and Acclamations of the People, tho by
his Proclamation, (of which never any Prince was so prodigal, and wherein he
continued to his dying Day) he had forbid it, because it raised so much Dust as
proved troublesome in his Passage; and upon the 11th of May he came to London,
where, being a Prince above all others addicted to Hunting, as his first care,
upon the 16th of May issued out another Proclamation forbidding all manner of
Persons killing Deer, and all kinds of Wild-fowl used for Hunting and Hawking,
upon Pain of the several Laws and Penalties to be executed upon them.

The gazing World abroad, were astonished at this King's peaceable and joyful
Settlement in England, and were as forward to Congratulate him in it, as his
Subjects were to receive him; and herein the Dutch (being Merchants) were the
first that addressed themselves to make their Market of him, and sent over the
youngest Son of William, Prince of Orange, one Fulk, and Barnevelt, who, (in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth lay covered in his Faction at Amsterdam, as
Tortoises do under Ground in the Winter) now the Dutch designing to make their
Harvest in this King's Reign, came abroad, as Tortoises do in the Spring, to
dispose him to it: but the Dutch needed not have been so forward herein, for
the King was environed with those which should do their Work, better than
Barnevelt could have done it.

The Spaniards, after the Loss of their Armada in 1588, and the Loss sustained
in the Sacking of Cadiz in 1595, declined as fast in Power and Reputation, as
the Dutch grew greater both in Europe, and the West Indies. But Philip the 2d
dying about three Years before Queen Elizabeth, the former Feuds between her
and Philip became much abated, and Philip the 3d. succeeding, a young Prince
(Nani says) of singular Piety (he means devoted to the Romish Superstition) but
wholly unacquainted with Government, and contenting himself with the Royal
Dignity, left the Power to his Favorites and Ministers, and of whom Nani in
his fourth Book, Anno 1621, makes this notable Remark as to his Death; That it
remained a Doubt, whether in an Age proclaimed by the Wrath of Heaven to the
Mockery of Favorites, the King would not have taken upon himself the
Government, when Death, in the 43d. Year of his Age takes him away from the
Troubles which Empire carries with it? His Years surely would have been more
memorable, if he had been born a private Man rather than a King; because being
better adorned with Ornaments of Life, than endowed with Skill to command, as
Goodness, Piety and Continence, placed him in an higher degree than ordinary
Subjects; so his Disapplication to Government, rendered him lower than was fit
or necessary. By public Defects private Virtues being corrupted, and in
particular keeping his Mind in Idleness, it was believed that he reserved
nothing to himself to do, but to consent to all that his Favorites had a mind
to.

Thus the Government of the World recommended to Princes, as the true
Shepherds, falls into Mercenary Hands, making themselves not understood but by
the sound of the Voice of Interest, and the Authority of Ambitition, the People
suffer Ruin and Calamity, and the Princes themselves render an Account to God
of that Talent which they have suffered their Ministers to make Merchandise of.
It is certain, Philip in the Agony of his Death, was not so much comforted with
calling to mind his innocent Life, as he was troubled with the Sting of
Conscience for his Omissions in Government.

This Character, how parallel soever it was with King Charles the First, tho I
do not find he had any Sting of Conscience for his Omissions and Transgressions
in Government, which brought upon himself and the Nation all the Miseries and
Calamities of the late Civil Wars, and wherein he persisted to the last, bears
no Proportion to the voluptuous and dissolute Life of King James, accompanied
with his profane Swearing in Passion, and even in his usual Conversation,
whereby he became not only contemptible, but by his Example, the generality of
the English Nation became debauched in their Manners and Conversation, to the
Scandal and Contempt of it in other Nations.

The Death of Philip the 2d, made the Passage to a Peace between England and
Spain, whereto both Kings were equally disposed, more smooth and easy. Yet
Philip the 3d, before he would openly seek it, by an Ambassador from the
Archduke Albert, (Governor of Flanders) felt the Pulse of the Court, how it
stood affected to a Peace with Spain, which beat high toward it, so as soon
after it followed; which as it was most beneficial to the English Nation, so it
had been to Spain, if it had been as sincerely observed by King James, as it
was by Philip.

Henry the 4th of France, tho spited, as 'twas said, that King James should not
only come so peaceably, but with universal Acclamations to the Crown of
England, whereas he labored with such difficulty above seven Years to attain
that of France, and at last was forced to a dishonorable Submission to the
Pope, Clement VIII. Yet being a Prince of great Prudence in Peace, as well as
fortunate and victorious in War, sent Monsieur de Rosny, Great Treasurer of
France, to renew the Treaty of Peace and Commerce formerly made between Queen
Elizabeth and him, which was without any difficulty done.

The King being thus at Peace Abroad and at Home, not only in England but in
Ireland, as if the Wars expired there with Queen Elizabeth, he not only
pardoned the Earl of Tyrone, the Head of that Rebellion, but by Proclamation
declared he was restored to the King's Favor, and to be honorably used of all
Men.

But how pleasing soever the King's coming to the Crown of England was to the
English Nation, it seems it was not so, or something else, to God; for an
horrible Plague, greater than any since that in the Reign of Edward the 3d,
accompanied his coming in. There were two Factions in England when the King
came to the Crown, distinguished by the Names of Puritans and Papists, both
dissenting from the Religion established in the Church of England: the King
hated those, and wrote against these, chiefly for their Doctrine of the Pope's
Power of deposing Kings: These received the King after different manners, the
Puritans had a huge Expectation of his Favor, because he was bred up in their
Doctrine and Discipline; but were much deceived in it, for he rarely mentioned
them but with Detestation, which he did not those of the Popish Religion.

However in January they obtained a Conference with the Church-Party at
Hampton Court, where the King himself would be Moderator, whilst most of the
Nobility and Bishops were Spectators. You need not doubt which Party prevailed,
the Nobility and Bishops not only giving the King the Victory, with the
Epithets of, The Solomon of the Age, The most Learned, but of being inspired.

But what Expectation soever the Puritans had of the King's coming to the
Crown, the Papists had another Lesson taught them; for tho the Popish
Conspiracy against the Person of Queen Elizabeth ceased upon the Death of the
Queen of Scots, yet did not the Pope's Designs upon the Kingdom of England do
so; but Clement VIII, in the Year 1600, sent Orders to his Emissaries in
England, that the Catholics should admit none to succeed the Queen, but one
obedient to the Holy See; and in Conformity hereunto, Watson and Clark, two
Romish Priests, joined in Cobhant's Conspiracy, to have kept the King from
coming to the Crown, and were executed for it as Traitors; but the Effects of
the Pope's Instructions did not die with Clark and Watson, as you will soon hear,
and upon the 24th of October 1603, a Proclamation was made for Quietness to be
observed in Matters of Religion.

Notwithstanding the Rage of the Pestilence, the first nine Months after the
King's coming to London, all were Halcion-days, Proclamations, Pageants,
Feastings, Creation of Lords and Knights, Reception of Foreign Ambassadors,
erecting a Master of the Ceremonies after the Mode of France, etc. and in this
time the Dignified Clergy, and those who courted to be so with the Favorites
at Court, with whom the Civilians chimed in, had so rooted their Doctrine of
the King's Absolute Power, and that, notwithstanding his Succession to the
Crown of Scotland in the Life of his Mother, he succeeded by inherent
Birthright; and that Primogeniture is the Gift of God by the Law of Nature;
and that in his Person was reconciled all the Titles of our Saxon, Danish and
Norman Race of Kings; that being propensly disposed to receive the Impressions,
they took such deep root in him, that in all his Life after he would never,
with Patience, hear any thing to the contrary, however it was not long before
he heard of it, as you shall hear. But we will stay a little, and see how
inconsistently these Flatterers jumbled an Absolute and Hereditary Monarchy
together, and how this King reconciled the Titles of the Saxon, Danish and
Norman Titles to the Crown.

For no Hereditary Monarch that ever reigned in this World, but derived his
Title from an Ancestor who had no Hereditary Right; nor did ever any Hereditary
King succeed, but to govern by Laws and Constitutions, which were established
before he became King: So however Absolute may be applicable to Conquerors, yet
it is inconsistent with Hereditary Kings, especially in a Regular Monarchy, as
that of England is, and those of old, as of the Medes and Persians, where the
Will of the King alone could not alter the Laws and Constitutions of them. And
now let us see how King James came to claim his Crown by inherent Birthright,
and how all the Saxon, Danish and Norman Titles came to be reconciled in his
Person.

It Is evident to me, that tho only God can make an Heir, and that tho
Primogeniture be natural; yet God, in disposing Kingdoms, is not obliged to it;
(tho Grotius lib. 1. Tit. 11. de Jure Belli and Pacis, is pleased to say, the
Law of Nature is immutable by God himself) but reserves unto himself the
Prerogative of disposing Kingdoms, without restraining the Succession of the
King to Primogeniture, or Hereditary Succession. Here let us see in Epitome,
which you may read at large in Sir William Jones his History of the Succession
of the Kings of England, (before and after the Conquest, and the History of the
Succession of the Crown of England, from King Egbert to Henry the 8th, printed
in the Year 1690,) where you will see, that tho the Kings of England, both
before and after the Conquest, succeeded in their Royal Families, yet many more
were not in the right Line than in it; and tho before Caesar invaded Britain,
there was no other Government but Kingly, yet Britain was divided into so many
petty Kingdoms, that tho it had not been barbarous, it would have been as
difficult to have wrote the History of the Succession of their Kings, as to
have wrote the History of the Succession of the Kings immediately after the
Flood.

After the Roman Empire (oppressed by its own Weight, by the Division into
Eastern and Western, its intestine Jars, and the overflowing of barbarous
Nations) was so torn and shaken, that the Legions which governed Britain, were
recalled by Ecius (the Roman General, under Honorius and Valentinian the 3d) to
make Head against Attila; the poor Britains disarmed, and only made use of to
serve their imperious Masters, and so utterly destitute of Martial Discipline,
easily became a Prey to the Picts and Scots, (not subject to the Romans) who
treated them more intolerably and tyrannically than the Romans had done: For
Redress whereof, the Britains sought Succors from the English Saxons, who came
to their Relief in the Year 409, (as Bede says, lib. 1. cap. 15. of the
Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation;) but these Saxons used the poor
Britains worst of all, and expelled the whole Race of them out of that part of
the Island now called England.

Tho the Saxons had their Wills of the Britains, they were before the Heptarchy
at continual Variance among themselves, and so after, that it is almost as
unaccountable to give a History of the Succession of their Kings, as it was of
the Britains before Julius Caesar.

Egbert, about the Year 800, ( viz. 391 Years after the Saxon Invasion) was
called the first of the Saxon Monarchs; (tho the Kingdom of the Mercians was
not united to his Monarchy) who by Merit as well as Birth, obtained the
Dignity, and succeeded Brithric.

Ethelwolph succeeded Egbert in the Kingdom of Westsax, but not to those of
Kent, Sussex and Eastsax, or Essex, these being given by Egbert to Ethelstan,
Egbert's younger Son.

Ethelwolph by his Will divided his Kingdoms between his two eldest Sons,
Ethelbald and Ethelbert; to Ethelbald he gave the Kingdom of the West Saxons,
to Ethelbert the Kingdom of Kent, and the Eastern, Southern and middle Angles.
But there were two other Sons Ethelred and Alfred.

Ethelbert, after the Death of Ethelbald, succeeded him in the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, and after the Death of Ethelbert, Ethelred succeeded in the whole,
viz. of the West Saxons, and of the Kingdoms of Kent, the Eastern, Southern,
and Middle Angles.

Alfred, after the Death of Ethelred, by universal Applause, the famous, the
youngest Son of Ethelwolph, succeeded.

Edward Son of Alfred, was chosen by the Nobles, on Whit-sunday, in 901.

Athelstan, after the Death of Alfred (tho a Bastard) was elected by the
Nobles, of whom 'twas said there was nothing ignoble in him.

But Athelstan dying without Issue, his younger Brother Edmund succeeded him
without any Opposition; and tho he left two Sons, Edwy and Edgar, yet

Edred (Edmund's younger Brother) succeeded him.

Edwy, after Edred's Death (Edred's elder Brother's elder Son) succeeded; but
being a vicious Prince, the Mercians and Northumbrians chose Edgar his younger
Brother King in the Life of Edwy; and

Edgar, after the Death of Edwy, became King of the whole Nation.

Edward, Son of Edgar, after his Death, was chosen by the Bishops and Nobles,
by the Command of his Father Edgar; but he being murdered by his Stepmother
Elfreil, Edward's younger Brother Ethelred succeeded: And after his Death the
Saxon Monarchy being rent in pieces by the Danes and Saxons,

Edmund Ironside (Son of Etheldred, by an obscure mean Woman) tho he had two
half-legitimate younger Brothers, Edward and Alfred, born of Emma, Etheldred's
Wife) was chosen King by one part of the Nobility, and Canutus the Dane, by
another. Thus the whole legitimate Race of the Saxon Kings were excluded; one
part choosing Ironside, a Bastard, the other Canutus, a Stranger to the Saxon
Royal Race.

Edmund Ironside being treacherously murdered by his Brother-in-law Edric,
Edmund leaving two Sons, Edwy and Edward,

Canutus the Dane became sole Monarch of the Saxon Monarchy: So that this was
the beginning of the Danish Dynasty, which lasted not long.

Harold, Son of Canutus, succeeded him; and

Hardicanute his Brother succeeded Harold, neither the Issue of Etheldred,
Edward, or Alfred, nor Edwy or Edward, the Sons of Edmund Ironside, so much as
taken notice of; with this Hardicanute ended the Danish Rule, with the
Slaughter and Expulsion of the Danes.

Edward, Son of Etheldred, called the Confessor, (Uncle to Edwy and Edward,
Sons of Edmund Ironside) after Hardicanute, was advanced to the Royal Dignity;
principally by means of Earl Goodwin (a powerful and imperious Lord) upon the
account of Edward's marrying the Earl's Daughter; so little was the Hereditary
Succession of the Saxon Kings regarded: And that Edward's Reign might be more
secure, this Earl Goodwin caused the Eyes of Alfred, the King's Brother, to be
put out, and, some say, took away his Life.

Edward the Confessor growing old, having no Issue, and the Family of the
wicked Earl Goodwin growing not only insolent, but intolerable to him, declared
Edward the Son of Edmund Ironside (his Cousin) his Heir: And to the end he
might better succeed, the King sent to the King of Hungary to return his Nephew
Edward, (whom the King of Hungary had married to his Niece Agatha, Daughter to
Henry Emperor of Germany) which the King of Hungary did; and upon Edward's
return, the Confessor declared, that he or his Sons should succeed in his
Hereditary Kingdom of England.

But the Confessor did not long hold in this Mind; for his Nephew Edward soon
after dying, and leaving a Son Edgar unfit for Government, either as to his
Body or Courage; he decreed that his Kinsman William Duke of Normandy (tho a
Bastard) should succeed him in the Kingdom of England, which came to pass; and
so a new Race of Kings have succeeded in England of the Norman Race, whose
original Title was from a Grant of a King of the Saxon Race, and so the
beginning creates little Title to an Hereditary Succession in the Norman Race.
And now we'll see how an Hereditary Succession was observed in it; yet as in
the Saxon, so in the Norman Kings, none succeeded who was not of the Royal
Blood; as all the Kings of Judah were of the Family or Tribe of Judah.

William Rufus, the second Son of the Conqueror, succeeded, his elder Brother
Robert then alive: So did

Henry the First, his elder Brother Robert living.

Stephen, the Son of the Conqueror's Sister, succeeded Henry, tho Henry left a
Daughter Maud, or Matilda.

Henry the Second succeeded Stephen, Maud, Henry's Mother, yet living; so his
Succession was not Hereditary, for Haeres non est viventis.

Richard the First succeeded Henry the Second.

John succeeded Richard, Arthur the Son of Jeffery, John's elder Brother then
alive.

Henry the Third succeeded John, Eleanor Arthur's Sister then alive, who was
Heir before him. So that of seven Successions after the Conqueror, but one
Richard the First, succeeded as Heir to his Father, or the Conqueror.

Admit Edward the First succeeded as Heir to Henry the 3d, and Edward the 2d,
as Heir to Edward the First, yet Edward the 3d did not succeed as Heir to
Edward the 2d, he being then alive.

Admit Richard the 2d was Heir to Edward the Black Prince, eldest Son to Edward
the 3d, yet neither Henry the 4th, 5th, or 6th, were Heirs from Edward the 3d,
but the Descendants of Phillippa, the Daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, John
of Gaunt's elder Brother.

So that of the Succession of 14 Kings after the Conqueror, there were but
four, viz. Richard the First, Edward the First and Second, and Richard the
Second, which succeeded as Heirs to the Conqueror, or his Heirs.

Admit Edward the 4th succeeded right, as Heir to Phillippa, Daughter of the
Duke of Clarence; yet if it be true, which Richard the 3d says, (and which is
confirmed by the Authority of the Act of Parliament 1 Rich. 3.) that Edward was
contracted to Eleanor Boteler, before he married Elizabeth, then did not Edward
the 5th (if it may be called a Succession) succeed right, nor could Henry the
7th claim any Right to the Crown of England in Right of his Wife Elizabeth, the
eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth.

But whether it be true or not, that Edward was contracted to Eleanor Boteler
before his Marriage, yet Richard the 3d succeeded not as Heir, Edward Earl of
Warwick, the Son of George Duke of Clarence, Richard's elder Brother, being
then alive.

Of all the Kings of England that succeeded the Conqueror, Henry the 7th had
the least Pretension to any Title to the Crown; for tho he were supposed to
have been descended from John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, yet it was the
Duke's Paramour, Katherine Swinford, whose Issue by the Duke, tho by Act of
Parliament they were legitimated to all other purposes, yet were not
capacitated to succeed to the Crown of England: but if the Title of Lancaster
had been preferable to that of York, and Henry had been of the legitimate Line,
yet could not he have succeeded as Heir, his Mother, under whom he claimed,
being then alive, and outlived her Son.

Nor did the King's Marriage with Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of Edward the 4th,
improve his Title to his Succession, the Marriage being subsequent to it; and
before it the Crown, by Act of Parliament, was entailed upon Henry the 7th, and
the Heirs of his Body; and after Marriage he never used her Name in calling any
Parliament, or in any Proclamation, or the Coin, or passing any Act of
Parliament; and as he reigned without her before Marriage, so he did after her
Death, (for he outlived her) tho she left two Sons, Arthur and Henry (after
Henry the Eighth) and two Daughters, Elizabeth, Queen of Scotland, and Mary,
after Queen of France.

It seems to me, that Ferdinand, King of Castile and Arragon, had the same
Opinion, which Richard the 3d, and the Parliament had, that the Issue of Edward
the 4th were not legitimate, for he would not assent to the Marriage of his
Daughter Katherine with Arthur, Prince of Wales, so long as the Earl of Warwick
(Son of the Duke of Clarence) lived; and there a fine Trick was found out to
put the poor Prince to Death, for endeavoring to make his Escape out of the
Tower with Perkin Warbeck, and in him ended the Masculine Line of the Race of
the Plantagenets, who had governed the English Nation after Stephen, to Henry
the 7th, above 340 Years. So that from the Conqueror to Henry the 8th, scarce
one of four of the Kings of England succeeded in a right Line, as Heirs to the
Conqueror.

As the Saxon Dynasty ended in Edward the Confessor, and the Norman began in
the Conqueror, so it seems to me that the Norman ended in Richard the 3d, and
another of the British was erected in Henry the 7th, who was the Son of Edmund
of Hadham, the Son of Owen Tudor, by Katherine Daughter of Charles the 6th of
France, Wife of Henry the 5th of England, and Mother of Henry the 6th. So that
Henry the 7th's Title to the Crown of France was better than that to the Crown
of England; for that of England was from a Maternal Ancestor, Margaret Countess
of Richmond, no otherwise related to the Crown of England, than descended from
John of Gaunt, by Katherine Swinford his Paramour: Tho I do not find that Henry
the 7th, or any of his Descendants, ever assumed the Surname of Tudor.

So that tho the Crown of England, neither in the Saxon nor Norman Race of
Kings, was always Hereditary, so neither was the Succession to the Crown
elective: For in elective Kingdoms, after the Death of one King, there is an
Establishment of the manner of Elections; and in the mean time there are
Custodes Regni appointed, whose Power ceases upon the Election of a King; but
neither of these were ever heard of in either of the Saxon or Norman Race: and
tho sometimes it is said the Kings were chosen, as of Edward the Son of Alfred,
by the Nobles, and so of Athelstan, and so in the Norman Race, Henry the First
was said to be chosen for that he promised to abrogate all the Oppressions and
Errors brought into the Government by his Father and Brother, (tho his eldest
Brother Robert was then alive) and restore the good Laws of Edward the
Confessor, and Stephen was chosen by the Clergy and Londoners, yet this was
rather a form of Speaking in those days, than any formal Election; and the
manner differed according to the different Humors of the Times.

Nor do we read that ever the Parliament meddled with the Succession of the
Crown before Henry the Fourth; for tho the first Parliament of Edward the Third
renounced their Allegiance to Edward the Second, and are said to have chosen
Edward the Third, yet they went no further; and such an Election was no more
than a Declaration of their Submission, as when the Council declared James the
Second King.

But whether the Crown of England was Hereditary in the Saxon and Norman Race,
it is evident it was not so in this British Race; for as it began in Henry the
Seventh, so it was entailed by Act of Parment upon him, and Heirs of his Body
before his Marriage with Elizabeth the eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth. So
the inheritable Right of Edward's Issue, and all the Norman Race was barred by
this Act.

Before we proceed in the Succession of the British Race, we'll take a view of
the Genealogy of it.

John of Gaunt, by Katherine Swinford, had Issue John, created Earl of
Somerset, who had Issue John, created Duke of Somerset, who had Issue Margaret.

After the Death of Henry the Fifth, Katherine his Wife (Sister of Charles the
Sixth of France) married Owen Tudor, a Welsh Gentleman, who had Issue Edmund of
Hadham, created Earl of Richmond, who married Margaret Daughter and Heir of
John Duke of Somerset, who had Issue Henry the Seventh.

Henry the Eighth succeeded his Father without any Contradiction, for the Wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster had destroyed the whole legitimate
Lancastrian Line, and Richard the Third, after the Murder of his Brother
Clarence, and Death of Edward the Fourth, had murdered his two Nephews, Edward
and Richard, (Sons of Edward the Fourth) and himself was killed in the Fight in
Bosworth-fields; and after that Henry the Seventh had put Edward Earl of
Warwick (Son of the Duke of Clarence) to Death, none of all the Royal Line of
the Plantagenets were left to be Competitors with him; yet his Succession could
not be Hereditary, for his Grandmother, under whom his Father claimed,
outlived her Son, and so Henry the Eighth could not claim from her. Yet this
is observable, That as his Father, Henry the Seventh, entailed the Succession
of the Crown of England upon the Heirs of his Body, so by Act of Parliament,
(28 Hen. 8.) Henry the Eighth might dispose of the Succession of the Crown by
his Will, for want of Issue of his Body; so little was the inheritable
Succession of the Crown of England regarded by these Kings of the British Race.

It seems the Council in Edward the Sixth's Reign, had as little an Opinion of
the Hereditary Succession of the Crown, as the Parliament had in the Reign of
Henry the Eighth, for by the Advice of Edward's Council, he by his Will
disposed of the Succession to his Cosen the Lady Jane Gray (Granddaughter to
Edward's Aunt, Mary Queen of France) contrary to the Will of his Father Henry
the Eighth, which ordained his Daughter Mary to succeed Edward, in case he died
without Issue.

I say, that by the Law of Inheritance in England, Queen Mary could not inherit
the Crown from Edward, she being but of half-Blood to him; and by the same
Reason Queen Elizabeth could not inherit to Queen Mary; but Mary the Daughter
of James the fifth of Scotland, being of the whole Blood to Edward, and
descended from the elder Daughter of Henry the Seventh, could.

For the Opinion of the Judges, after King James came in, that the Succession
of the Crown of England differs from that of the Inheritance of Subjects in
regard of an Alien born, and those of half Blood may inherit the Crown; it is
Gratis dictum, and said to please the King; for there never was any such usage
in England, nor any such Act of Parliament to warrant their Opinion.

But admit the Crown of England were inheritable from Henry the Seventh, and
Half-Blood no Bar to the Succession, yet Mary and Elizabeth could not both
succeed; for one of them was Illegitimate, Elizabeth being born in the Life of
Katherine Queen Mary's Mother.

If the Parliament in the Reign of Henry the 8th had little or no Opinion of
the Inheritable Succession of the Crown of England, and therefore empowered the
King to dispose of it by Will: The Parliament in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
had less, and therefore often petitioned her, and that with Importunity, to
declare her Successor without Consent in Parliament, and declared it 13 Eliz.
Cap. 1. to be High Treason to affirm that the Crown of England might not be
disposed of by Act of Parliament in her Life, and a Praemunire after her Death.
Here I make these Remarks upon the Race of the Plantagenets, and the Succession
of the British Line, that as the Plantagenets inherited the Name from Jeffery
Duke of Anjou, who was never King of England; so Henry the 7th, if he had any
Title, derived it from John of Gaunt (by an Illegitimate Succession) who never
was King of England.

From England we step into Scotland, and see how the Hereditary Succession was
observed there after the Reign of Alexander the 3d, in whom the direct Line of
the Race of their Kings failed, which was, so near as I can compute, about the
Year 1278, and leave the Succession of their 93 Kings before, to the Scrutiny
of the Scottish Antiquaries and Heralds.

The Scots, if they be not clearer in the Genealogy of their 93 Kings before
Alexander the 3d, than my Author is of retrieving it after the Death of
Margaret Daughter of Alexander the 3d, do make but a blind Genealogy of their
93 Kings before; however we'll take it as we find it.

David, Brother of William King of Scotland, (but whether William was Father,
Brother or Uncle to Alexander the 2d, my Author says not) and Earl of
Huntingdon, had Issue by Maud, Daughter to the Earl of Chester, three
Daughters, Margaret married to Allen of Galloway, the second (not named) was
married to Robert Bruce; the third to Henry Hastings Earl of Huntingdon.

Allen of Galloway had a Granddaughter, named Dornagil, married to John Baliol.

Bruce was Great Grandchild to the second Daughter of David Earl of
Huntingdon; but being a Male, pretended he was to be King before Dornagil, a
Female, though a Degree nearer, and descended from the elder Sister. Henry Earl
of Huntingdon made no claim. So the Right between Baliol and Bruce was referred
to the Determination of Edward the first, King of England, who adjudged the
Right to be in Baliol, and soon after Baliol by Dornagil had a Son named
Edward; so that Bruce's Pretension of Title as being Son, vanished by the Birth
of Edward Baliol, being descended from the eldest Sister. But

The Scots (or a prevailing Party) not liking Baliol's Reign, in the Year 1306
crowned Robert Bruce King.

In the Year 1310 Bruce, by Acts of Parliament, had the Crown of Scotland
entailed upon him and his Heir-male; and for want of Issue to his Brother
Edward,

This Robert had Issue a Son named David, and a Daughter married to Robert
Stuart, and by Act of Parliament settled the Crown upon his Son David; and for
want of Issue by him, to Robert Stuart, his Grandchild by his Daughter. So
here is the Succession of the Crown of Scotland twice differently settled by
Parliament, to the disinheriting of Edward Baliol.

But in the Year 1332 Edward Baliol (the right Heir) was received and crowned
King of Scotland. After that, David Bruce recovered the Kingdom of Scotland,
and afterward was taken Prisoner by the Queen of England, in the Absence of
her Husband Edward the 3d in France, and being released, he died Ann. 1370.

Robert Stuart (Grandson of Robert Bruce, by his Daughter) succeeded David,
who married Euphemia Daughter of the Earl of Ross; but before he was King, had
Issue by Elizabeth Moor, his Concubine, two Sons, John and Robert, and by the
Queen he had Issue Walter Earl of Athol, and David Earl of Strathern; yet by
Act of Parliament the King disinherited his Legitimate Issue, and settled the
Crown upon his Issue by Elizabeth Moor, from which Issue all the Kings of
Scotland have since descended.

This was the most unaccountable Accident, if we consider the Cause and
Consequence (I think) that is recorded in any History, That a King and
Parliament, by the Importunity of a Slut, should disinherit his Legitimate
Offspring from the Succession to the Crown of Scotland, to advance her spurious
Issue.

It Is true, for some Reasons of State, the right Heir is set aside, as Edward,
Son of Ethelred (after the Confessor) being young, and not a fit Match to
oppose the Danes, Edmund Ironside, tho Illegitimate, for his Strength and
Courage, was said to be chosen King, as most likely to withstand the Danish
Invasions; so Edward the Confessor observing the heavy and slow Nature of Edgar
(the Grandson of Edmund Ironside) not to be a fit Match to oppose the turbulent
aspiring Faction of Harold, and his Family, named William Duke of Normandy, his
Successor: but none of these were Reasons for the Deposing the Earls of Athol
and Strathern, being for ought I find, much better qualified to reign than
either John or Robert, the Issue of Elizabeth Moor; for John was of a heavy and
unactive Disposition, not fit to govern, which made the King his Father to
constitute his younger Brother Robert Viceroy, a Man of a violent and
inveterate Disposition. So that these three Dynasties, viz. the Norman, B^itish
and Scottish, were all derived from spurious Originals; and as Henry the 7th was
descended from John of Gaunt (who was never King) by Catherine Swinford, so is
the Race of Scotland from Robert Stuart, the first of that Name (before he was
King) by Elizabeth Moor.

But though the Parliament erected this Dynasty of the Kings of Scotland, yet
this did not cease their Power of altering the Succession of it in a right
Line: For James the 2d had two Sons, James the 3d, who succeeded him, and
Alexander Duke of Albany.

Alexander married two Wives, the first was a Daughter of the Earl of Orkney,
by whom he had a Son named Alexander, and after married a Daughter of the Earl
of Bulloign, by whom he had a Son named John; yet in James the 5th his Reign,
John was by Parliament declared the second Person of the Kingdom, and next Heir
to James the Fifth, notwithstanding the Claim and Protestation made by
Alexander (John's elder Brother) against it. And the Scots out of Parliament
assumed a Power not only of altering the Succession of their Kings, but of
deposing them: For in the Year 1567, they deposed Queen Mary, (the Daughter of
K. James the 5th) and set up King James the 6th (after King James the 1st of
England) an Infant (scarce 14 Months old) in her stead; and by this Title he
reigned in Scotland twenty Years in his Mother's Life, and to his dying Day
owned this Title.

Yet this King, and his Son, and two Grandsons after him, gloried in declaring
their Titles to be by inherent Birthright, and that they were accountable only
to God for all their Actions: Here (how truly let the Reader judge) the Scene
was laid, upon which they played their designed Game, which did not end so.

I do not account the Dynasty of the Kings of England in the Scottish Race since
Queen Elizabeth, to be new in the Succession of the Persons of the four last
Kings, I mean King James the 1st, King Charles the 1st, King Charles the 2d,
and King James the second; yet I say it was new in the Exercise of it, and such
as none of the Saxon, Danish, or Norman Race since Henry the 3d, or of the
British Race, ever pretended to claim: But in regard it has put the Nation into
such a Ferment for above 80 Years, and which, if God pleases not to put an end
to, may prove as fatal to these Nations, as the Feuds between the Guelphs and
Gibelines, did for above 300 Years overwhelm Germany and Italy in most horrible
Bloodshed and Devastation, we are more particular in taking a View of the
Original of it.

From the time of the King's coming to London, May the 7th, to the 11th of
January, little more than eight Months, Stow takes notice of twelve
Proclamations, and upon the 11th of January out comes another for calling a
Parliament, which though new for the manner, yet more new for the Substance,
and such as never before was heard of in England: And that we may the better
take a view of the success of the Parliaments of England in this King's Reign,
from this we will stay a little, and consider the Constitution of a Parliament,
and the principal Ends of its meeting.

The King is the Head, Principle and End of the Parliament; the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons, which are made up of Knights of the Counties of
England and Wales, Citizens sent from Cities, Burgesses sent from Corporations,
and Barons sent from the Cinque Ports, which do not differ from Burgesses, but
only in Name, are the Body; the Temporal Nobility sit in Parliament in their
personal Capacities, but the Spiritual Nobility do not so, but in right of
their Bishoprics, which they hold of the King by Barony; and the Commons are
said to be the Representative-Body of all the Commons in England; not Noble by
Birth, or in their Politic Capacities, as the Bishops are: and in this
Assembly resides the Supreme Authority of the Nation, which as they make Laws
for the public Benefit, for are they loose from them, and are not obliged to
them.

As the King is freed from the imputation of Tyranny in sanguinary Laws, and of
Oppression in taxing the Subjects; for how can the Subjects complain of either,
when their Representatives in Parliament promote them? So does a Parliament
discharge the great Objection against Hereditary Monarchies, that tho Princes
see only with their own Eyes, and hear with their own Ears, as other Men do;
yet so as it is impossible without a true Representation of the State of their
Subjects, they can see or hear of the true State of them; whereas Minions and
Flatterers, whose Interest is different from that of the Kingdom, not only
conceal the true State of the Nation, but make false Representations of it, to
raise themselves tho out of the public ruin: but the Parliament is the Eye of
the Nation, which sees the Abuses, which Flatterers by abusing the King's Name,
and making it subservient to their Interest, impose upon it. The great Ends of
the Meetings of Parliament are, first, to redress the Grievances of the Nation,
if any be, by representing them to the King. Secondly, to punish Men, which are
out of the reach of the ordinary Rules of Justice, which either abuse the
King's Name to attain their Ends, or may prove dangerous to the Government.
Thirdly, to make Laws against growing Evils, and to repeal Laws which have been
found inconvenient to the Nation. And fourthly, to supply the King upon
extraordinary Occasions for Support of the Nation, as Times and Accidents may
happen.

Heretofore the Meetings of Parliament were so frequent, that Sir John
Thompson, in his Preface to the Earl of Anglesey's Memoirs, takes notice, that
from the first of Edward the 3d, to the 14th of Henry the 4th, which was but 85
Years, there are 72 Original Writs for the Summons of Parliament; so that if
you allow forty Days from the Tests of the Writs to the Returns, and but one
Month for the Sittings of Parliament, there will not be a Year's Interval
between the Dissolution of one Parliament and the Summoning another: and Mr.
Johnson proves that they were annual, and fixed to meet on the first, or the
Kalends of May, which continued down to Edward the 1st, how or whether
discontinued by Edw. the 2d I cannot tell; however, there are two Laws yet in
force for the annual Meeting of the King in Parliament, one the 4th of Edw. the
3d, c. 14. the other 36 Edward 3. c. 10. and when Parliaments thus frequently
met, Grievances were nipt in the Bud; the Courts of Law kept to the
Administration of Justice uprightly; the Ambition of great Men restrained;
Factions and Innovations suppressed: and when the Parliament met thus
frequently, the King had an Account of the State of the Nation, and upon
Redress of Grievances, if any were, the Parliament in acknowledgment of their
Duty gave the King a Gratuity, sometimes a Fifteenth, other times a Subsidy,
and at other times a Subsidy and a Fifteenth, and sometimes a Subsidy and two
Fifteenths; but never more before the 35 of Eliz. and the King in return,
granted a general Pardon to his Subjects, with such Exceptions as the
Parliament pleased: and thus a mutual Love and Understanding between the King
and his Subjects was nourished and increased.

Whereas by the long discontinuance of Parliaments, Grievances multiply and
take Root, so as they become so much more difficult to be redressed, by how
much longer the Discontinuances last: The Favorites by their flattering the
Prince, not only keep him in Ignorance of the State of his Subjects, but fix
the Prince so to their Will, that it becomes so habitual in him, that the
Prince prefers them before his Subjects, and their Flatteries before the Advice
of his Parliament, and often takes their parts before that of the Parliament
and Nation.

These long Intervals of Parliaments you will see will beget long Parliaments,
and the Members get to be chosen by the Favor of great Men, and vast Expense;
so that the Grievances with the Parliament should redress, become diffused into
the Body of the Parliament, than which nothing can be more dangerous to the
Constitution of Parliament. Besides, that the public Business may not be
interrupted during the Sessions of Parliament, the Members of both Houses have
Privileges whereof they are the only Judges, both in their own Persons, and of
their Servants, whereby they are exempted from Arrests, or any Process at Law,
which is not only grievous to the Subjects, but often the Ruin of them. But now
it is time to see, what the King's Proclamation for calling his first Parliament
tended to.

Before King James his coming to the Crown of England, the Election of Members
in the House of Commons was so free, that the Letters of the King, or any Noble
Man, to choose a Member, was judged Cause sufficient to render the Election
void; but the King by this Proclamation gives order, what Sorts of Men, and how
Qualified, should be chosen by the Commons, and concludes, We Notify by these
Presents, That all Returns, and Certificates of Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, ought and are to be brought to the Court of Chancery, and there to
be filed upon Record; and if any be found to be made contrary to this
Proclamation, the same is to be rejected as unlawful and insufficient, and the
City or Borough to be fined for the same; and if it be found that they have
committed any gross or wilful Default or Contempt in the Election, Return, or
Certificate, that then their Liberties, according to the Law, are to be seized
as forfeited: And if any Person take upon him the Place of a Knight, Citizen or
Burgess, not being duly elected and sworn, according to the Laws and Statutes
in that behalf provided, and according to the Purport, Effect and true Meaning
of this our Proclamation, then every Person so offending to be fined and
imprisoned for the same.

Never was such a Prelude to the Meeting of a Parliament, by any of the Kings
of England, either of the Saxon, Danish, Norman, or British Race: and if the
King in the Beginning thus extends his first Note above ELA, to what Pitch will
he strain his Prerogative hereafter? However since Forfeitures of Charters,
Fining and Imprisoning of Members not elected and returned according to this
Proclamation, were the Penalties imposed by it for the better Execution, it
might have been declared, who should judge of these Elections and Returns, or by
what Law?

It fell out unluckily, I think I may say designedly, that upon the opening of
the Parliament, several of the House of Commons, one of which was Sir Herbert
Crofts, coming to hear the King's Speech in the House of Lords, had the Door
shut upon them, and were repulsed by a Yeoman of the Guard, one Bryant Cash,
with the uncivil and contemptible Terms of, Goodman Burgess you come not here.

The King, in a long and tedious Speech (which you may read at large in Stow's
Chronicle) after he had expressed his Thanks to the whole Nation for their
Universal Acclamations, in receiving him for their undoubted Sovereign, which
so much conduced to their Happiness in the Union of all Claims in his Person,
being the undoubted Heir of Hen. 7, and Elizabeth the Eldest Daughter of Edward
the 4th, wherein the Titles of the Houses of York and Lancaster were
reconciled: He tells them the Wonders which he will do, both in reference to
the inward and outward Peace of the Kingdom, which how well he performed, you
will hear hereafter: But as to the Glory which he ascribes to himself of being
King by inherent Birthright from Hen. 7. and his Queen, I think he could not
have taken a worse Topic for what he so much gloried in.

For no hereditary Monarch has a better Title to his Crown, than the Ancestor
from whom he first claims, had; and it is evident, Henry the 7th had no Color
of Title to the Crown of England by Inheritance, being only descended from John
of Gaunt, by Katherine Swinford his Concubine, when John of Gaunt's Wife was
alive; nor could the King claim any Title from the Wife of Henry the 7th, for
Henry himself would never own she had any, reigning not only during her Life
without naming her in the Coins, Proclamations or Laws, but after her Death;
and was not only crowned without her, but called a Parliament without her, ere
he was married to her, and had the Crown entailed upon him, and the Heirs of
his Body, before he married her. Besides, there is no Averment against an Act
of Parliament, and the Act of the first of Richard the 3d declares all the
Issue of Edward the 4th by the Lady Gray (the Mother of Henry the 7th's Wife)
to be Illegitimate, and so incapable of any Inheritance to the Crown of England.

But how edified soever the Commons were with the King's Speech, they were
little pleased with the Yeomen of the Guards usage of their Members, which in
due time the King shall hear of. However the King, who, since his coming in,
had been acquainted only with Flatteries, introduced with the Epithet of most
sacred, (which I find rarely applied to any of his Predecessors, and how
properly applied to him, giving himself up to a dissolute and profane Life,
let another judge) was buoyed up with a mighty Expectation of the Success of his
Proclamation and Speech, which did not succeed accordingly.

The Parliament met on Monday March the 19th, and a Debate happening in the House
of Commons about the Return of the Election of Sir Francis Goodwin and Sir John
Fortescue, for Knight of the Shire for the County of Bucks, the Commons, Friday
the 23d upon a full hearing determined Sir Francis to be lawfully elected and
returned.

An. Reg. 2. An. Dom. 1604. Tuesday, March the 26th, The Lords, by Sir Edward
Coke and Dr. Hone, sent a Message to the Commons, that the former Committees
may (in a second Conference to be had) have Authority to treat touching the
Case of Sir Francis Goodwin, the Knight of Bucks, first of all before any other
Matters were proceeded in.

The Commons returned Answer, that they do conceive that it did not stand with
the Honor of this House to give an Account of their Proceedings and Doings:
but if their Lordships have any Purpose to confer for the Re^due, that then
they will be ready at such time and place, and such number as their Lordships
shall think meet.

Sir Edward Coke, etc. delivered from the Lords, that their Lordships taking
notice in particular of the Return of the Sheriff of Bucks, and acquainting his
Majesty with it, his Highness conceived himself engaged, and touched in Honor,
that there might this be some Conference of it between the two Houses, and to
that end signified his Pleasure unto them, and by them to House.

The Commons by their Speaker give their Reasons to the King, why they cannot
confer with the Lords: The King in return, charges the Commons to admit a
Conference with the Judges: the Commons give Reason and answer Objections, why
they cannot confer with the Judges, and the 3d of April, deliver them at the
Council Chamger by Sir Francis Bacon, desiring that their Lordships would be
Mediators in behalf of the House for his Majesty's satisfaction: the King in
return, commanded as an Absolute King, that there might be a Conference between
the House and Judges.

The House upon return hereof, resolved to confer with the King, in presence of
the King and Council, and named a select Committee for the Conference; but the
Success being doubtful, Sir Francis Goodwin fearing this might cause a Rupture
between the King and the House, and to remove all Impediments to the worthy and
weighty Causes, which might by this time have been in a good furtherance,
desired another Writ of Election for a Member in his stead.

Hereupon, and other Accidents succeeding, wherein the Commons supposing
themselves aggrieved; the Commons upon the 16th of June, in an humble Apology
to his Majesty, represent their Privileges, and wherein they conceive
themselves aggrieved.

The Stubborness of the Commons, for so the King would have it, so dissonant
from the Flatteries he had constantly sounding in his Ears, and of being an
Absolute King by Inherent Birthright, put the King so out of Conceit with
Parliaments, that in all his Life, till the last Parliament of his Reign when
necessity brought him to it, he was never reconciled to them. But that we may
more clearly see what followed, we will look back into the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

There were three things which the Queen was impatient of being debated in
Parliament, the Succession of the Crown after her Death, her Marriage, and the
making any Alterations in the Church, as it was established in the first Year
of her Reign.

But the Commons having a fearful Eye of a Relapse into Popery, after the
Nation had been freed from it, and the Queen of Scots being zealously addicted
to the Romish Religion, and having not only assumed the Arms of England, as
next Heir to Queen Elizabeth; but upon her Return from France into Scotland, by
many Embassies solicited Queen Elizabeth, that she might be declared her
Successor, in case Queen Elizabeth died without Heirs of her Body: To prevent
this, the Commons in manifold Addresses to the Queen, petitioned her to marry,
and declare her Successor; and after the Duke of Norfolk's Conspiracy, and the
Rebellion in the North under the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland,
wherein it appeared the Queen of Scots was privy and consenting, in all the
Parliaments (I think) from the 9th of Elizabeth to the Queen of Scotland's
Death, the Commons were importunate with the Queen to cut her off, which you
may read at large in the Journals of the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, set
forth by Sir Simon D' Ewes.

The Queen fixed in these Resolutions, did often forbid the Parliament, upon
their Allegiance, to enter into Debates upon them: yet some zealous Members,
the principal of which was one Mr. Peter Wentworth, as well in the case of the
Queen of Scots, as for some Reformation in the Church, did several times
endeavor to have them debated, upon which the Queen committed them to the
Tower, tho soon after they were discharged: This the Commons in their Apology
to the King take notice of, and pray that this be no Precedent for the future,
but that their Debates in Parliament may be free: but they shall find that this
King's little Finger, and his Son's after him, shall be heavier upon them than
Queen Elizabeth's Loins.

However this Apology of the Commons tended to a Rupture between the King and
them within, yet the King was resolved to have Peace without the Kingdom, how
inconsistible soever the Terms were; and to that end upon the 18th of August
following, being the second Year of his Reign, he concluded a firm Peace with
Philip the 3d of Spain, and Albert and Isabel Archdukes of Austria, etc. and
also a Treaty of Commerce, which as it was the most beneficial to the English
Nation, so it was difficult, if not impossible, to observe the Peace: the King,
as he had managed it, made the Treaty of Commerce to be but little beneficial
to the Nation.

For the Year before the King had renewed the Treaty of Alliance which Queen
Elizabeth had made with the Dutch States, where, tho the King was not obliged
to maintain such a number of Men for the Dutch Support against the Spaniards,
to be repaid at the end of the War, whereby the Treaty with the Queen, Anno
1598. the Dutch were not only to pay, but to repay the Queen yearly 100000 l.
till a Peace was made with Spain, when they were to pay her two Millions of
Money, with the Interest of 10 per Cent. deducting the 100000 l. per Annum they
were to pay; yet by the fourth Article of the said Treaty it was agreed, That
neither the Kings of England nor Spain, shall themselves give, or shall consent
to be given by any of their Vassals, Subjects or Inhabitants, Aid, Favor or
Counsel directly or indirectly, on Sea, Land, or fresh Waters; nor shall supply
or minister, or consent to be supplied or ministered, by their said Vassals,
Inhabitants or Subjects, unto the Enemies or Rebels of either Part, of what
Nature or Condition soever they be (whether they shall invade the Countries and
Dominions of either of them, or withdraw themselves from their Obedience and
Subjection) any Soldiers, Provision of Victuals, Moneys, Instruments of War,
and whatsoever Aid else to maintain War: and the five Articles renounce all
former Leagues, Confederacies, Capitulations and Intelligences to the contrary.

But tho these two Articles pointed as directly as the Wit of Man could devise,
and to which King James swear, to withdraw the English and Scotch out of the
Dutch Service against the Spaniard, yet had the King no more Courage to do it,
than he had to demand the 600000 l. now due from the Dutch to him, by their
Treaty with Queen Elizabeth in 1598. And King James to palliate this, made it
worse, by granting the King of Spain License to raise what Forces he could in
any of his Dominions to fight against the Dutch; so prodigal was the King of
the Expense of his Subjects Blood Abroad, to keep an unsettled Peace at Home,
wherein he might follow his Pleasure and Luxury, and aspire to a Dominion over
his Subjects, which none of his Predecessors ever claimed.

King James in the 7th Article excuses the delivery of Flushing, Brill,
Rammekins, and other Forts in the English Possession in the Netherlands, to the
King of Spain, because of the Contracts made between Queen Elizabeth and the
States, by which she being engaged in Faith and Honor, it was not free for him
to restore the same to the Archdukes; yet, on the Word of a King, he promises
to enter into a Treaty with the said States, wherein he will assign a competent
time to them, to accept and receive Terms agreeable to Justice and Equity, for
a Pacification with the Archdukes, (to whom the King of Spain had assigned the
Dominions of the Low Countries) which if the States shall refuse, his Majesty
from henceforth, as being freed from the former Conventions, will determine of
the said Towns, according as it shall be just and honorable, wherein the said
Princes, his loving Brethren, shall find there shall be no want in him of those
good Offices, which can be expected from a Friendly Prince. How well the King
performed his Promise you will hear hereafter; but I find no time set by the
King, when he entered into any Treaty herein with the States.

As the King of Spain and Archdukes got but little by this Treaty of Peace, so
did the English Nation, as the King had ordered it, get as little by the Treaty
of Commerce: for if you consider Man in his Nature he is born naked, and the
generality of Mankind have nothing to feed, clothe, provide an Habitation, or
defend themselves with, but as they are assisted by other Men; and as they are
born to nothing, but what they get from others, so if any rob or steal from
another any thing, this will be an Injury to that other: Nor does Man, born in
this poor State, know how to get, or be supplied by another with either Food,
Raiment, or an Habitation, but as he shall be taught or instructed by another;
so that after all, the generality of Mankind in their most perfect State, eat
their Bread by the Sweat of their Brows, and in the Cares of their Mind. To
debar therefore any Man from his honest Labors, whereby he gets his
Subsistence, is a greater Violation of the Law of Nature, than to rob another,
and equal to the depriving another by Injustice of an Estate whereon a Man
lives, and is a greater Injury than the Tyranny of Pharaoh over the Children of
Israel, in compelling them to make Brick, yet denying them Straw: for this
imposed upon the Israelites a greater Hardship how to live, whereas that denies
poor Men their Means of living; and by Consequence, it is a greater Tyranny and
Injustice for any Man, or Company of Men, either by Law, or without Law, to
arrogate to themselves a Monopoly in any lawful Employment exclusive to other
Men, than to rob any of them; for this but hinders them in their Livelihood,
whereas that takes from them all their Means of living.

Nor are Monopolies less impolitick than injurious; for the restraining the
Labors and Industry of Men in any Profession, Art or Mystery, in any Country
to a few, does not only hinder the Improvement of them in that Country, but
makes open a Way to the People of other Countries, not only to enlarge, but
improve them, as much to their Benefit, as to the Loss of that Country, where
they are restrained to a few.

And if Monopolies be so wicked, impolitick and injurious, in restraining the
Labors and Industry of Men, the monopolizing the Product of Men's Labor by
Navigation in Foreign Trade is not less but more; for no Man will labor who
cannot enjoy the Fruits of his Labor; and the great Benefit herein which
England enjoys, is, that being the greater and better part of the Isle of
Britain, it abounds with more noble and better Ports (except Ireland) to vend
the Product of Men's Labors upon the Materials which it abounds with, than any
other Country. To monopolize therefore the Foreign Vent of our Manufactures to
any Men, or Company of Men, is doubly injurious, not only to our Artificers in
them, but to those Countries which might otherwise reap the Benefit of them,
and by this Restriction gives other Countries the opportunity of supplying them.

Nor does the Injury and Impolicy of restraining the Foreign Vent of our
Manufactures stay here, for by it infinite People might be supplied with
manifold things from other Countries, as Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, Beeswax,
Elephants Teeth, Raw Silks, all sorts of dying Stuffs, etc. whereof the Nation
stands in need; which being restrained to a few, the Nation cannot be supplied
by them, and so multitudes of Manufacturers are denied the Fruits of their
Labors; and hereby they become so dear, that those who employ themselves in
them, cannot without extraordinary Pains subsist, and thereby give the Foreign
Vent of them to other Nations, where these are more plentiful and cheap.

Nor does the Injury and Impolicy of monopolizing of Foreign Trades end here;
for as the Riches of England are derived from our Foreign Trades, so is the
Strength and Glory of it founded in Navigation, which (Trade being a principle
to it) will be so much lessened, as the Foreign Vent of our Manufactures and
their Returns are restrained. We have thought ^it to premise this, that a
better View may be had of what follows.

The first day the King came to London after the Death of Queen Elizabeth, viz.
the 7th of May, he issued out a Proclamation to cease the exacting all
Monopolies and Protections that hindered Men's Suits in Law, and to forbid the
Oppressions done by Salt-Peter-Makers, Purveyors, and Cart-takers; but this was
too hot to hold.

For the Treaty of Peace and Commerce with Spain was no sooner made, but the
King made a Monopoly of the Trade to Spain and Italy, by incorporating it in a
Company exclusive to other Men: Hereupon the Parliament then sitting, made that
memorable Law founded upon those unanswerable Reasons of a National Interest,
and the manifold Inconveniences the incorporating those Trades in a Company
brought to the Navigation of the Nation, both in the Foreign Vent of our
Manufactures, and in their Returns, to the Ruin of infinite Artificers, Seamen
and Shipwrights, and to the Diminution of the King's Revenue: Whereupon these
Trades were declared free, and have ever since continued so, to the inestimable
Benefit of this Nation.

But tho the Reasons in this Act extend to all other Beneficial Trades, as to
Turkey, the East-Country, and Hamburgh Trades, and to Africa and the
East Indies; yet all these Trades are monopolized into Companies, exclusive to
other Men, as much to the Prejudice of the Nation, as the making the Spanish
Trade free was beneficial to it.

About this time the Clergy (at least a Faction, which styled themselves the
Clergy) made an Attempt to try how far their Doctrine of Absolute Power in the
King had taken root in him; they had gained their Point so far, as the King had
declared his Command to the Commons as Absolute King, and now they will see
whether the King would assert it, and the Case was this.

Archbishop Whitgift (a Prelate of singular Piety and Humility) died the last
day of February, in the first Year of the King, and Doctor Richard Bancroft (a
Man of a rough Temper, a stout Football-player) as zealous an Assertor of the
Rights of the Church of England, or rather a Faction of Churchmen, who
arrogated to themselves the Title (as Julius the 2d was of the Papacy)
exhibited to the King and Council 25 Articles in the Name of all the Clergy of
England, called Articuli Cleri, which were desired to be reformed in granting
Prohibitions, tho there were a Parliament and Convocation then sitting, which I
do not find had any hand in it.

This Exhibition, as it ascribed an Absolute Power to the King, so it struck
directly at the Constitution of Parliaments, the principal End of which is to
redress Grievances and Abuses in the Nation; and if the King's Council, during
the sitting of a Parliament, shall ascribe to themselves this Power, then the
great End of Parliaments redressing Grievances and Abuses is in vain: However
Bancroft herein, not only makes the King's Council to have a concurring Power
with the Parliament, but paramount to it, by exhibiting these Articles in the
sitting of a Parliament and Convocation: but the Judges gave so clear and
distinct an Answer to them all, that the King did not think fit to meddle in
them; yet did not Bancroft rest here, as you will hear hereafter. The Articles,
and the Judges Answer to them, you may read at large in Sir Edward Coke's
second Institute, tit. Articuli Cleri.

Whilst Bancroft was thus ascribing to the King this Absolute Power, and
exalting a Faction of Churchmen, above the true State of the Clergy, which is
one of the three States of the Nation, and above the Nobility and Commonalty,
which are the other two: The Popish Faction were plotting a Design, not only to
destroy the Church of England, but the very Person of the King, with the
Nobility and Commons convened in Parliament, which was to have been executed
upon the fifth of November following, the day on which the Parliament were to
meet.

The Popish Party hoped (and it may be not unreasonably) that the King, in
regard of his Mother's Religion, was not averse to theirs, so that if he became
not of their Church, (which in his Speech at the opening the Parliament, he
owns our Mother Church) at least hoped to have their Religion tolerated;
whereas finding the King in his Speech, after he had declaimed against the
Heresies and Abuses crept into their Church, and the Pope's having arrogated an
Imperial Civil Power over Kings and Emperors, by dethroning and decrowning them
with his Foot, and disposing of their Kingdoms; and the Jesuits Practice of
assassinating and murdering Kings, if they be cursed by the Pope: That so long
as they maintained these, they were not sufferable in the Kingdom: From this
time forward, and it may be before, a Popish Crew contrived how to bring in
their Catholic Religion, they cared not which way, so it might be done. At
last it was agreed upon the opening of the Session of Parliament upon the 5th
of November, one part of the Conspirators should blow up the Lords House, while
the King, Prince, with the Nobility and Commons were in it (having prepared all
things in a readiness) whilst another part should seize upon the Lady Elizabeth
(after Queen of Bohemia) and proclaim her Queen: But the Plot being discovered,
the Conspirators were defeated of both their Designs.

The Horror and Terror of this Conspiracy, (the Discovery whereof was
industriously divulged and believed to be by the King's great Wisdom and Care)
reconciled for a time all Differences between him and his Parliament; and the
Parliament to gratify the King, the Clergy gave him four Subsidies at four
Shillings in the Pound, and the Temporality three Subsidies and ^ix Fifteenths,
(which was threefold more than any Parliament, in one Session, gave Queen
Elizabeth, before that of the 35 Eliz. notwithstanding the Payment of her
Father's, Brother's and Sister's Debts, her expelling the French out of
Scotland, the building, and repairing the Navy Royal, the Support of the
Reformed in France, the subduing the Rebellion in the North, the Support of the
Dutch in the Netherlands, the Irish War, and the Overthrow of the Spanish
Armada in 88.) The Parliament enacted the Oath of Allegiance, which Bellarmine,
under the Name of Tortus, wrote against, and Andrews Bishop of Winton, under
the Name of Tortura Torti, defended it. The Parliament too ordained the
Anniversary of the Fifth of November, to be celebrated for a perpetual
Thanksgiving-Day for the King and Kingdom's Delivery from this Conspiracy. All
Heats about Prerogative and Privilege were now laid aside; the Pulpits and our
Universities rang with Declamations against the Heresies and Usurpations of the
Church of Rome; and now the King gave himself wholly to Hunting, Plays,
Masks, Balls, and writing against Bellarmine and the Pope's Supremacy, in
arrogating a Power over Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms; and thus the
Case stood for four Years after, wherein I scarce find any thing worth
mentioning.

This and the next Year was almost wholly spent in Debates, concerning the
Uniting of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which the King eanestly
solicited, and which ended only in Contests and Arguments, for the House of
Parliament refused to join with the King in it: however the King obtained a
Judgment in Westminster Hall in a Case called Calvin's Case, that the Post Nati
in Scotland, after the King's Assumption to the Crown of England, were free to
purchase and inherit in England.

But whilst the King was thus wallowing in Pleasure, he wholly gave himself up
to be governed by Favorites, to whom he was above any other King of England
(except Henry the 8th) excessively prodigal, not only in Honors and Offices,
but of the Revenues of the Crown, and Aids given in Parliament; and these being
of both Nations, Scotch as well as English, made them to be the more
intolerable: All things being at Peace Abroad, Public Affairs were neglected,
or scarce thought of, whilst the Dutch still grew more powerful at Sea, and
without any Aid from the King, were Matches for the King of Spain by Land; and
Henry the 4th of France was accumulating incredible Treasure at Home, and
laying the Foundation of vast Designs Abroad, whereof the King took no notice,
his Genius lying another way.

In these Debates at Home, and Lethargy of State of Foreign Affairs, the
Prerogative-Clergy swelled the High Commission to such an height, that it was
complained of as a Grievance in Parliament, as you may read in Arthur Wilson's
History of Great Britain, ^ol. 46. Nay Bancroft this Year (notwithstanding the
Judges Answer to the Articles exhibited to the King, against granting
Prohibitions, and that the Parliament was still sitting) repeated his
Exhibitions: But however the King inclined to favor Bancroft, he had not
Courage enough to overruled the Judges Answer to them, it may be for fear the
Parliament should interpose, or indispose them to grant him more Money, whereof
already he stood in great need.

But the Parliament, however they gratified the King for their Deliverance from
the Popish Conspiracy, did not think fit to pour it forth so plentifully now in
times of Peace, to be profusely thrown upon Favorites and Minions, who were no
more Friends to them, than they to the established Church of England.

To supply the King's Necessities, as he made them, one Doctor Cowell (no doubt
set upon by Bancroft, and those called the Church) the next Year after
published his Interpreter, wherein he premises these three Principles: First,
That the King was Solutus a Legibus, not bound by his Coronation Oath.
Secondly, That it was not ex Necessitate, that the King should call a
Parliament to make Laws, but might do it by his Absolute Power. Thirdly, It was
a Favor to admit the Consent of the Subjects in giving Subsidies.

Cowell's Interpeter, approved by the King, as the Civil Law was highly
extolled by the King (See Wilson, fol. 46.) was not only printed, but publicly
sold without Impunity; and this gave Encouragement to the publishing many
others to the same purpose, among which one Blackwood published one, which
concluded that we were all Slaves, by reason of the Conquest.

The Commons, tho they took no notice of Bancroft, and his Articles against
Prohibitions, took Fire at these, and intended to have proceeded severely
against him; but the King interposed, and promised to call in these Books by
Proclamation, as he did, but they were out, and the Proclamation could not call
them in, but only served to make them more taken notice of: But this had not
the desired Effect of getting more Money, than one Sub^dy and one Tenth,
whereupon the King, by Proclamation, dissolved them the 31st of December 1609,
after they had sat near seven Years, wherein the King set forth that he had
proposed many things far differing and surpassing the Graces and Favors of
former times, both in Nature and Value, (...) ^^pectation of a good Conclusion
of some weighty Cause which had been there in Deliberation, not only for the
Supply of the Necessities of his Majesty's Estate, but for the Ease and Freedom
of his Subjects: but these being the two last Sessions little taken notice of;
and that the Members, by reason of the length of the Parliament, were debarred
from the Hospitality they kept in the Country, and that diverse Shires, Cities
and Boroughs had been burdened with Expense of maintaining their Members, for
these Reasons he dissolved them; so that they should not need to meet at the
Day set by their Prorogation.

CHAP. II.
A Continuation of this Reign, to the Dissolution of the Second Parliament,
1614.
BUT how precarious soever the King was to get Money of the Parliament, he had
not Courage enough to demand the 100000 l. per Annum by the Treaty between
Queen Elizabeth and the Dutch States in 1598, whereby Eleven hundred thousand
Pounds was due to him, much less to demand the principal Debt, viz. two
Millions, and also two Millions and two hundred thousand Pounds due for eleven
Years Interest, at 10 l. per Cent. Now, by the Mediation of several Princes,
but especially by King James, this Year a Truce or Peace for twelve Years was
concluded between the King of Spain and the Archdukes, Albert and Isabel, and
the Dutch; wherein the Dutch were declared Free States, and independent upon
the Crown of Spain, or Archdukes. But tho the King had not Courage enough to
demand the Moneys due to him from the Dutch, by the Treaty with Queen
Elizabeth, he had so much as to enter into a Treaty with the Dutch, for a
Tribute to be paid to him for License to fish upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland: but the Dutch observed this no better than that with the Queen, and
the King got less by it.

Long Parliaments beget long Intervals, in which Grievances become so
multiplied and fixed, that they become so much more difficult to be redressed,
by how much longer the Intervals are: And since the King could not get Money of
the Parliament, and was afraid to demand any of the Dutch, let us see what
Courses he took to get Money, during the Interval from this Parliament to the
meeting of the next, which was five Years, and how the Case stood with them.

In the opening of the first Parliament, the King tells them, that he was so
far from increasing their Burden with Rehoboam, as that he had so much, as
either Time, Occasion, or Law could permit, lightened them; and, at that time,
had been careful to revise and consider deeply upon the Laws made against them,
that some Overture may be proposed in Parliament for clearing those Laws by
Reason (which is the Soul of the Law) in case they have been in times past,
further or more rigorously executed by Judges than the meaning of the Law was,
or might tend to the Hurt as well of the innocent as guilty Persons.

At the Dissolution of the Parliament, the King's principal Favorites were
Henry Howard, (Brother to the Duke of Norfolk, whom Queen Elizabeth beheaded)
tho a Papist, yet Lord Privy Seal; Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, Lord
Treasurer; Philip Earl of Mountgomery, (for a certain Reason); Thomas Lord
Walden, (Son of the Duke of Norfolk) after created Earl of Suffolk; and Sir
Henry Rich, after Earl of Holland, English: the Earl of Dunbar, Sir Alexander
Hay, and Sir Robert Carr (who in a short time shall overtop them all) Scottish.

There was a Story current in those Times, which I have heard from some
credible Persons which did live in that time, That King James having given Sir
Robert Carr a Boon of 20000 l. my Lord Treasurer Salisbury, that he might make
the King sensible of what he had done, invited the King to an Entertainment,
and so ordered it, that before the King should come at it, he should pass
through a Room wherein he had placed four Tables, and upon each Table lay 5000
l. in Silver; when the King came into the Passage, he started, and was amazed
at the sight (having never before seen such a Sum) he asked the Treasurer the
meaning of it, who told the King, It was the Boon he had given Sir Robert Carr:
Swounds Man! (the Oath he usually swore) but five thousand should serve his
turn, and so for that time the Treasurer saved the King the other fifteen
thousand Pounds.

To support these Favorites, and other of the King's Countrymen of less Note,
was all the King's Care, notwithstanding his Foreign Affairs, or his
Proclamation at his first coming to London against Monopolies, or his Speech at
the opening of the Parliament: But since Money cannot be had by Parliament,
other means must be found out.

There were many ways used for raising Moneys during this Interval of
Parliament: First, Monopolies which swarmed more than in any King's Reign
before. Secondly, Payments for new invented Knighthoods, never before heard of
in England in Times of Peace, called Baronets: the Prince was 1000 l. and the
King to quicken the Market, promised to make but 200 of them; tho when this
Market was done, he kept it up all his Lifetime after. Thirdly, Tho the
Baronets paid for their Honors, yet the King issued our Commissions for
reviving the old Obsolete Laws, for making Men which could expend 40 l. per
Annum, to compound for not being Knighted. Fourthly, Payments for being made
Knights of Nova Scotia. Fifthly, The purchasing of English Honors at certain
set Prices, a Baron at 10000 l. a Viscount at 15000 l. an Earl at 20000 l.
Sixthly, Payments for Scottish and Irish Honors, I do not find set Prices of
these; Scottish Honors of the same Title to have the Precedence of an Irish, as
a Scottish Baron, Viscount or Earl, to have the Precedence of an Irish: and tho
an English Honor of like Degree had the Precedence of either of the other, yet
if either of the other had a higher Title, he should precede an English Peer
under a less; as a Scottish or Irish Viscount shall precede an English Baron, so
such an Earl shall precede an English Viscount. Seventhly, Compositions upon
defective Titles. Eighthly, Compositions for Assart Lands. Ninthly, Moneys for
making Prince Henry Knight. Tenthly, Moneys to marry the Lady Elizabeth to the
Palsgrave. Eleventhly, A Benevolence. Twelfthly, Moneys borrowed upon
Privy-Seals, and never repaid, besides Sales of Lands, Woods and Fee-farm
Rents, etc.

During this Interval of Parliament, was perpetrated a most horrible Murder
upon the Person of Sir Thomas Overbury, which is the more remarkable if it be
considered how far (tho the King detested the Fact) Favorites had the
Ascendant over the King, and how the King influenced the Causes of this Murder;
and that the Story may more entirely consist, it will be necessary to borrow a
little of common Fame.

Sir Robert Carr was made Viscount Rochester the 25th of March 1610, and upon
the 22d of April following, was made one of the King's Privy Council; and
having the Ascendant above all other Favorites over the King, he chose a
Council of some Persons, how to advance himself in this great Power: Of these
Sir Thomas Overbury (a Gentleman of brisk and lively Parts) was the chief, who
had as much an Ascendant over the Lord Rochester, as he had over the King; and
as Rochester was a Favorite, so was Thomas Earl of Suffolk, who had a Daughter
named Frances, married to Robert Earl of Essex, Son of Robert cut off in the
last Year of Queen Elizabeth, who after was General of the Army raised by the
Parliament in the late Civil Wars.

Tho of disagreeing Humors, the Earl and Countess were of agreeable Years when
they were married, both about the Age of twelve Years, and now had lived above
ten Years without any Carnal Knowledge of one with the other (as both confessed
when the Countess sued for a Divorce) whereto the Countess was intolerably
bent: and if public Fame may be credited, and which is attested by a Writer of
the first 14 Years of King James his Life, chap. 7. she entered into a
Conspiracy with one Ann Turner to have poisoned the Earl.

But how cold soever the Countess was in her Affections to the Earl, they were
not less on fire to my Lord of Rochester; and that these Flames might soar in
an equal height, the Countess, by the help of Mrs. Turner, procures one Doctor
Foreman (as he was called) to bewitch Rochester into equal Desires of mutual
Love with the Countess; and now Familiarity between the Countess and Rochester
becomes publicly scandalous.

However the Earl continued his Love to the Countess, but withal acquainted her
with the Dishonor she brought upon him, and more upon her self by her loose
Life, which was now become so publicly taken notice of: this was so far from
reclaiming the Countess, that it stung her to the quick, and instead of
Reformation, she, by Letters to Mrs. Turner, who (the Countess says) is all her
hopes of Good in this World, and by her to Dr. Foreman (whom she calls sweet
Father, and subscribes her self his Affectionate Daughter, Frances Essex)
endeavors to procure the Doctor to bewitch the Earl to Frigidity toward her.

Sir Francis Bacon, in his Charge against my Lord Rochester, after Earl of
Somerset, at his Trial for the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, gives Sir Thomas
hard words, as, That there was little in him that was solid for Religion, or
Moral Virtue, but was wholly possessed with Ambition and vain Glory, and was loath
to have any Partners in my Lord of Rochester's Favor; and that to flatter my
Lord in his unlawful Love with the Countess of Essex, Sir Thomas had made his
Brags that he had won Rochester the Love of the Countess, by his Letters and
Industry.

But these stolen Pleasures could not satisfy the Countess's Desires, and that
she might enjoy them to be complete, she endeavors, since the Design of
poisoning the Earl did not succeed, to make way to her Desires of marrying
Rochester, by suing out a Divorce against the said Earl, which she acquaints
Rochester with, and Rochester and the Countess acquaint the Earl of
Northampton, who before was privy, and consenting to the Familiarity between
them, and was easily induced to join in procuring a Divorce.

Tho this was agreed between them, yet the Viscount would not proceed further,
till he had consulted Sir Thomas Overbury, protesting he (the Viscount) would
do nothing without his Advice: Sir Thomas told him, The marrying the Countess
would not be only hurtful to his Preferment, but helpful to subvert and
overthrow him, and who would (being possessed of so great Possibilities as he
was, so great Honors and large Revenues, and daily in expectation of others)
cast all away upon a Woman, noted for her Injury and Immodesty, and pull upon
himself the Hatred and Contempt of great Personages for so small a matter. Then
he willed the Viscount to consider with himself the Condition of the Countess,
the manner of her Carriage from her Youth, her present Conversation, the many
Envies, Dishonours and Dislikes which attend upon her; and besides, which is
the Opinion of the Vulgar (and he should find it so) many Evils to attend his
Subversion and Overthrow; That it was not the Nature of a wise Man to make her
his Wife, whom he had made his Whore. Lastly, Sir Thomas advised him that he
should expect no better Requital from her, than such as she had showed to her
former Husband; and withal to weigh the present Condition he is in, and compare
it with the future, and much more to this purpose; and that Honor is not
attended by Voluptuousness, nor the Ruins of a rotten Branch to be cherished
upon a new planted Tree; but if he (the Viscount) meant to be made famous, and
to continue that with him which he now freely enjoyed, Sir Thomas his Opinion
was, That he should utterly leave and forsake the Countess's Company, and hold
her both hurtful and hateful.

Rochester was surprised at Overbury's Advice, and the more, by how much less
he expected it, and falls out with Overbury, and gives him harsh Language: but
Overbury retorts again, and persists in his Advice, and demands his Portion due
to him of Rochester, and so leaves him to his own Fortunes.

If Rochester was surprised at Overbury's Advice, the Countess was enraged at
it, so as nothing less than Overbury's Blood could appease her Revenge; but how
to compass it would be a work of time, and required deep Consideration, Secrecy
and Resolution. But we leave this Affair here to take a view of other
Occurrences which happened this Year, 1610.

To the King's former Monopolies, he this Year added another which caused many
Commotions here, and endangered a Rupture with the Dutch* and this was the
Case. The English at this time were not skilled in the Art of dressing and
dying English Woollen Manufactures, but after they were made here they were
vented into Holland, where they were dressed and dyed: Alderman Cockaine, and
some rich Citizens, having, as was said, promised Rochester, Northampton, and
the Lord Treasurer, great Sums of Money to procure them a Patent for dressing
and dying of Cloths, and that the King would seize into his Hands the Charter
of the Merchant-Adventurers for transporting of white undressed Cloths;
Cockaine pretending, that besides the enriching the Nation, multitudes of poor
People might be employed to the Benefit of the Nation, which now were a Burden
to it: Hereupon the King seizes upon the Merchant-Adventurers* Patent, and
grants to Cockaine, and others, a new Patent for dressing and dying Cloths.

But Cockaine's Project succeeded both ways quite contrary, for the Dutch
prohibited the Importation of English dressed and dyed Cloths from England; and
Cockaine, and his Company, not only dyed and dressed the Cloths worse and
dearer (which are ever the Consequences of Monopolies) than they were in
Holland, but these being restrained to a Company, they could not near dress and
dye the Cloths made in England: Whereupon the making Cloths stood at a stand,
and infinite Numbers of poor People, which were employed in making Cloths, lay
idle, and were reduced to a starving Condition; this raised great Clamours,
which arrived at the Council; which to pacify, the Council permitted some
quantities of white Cloths to be transported, but this did at present but skin
the Soar, not cure it, as you will soon hear.

This Year was wounded up in a mournful Catastrophe, for upon the 6th of
November Prince Henry died, in the beginning of the Blossom of his Youth, being
18 Years, 8 Months, and 17 Days old: A Prince adorned with Wisdom and Piety
above his Years, Strength and Ability of Body equal to any Man, of a Noble and
Heroic Disposition, and an hater of Flatteries and Flatterers, and therefore
fell flat at odds with Rochester, not once giving him any Countenance, or
vouchasafing him his Company.

I have heard my Father (who was about the Prince's Age) tell several Stories
of him: Once when the Prince was hunting the Stag, it chanced the Stag being
spent, crossed the Road, where a Butcher and his Dog were traveling; the Dog
killed the Stag, which was so great that the Butcher could not carry him off:
When the Huntsmen and Company came up, they fell at odds with the Butcher, and
endeavored to incense the Prince against him; to whom the Prince soberly
answered, What if the Butcher's Dog killed the Stag, what could the Butcher
help it? They replied, If his Father had been served so, he would have sworn so
as no Man could have endured it: Away, replied the Prince, all the Pleasure in
the World is not worth an Oath. Another time, when the French Ambassador came
to take his leave of the Prince, the Ambassador asked him, What Service he
would command him to his Master; the Prince bid him tell his Master what he was
a doing, being then tossing (...) Pike. The Prince had an high Esteem for Sir
Walter Rawleigh, and would say, No other King but his Father would keep such a
Ma^^ as Sir Walter in such a Cage, meaning the Tower.

His Court was more frequented than the King's, and by another sort of Men; so
that the King was heard to say, Will he bury (...) alive? And the high
Church-Favourites taxed him for being a Patriot to the Puritans.

Never was any Prince's Death more universally and cordially lamented, and the
more, by how much the Suddenness of his Death being known, before his Sickness
was scarce heard of, was surprising: As Men's Humors flowed they vented their
Passions, some said, A French Physician killed him, others, He was poisoned*
and it was observed, that poisoning was never more in fashion than at this
time; others, That he was bewitched, etc.

Whether it were to appease these Clamours, or out of Curiosity, I cannot tell,
but Dr. Mayerne, Dr. Atkins, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Palmer, Dr. Gifford and Dr.
Butler were ordered to dissect the Prince's Body the next day after his Death,
and to give their Opinions of it, which were,

First, They found his Liver paler than ordinary, in certain place somewhat
wan; his Gall without any Choler in it, and distende^ with Wind.

Secondly, His Spleen in diverse places more than ordinarily black.

Thirdly, His Stomach was in no part offended.

Fourthly, His Midriff in diverse places black.

Fifthly, His Lungs were very black, and in diverse places spotted* and of a
thin watery Blood.

Sixthly, That the Veins of the hinder part of his Head were full^ than
ordinary, but the Ventricles and Hollowness of the Brain (...) full of clear
Water.

However Prince Henry died, Henry the 4th of France died by (...) violent
Death, being stabbed by Raviliac the 4th of May the Year, his Predecessor Henry
the 3d being about 22 Years before stabbed by James Clement, a Jacobite Friar.
At Henry the 4th his Death there was an universal Peace in Christendom, when he
was putting it into an universal War; all the Western Princes (...)
Christendom, except King James, were engaged in it, against the House of
Austria: but it was so vast, as in the Nature of things* if Henry had been
young, as he was in the 57th Year of his Age he could not have lived to have
accomplished it: at his Death, tho he lived but 13 Years after the Treaty of
Vervins, when he made Peace with Philip the 2d of Spain, he had amassed such a
Treasure, as is incredible, if so great an Historian as Messeray did not
testify it; especially if it be considered, that before the Treaty at Vervins,
France had for forty Years before been imbroiled in a Civil War, and with
Spain; and these Wars being in all the Parts of France, France was never before
in so poor and feeble a State, and Henry himself after the Peace giving himself
up to Venery and Gaming above any King of France before him, or since. Nor can
it be imagined from whence such Treasures should arise, for there are no Gold
nor Silver Mines in France, unless it were from the Trades which the English,
Dutch, Dane, Swede and Hamburghers drove into France. However Henry was
addicted to Women and Gaming, yet otherwise he excelled all the Kings of the
Age, not only in Heroic Virtues, but in Prudence, Constancy and Secrecy in his
Designs; curious in Enquiry into the Qualities of Men, whom he would prefer as
Qualities merited; and was pleasant and witty in his Conversation, and always
disposed to take the Impression of good Counsel.

He left his Son (a Prince of weak Constitution both of Body and Mind) at ten
Years of Age, and his Wife (an imperious bigoted Italian to the Church of
Rome) Regent: These overthrew all the Methods which Henry had laid for
promoting the French Grandeur, and gave themselves up to be governed by
Favorites, yet in a different manner from those in England, whereby they
squandered away all that inestimable Treasure which Henry left, in less than
half the time Henry had been collecting it; and put all France into Tumults and
Wars, whilst the English patiently submitted to the Exorbitances of King James
his Favorites, and by Proclamations were forbid to mention them, or talk of
their Government, no not in Parliament: And now it is time to return to England,
and see what is doing there.

If we begin this Year 1612, with January, we shall find two Marriages in it,
to succeed the two Deaths of the two famous Henry's of England and France: The
first upon the 14th of February, being Shrove-Sunday, between Frederick, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, commonly called the Palsgrave, and the Princess
Elizabeth, the King's only Daughter; and the Triumphs, Pageant^, and other
Gaieties upon the Thames, in the City and Inns of Court, far exceeded any
before seen in England, which you may read at large in Stow's Chronicle, fol.
1004. so as the Tears for the Death of Prince Henry, were overflowed by the
excess of Joy for this Marriage.

However Northampton was not pleased with it, nor the Emperor, or King of
Spain, and from the same Causes, viz. It would so far advance the Protestant
Interest in Germany as to make it more formidable to the Popish Religion; and
it is certain (for I had it from good Authority) that Queen Ann was averse to
it; and to put the Princess out of conceit of it, would usually call her
Daughter, Goodwife Palsgrave; to which the Princess would answer, she would
rather be the Palsgrave' s Wife, than the greatest Papist Queen in Christendom.
The Reason of the Queen's Aversion to this Marriage is not said, but certain it
is, that these fading Joys for this Marriage were succeeded by fixed and real
Calamities, which the King took little Care to prevent, and shall never live to
see, nor his Son after him, an end of.

While the Preparations for solemnizing this Marriage were making, a different
sort was making for another, between the Viscount Rochester, and the Countess
of Essex; and to make the Way to it more passable, two Rubs were to be removed,
one to take off Sir Thomas Overbury, the other to procure a Divorce, not only a
Mensa and Toro, between the Earl and the Countess, but a Nullity, whereby the
Countess should be free to marry as she pleased, and she had agreed upon the
Person.

To remove Sir Thomas it was agreed between the Earl of Northampton, Rochester,
and the Countess, that Sir Thomas should be sent Ambassador to the Great Duke
(or Emperor) of Russia, so that if Sir Thomas did accept of it, he should be
far enough out of the way to hinder this Design; and if he did not, to commit
him to the Tower, where they would do well enough with him. The Business of the
Embassy was no sooner propounded to the King, but assented to by him; and Sir
Thomas was not unwilling to undertake it.

How harsh soever Rochester was to Sir Thomas, when he dissuaded Rochester from
marrying the Countess, yet now he becomes instant kind to Sir Thomas, and tell
him, how much he relied upon his Integrity and Parts, which, in his Absence, he
should not only want, but that thereby Sir Thomas would give Occasion to his
Enemies, which were many, and upon Rochester's account to ruin him, when as it
would not be in Rochester's Power to prevent it; but if Sir Thomas would refuse
to undertake this Embassy, Rochester would, in a short time, undertake to
reconcile him to the King, and Sir Thomas would in the mean time be at hand to
assist him with his Counsel upon all Occasions.

This was all deep Dissimulation, which Sir Thomas took to be in good earnest,
and so Sir Thomas excused his going on this Errand, and this was what Rochester
desired: Hereupon Rochester possessed the King, that Sir Thomas was not only
grown insolent and intolerable to him, but to the King, by contemning him, in
refusing to go on this Embassage: The King becomes incensed hereat, and the
more, as 'twas commonly said Sir Thomas had vented some stinging Sarcasms upon
the Court, which came to the King's hearing, and so ordered him to be committed
to the Tower. Northampton and Rochester had prepared the Business so, that Sir
William Wade was removed from being Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Jervis
Elvis, a Gentleman wholly depending upon them; was made Lieutenant of it.

Upon Sir Thomas his Commitment, Sir Jervis Elvis, by Order from Northampton
and Rochester, confines him close Prisoner, so that Sir Thomas his Father was
not permitted to visit him, nor any of his Servants, tho one desired he might
be confined with his Master. The Countess, that she might not be behind-hand
with Rochester and Northampton, had consulted with Mrs. Turner for a fit
Instrument to practice what was designed upon Sir Thomas: Mrs. Turner's Husband
was an Apothecary, and had a Servant named Richard Weston, who since her
Husband's Death was become very poor; this Man was agreed by the Countess and
Mrs. Turner to be Under-keeper to Sir Thomas, and had a Promise of 200 l.
Reward, when Sir Thomas should be dispatched; and that he might with more
Secrecy work his Design, the Lieutenant had Orders from Northampton and
Rochester, that no Man else should come at Sir Thomas, and Turner only to wait
upon him at Table, and to give Order for his Diet and Drinks.

Sir Thomas thus mewed up, and excluded from the Sight of his nearest Relations
and Servants, upon the 9th of May was begun the Practice of poisoning Sir
Thomas, in his Broth which Weston brought him; and this was continued with many
Varieties of Poisoning, till the 14th of September, when by a Glyster (for
which the Administer had 20 l. Reward) he was dispatched: but the Malice
against Sir Thomas did not end with his Death; for the Blanes and Blisters
which the Poison had caused upon his Body, were interpreted to be the Effects
of the French Pox, and his Body was irreverently buried in a Pit dug in a
very mean Place.

Here we may see the unhappy Fate of Princes above other Men, who neglecting
their Duty, give themselves up to be governed by Minions and Favorites: for
private Men are accountable only for their own Actions, whereas Princes are
accountable to God and Fame for all the ill Actions of their Ministers; and how
many ways was the King's Name used and abused in perpetrating this black and
horrid Murder: First, in getting the King to send Sir Thomas on the Embassage
to Russia. Secondly, in committing him to the Tower for refusal. Thirdly, in
keeping him close Prisoner there, which was a Practice never known before for a
Contempt, that any Man should be close confined from all his Relations and
Servants; and 'twas a greater Villainy to practice Sir Thomas his Death, while
he was the King's Prisoner, than if he had been at large, as being more
immediately under the King's Protection.

These Considerations little affected the Court, and Sir Thomas Overbury's
Destruction went but half way toward the designed Marriage between Rochester
and the Countess of Essex; but a Commission of Delegates under the Broad Seal,
is issued out to the Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. Abbot, the Bishops of
London, Winchester, Ely, Litchfield and Coventry, and Rochester, Sir Julius
Caesar, Sir Thomas Parrey, Sir Daniel Danne, Sir John Bennet, Francis James and
Thomas Edwards, Doctors of the Civil Law, at the Suit of the Countess for a
Divorce from the Earl of Essex.

Here you may see the Ascendant Rochester and Northampton had over the King;
not only in getting this Commission, wherein the King's Name and Authority was
abused; but they procured the King in the hearing of the Countess's Cause to be
her Advocate, in answering the Objections which the Archbishop made against
the Divorce: so as this Matter was managed, the Bishops of Winchester Dr.
Bilson, of Ely Dr. Andrews, of Litchfield and Coventry, and Rochester, with Sir
Julius Caesar, Sir Thomas Parrey, and Sir Daniel Dunne, were for the Divorce;
and that the Countess was Virgo non vitiata, and that there was Frigidity in
the Earl, and the Marriage a Nullity; and decreed the Earl to repay the
Countess her Portion: but the ABp, the Bp of London, and Bennet, James and
Edwards, Doctors of the Civil-Law, were against it.

Thus far was the King's Name and Authority abused, in the attaining the Murder
of Sir Thomas Overbury, and the designed Marriage between Rochester, and the
Countess of Essex; for Overbury being dead, and the Divorce obtained, the
Countess must not lose the Title by this Marriage, and thereupon the 4th of
November, Rochester is created Earl of Somerset.

All things are now prepared for the hopeful Marriage; and that the Solemnity
at the ending of it might outvie that of the Palsgrave, and the Lady
Elizabeth, upon the 6th of December, the Earl and Countess were married at
White Hall in the Presence of the King and Queen, Prince, and a great
confluence of the Bishop^ and Temporal Nobility; the Bishop of Bath and Wells
married them, and Dr. Mountain (Dean of Westminster) preached the Nuptial
Sermon, and that Night there was a gallant Masque of Lords; but upon the
Wednesday following the 29th there was another of the Prince's Gentlemen which
quite out-did this, and pleased the King so well, that he caused it to be acted
again on the Monday following, being the 3d of January.

But White Hall was too narrow to contain the Triumphs for this Marriage, they
must be extended into the City, and upon the 4th of January the Bride and
Bridegroom, accompanied by the Duke of Lenox, my Lord Privy Seal, (Northampton)
the Lord Chamberlain, the Earls of Worcester, Pembroke and Montgomery, with a
numerous Train of Nobility and Gentry, were invited to a Treat in the City at
Merchant-Taylors Hall, where my Lord Mayor and Aldermen entertained them in
their Scarlet Gowns: At their Entry they were accosted by a gratulatory Speech
and Music, the Feast (which was most sumptuous) served by the choicest
Citizens, selected out of the 12 Companies, in their Gowns and rich Foines:
After Supper they were entertained with a Wassaile, two pleasant Masks, a
Play and Dancing; and after all, the Bride and Bridegroom, with all this Noble
Crew, were invited to a Princely Banquet, and at three in the Morning the Bride
and Bridegroom returned to Whitehall: and before this Surfeit of Pleasure and
Excess was well digested, the Gentlemen of Gray's Inn, upon Twelfth-Day, invited
the Bride and Bridegroom to a Masque. Thus these Gaieties though they outlived
the Year, yet ended in the Holy Days of Christmas, as they began with them,
being the next Day after Christmas. But before the end of this Year, these Joys
shall turn sharp and sower.

This Year 1614, as it was the Meridian of the King's Reign in England, so was
it of his Pleasures; the King was excessively addicted to Hunting and Drinking,
not ordinary French and Spanish Wines, but strong Greek Wines; and though he
would divide his Hunting from drinking these Wines, yet he would compound his
Hunting with drinking these Wines; and to that purpose he was attended with a
special Officer, who was as much as could be always at hand, to fill the King's
Cup in his Hunting, when he called for it. I have heard my Father say, that
being hunting with the King, after the King had drank of the Wine, he also
drank of it; and though he was young, and of an healthful Constitution, it so
disordered his Head, that it spoiled his Pleasure and disordered him for three
Days after. Whether it were drinking these Wines, or from some other Cause, the
King became so lazy and unweildy, that he was treist on Horseback, and as he
was set so would he ride, without otherwise poising himself on his Saddle: Nay,
when his Hat was set on his Head, he would not take the pains to alter it, but
it sat as it was put on.

And as he thus gave himself up to Pleasure, so he did to Favorites and
Flatterers, and scarce heard any thing without the prelude of Sacred, Peaceful,
Wise, Most Learned, etc. These made him careless both of his Domestic and
Foreign Affairs, the Thoughts of which disturbed his Pleasures; and if at any
time he was thoughtful, or pensive, his Favorites made it their Business to
mimick or ridicule those things, especially the Puritans, wh^m the King hated.

These Courses, and the King's Favorites perpetually sucking his Treasures,
brought the King to great Necessities, yet he had not Courage enough to demand
the Debt due to him from the States of Holland, neither Principal nor Interest:
so that after five Years interval a Parliament is agreed to be called, to
supply the King's Occasions; and the principal Cause to excite the Parliament
to give Money, was for the Portion the King had paid for marrying the Princess
Elizabeth to the Palsgrave, and for his Entertainment whilst he was in England,
tho the King had collected Aid-Money all over England before.

But it rarely happens when Grievances be multiplied, and the Kings become
necessitous, that then the King and Parliament attain their Ends; the Ends
being so different, the Parliaments being to redress Grievances, and the Kings
to get Money: and so it fell out in this Parliament, for entering upon
Grievances, and remonstrating them to the King, which was Language he was not
acquainted with, he in great Passion dissolves the Parliament, and commits many
of the principal Members of the Commons close Prisoners, without Bail or
Man-prize: and though no Law was passed this Parliament, nor any Notice had of
it in the Statutes printed at large; yet this Benefit came of it, That the
Commons voting Cockaine's Patent for Dressing and Dying English Cloths to be a
Monopoly and a Grievance, it was recalled and cancelled, and the vent of White
Cloths left free.

This was the greatest Violation and Invasion of the Privilege of Parliament
that ever was done by any King of England before; but though it began, it did
not end here, neither in this King's Reign, nor his Son's after him: For after
the Dissolution of the Parliament, the King extorted a Benevolence from the
Subject, and those who would not contribute, were to have their Names returned
to the Council.

CHAP. III.
A further Account of this Reign, to the End of the third Parliament, in 1620.
IF from the Parliament we look into the Court, we shall see the King's
Affections begin to alter toward his Favorites, which began upon this
Occasion: My Lord of Northampton was Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and by
his Permission Romish Priests in great Numbers swarmed into England; this was
observed, and great Clamours were made upon it, which came to the Earl's Ears:
hereupon the Earl exhibits an Information against some of them; these justify
the Truth of what they were accused of; the Archbishop Abbot, at the same
time, produces a Letter from the Earl to Cardinal Bellarmine, wherein he says,
That however the Condition of the Times compelled him, and the King urged him
to turn Protestant, yet nevertheless his Heart stood for the Catholics, and
that he would be ready to further them in any Attempt.

This procured the King's Frowns, and the Prisoners Discharge; whereupon 'twas
said Northampton took such Grief that he made his Will, wherein he declared He
died in the same Faith wherein he was baptized, [viz. the Popish) and died the
15th of June. Now was Somerset left without his chiefest Support, and soon
after another shall rise up, which shall turn him quite out of the King's
Favor.

About this time one Mr. George Villiers appeared in Court, the youngest Son of
Sir George Villiers of Leicestershire, by a second Venture, whose Name was Mary
Beaumont: the Heralds will tell you she was of the honorable Family of the
Beaumonts; and I will tell you what a Lady of Quality told me, and one who
might well know the Truth of what she said, her youngest Sister by a second
Venture being married to the Eldest Son of Sir George Villiers, by Beaumont.

Mary Beaumont was entertained in Sir George Villiers his Family, in a mean
Office of the Kitchen; but her ragged Habit could not shade the beautiful and
excellent Frame of her Person, which Sir George taking notice of, prevailed
with his Lady to remove Mary out of the Kitchen into an Office in her Chamber,
which with some Importunity on Sir George's part, and unwillingness of my Lady,
at last was done.

Soon after my Lady died; and Sir George became very sweet upon his Lady's
Woman, which would not admit any Relief without Enjoyment; and the more to win
Mary to it, gave her 20 l. to put her self into so good a Dress as this would
procure, which she did, and then Sir George's Affections became so fired, that
to allay them he married her.

In this Coverture Sir George had three Sons, John after Viscount Purbeck,
Christopher after Earl of Anglesey, and George, and one Daughter after married
to the Earl of Denbigh: When Sir George died, George was very young; and Sir
George having settled his Estate upon the Children born of his former Lady,
could leave the Issue by his Widow but very little, and her but a Jointure of
about 200 l. per Annum, which dying with her, nothing could come to these
Children; nor was it possible for her, out of so contracted a Jointure to
maintain her self and them, so as to make scarce any Provision for them after
her Death; and the Issue of Sir George by his former Lady, both envied and
hated her, so as little could be expected from them.

To supply these Defects, she married one Thomas Compton a rich Country
Gentleman, whereby she became able to maintain and breed up her Children in a
better than ordinary Education; and George being of an extraordinary and exact
Composition of Person, was sent abroad, and in France acquired those outward
Advantages which more adorned the natural Parts, which Nature had given him.

The King this Year, about the Beginning of March 16 14/15, according to his
usual Methods, went to take his Hunting Pleasures at New Market; and the
Scholars (as they called them) of Cambridg who new the King's Humor, invited
him to a Play, called Ignoramus, to ridicule (at least the Practice of) the
Common Law: Never did any thing so hit the King's Humor, as this Play did; so
that he would have it acted and acted again, which was increased with several
Additions, which yet more pleased the King.

At this Play it was so contrived, that George Villiers should appear with all
the Advantages his Mother could set him forth; and the King so soon as he had
seen him, fell into Admiration of him, so as he became confounded between his
Admiration of Villiers and the Pleasure of the Play, which the King did not
conceal, but gave both Vent upon several Occasions. This set the Heads of the
Courtiers at work how to get Somerset out of Favor, and to bring Villiers in;
but here it is fit to look a little back, and see the Occasion Somerset gave of
Villiers's Rise, and of his own Fall.

Somerset was of mean and scarce known Parents, and as he was endued with no
natural Parts, so neither had he acquired any, being brought up and bred a Page
at Court; hereby he became as little capable of demeaning himself in Prosperity
as Adversity. After Sir Thomas Overbury's Confinement he gave himself up wholly
to be governed by Northampton; and soon after his Marriage he fell into an
universal Solitariness and Sadness, so that it was much taken notice of: which
Northampton observing, and judging not unlikely that the Cares of Somerset did
arise from his Fears of the Discovery of Overbury's Death, wherein they were
both deeply engaged, which if it should come to pass, they had no other means
to secure themselves, but by making themselves so great, as to oppose all who
should charge them with it, or else by being Catholics, they might draw all
that Party to assist them, and in these they both agreed; and to make Matters
more perplexed, Northampton, by one Hamon did encourage the Irish to continue
firm in their Religion, assuring them that God would one way or other protect
his Church, and that now the greatest Favorite in England would stand firm to
them, and also give Encouragement to the Papists in the North to meet openly at
Mass, and foment the Feuds between the English and Scots; the English murmuring
at the King's Favors more to the Scots than them. If I have erred herein, the
Writer of the historical Narration of the first fourteen Years of King James's
Reign, cap. 30. led me into it. This sullen Humor of Somerset's little suited
with the King's liking, being before better pleased with Somerset's Gaiety, in
humouring him in all his Pleasures.

After Northampton's Death, he was left alone to himself, and all Northampton's
Designs died with him; and then Somerset having forsaken all Men, and being
forsaken by them, appeared in his own Nature without any Disguise, wretchedly
penurious and intolerably covetous: There was no coming at the King's Ear but
by him, nor any coming at him but by excessive Bribes; and as the King began to
loath him, so all Men detested and hated him: So it was every Bodies business
to out Somerset, and bring young Villiers, into the King's Favor.

All the Court took notice of the King's Affection to young Villiers, and the
Queen observed it, and Villiers not to be wanting to himself daily appeared at
Court: There was but one Obstacle to be removed, and the Way was plain and easy
for Villiers to be the King's Favorite; the King would receive none into
Favor, but who was first recommended to him by the Queen, and the Queen had
observed something in young Villiers which she utterly disliked; and how to get
the Queen to recommend young Villiers to the King, was the only business to be
done.

The Queen (a Princess of rare Piety, Prudence, Temperance and Chastity) had a
great Veneration for the Archbishop of Canterbury Abbot, and the Archbishop
as much an Aversion to Somerset, not only for his Marriage with the Countess of
Essex, but for his other detestable Qualities; so that the Archbishop was the
only Instrument which was judged could move the Queen to recommend young
Villiers to the King.

It was no great difficulty to persuade the Archbishop to undertake this
Business, being of himself disposed to it; but when he propounded it to the
Queen, she was utterly averse from it, having before been stung with
Favorites; but by her Observation of Villiers, she told the Archbishop she
saw that in that young Villiers, that if he became a Favorite, he would become
more intolerable than any that were before him.

Hereupon the Archbishop declined the Business, but Somerset declining daily
from bad to worse, the Archbishop was again prevailed upon to move the Queen
to recommend young Villiers to the King, which he did with more Importunity
than before, urging Somerset's intolerable Pride and Covetousness, and that he
observed a good Nature and gentle Disposition in Villiers; so that some Good
might be hoped from him, which could never be expected from the other: at last
the Queen assented to it, but withal told the Archbishop, he among the rest
would live to repent it.

After Villiers was recommended by the Queen, it became out of her Power, and
the Power of the Kingdom to get him out of the King's Favor, or his Son's
after him, and the Archbishop himself shall find the Queen to have been a true
Prophetess; however at first Villiers acknowledged his Favor with the King to
have its Original from the Archbishop, called him Father, and protested to be
governed by him before all other Men; and the Archbishop gave him some Lessons
to observe toward the King and Queen, which Villiers repeated to him, and
promised to observe, which you may read at large in the first part of Mr.
Rushworth's Collections in the second Year of King Charles the First written by
the Archbishop.

In the beginning of Mr. Villiers's coming into Favor he was affable and
courteous, and seemed to court all Men as they courted him; he promoted Men's
Suits to the King gratis, which Somerset would not do, but for great Sums of
Money; and hereby Villiers stole all the Hearts of the Courtiers and
Petitioners to the King from Somerset, who was now wholly forsaken by God and
all Men.

Somerset thus forsaken of all Men, and stung in Conscience for the Death of
Overbury, and finding a Rival in the King's Favor, seeks by that small Portion
which he had left, to procure a general Pardon from the King to secure him in
his Life and Estate, (which was far the greatest of any Subject in the King's
Dominions) and to that purpose applies himself to Sir Robert Cotton to draw
one, as large and general as could be, which Sir Robert did, wherein the King
should declare, That of his own Motion, and special Favor, he did pardon all,
and all manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and
Outrages whatsoever, by the Earl of Somerset had been committed, or hereafter
should be committed; and this Pardon the King signed.

But Somerset grasping at too much, lost all, for my Lord Chancellor Egerton
refused to seal the Pardon: Somerset asked him the Reason, which the Chancellor
told him was, because if he did it, he should incur a Praemunire; and this the
Chancellor told the King, who was not displeased with it: So that now all Hopes
of Pardon for Sir Thomas Overbury's Murder failing, he had recourse to other
Artifices, of suppressing all Letters which passed between him, the Countess,
and Northampton, either to Sir Thomas, the Lieutenant, or any of the Prisoners,
and to make away Franklin the Apothecary, who was fled into France, and had
given Sir Thomas the Glister which dispatched him; but that which Somerset
designed for his preservation, 'twas thought, proved his Overthrow: but this
was the Product of next Year 1615, being the 13th of the King.

Tho Villiers had the Ascendant of the King's Favor far transcending all other
Favorites; yet the King's Necessities were never so great, and the Exchequer
so poor, and the King so much in debt, so as he had so much less means to
gratify his new Favorite as his Affections to him were more: and here it will
not be amiss to take some part of a View of the King's Prodigality (or if you
please, Bounty) to some of his former Favorites; the Earl of Somerset had
amassed (if my Author of the Historical Narration of the first 14 Years of King
James, cap. 34. says true) in Money, Plate and Jewels, two Hundred Thousand
Pounds, besides 19000 l. per Ann. The Earl of Salisbury (but a younger Son of
Treasurer Burleigh) le^t an Estate, besides the noble House and Seat of
Hatfield, equal, nay superior to most of the other Nobility; the Earl of
Northampton (a younger Brother of the Duke of Norfolk, and born to little or no
Estate) built that noble Structure in the Strand, now called Northumberland
House, and being unmarried, left a very great Estate to the Earl of Arundel,
and others of his House; the Earl of Suffolk (youngest Son of the Duke of
Norfolk, who had no Estate but what he derived from the Crown) besides his
other Estates, built Audley-Inn Palace, the noblest Structure ever built by any
Subject in England, except Hampton Court by Cardinal Woolsey, which by
reasonable Estimates cost above 190000 l. besides the Largesses given to the
Duke of Lenox, Sir Alexander Hays, and other Scottish Favorites, Sir Henry
Rich, and other English Favorites.

These had only themselves to take care for, but this new Favorite had a
Mother, two Brothers, and a Sister, to pully up into Honors and Estates, tho
their Parts could not entitle them to any other than Court-Preferment: but
besides these, I do not find he regarded any other of his Father's Family, no
more than they did him: However until the Discovery of Overbury's Murder, he
contained himself within the Bounds of Modesty, as well as Courtship; Somerset,
till then, being a kind of Check upon him. However the King, in his Poverty of
Affairs, gave him 1000 l. and upon the 23d of April, made him one of the
Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and next Day knighted him.

Sir Thomas Overbury's Murder had been about twenty Mont^ concealed, when about
the middle of August it was brought (...) light, but the Manner how was
variously rumoured: Some ta^^ed that Sir Thomas his Servant gave notice of it
to Sir Edwar^ Coke; others, that my Lord of Canterbury had got knowledge of it,
and made it known to Sir Ralph Winwood, one of the Secretaries of State, and
that by searching in a certain Place he should find a Trunk wherein were
Papers, which would disclose the whole Business, which Sir Ralph did, and found
it so.

The King at this time was gone to hunt at Royston, and Somerset with him; and
when the King had been there about a Week, next day he designed to proceed to
New Market, and Somerset to return to London, when Sir Ralph came to Royston,
and acquainted the King with what he had discovered about Sir Thomas Overbury's
Murder: the King was so surprised herewith, that he posted away a Messenger to
Sir Edward Coke to apprehend the Earl; I speak this with Confidence, because I
had it from one of Sir Edward's Sons.

Sir Edward lay then at the Temple, and measured out his time at regular Hours,
two whereof were to go to Bed at Nine a Clock, and in the Morning to rise at
Three: At this time Sir Edward' s Son, and some others were in Sir Edward' s
Lodging, but not in Bed, when the Messenger about one in the Morning knocked at
the Door, where the Son met him, and knew him: Says he, I come from the King,
and must immediately speak with your Father: If you come from ten Kings, he
answered, you shall not, for I know my Father's Disposition to be such, that if
he be disturbed in his Sleep, he will not be fit for any Business; but if you
will do as we do, you shall be welcome, and about two Hours hence my Father
will rise, and you then may do as you please, to which he assented.

At three Sir Edward rung a little Bell, to give notice to his Servant to come
to him, and then the Messenger went to him, and gave him the King's Letter; and
Sir Edward immediately made a Warrant to apprehend Somerset, and sent to the
King that he would wait upon him that Day.

The Messenger went back Post to Royston, and arrived there about Ten in the
Morning: the King had a loathsome way of lolling his Arms about his Favorites
Necks, and kissing them; and in this Posture the Messenger found the King with
Somerset, saying When shall I see thee again? Somerset then designing for
London, when he was arrested by Sir Edward's Warrant. Somerset exclaimed that
never such an Affront was offered to a Peer of England in the Presence of the
King: Nay Man, said the King, if Coke sends for me I must go; and when he was
gone, Now the Deel go with thee, said the King, for I will never see thy Face
any more.

About three in the Afternoon the Chief Justice came to Roy^^on, and so soon as
he had seen the King, the King told him, that (...) was acquainted with the
most wicked Murder by Somerset and (...) Wife, that was ever perpetrated, upon
Sir Thomas Overbury, and that they had made him a Pimp to carry on their Bawdry
and Murder; and therefore commanded the Chief Justice, with all the Scrutiny
possible, to search into the Bottom of the Conspiracy, and to spare no Man how
great soever, concluding, God's Curse be upon you and yours, if you spare any
of them; and God's Curse be upon me and mine, if I pardon any one of them.

The Chief Justice, as well by his Place as the King's Command, imprisons
Weston, Mrs. Turner, Sir Jervis Elvis, Franklin, and Sir John Munson, and
examines them; and also Simon Mason, Munson's Servant, Paul de la Bell,
Weston's Servant, etc. against them: Whereupon they were all, except Munson,
arraigned, condemned and executed in the Months of October and November
following, all of them, I say, except Munson, whom Justice Dodridg and Justice
Hide (as well as the Chief Justice) declared to be as guilty of the Murder as
any of the other. You may read the Trials at large, in the Narrative of the
first fourteen Years of King James his Reign, entitled, Truth brought to light
by time.

There was a general Rumor, that the Chief Justice, making a severe Inspection
into Overbury's Murder, found some Papers about the poisoning of Prince Henry;
and Sir Anthony Weldon in his History of the Reign of King James, says, That
the Chief Justice had blabb'd abroad so much: I am sure there was never any
such Acquaintance between the Chief Justice and him, that he should blab it out
to Weldon; whether this were true or false I cannot tell, but sure the
displacing Sir Edward Coke the next Year gave Reputation to these Rumors; and
here we end this Year 1615. being the thirteenth Year of King James his Reign.

Tho Turner, Weston, Elvis and Franklin were convicted and hanged last Year for
the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, yet the Trial of the Earl of Somerset and
the Countess was put off till the 24th of May this Year; yet the Earl being a
Prisoner, and utterly cast out of the King's Favor, the young Favorite
Villiers, having now no Competitor, rose as fast upon the Earl's Ruin as he
fell; and began to appear in his own Colors, from being Sir George, and of the
Bedchamber to the King, in the beginning of the Month of January to be made
Master of the Horse; and upon the Conviction of the Earl and Countess, the King
seized upon the huge Estate of the Earl, only allowing him 4000 l. per Annum
during his Life (as was said) for the King reprieved the Earl and Countess too,
not only from Death, but Imprisonment; and the Earl 24 Years after saw his
Daughter married to the now Duke of Bedford, who proved to be the Mother of
many Children, whereof my Lord Russel cut off by King Charles the Second, was
one, and a Lady of great Honor and Virtue.

The seizing of Somerset's Estate, at present afforded a plentiful Harvest to
our young Favorite; and that proportionable Honors (which were no burden to
him) might attend him, upon the 17th of August he is created Viscount Villiers,
and Baron of Whaddon. We will stay a little here, and look abroad and see what
Dishonor the King, by his Prodigality to his Favorites, and his ill Terms
with his Subjects, brought upon himself.

This Year seven of the twelve Years Truce made between the King of Spain, the
Archdukes and the Dutch States in 1609. were worn out, and now the Dutch
hugely swelled their Trade^* not only in Europe and Africa, but in the
East Indies, and to Turkey; but they could never be truly esteemed High and
Mighty, so long as the English possessed the Brill, Rammekins and Flushing, which
were the Keys of their Country, and opened the Passages into and out of the
Maese, Rhine and Scheld: They could not now pretend Poverty, as they did to
Queen Elizabeth for not payment of the Money, with Interest upon Interest at 10
per Cent. which being two Millions, when upon the Account stated between the
Queen and them, due Anno 1598. besides the Payment of the English in Garrison in
the Cautionary Towns this Year, did amount to above six Millions of Money; and
how to get rid of this Debt, and get the English out of the Cautionary Towns,
was the Design of Barnevelt and the States.

Barnevelt had his Eyes in every corner of the Court, he observed the King was
wholly intent upon his Pleasures, exalting his Favorites, and writing against
Bellarmine and Peron, against their King-killing and Deposing Doctrines, and
otherwise utterly neglected his Affairs both at Home and Abroad; and by how
much longer the King continued these Courses, so much better might the States
make a Bargain with him about restoring their Cautionary Towns, but not as
Merchants, but Bankrupts. The Truce between the Spaniard and them was above
half expired, and if the English should keep their Towns till the War broke out
again, the King might impose what Terms he pleased upon them.

Barnevelt also observed the ill Terms which the King was upon with his
Subjects upon the Dissolution of the last Parliament, about 14 Months before,
and imprisoning the Members for representing the Subjects Grievances, which the
King made worse by a Proclamation forbidding Men to talk of State Affairs; and
that he doted upon, and was wholly governed by Viscount Villiers, a raw and
unexperienced Gentleman in State Affairs, scarce of Age: Upon these
Considerations Barnevelt advised the States not to pay the English in Garrison
in their Cautionary Towns, tho this was expressly contrary to the Agreement they
made with Queen Elizabeth in 1598.

The English debarred of their Pay, apply themselves to the King for Relief;
the King was incensed at the Dutch, and talked high what he would do, but upon
Repose he advised what to do: the Lord Treasurer Suffolk told him there was no
Money in the Exchequer, to call a Parliament would be a work of Time, and in
the mean while the Soldiers in Garrison in the Cautionary Towns must either
starve or revolt; besides, the Wounds which the imprisoned Members had were so
green, that the Parliament in all likelihood, would rather seek to cure them
than supply the King's Necessities; and starve or revolt the Soldiers might,
rather than the King would abate any thing of his Bounty to his Favorites.

Hereupon it was agreed, That the King should enter into a Treaty with the
Dutch, concerning the Delivery of their Cautionary-Towns; the Dutch expected
it, and had given Orders to their Ambassador here (called the Lord Caroon) to
treat about it, and what they would give, the King must take; and Caroon's
Instructions were to give two hundred and forty eight thousand Pounds in full
Satisfaction of the whole Debt, which was scarce Twelve Pence in the Pound, but
was greedily accepted of by the King and his Favorites. But how well this
Agreement did sort with the Treaty made with the King of Spain and Archdukes
in August 1604, where in the 7th Article the King swears and promises in the
Word of a King, That in a competent time he would assign a Treaty with the
Dutch States, to acccept and receive Conditions agreeable to Justice and
Equity, for a Pacification to be had with the renowned Princes his dear
Brethren; which if the States shall ref^se to accept, his Majesty from
thenceforward, as being freed from former Conventions, will determine of those
Towns according as he shall judge it to be Just and Honorable, wherein the said
Princes, his loving Brethren, shall find there shall be no want of these good
Offices, which can be expected from a friendly Prince; let the World judge.

Tho the Bargain were agreed, yet the King and Courtiers were in fear the Money
should not be paid accordingly, and therefore the King wrote to the States in a
Style far differing from that he used to the Parliament; for, says my Author,
William de Britain, fol. 12. the King told them, He knew the States of Holland
to be his good Friends and Confederates, both in Point of Religion and Policy
(one as true as the other, for the Religion of the Dutch was Presbytery, which
the King hated, nor did he ever imitate their Policy) therefore he apprehended
not the least fear of Difference between them: In Contemplation whereof, if
they would have their Towns again, he would willingly surrender them.

So tho the Dutch got their Towns again, yet the King got not all the Money,
for my Lord Treasurer Suffolk kept back so much of it, as he was fined 30000 l.
in the Star Chamber for it, and had not escaped so, if Sir Francis Bacon, then
Lord Chancellor, had not been his Friend.

After the Sale of the Towns was agreed on, the next Debate was, What should
become of the Soldiers in Garrison? But let them look to that, for the King
being Rex Pacificus, had no need of them, they might go where they pleased; all
the Care the Favorites had, was how to share the Money among themselves.

The dishonorable Delivery of the Dutch Towns, made no Allay in his Affections
to his new Favorite, tho wholly unacquainted with State Affairs, who was as
much given up to the Pleasures of Venus, as the King was to those of Bacchus;
neither the Sale of the Dutch Towns, nor the seizing Somerset's Estate, would
answer the Expense of his Pleasures and Bounty, the disposing of all Places and
Offices Ecclesiastical and Civil, all waved as he nodded; and herein his
Venality was as profuse as his Venery.

One of the first that felt the Effects of his Power herein, was Sir Edward
Coke, who at this time sat very loose and uneasy; he had highly disgusted the
Court and high-Church-Party, in opposing Archbishop Bancroft's Articles
against granting Prohibitions at Common Law. He opposed my Lord Chancellor
Egerton taking notice of a Cause in the King's Bench, after Judgment given,
contrary to the Act 4 Hen. 4. 23. and refused to give any Opinion in the Case
of Commendums, being a Judge, before it came judicially before him: And however
my Lord Chancellor Egerton, upon the swearing Sir Henry Mountague, when he
succeeded Sir Edward Coke in the Office of Chief Justice, declared Sir Edward's
deposing was for being so popular; yet I have it from one of Sir Edward's Sons,
that the Cause of his Removal was,

That Sir Nicholas Tufton being very aged, and having a Patent for Life of the
Green-wax-Office in the King's Bench, the Viscount Villiers by his Agents dealt
with Sir Nicholas, that if he would surrender his Patent, the King would make
him Earl of Thanet; and in the mean time Sir Francis Bacon treated with Sir
Edward, to know whether in case Sir Nicholas surrendered his Patent, the
Viscount should prefer another to the Office; Sir Edward would give Sir Francis
no other Answer than this, That he was old, and could not wrestle with my Lord.
However, after Sir Nicholas had surrendered, Sir Edward refused to admit of a
Clerk by Villiers's Nomination, but stood upon his Right; and that the Judges
of the King's Bench served the King to their Loss, and therefore he would so
dispose of the Office, that the other Judges of the King's-Bench's Salaries
should be advanced; and that hereupon he was turned out of his Place, and Sir
Henry Mountague put in, who disposed the Office as the Favorite pleased. But
tho the Favourite's Displeasure began here with Sir Edward, it did not end so,
nor the Titles of our new Favorite, for upon the 5th of January following he
was created Earl of Buckingham; however Sir Edward might have been restored
again to the place of Chief Justice, if he would have given a Bribe, but he
answered, A Judge ought not to take a Bribe, nor give a Bribe. See the second
Part of the Bishop of Lincoln's Life, fol. 120. Tit. 116.

We begin this Year 1617, (after the King had created the Earl Marquess of
Buckingham, on the first of January) with the Story of Sir Walter Raleigh's
Voyage to Guiana, which was the Cause of his Death, tho upon another score,
being condemned in the first Year of the King for High Treason in Cobham's
Conspiracy, for endeavoring to have hindered the King's coming to the Crown:
But before we proceed we'll stay a little and take a view of him.

Sir Walter was of an ancient Family, but a younger Brother; and as he was a
Person of admirable Parts, excellently adorned with Learning, not Pedantick,
but of a nobler Strain, so he had a Mind far above his Fortune, and accounted
Poverty the greatest of Misfortunes; and to advance his Fortune he became a
Courtier to Queen Elizabeth, who was as great a Discerner of Men, and their
Qualities, as any Prince in her time, or perhaps before or since; and as such,
and not as imposed by Favorites, she esteemed and preferred them; and upon
this account she entertained and favored Sir Walter.

The Queen made him Captain of her Guards, Lieutenant General of Cornwall, and
Lord Warden of the Stanneries: but these were rather Honorary Titles, than much
profitable; and being at Enmity with the Earl of Essex (the Queen's greatest
Favorite) and the whole Family of the Cecils, (who governed all in
State Affairs) these put a full stop to Sir Walter's further Rise at Court.

Sir Walter thus balk'd at Court, seeks Adventures abroad to raise his Fortunes
thence; and the Wars continuing between the Queen and the King of Spain, in the
Year 1595, he man's out a Ship to Guiana in the West Indies, and by the
Intelligence which he had with some of the Indians, and some Spanish Prisoners
he had taken, believed he had made a Discovery of several rich Mines, and had
certain Marks whereby to discover them again, if occasion should happen.

But if he got nothing else by his Voyage, he got this Advantage by it, that
adding Experience to his excellent Theory in Navigation, he justly merited the
Applause of the best Director of Sea-Affairs of his time.

After Queen Elizabeth's Death, he was kept 12 Years a Prisoner in the Tower,
where he compiled his History of the World, a Design so vast, that no other Man
of less Parts both of Body and Mind could have accomplished: And while he was
thus confined, he was the first which made public the Growth by Sea of the
Dutch, and the Riches they derived by their fishing upon the Coasts of England
and Scotland, and the Consequences which would necessarily follow, not only to
the loss of the King's Sovereignty of the British Seas, but to the Trade and
Navigation of England otherwise. After that, one Tobias Gentleman set forth
another Treatise of this Nature, and how this Fishery might be carried on from
the Ports of England, and dedicated it to the King; but the King wholly giving
himself up to Pleasure, neither minded the one, nor regarded the other.

Sir Walter had been discharged out of the Tower about two Years and an half
before, but by what means I do not find, and then Poverty stared him in the
Face (for Somerset had begged his Estate) which to him was more intolerable
than his Imprisonment, and how to extricate himself out of it was all his
Business: There was a new face of Court to what was in Queen Elizabeth' days,
and Sir Walter unknown to any of them. His being freed out of Prison was such a
Favor as any further was not to be hoped for: Happy had Sir Walter been if he
had been still confined, where in the restraint of his Person he enlarged the
Faculties of his Mind to nobler Pleasures than can be found in Sensuality, or
any Temporal Greatness; where by his Freedom pursuing these, besides other
concomitant Calamities, he brought Destruction upon himself, having first seen
his Son Walter slain in the Design he intended to raise his Fortunes by.

Tho the King was never poorer than at this time, yet the Nation was far richer
than in all the long Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by reason of the English Trade
with Spain made free by that celebrated Law of the 3d of the King, cap. 6. and
at this time, and many Years before, the King of Spain made Count Gundamor his
Legier Ambassador in England; the Count would ape the King i^ all his Humors
but his Cups, and hereby became so intimate with the King, that he discovered
all his Designs, and the Secret^ (if there were any) of the Court.

In this Posture of Affairs Sir Walter informs the King, that (...) he would
grant him a Commission, he would bring Mountains of Gold into the King's
Exchequer from Guiana: the King, who had stopped his Ears to Sir Walter's Advice
concerning the Dutch Fishe^ upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, opens them
both to Sir Walter's Project, and grants him a Commission, directed, Dilecto
and fideli meo Waltero Raleigh Militi.

But this Commission ill agreed with the Treaty made between the King and the
most renowned King of Spain, his dear and loving Brother, in the second Year of
his Reign, wherein in the first Article it was agreed, That they should use one
another with all kind and friendly Offices; and by this Treaty the English were
restrained to their Trades in Europe: For the King of Spain was as jealous of
his West Indies as the Apple of his Eye, or the Pope (...) of his Triple-Crown,
or the King of his Prerogative.

The Fame of Sir Walter, and the Expectation of the Mountai^^ of Gold to be
poured into the Exchequer by this Expedition, b^^zed it all abroad, so as
Gundamor gave the King of Spain a^ account of it; and this became so much the
more public, by how much the King could not contribute any thing but his
Commission toward it: and tho Sir Walter's Fame induced many Nobles and
Gentlemen to join with him in it, yet this being distracted and divided into so
many Interests, it went on more heavily, and became every day more known; so
that tho Sir Walter intended to have proceeded on his Voyage this Year in the
beginning of April, it was upward in August before he set out.

In his Passage a terrible Fever overtook Sir Walter, now in the 76th Year of
his Age, which yet the Strength of his Constitution overcame, to bring him to
his End by a worse Fate: When he arrived at Guiana, he found all the Marks
which he and Sir Nicholas Kemish had made, either worn out by Time, being
twenty Years before, or altered by the Spaniards, who had so long before had
notice of his Design; so that Kemish and Sir Walter fell at such odds about it,
that Kemish killed himself; besides, the Spaniards to prevent Raleigh's Design,
had built many new Fortifications unknown to Raleigh or Kemish.

Hereupon Sir Walter stormed the Town of St. Thomas, wherein he lost his Son
Walter, but took the Town and sacked it; and here the Soldiers took great
Spoil, but with little Profit to Sir Walter, or any of the Adventurers with
him: For the Soldiers and Seamen, being Reformades, and being under no severe
Discipline, kept what they had got.

Now was Sir Walter in a most desperate State, he had no Friends at Court, and,
which made the matter worse, he had disgusted all the Nobles and Gentlemen who
had engaged with him in this Expedition: he need not consult the Augurs what
should be his Fate upon his Return, to prevent which he endeavored to have got
into France, and carry his Ship with him; but the Seamen, who now had his
Fortune in Contempt, would not forsake their Wives and Children, to partake
with him in his Misfortunes, and so brought him back again into England.

It was resolved that Sir Walter's Misfortunes should lose him his Head, but
how to do it with a face of Justice was the Question; for his Commission
protected him from any Prosecution for the sacking of St. Thomas; and it would
seem strange to execute him upon the Conviction in Cobham's Conspiracy sixteen
Years before, especially since the King had discharged his Imprisoment upon it,
and had granted him a Commission, wherein he called Sir Walter his beloved and
faithful Sir Walter.

However this was the best Face could be put upon it, and upon the 28th of
October next Year 1618, Sir Walter was brought from the Tower to the
King's Bench, to show Cause why Sentence of Death should not pass upon him,
Mountague being Chief Justice, upon his former Conviction: to which Sir Walter
pleaded his Commission, which pardoned his Crime; For he could not be a Traitor
and the King's beloved and faithful Servant at one and the same time: but this
was overruled by the Court, which answered, That Treason could not be pardoned
by Implication, but by express words: And next day he had his Head cut off in
the Palace-Yard at Westminster.

In granting Sir Walter Raleigh this Commission, you may see by what an
undistinguished Power Covetousness governs the Actions of Princes, as well as
meaner Men, against their Honor and Interest; for at the same time when the
King granted this Commission, he was by Sir John Digby (after Earl of Bristol)
treating a Marriage between Prince Charles and the Infanta of Spain, upon the
Terms of a Portion of two Millions of Money with her: but if this Act of
Raleigh's, and the difficulty of raising such a Portion, put no stop to the
Progress of it, you will soon see an Accident which shall make it utterly
impracticable with the Maxims and Policy of Spain; yet so far was the King
blinded with the Covetousness of getting the Portion, that he shall put his
only Son into the Power of the Spaniards to obtain it.

Tho young Villiers and the King's Favorites governed the King without any
Control by the English, Conchino Conchini an Italian, Marquess d' Ancre and
Marshal of France, and his Wife succeeded not so well in France; for after the
Death of Henry the Fourth of France, these two governed Mary d' Medicis,
Henry's Relict and Regent, as absolutely as our young Favorite did the King,
which put the Princes of the Blood and Nobility into such a Ferment, that they
several times rose in Tumults and Arms against them: Yet such was their Power
with the Queen, that they continued as insolent after the King was declared of
Majority as before, whereupon the Feuds of the Princes of the Blood and
Nobility grew higher; hereupon Luynes, the King's Favorite, prompted the King
to take off Ancre any way, which was so ordered, that Ancre coming into the
Louvre, and reading a Letter, Vitry, Captain of the King's Guard, arrested him:
Me? said Ancre; Yes you, by the Death of God, answered Vitry, who cried out,
Kill him! whereupon he was killed by three Pistol Shots, the King owning the
Fact. But Ancre's Fate did not end with his Life, for the next day after he was
buried, the Lacquies of the Court, and Rabble of the City dug up his Coffin,
tore his Winding Sheet, and dragged his Body through the Gutters, and hanged it
upon the Gibbet he had prepared for others, where they cut off his Nose, Ears
and Genitors, which they sent to the Duke of Main, Head of the Popish League
(the great Favorite of the Parisians) and nailed his Ears to the Gates of
Paris, and burned the rest of his Body, and hurled part of the Ashes into the
River, and part into the Air; and his Wife soon after was condemned by the
Parliament of Paris for a Witch, for which she was beheaded.

In the Year 1618, a Blazon Comet appeared, and the Marquess of Buckingham, by
the removal of my Lord Admiral Nottingham (who was so in the famous Overthrow
of the Spanish Armado in 1588.) was made Lord Admiral, being as well qualified
for that Office, as he was for being Prime Minister in State Affairs.

It was no wonder that Lewis XIII th, after the Death of the Marquess d' Ancre
and his Wife, should remove his Mother from State Affairs and confine her to
Blois, to make room for Luynes, to govern him more absolutely than the Marquess
and his Wife had done his Mother; for Lewis as he was of a feeble Constitution
both of Body and Mind, so Luynes was a kind of Governor to him, appointed so by
his Father Henry the 4th, to humor him in all his Childish Toys and Pleasures:
So tho Rehoboam, when forty Years old, was governed by young Men, not in Years
but Understanding; so neither was it any great wonder, that Edward the 2d, a
young Man, should be governed by Pierce Gaveston, a Person of far more
accomplished Parts than Buckingham, for Gaveston was bred up with Edward, and
had so far by his Flatteries prevailed upon him, that Edward could not enjoy
any Pleasure in his Life without him. But for an old King, having been so for
above fifty one Years, to dote so upon a young Favorite, scarce of Age, yet
younger in Understanding, tho as old in Vices as any in his time, and to commit
the whole Ship of the Commonwealth both by Sea and Land to such a Phaeton, is
a Precedent without any Example.

But how much soever the Safety of the English Nation was endangered hereby,
yet the but mentioning any thing hereof was an Invasion of the King's
Prerogative, and meddling with State Affairs, which was above the Capacity of
the Vulgar, and even of the Parliament, as you will soon hear. But how absolute
soever the King was at Home, the face of Affairs Abroad stood quite contrary;
for the Dutch having retrieved their Cautionary Towns out of his Possession,
had the King in such Contempt, that they neither regarded him, nor his new Lord
High Admiral; and this Year, says the Author of the Address to the Freemen and
Freeholders of the Nation, in his second Preface, f. 13, 14. The Dutch never
before fished upon the Coast of England, till they had begged leave of the King
or Governor of Scarborough Castle; but this was now thought beneath the
Magnificence of the Hogan Mogans, and therefore they refused it. They had been
formerly limited by our Kings, both for the Number of their Vessels they should
fish with, and the time: Now they resolve to be their own Carvers, and in order
to that, denied the English the Sovereignty of the British Seas; and as if this
had not been enough, drew nearer and nearer upon the English Shores Year by
Year than they did in preceding Times, without leaving any Bounds for the
Country People or Natives to fish upon their Princes Coasts; and oppressed some
of his Subjects, with intent to continue their pretended Possession, and had
driven some of their great Vessels through their Nets, to deter others by like
Violence from fishing near them, etc. as Secretary Nanton, January 21, 1618.
told Carleton, the Dutch Ambassador: And to justify all this, they set out Men
of War with their Fishermen to maintain all this by Force. But it was not Fish
our new Lord Admiral cared for; nor did he care for the King's Sovereignty of
the British Seas, so as he might be Lord High Admiral in Name.

The Sails of Buckingham's Ambition were not full swelled, till to the Title of
Lord High Admiral, the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports was added to it, tho he
regarded the guarding the Coasts of England as little as he did the Sovereignty
of the British Seas: Nor did the accumulated Honors to himself alone satisfy
his Ambition, but a new Strain, his Mother, tho a professed Papist, must be
pullied up with him in a concurring Title of the same Honor, by being created
Countess of Buckingham. And being thus exalted she forsook her Husband's Bed,
which she sanctified by being converted to the Church of Rome; and as her Son
governed the King, so she governed her Son, so that, as Mr. Wilson observes,
fol. 149. tho her Son acted in appearance in all Removes and Advancements, yet
she wrought them in effect, for her Hand was in all Actions both in Church and
State; and she must needs know the Disposition of all things, when she had a
feeling of every Man's Pulse; for all Addresses were made to her first, and by
her conveyed to her Son (for he looked more after Pleasure than Profit) which
made Gundamor (who was well skilled in Court Holy Water) among his other witty
Pranks, write merrily in his Dispatches to Spain, that there were never more
hopes of England' s Conversion to Rome than now. [For there were more Oblations
offered here to the Mother than to the Son.] Then he tells the Marquess's
Behavior to attain his Ends of Ladies, how he married the Earl of Rutland's
only Daughter, the greatest Fortune in England, but being a Papist, how she was
converted by Dr. White (tho the Bishop of Litchfield attributes her Conversion
to Dr. Williams, Dean of Westminster) but was brought back to the Church of
Rome by the Countess of Buckingkam.

The next Year, if you begin at January, Queen Ann died the 22d of March, but
this is but a beginning of the King's Sorrows, at least of his Troubles: But
this no way troubled our young Favorite, but to increase the Honor of his
Family by Sir George's second Brood, in June following he had his eldest
Brother John created Baron Stroke, and Viscount Purbeck, tho I do not find he
ever gave him one Penny to maintain these Titles.

Such disgust the King had taken at the Commons representing the Grievances to
him in the last Parliament, that in his Cups, and among his Familiars upon all
Occasions, he would inveigh against Parliaments, saying, God is my Judge, I can
have no Joy of any Parliament in England; and that he was but one King, and
there were alove five hundred in the House of Commons: So as if he could have
helped it, he never would have been troubled with another: but as the Marriage
of his Daughter with the Elector Palatine was the cause of his calling the last
Parliament, so the Consequence of this Marriage put him upon the necessity of
calling another.

But because Mr. Rushworth, Franklin, and all other our Writers at home, have
either mistaken the Cause, or taken it too short, we will look into it from
abroad.

Before Ferdinand, the first of that Name, Emperor of Germany, and younger
Brother of Charles the 5th, the Kingdom of Bohemia was elective; and tho they
often chose the German Emperors their Kings after the Turks became great in
Europe, as Charles the 4th, Wenceslaus his Son, Sigismund and Albert (the first
of the Family of the House of Austria) yet in the Year 1440 they chose
Vladislaus King of Hungary, who was a Polander, to be their King, who being
slain at the great Battle of Varna against Amurath the 2d, 1444, they chose his
Son Vladislaus (an Infant) King of Hungary, whose Guardian in his Minority was
John Huniades, the famous Champion against the Turks. After Vladislaus (who
died without Issue) the Bohemians in 1456, chose George Bogebracius. After him
in 1470, they chose Vladislaus, the Son of Casimir King of Poland, who had
Issue a Son named Lewis, and a Daughter named Ann, married to Ferdinand,
Brother of Charles the 5th Emperor of Germany: this Vladislaus was likewise
chosen King of Hungary, and died in the Year 1516. his Son Lewis being then an
Infant, was chosen King of Bohemia and Hungary; and ten Years after, viz. 1526,
Lewis was overthrown and slain by Solomon the Great Turk, at the Fight at
Mohatz.

With Lewis fell the Glory and Majesty of Hungary, the Paradise of the World,
of a sweet and temperate Climate, a most healthful Air, the Soil exceeding
fruitful, yet reserving Mines of Gold and Silver in its Bowels; abounding with
Cattle, of a larger size than elsewhere, which it supplied Germany, Italy and
Turkey with; watered with the noblest Rivers of Europe, the Danube, the Drove,
Save, Tibiscus, etc. as fruitful with Fish as the Land was with Cattle,
excelling the Countries in manifold and fair built Cities and Towns.

Hungary, at the Death of Lewis, from the time when Matthias (the Son of the
famous Huniades) began to reign over them, for 70 Years enjoyed perfect Peace
within, and abroad had the Reputation of the most Warlike Nation, and of all
other the best Frontier, to stop the further Rage of the Turkish Arms in
Europe: But in this long Peace, the People, especially the Clergy, became
excessive rich, accompanied with intolerable Pride, and all other Vices which
accompany Luxury and Ease.

In this high Conceit of themselves, the Clergy (especially Tomerius) put the
King with an Army of 25000 Men only, to fight with Solomon with 300000 Turks,
twelve to one, wherein not only the King, but also Tomerius, and the Flower of
all the Nobility of Hungary fell; here the Fate of Hungary began, but did not
end here.

For Ferdinand having married Lewis his Sister, and assisted by his Brother
Charles, set up for himself to be King of Hungary in right of his Wife, which
the major part of the Nobility, not slain in the Battle of Mohatz, refuse to
submit to, and chose John Sepuce, Vaivod of Transylvania, to be their King; and
John being too weak to oppose Ferdinand, flies to Solomon for his Assistance;
so that Hungary, which before was the Barrier against the Progress of the
Turkish Power in Europe, now opens her Gates to let it in: however the Turk
being engaged in Wars against the Persians, Ferdinand prevailed against both,
and John and Ferdinand came to this Agreement, That John should enjoy that part
of Hungary whereof he was possessed during Life, and Ferdinand the whole after
his Death.

Soon after John died, leaving the Queen with Child, which proved a Son; and
the Nobility, which before chose the Father King, now choose the Son, and
joining with the Queen, call in Solomon for their Assistance, who by this Call
enters Buda (the Regal City of Hungary) and turns the Queen and her Son out,
giving him only the Title of Vaivod of Transylvania: Now was Hungary become the
Theater for above 150 Years of all those Calamities which both Civil and
Foreign Wars bring upon a Country; so that of the most fruitful and best
inhabited Kingdom in Europe, it became the most desolate and uninhabited, the
Inhabitants being made use of only to be Slaves either to imperious Soldiers,
or lazy and idle Clergymen.

If Hungary were the Paradise of the World, Bohemia was not less of Germany;
and as an Island is encompassed with Waters, so is Bohemia environed with
Mountains, which, like a Garden with Walls, encompassed a most rich, pleasant
and healthful Kingdom; and to this Kingdom, as well as that of Hungary, does
Ferdinand lay Claim in right of his Wife; and being assisted by his Brother
Charles, and further from the Assistance of the Turks, he forced the Bohemians
to submit to his Empire; but this was not only during his and his Wife's Life,
and her Heirs, but to his Heirs Male, tho he claimed in right of his Wife. And
herein you must observe, That the Bohemians at this time, as well as their
Ancestors before, were Enemies to the Popish Tyranny and Heresies, so that
Zisca, the famous Captain of the Hussites, about one hundred Years before, in
many Battles, in Opposition to the Popish Tyranny, overthrew the Emperor
Sigismond; and Ferdinand was a zealous Maintainer of the Popish Supremacy and
Usurpations in Religion as well as Tyranny.

Ferdinand had Issue two Sons, Maximilian who succeeded him in the Empire, as
well as in the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary, and Charles the first Archduke
of Austria. Maximilian had Issue Maximilian, Rodolph, Matthias and Albert,
Governor and Prince of the Spanish Netherlands, with whom King James in the
second Year of his Reign made the League before spoken of.

Rodolph in 1576, succeeded Maximilian in the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary,
as well as in the Empire: This Rodolph, Helvicus says, was a Prince most worthy
of all Praise, the Refuge of good Learning, Ensign of Peace and Clemency; and
in the Year 1609, granted Liberty of Conscience to the Bohemians and Austrians.

Matthias, Rodolph's Brother, succeeded him in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the
Empire in 1614; but Matthias having no Issue, and the Issue Male of Maximilian
ending in him, a Question might arise about the Succession to the Crowns of
Hungary and Bohemia: for admitting the Succession were hereditary, then by the
Laws of Inheritance these Crowns would devolve upon the King of Spain, Philip
the Third, whose Mother Anna was Daughter to Maximilian the Second, and
therefore to be preferred before Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, descended
from Charles, Maximilian's younger Brother: To prevent this, the Popish Party,
jealous of the Consequences, prevail upon, or rather forced the Emperor
Matthias to surrender his Title to the Kingdom of Bohemia to his Cousin
Ferdinand, a zealous Assertor of the Supremacy of the Church of Rome.

The Bohemians having this farther strain of their Crowns being disposed of to
another, and dreading the Disposition of this Ferdinand, assembled at Prague
(the Regal City of Bohemia) and demand a General Diet of the Kingdom to bring
their Grievances thither; herein they did not apply themselves to Ferdinand, as
their King, but to Matthias the Emperor; but Matthias denied, or deferred it
(to use Nani's words, who, tho a Venetian, seems to me to be very partial
against the Bohemians) whereupon the Bohemians upon the 23d of May 1618, parted
in a Rout, and believing the Counts Martinitz, Slavata, and Philip Fabritus,
most zealous Papists, to be the Motives of Matthias his Denial, flung them out
of the Windows of the Castle of Prague, but they escaped by a Miracle, as Nani
says, lib. 4. p. 127.

The Count de la Tour in this Commotion, makes a most pathetick Oration to the
Bohemians, wherein he sets forth how the Privileges of the Kingdom were
violated, and the Exercise of their Religion forbid, and made to descend upon
the Will of Princes: That the usurped Crown of Bohemia passed from Head to
Head, as the Revenue and Inheritance of one House; and to establish an
everlasting Tyranny, being ravished before its time from Successors, in spite
of Death is never suffered to be vacant, etc. And then goes on, What have we
not yet suffered? The use of Life comes now to be denied us, and the Vsufruit
of our Souls contested; but all our past Miseries will not be able to call to
Remembrance but some imperfect Representations of the Calamities to come: In
sum, Rodolph lived amongst us, Matthias has reaped us as the first Fruits of
his ambitious Desires; (for Matthias had forced Rodolph to resign the Crown of
Bohemia to him, as Ferdinand had done to Matthias) But what may we expect from
Ferdinand, unknown to us, and in himself rigorous, directed by Spanish
Counsels, and governed by that sort of Religious Priests and People, who
detest, with an equal Aversion, our Liberty and Belief? He was born and bred up
in the Abhorrence of us Protestants, and why should we be so forward to make
trial of it? Since the Persons banished, the Families displanted, the Goods
violently taken away, demonstrate too cruelly to us, that he would abolish our
very Being, if he could as easily command Nature as he uses Force, Woe to you
Bohemians, to your Children, to your Estates, to your Consciences, if you
suffer this Ferdinand to keep his footing in the Throne: And when will you
attempt to shake off the Yoke, if you have not Courage to do it at a time when
without Power, without Guard, the Kingdom is in your own Power, and that you
have two Kings to oppose you, one whereof is fallen, and the other to^ters?
etc. which you may read at large in the fourth Book of Nani; and concludes, The
Lot is drawn, Liberty, or the Hangman: If Conquerors, we shall be Just, Free
and Princes; if overcome, Per^idious, Perjured and Rebels.

The Inhabitants of Prague before disposed, took fire at this Oration of De la
Tour* and chose a Magistracy of Thirty, with the Title of Directors, to carry
on a Government in opposition to Ferdinand; and what happened in Prague, was no
sooner divulged through the Kingdom, but all was in a Revolt, drawing also the
Provinces of Lusatia and Silesia, adjoining to them, into their Confederacy.

Matthias had a Counselor named Gleselius, upon whose Advice and Integrity
Matthias relied above all other Men, who advised Matthias by all fair means
possible to compose the Commotions of the Bohemians; for if he should come to a
Rupture with them, and Matthias be compelled to raise an Army, the Interest of
Ferdinand was such, not only in the Spanish Councils, but the Popish in
Germany, and the hereditary Countries, that he would command it, and thereby be
in a Condition to ravish the Empire from him, as he had done the Crown of
Bohemia; and Matthias feeling yet this Flesh-wound, feared that mortal one, if
Ferdinand were put on the Head of an Army.

Hereupon Ferdinand, without any regard to the Majesty and Authority of
Matthias, resolved to arrest Gleselius, and separate him from giving any
farther Advice to Matthias; and one day being called to Council, where the King
was with one Ognate, Gleselius was seized upon by d' Ampiere and Prainer, and
put into a close Coach, and guarded by an hundred Horse, hurried away to
Inspurg.

Matthias was astonished at this bold Insolence, which struck at his Authority
in the tenderest part, and now without any Council, left in the Hands of his
Cousin, who designed to rise out of his Ruin, became so overwhelmed with
Melancholy, that both asleep and awake, he could not be withheld from crying
out with a loud Voice, That Gleselius might be brought back again, but all to
no purpose, for he shall never live to see him again; and in these Agonies he
had some thoughts to have cast himself into the Arms of the Bohemians, but it
was not in his Power to do it. These things were in 1618, at the end whereof
Matthias died.

These Commotions in Bohemia and other parts of the Empire, increased after the
Death of Matthias, so that the Election of an Emperor was controverted till the
30th of August 1619, when Ferdinand was chosen, having by large Promises
prevailed upon George Duke of Saxony to vote for him.

But however, the Bohemians were stiff in opposing his Election to the Kingdom
of Bohemia, and offered the Crown to Charles, Duke of Savoy, tho a Popish
Prince, and who had a better Title to the Crown of Bohemia than Ferdinand; his
Mother being a younger Daughter of Maximilian the 2d, but prevailed upon by the
Pope and Spanish Councils, he refused it, as did the Duke of Saxony; and then
they chose Frederick Count Palatine, hoping to receive great Assistance from
King James his Father-in-law, but were mistaken in the Man.

Upon this Election Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury was all on Fire, to
persuade the King to assist his Son-in-law, and to that purpose wrote a long
persuasive Apology to the King concerning it, which you may read at large in
Rushworth's Collections, fol. 12. but the King and Bishop were not of the same
Opinion; for the King would have it, that the Election of his Son-in-law was
upon the Score of Religion, not Right, and therefore dissuaded him from it; but
being a mighty Man of Embassies, as well as Words, Nani says fol. 138.
published, that he would assist his Son-in-law, and dispatched an Ambassador to
Vienna, proposing that Bohemia should remain to Frederick: But if his Authority
by words would not settle his Son-in-law, King James could not go further.
Frederick thus forsaken by his Father-in-law, raised upon his own account 10000
Foot and 2000 Horse, and entered Prague; and was crowned King on the Fourth of
November 1619, and was no sooner crowned, but laid the Foundation of his own
Ruin: for the Counts De la Tour and Mansfield, who had raised two Armies and
kept up the Bohemians, till the King's coming to Prague, were not only
neglected, but the Prince of Anhalt, whom the King brought with him, was made
not only Generalissimo of the Army the King brought, but of the Armies raised
by de la Tour and Mansfield; besides, the King, tho he had got a vast Treasure,
was niggardly in paying the Soldiers, which necessitated them to take free
Quarters upon the Bohemians.

In this disgusted State with the Bohemians, the King having withd^awn so great
Forces out of the Palatinate, left it exposed to the Ravages of the Spaniards,
who under the Command of Ambrose, Count Spinola, General of the Spanish Army,
under the Archduke Albert (whom the King in the Treaty of the 2d Year of his
Reign calls His renowned and dear Brother) made terrible Wars in the Palatinate.

Here you may see how unhappy King James was in the Peace or Truce he procured
the King of Spain, and the Archdukes to make with the Dutch in 1609, for
twelve Years; for in this Interval, the Dutch did not only retrieve their
Cautionary Towns out of the King's Possession, but the Truce still continuing,
the Archduke had not only an Opportunity to assist the Emperor, but to send
Spinola with an Army to invade the Palatinate; and the Emperor by an imperial
Ban, had proscribed the King's Son-in-law a Traitor and Rebel to the Empire,
and thereupon forfeited his Electoral Dignity and Estate, which he gave to
Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria, and committed the Execution of it to the Archduke
Albert, the Elector of Saxony, and Duke of Bavaria.

King James was startled at this Return to his Proposition at Vienna, that his
Son-in-law shall possess the Crown of Bohemia; and now complains that his
Childrens Patrimony would be lost, and that he would not sit still, and take no
further Care in it, and therefore sent another Ambassador to the Archduke at
Brussels, to expostulate the matter; and this was the utmost he was able to do,
and was forced to strain his Credit for it: but lest this should not do, tho
sore against his Will, he resolved to call another Parliament, and try their
Good Will toward it.

But that we may take all things before us, as they stood at the Meeting of
this Parliament, the King notwithstanding the Attempt of Sir Walter Raleigh
upon the Spanish West Indies, had still by Sir John Digby continued the Treaty
of Marriage between the Prince of Wales, and the Infanta Maria of Spain, with
the same Confidence of Success, as if the King of Spain had not been concerned
in Sir Walter's Expedition: But the Court of Spain, to check the King's forward
Desires, demand high Privileges for the Romanists, which amounted to little
less than a Toleration; and that the Pope must be satisfied in his Conscience,
before he could grant a Dispensation for the Infanta to marry with an Heretic
Prince; both which the King and Prince agreed to, and were signed by them both,
though afterward.

But however the Agreement between the Pope, King and Prince was not much
known, the Liberty granted to the Roman Catholics was generally taken notice
of; and beside, the Generality of the Nation, notwithstanding the Benefits
received by the Spanish Trade, still retained an Aversion to the Spaniards,
which made the Spanish Match hated and feared by them; and how much more they
hated and feared the Spaniards, so much more zealous were they for the King's
Assistance of his Son-in-law in his Title to the Kingdom of Bohemia, as well as
in the Preservation of the Palatinate, now invaded by the Emperor and King of
Spain.

Thus things stood when the King's Necessities forced him to the unwilling
Resolution of calling another Parliament: but they did not stay here, for upon
the 9th of November happened the fatal Battle at Prague, fought by above 60000
Combatants, wherein, tho the Bohemians were superior in Number, the
Imperialists were in Discipline and Valor; and tho the King was the principal
Object of the War, yet he thought not fit to engage in the Battle, but stood at
a distance out of Harm's way to observe the Event of it.

After two hours Fight, the Bohemians were utterly overthrown and routed, 6000
being killed, and more taken Prisoners, with all their Colors, Baggage, Guns
and Ammunition, and scarce 300 of the Imperialists killed; the Prince of Anhalt
was the first who gave the King notice of his Overthrow, with Advice to provide
for his Safety, which the King thought to do by flying back into Prague, but
found no Safety there.

For the Duke of Bavaria, General of the Imperialists, followed him close, and
summons him to surrender the City, and quit his Claim to the Kingdom: The King
demands 24 Hours respite to answer, but Bavaria only grants him 8, to which
without any Reply, next Morning the King, with the Queen, big with Child, and
their Children fly out of Prague, and by unfrequent Ways, by almost a Miracle,
escape to Vratislavia, leaving the Heads of his Party in Prague to be Victims,
after an horrible Sacrifice, to their enraged and bloody Enemies, and all that
inestimable Wealth, which he had got together, and was so niggardly of to his
Soldiers, to be a Prey to his Enemies also.

In this disasterous State, Frederick driven out of Bohemia, the Palatinate
invaded and overrun by Spinola, and having lost all his Wealth, as well as
Kingdom and Country, retires with his Wife and Children into Holland; more
supported by the Dutch, Prince of Orange, and some of the English Nobility, and
Archbishop Abbot, than by the King, whose Bounty lay another way; and since he
could not obtain Aids from his Father-in-law for the Preservation of his
Country, yet he became a Suitor to the King to solicit the Imperial Court for
the Conservation of the Palatinate, which the King did, but did him no good,
and further the King would not go; but vainly promised to himself he could do
it, by the Marriage of his Son to the Infanta of Spain, and get two Millions of
Money for her Portion to boot.

Though the English Nobility patiently truckled under the Ambition and
Covetousness of Buckingham, yet the same Genius was not found in the French
Princes of the Blood, and Nobility, under the prodigious Pride, and exorbitant
Promotions of Luynes: to restrain them, or it may be, to force Luynes from the
King's Favor, the Queen Mother made a League with the Count of Soissons, (a
Prince of the Blood) the Count Vendosm and Grand Prior of France, (both natural
Sons of Henry the 4th of France) against him, and the Dukes of Longuevil, Main
and Espernoon joined with them, so did those of the reformed Religion under the
Duke of Rohan, and his Brother Sobiez, Princes of the Blood of the Line of
Navarr.

But these Commotions, being sudden and ungrounded, were soon suppressed, and the
King was reconciled to the Queen and Popish Nobility, and the greatest Loss
fell upon those of the Reformed Religion, who lost St. John de Angely, Gergeau,
Sancerre and Saumur, which were all the Cautionary Places which the Reformed
had upon the Loire, and also Suilly, Merac and Caumont. King James, that he
might as much appear for the Reformed, as he had done for his Son-in-law, sent
Sir Edward Herbert, after Baron Herbert of Cherberry, his Ambassador into
France, to mediate a Peace between the King and the Reformed, and in Case of
Refusal, to use Menaces, which Sir Edward bravely performed, to Luynes, and
after to the French King himself; which being misrepresented to King James, Sir
Edward was recalled, and the Earl of Carlisle was sent Ambassador into France
in his room; and the Earl finding the Truth to be otherwise than was
represented by Luynes, acquainted the King with it: Hereupon Sir Edward kneeled
to the King, and humbly besought him, that since the Business between Luynes
and him was become public, that a Trumpeter, if not an Herald on Sir Edward's
Part might be sent to Luynes, to tell him, That he had made a false Relation to
the King of the Passages between them; and that Sir Edward would demand Reasons
of him with Sword in Hand on that Point: but the King was not pleased to grant
it; and here began the Downfall of the Power of the Reformed in France, and the
Rise of the French Grandeur by Land.

In this rotten and teachy State of Affairs, before the Meeting of the
Parliament, the King issued out a Proclamation, (of which he was as prodigal,
as bountiful to his Favorites) forbidding Men to talk of State Affairs (as if
his Favorite Buckingham, who governed all, was so mindful of them;) nor was
the King less jealous of the Parliament's meddling with State Affairs, than of
the Peoples talking of them out of Parliament, so that the King upon the
opening of the Parliament the 30th of January, told them of the Constituting
Parts of a Parliament, and how it was twelve Years since he had received any
Aids from Parliaments; and how that though he had prosecuted a Treaty of
Marriage between the Prince and Infanta of Spain, which if it were not for the
Benefit of the Established Religion in England, and of the Reformed abroad, he
was not worthy to be their King; and though he had refused to assist his
Son-in-law in his Election to the Kingdom of Bohemia, being a matter of
Religion contrary to what he had wrote against the Jesuits, yet that he could
not sit still, and see the Patrimony of his Children torn from them by the
Emperor, and therefore was resolved to raise an Army next Summer; and that he
would engage his Crown, his Blood and Soul for the Recovery of the Palatinate:
And having before told the Commons of their Duty to petition the King, and
acquaint him with their Grievances, but not to meddle with his Prerogative; he
after tells them, that who shall hasten after Grievances, and desire to make
himself popular, has the Spirit of Satan.

The Parliament, notwithstanding the violation of their Privileges the last
Parliament; by the King's imprisoning their Members; yet being zealous to
assist the King against the Emperor, and King of Spain, in favor of the
Palsgrave; and though the Nation at no time before so much abounded in
Corruption and Grievances, yet to humor the King, inverted the Methods of
Proceedings in Parliament; and the Commons granted the King two entire
Subsidies, and the Clergy three, before they entered upon Grievances, which so
pleased the King, that in a Speech in the House of Lords; he declared it was
more acceptable to him than Millions, it showing he reigned in the Love and
Affections of his Subjects, but he did not long hold in this Mind.

At this Sessions of Parliament, (if it may be called so, no Act but that of
the Subsidies passing) Sir Giles Mompesson and Sir Francis Michel; were
sentenced and degraded, for erecting new Inns and Alehouses, and exacting
great Sums of Money by pretense of Letters Patents granted for that purpose;
Sir Giles fled, and so escaped a farther Punishment, but Sir Francis was
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment in Finsbury Goal. Sir Francis Bacon,
Viscount Verulam; and Lord Chancellor, was likewise censured, deposed, fined,
and committed Prisoner to the Tower for Bribery; and Bacon's Fall was Doctor
Williams's Rise, Dean of Westminster, to be Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.

But the Commons debating the Growth of Popery, and the dangerous Consequences
of the Spanish Match, contrary to the King's Speech and Inclinations, he upon
the Fourth of June (which the Commons took to be an Invasion upon their
Privileges) by Commission adjourned them to the 14th of November, and by a
Proclamation forbid the talking of State Affairs. In this recess the Spaniards
took Stein in the lower Palatinate, and the Duke of Bavaria all the Upper
Palatinate, and the Arms of Lewis prevailed more upon the Reformed in France;
yet none of these prevailed upon the King, further than to mediate a Suspension
of Arms, in order to treat an Accommodation between the Emperor and his
Son-in-law, and the French King and the Reformed, which had no other Effect,
but to make the King contemptible in Germany as well as France, his Power and
Authority being bounded up only in Words and Messages, which the King's
ill-Willers blazing abroad, cost the King more than would have recovered the
Palatinate.

However the King abated nothing of his Pleasure and dissolute Life, but
according to the usual Methods of his Life, in the Autumn went to New Market to
divert himself with Hunting, from the trouble of Affairs, either foreign or
domestic, leaving his Favorite Buckingham Dictator of all his Affairs, when
the Parliament met again: But how remiss soever the King was of his Affairs,
the Commons were not, perhaps heated by their Adjournment, and alarmed at the
Progress of Lewis against the Reformed in France; and of the Emperor, and King
of Spain, not only in the Palatinate, but all over the Empire against the
Protestants; and also with the Liberty which the Popish Party took, upon the
hopes they conceived would accrue to them by the Spanish Match still as
fervently pursued by the King and Prince as ever, the King being encouraged
hereto by the Earl of Bristol, the King's Ambassador in Spain, but more by the
Spanish Ambassador Gundamor here: A Person, as N^ni observes, who with a
stupendous Acuteness of Wit, so confounded pleasant things with serious, that
it was not easy to be discerned when he spoke of Business, and when he rallied;
he had so insinuated himself into the Mind of the King, that he need not take
any further care of restoring his Son-in-law to the Palatinate, but by Prince
Charles his marrying with the Infanta, the Treaty whereof now is 8 Years old,
being brought to Maturity and Perfection so soon as the Pope should grant a
Dispensation.

The House of Commons hereupon, being ill satisfied with the Distribution of
the Subsidies before granted to the King, resolve to proceed upon Grievance,
before they granted more Supplies, and to that end drew up a long and
particular Remonstrance, which you may read at large in Mr. Rushworth's
Collections, fol. 40, 41, 42. setting forth the dangerous State of the Nation,
and of Christendom, by the Alliances of the Pope and Popish Princes, especially
the King of Spain, chief of the League, and what dismal Consequences would
follow by the Marriage of the Prince with the Infanta, etc. yet resolve to
grant the King another Subsidy for carrying on the War for the Recovery of the
Palatinate; but withal humbly desired his Majesty to pass such Bills, as shall
be prepared for his Honor, and the general Good of his People, accompanied
with a general Pardon as is usual; concluding with their daily Prayers to the
Almighty, the great King of Kings, for a Blessing upon their Endeavors, and
for his Majesty's long and happy Reign over them, and for his Childrens
Children after him, for many and many Generations.

The Noise of this Remonstrance so disturbed the King in his Pleasures at
New Market, which all his Cares for the Preservation of his Son-in-law's
Patrimony could not do, that upon the 3d of December he wrote to Sir Thomas
Richardson, Speaker of the House of Commons, this Letter, which because of the
Rarity of it by any King of England to his Parliament before, we will give
verbatim.

Mr. Speaker,
WE have heard by diverse Reports to Our great Grief, that Our distance from the
Houses of Parliament, caused by our Indisposition of Health, has imboldned the
fiery and popular Spirits of some of the Commons, to argue and debate publicly
of Matters far above their Reach and Capacity, tending to Our high Dishonor,
and breach of Prerogative Royal. These are therefore to command you to make
known in Our Name unto the House, that none therein from henceforth do meddle
with any thing concerning Our Government, and deep Matters of State, and namely
not to deal with Our dear Son's Match with the Daughter of Spain, nor to touch
the Honor of that King, or any other of Our Friends and Confederates; and also
not to meddle with any Man's Particulars, which have their due Motion in any of
Our ordinary Courts of Justice. And whereas We hear they have sent a Message to
Sir Edwin Sandys, to know the Reasons of his late Restraint, you shall in Our
Name resolve them, that it is not for any Misdemeanor of his in Parliament; but
to put them out of doubt of any Question of that nature, that may arise among
them hereafter, you shall resolve them in our Name, that We think our self very
free and able to punish any Man's Misdemeanors in Parliament, as well during
their Sitting as after, which We mean not to spare hereafter, upon any Occasion
of any Man's insolent Behavior there that shall be ministered unto Us: And if
they have already touched any of these Points, which We have forbidden, in any
Petition of their which is to be sent to Us, it is Our Pleasure that you tell
them, That except they reform it before it comes to our Hands, We will not
deign the Hearing nor Answering of it.


The Commons having a public Trust reposed in them, and truly apprehensive of
the dangerous State of the Protestants in Christendom, as well as of the
Kingdom; and that not only the King's remisness in taking care of both, but the
Designs he prosecuted, were equally dangerous to both; in a most humble and
supplicant Remonstrance, represent to the King his recommendation of the
Affairs of the Palatinate to them, and the dangerous State of Christendom: in
discourse whereof they did not assume to themselves any Power to determine of
any part thereof, nor intend to encroach or intrude upon the Sacred Bounds of
his Royal Authority, to whom, and to whom only, they do acknowledge it does
belong to resolve of Peace and War, and of the Marriage of the most noble
Prince, his Son; but as his most loyal and humble Subjects do represent these
things to his Majesty, which otherwise could not, so clearly come to his
Knowledge, etc.

They beseech his Majesty that they may not undeservedly suffer by the
Misinformation of partial and uncertain Reports, which are ever unfaithful
Intelligencers; and not give Credit to private Reports against all, or any of
their Members, whom the House has not censured, until his Majesty has been
truly informed from themselves, that they may stand upright in his Majesty's
Grace and good Opinion, than which no worldly Consideration can be dearer to
them, etc. Which you may read at large in Mr. Rushworth's Collections, Fol. 44,
45, 46.

The King having cast the Sheet-Anchor of all his Hopes upon the Spanish Match,
whereby he should not only re-establish his Son-in-law in the Palatinate, and
get more Money than he could hope for in Parliament, furled all his Sails, and
resolved to ride out this Storm of the Commons; notwithstanding his Pleasures
and Indisposition of Health, in a long Invective against them in a Scotis^
Dialect, which you may read at large in Rushworth's Collections; the Heads
whereof were,

1. That he must repeat the Words of Queen Elizabeth to a^ insolent
Proposition, made by a Polonian Ambassador, Legatu^ expectabamus, Heraldum
accepimus, that he had great Reason to have expected better from them, for the
37 Monopolies and Patents called in by him since the last Recess; and for the
three, whereof Mompesson and Michel were censured: but of these he heard no
news; but on the contrary, Complaints of Religion, tacitly implying his ill
Government.

2. That the taxing him with trusting to uncertain Reports, and partial
Informations concerning their Proceedings, was needless, being an old and
experienced King, and in his Conscience the freest of any King alive from
hearing or trusting to idle Reports* That in the Body of their Petition, they
usurp upon his Prerogative Royal, and meddle with things far above their Reach,
and then protest to the contrary; as if a Robber should take away* Man's Purse,
and then protest he meant not to rob him.

3. That his Recommendation of the War for regaining the Palatinate, was no
other than if it could not be recovered otherwise; which can be no Inference,
that he must denounce War against the King of Spain, break his dearest Son's
Match, and match him to one of our Religion; which is all one as if we should
tell: Merchant we had great need to borrow Money of him for raising an Army,
and that thereupon it should follow, that we were bound to follow his Advice in
the Direction of the War: That this Plen^potency of theirs, invests them with
all Power upon Earth, lacking nothing but the Pope's, to have the Keys both of
Heaven and Purgatory: That it was like the Puritans in Scotland, to bring all
Causes within their Jurisdiction; or like Bellarmine's distinction of the
Pope's Power over Kings, in ordine ad Spiritualia, whereby he gives them all
temporal Jurisdiction over them.

4. That he expected the Commons would have given him Thanks for the long
maintaining a settled Peace in all his Dominions, when all our Neighbors about
are in a miserable Combustion of War; but Dulce Bellum inexpertis.

5. That he had ever professed to restore his Children to their Patrimony by
War or Peace, and that by his Credit and Intervention with the King of Spain
and Archdukes, he had preserved the lower Palatinate from the farther
conquering for one whole Year; and that his Lord Ambassador Digby had
extraordinarily secured Heidelburg.

6. That he could not couple the War of the Palatinate with the Cause of
Religion, and that the War was not begun for Religion, but only by his
Son-in-law's hasty and rash Resolution to take to himself the Crown of Bohemia;
and that this Usurpation of it from the Emperor had given the Pope, and that
Party, an Occasion to oppress and curb many thousands of our Religion in diverse
parts of Christendom.

Here I desire that the Reader take notice of the Case of the Bohemians, as it
is set forth by Baptista Nani, fol. 126. Anno 1618, after they had Liberty of
Conscience granted them by Rodolph the Emperor, and that Ferdinand had no
color of Title to the Kingdom of Bohemia, but as he forced the Emperor
Matthias to surrender it to him.

Ferdinand, says he, bred up in the Catholic Faith, detested all sorts of
Error; and therefore by how much not succeeding to the Father, he found the
Patrimonial Countries encumbered with false Opinions, so much more with signal
Piety had he applied himself to promote the true Worship, with such Success,
that at last those Provinces rejoiced to be restored to the Bosom of the
Ancient Religion: But this was not without some Sort of Severity, so that many
not to leave their Errors were constrained to abandon their Country, and sell
their Estates, living elsewhere in Discontent and Poverty; and others driven
away by force, and their Estates confiscate, saw them not without Rancour,
possessed by new Masters; and all this done in the Life of Matthias: So that
Ferdinand, as his Title was Usurpation and Force, so was the Exercise of it
Tyranny in the highest Degree, to the Overthrow of the Bohemian Laws and
Liberties; therefore the Original of the Bohemian War was not founded in the
Election of Frederick to be King, for Ferdinand perpetrated these things two
Years before.

Nani goes on and says, in the Empire therefore, in which the Religion no less
than the Genius is for Liberty, there appeared great Apprehensions, that where
Ferdinand should get the Power, he would exercise the same Reformation, and
impose a Yoke so much the more heavy, by how much standing in need of Money,
and the Counsels of Spain, he should be governed by the Rules and Maxims of
that Nation, so hateful to the Germans: So that it was not the Election of
Frederick to be King of Bohemia, that opened that Gate for the Pope and his
Party, for curbing and oppressing of many thousand of our Religion in diverse
parts of Christendom, as the King said, for it was set wide open before by
Ferdinand.

7. That the Commons Debates concerning the War with Spain and Spanish Match,
were Matters out of their Sphere, and therefore Ne suitor ultra Crepida^, and
are a Diminution to him and his Crown in Foreign Countries: That the Commons in
their Petition had attempted the highest Points of Sovereignty, except the
stamping of Coin.

8. That for Religion, he could give no other Answer than in general, that the
Commons may rest secure, he will never be weary to do all he can for the
Propagation of ours, and repressing of Popery; but the manner they must remit
to his Care and Providence.

9. That for the Commons Request of making this a Sessions, and granting a
General Pardon, it shall be their fault if it be not done; But the Commons
required such Particulars in it, that he must be well advised, lest he give
back double or treble of that he was to receive by their Subsidy; but thinks
fit that of his free Grace he sends down a Pardon from the higher House
containing such Points as he shall think fittest.

10. He thinks it strange the Commons should make so bad and unjust a
Commentary upon some Words in his former Letter, as if he thereby meant to
restrain the Commons of their ancient Privileges and Liberties in Parliament,
wherein he discharges them from meddling with Matters of Government and
Mysteries of State, namely Matters of War and Peace, or his dearest Son's Match
with Spain, or that they meddle with things which have their ordinary Course in
the Courts of Justice: That a Scholar would be ashamed so to mis-judg and
misplace Sentences in another Man's Book, for in the coupling these Sentences
they plainly leave out Mysteries of State, and so err, a been divisis ad mala
conjuncta: that for the former part concerning Mysteries of State, he plainly
restrained his meaning to the Particulars which were after mentioned; and for
the latter, he confesses he meant it by Sir Edward Coke's foolish Business, and
therefore it had well become him, especially being his Servant, and one of his
Council, to have complained to him, which he never did, tho he was ordinarily
at Court, and never had Access refused him.

Sir Edward Coke's Business was a Conspiracy against him by my Lord Chancellor
Bacon, one Lepton and Goldsmith, after he was discharged from being Chief
Justice, to have exhibited an Information against him in the Star Chamber, or
have sent him into Ireland: The Business was debated in the House of Commons,
but Sir Edward complained not, nor appeared to speak in it.

If the King were uneasy with the Commons Remonstrance, the Commons were not
less with the King's Answer, and at the Resolution taken at Court, to adjourn
the Parliament to the 8th of January next, which the Commons took to be a
Violation of their Privileges, and an Omen of their Dissolution; whereupon they
entered this Protestation.

THE Commons now Assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto,
concerning sundry Liberties, Franchises and Privileges of Parliament, among
others here mentioned, do make this Protestation following, That the Liberties,
Franchises, Privileges and Jurisdictions of Parliament, are the ancient and
undoubted Birthright and Inheritance of the Subjects of England, and that the
ardueus and urgent Affairs concerning the King, State and Defense of the Realm,
and of the Church of England, and the maintenance and making of Laws, and
Redress of Grievances and Mischiefs which may happen within this Realm, are
proper Subjects, and Matter of Counsel and Debate in Parliament; and that in
the handling and proceeding of those Businesses, every Member of the House of
Parliament has, and of right ought to have freedom of Speech, to propound,
treat, reason, and bring to Conclusion the same: And that the Commons in
Parliament have like Liberty and Freedom to treat of these Matters in such
order, as in their Judgment they shall think fittest: And that every Member in
the said House, has likewise freedom from all Impeachment, Imprisonments and
Molestation (other than by Censure of the House it self) for, or concerning any
speaking, reasoning or declaring any Matter or Matters touching the Parliament,
or Parliament-business. And that if any of the said Members be complained of,
and questioned for any thing done or said in Parliament, the same is to be
showed to the King, by the Advice and Consent of all the Commons assembled in
Parliament, before the King give Credence to any private Information.

If the King was alarmed at the Commons Remonstrance, this Protestation of the
Commons was such an Invasion upon his Sacred Prerogative Royal, that neglecting
his Pleasures and Health, which he took such care to preserve, by retiring into
the Country; up he now comes to London, and upon the 30th of December, and in a
full Assembly of Council, and in the Presence of the Judges, declares the said
Protestation invalid, annulled and void, and of none effect, and Manu sua
propria, takes the said Protestation out of the Journal Book of the Clerk of
the Commons House of Parliament, and commanded an Act of Council to be made
thereupon, and this Act to be entered in the Register of the Council-Causes.

And on the 6th of January the King by his Proclamation dissolved the
Parliament, Showing that the meeting, continuing and dissolving of Parliaments
does so peculiarly belong to him, that he needs not give any account thereof to
any other; yet he thought fit to declare, that in the Dissolution of this
Parliament he had the Advice and Uniform Consent of his whole Council; and that
some particular Members of the Commons took inordinate Liberty, not only to
treat of his High Prerogatives, and sundry things not fit to be argued in
Parliament, but also to speak with less respect of Foreign Princes: That they
spent their time in disputing Privileges, and descanting upon the Words and
Syllables of his Letters and Messages; and that these evil-temper'd Spirits
sowed Tares among the Corn, and by their Carriage have imposed upon him a
necessity of discontinuing this present Parliament, without putting to it the
Name or Period of a Session. And lastly, he declared, That tho the Parliament
were broken off, yet he intended to govern well, and shall be glad to lay hold
on the first occasion to call another.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of this Reign to King James his Death.
THE first Act the King did to make good his Promise in his Proclamation to
govern well, was, his Commitment of Sir Edward Coke and Sir Robert Philips to
the Tower, and Mr. Seldom, Mr. Pym and Mr. Mallery to other Prisons; and Sir
Dudley Diggs, Sir Thomas Crew, Sir Nathaniel Rich, and Sir James Parrot into
Ireland. Sir Thomas Overbury had a Cause assigned for his Commitment to the
Tower, but yet it was observed an Hardship upon him, without any Precedent,
that he should be confined a close Prisoner for a Contempt; whereas these were
not only confined, but close Prisoners, (for ought I can find, I am well
assured Sir Edward Coke was) not only without any Cause showed, but for
performing a public Trust reposed in them. Nor did the Commons only suffer
under this Fury of the King for performing their Duty, but the Noble Earl of
Southampton was imprisoned for his freedom of Speech, and for rebuking
Buckingham for his disorderly speaking in the House of Lords, as you may see in
the first Part of Keeper Williams's Life, fol. 62. tit. 8.

But of all others, this Storm fell most severely upon Sir Edward Coke, and by
several ways his Ruin was contrived: First, By sealing up the Locks and Doors
of his Chambers in London, and in the Temple. Secondly, By seizing his Papers,
by virtue whereof they took away his several Securities for Money, as a learned
Lawyer, Mr. Hawles, has observed. Thirdly, It was debated in Council, when the
King would have brought in the General Pardon, containing such Points as he
should think fittest, by what ways they might exclude him from the benefit of
it, either by preferring a Bill against him before the Publication of it, or by
excepting him by Name. Fourthly, If the King's Name were used by Northampton
and Somerset to confine Sir Thomas Overbury so close, that neither his Father
nor Servants should come at him; so was the King's Name used here, that none of
Sir Edward Coke's Children or Servants should come at him; and of this I am
assured from one of Sir Edward's Sons and his Wife. Fifthly, In this
Confinement, the King sued him in the King's Bench for 30000 l. 2 s. 6 d. for
an old Debt pretended to be due from Sir William Hatton to Queen Elizabeth; and
this was prosecuted by Sir Henry Yelverton, with all Severity imaginable: but
herein the King's Counsel were not all of one piece, for when a Brief against
Sir Edward was brought to Sir John Walter (I think) then Attorney General, he
returned it again with this Expression, Let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my
Mouth whenever I open it against Sir Edward Coke; however after the Trial, the
Verdict was against the King.

Mr. Seldom got his Liberty by the favor of my Lord Keeper Williams; but the
rest must abide by it till the breaking of the Spanish Match necessitated the
King to call another Parliament.

But lest the King's Word in his Proclamation for governing well should not
pass current, and without dispute, the King ordered the Judges in their
Circuits to give this in their Charges, That the King taking notice of the
Peoples liberal speaking of Matters far above their reach, and also taking
notice of their licentious undutiful Speeches touching State and Government,
notwithstanding several Proclamations to the contrary, the King was resolved no
longer to pass it without severest Punishment; and thereupon to do exemplary
Justice where they find any such Offenders.

The King having in the ninth Year of his Reign borrowed 111046 l. upon
Privy-Seals, which the Writer of the Historical Narration of the first 14 Years
of King James his Reign, Tit. Moneys raised by him, fol. 14. says, were
unrepay'd: Now, since he could receive no more Money in Parliament, orders the
Privy Council to issue out an Order for raising Money out of Parliament, for
the Defense of the Palatinate; and also sent Letters to the Justices of the
Courts in Westminster Hall, and Barons of the Exchequer, to move them, and
persuade others to a liberal Contribution for the Recovery of the Palatinate,
according to their Qualities and Abilities: Nevertheless, if any Person shall,
out of Obstinacy or Disaffection, refuse to contribute thereto, proportionably
to their Estates and Means, they are to certify their Names to the
Council Board.

Letters to the same effect were directed to the High-Sheriffs of Counties, and
Justices of Peace, and to the Mayors and Bailiffs of every City and Corporation
within the Kingdom, requiring them to summon all before them of known Abilities
within their Jurisdictions, and to move them to a cheerful Contribution,
according to their Means and Fortunes, in some good measure answerable to what
others well affected have done before them: And to make choice of meet
Collectors of the Moneys, and to return a Schedule of the Names of such as
shall contribute, and the Sums that are offered by them; that his Majesty may
take notice of the good Inclinations of the Subjects to a Cause of such
Importance; as likewise of such others, if any such be, as out of Obstinacy or
Disaffection shall refuse to contribute. These were the Ways which this
pacifick King took in and out of Parliament, which I believe (except in the
Reign of Edward the 4th) were never practiced by any of our English Kings; and
all this under the specious Pretense of recovering his Son-in-law's Patrimony,
prodigally to squander it among his Favorites, especially Buckingham, whose
Avarice could not be supported otherwise by the Revenues of the Crown, and
Venality of all Places Sacred and Civil.

These were the Noble Achievements, which this pacifick King obtained over his
Parliament, which presumed to advise him for his own Honor and the Nation's
Safety; this was the Return he made for inverting the Methods of Proceedings in
Parliament to pleasure him, by granting Subsidies before Grievances were
redrest: A Prince foreign born to our English Laws and Constitutions; A Prince,
as the noble Nani, Anno 1619. fol. 137, 138. observes, in whom Decorum, and
want of Power, were commonly Opposites; he being Scottish by Birth, and come to
the Crown by Inheritance, was the first that governed the two Nations by
Natural Antipathy, and ancient Emulation of Enemies; and designing to reclaim
the Fierceness of those People with Ease and Idleness, had set up his Rest in
Peace; and avoiding, as much as possible, the calling of Parliaments, without
which not having the Power to impose Contributions, nor levy Money, he
contented himself rather to struggle with many Straits and Difficulties, than
to see them meet with a Jealousy of them; or being met, be obliged to separate
them with the disgust of the People, or with the satisfaction of Prejudice to
the Superior in Power. A Prince so poor before he came to the Crown of England,
that if he had not been supported by the Pension which Queen Elizabeth allowed
him, could not have maintained the Garb of many of our English Gentry; and
being come to the Crown of England, not only the Sacred Patrimony of it was
squandered and embarassed upon debauched and profane Favorites, but the People
otherwise oppressed with almost infinite Monopolies and Projects, which the
Nation never before heard of; and as they were new, so were they all illegal;
and all these to make his Favorites rich, while he continued the poorest King
that ever governed England: Justled in his Throne by the Presbytery in
Scotland, yet nothing less than Sacred would down with him from the Clergy in
England, tho his dissolute Life and profane Conversation were diametrically
contrary.

These, by a twenty Years Habit, were so fixed in the King, a Prince of all
others the most regardless of his Honor and Word, that they became natural: So
that after the Parliament had given him two Subsidies, and intended another for
carrying on the War for the recovery of the Palatinate; and after he had by
such means, as before said, by such Terror raised Benevolences all England over
upon pretense of it; yet by the Advice of Buckingham and Gundamor, he placed
the Anchor of his Hope to do it by the Match of his Son with the Infanta of
Spain, when an unlooked-for Accident, reported by Nani, in his 5th Book, fol.
186. had like to have spoiled all.

For the King of Bohemia, weary of being amused, and deluded with the Hopes of
his Father-in-law's Treaties, which he now saw were mocked by the Spaniards
themselves, in a Disguise, with two Persons only, from Holland passes into
France by Sea, and from thence through Lorrain, and through the midst of his
Enemies Troops, arrives at Landau, where Count Mansfield (who then made War in
the Palatinate in his Right) had a Garrison, where he discovered himself, and
from thence went to Germersheim, where he was received with the general
Applause of the whole Army.

This Escape of the King's Son-in-law confounded all the King's Measures which
he had taken for him, by the Marriage of the Infanta with his Son, so that he
was more alarmed at it, than at the Commons Remonstrance and Protestation, tho
he bore the Affliction with a much better Temper: So all Wits were set at work
how to get the Elector out of the Hands of Mansfield back again into Holland;
for now the Proceedings at Brussels upon the Peace, were put to a full stop,
the Spaniards alleging they could not proceed in the Treaty so long as the
King's Son-in-law was in the Hands of Mansfield, their most inveterate and
bitter Enemy.

It fell out luckily for the King's Designs, tho unluckily for his
Son-in-law's, that Mansfield being worsted by the Spanish Arms in the
Palatinate, and the Elector Palatine fearing that Mansfield in the Adversity of
his Affairs would make him a Sacrifice, in giving him up to the Spaniard, to
make his own Terms the better, was the more easily enveagled by the King's
Agents to return again into Holland, where the first News he heard was, that
Tilly had taken Heidelburg (the Capital Seat of his Ancestors) by Storm, and
Frankendal (his next City) reduced to Extremity by Cordua; so that, as Nani
says, fol. 188. King James* who had published that his Son-in-law held that
Country under his Protection, was laughed at by all the World, and forced to
consent to a Truce for fifteen Months, during which Frankendal, and the rest of
the lower Palatinate, should be deposited into the Spaniards Hands, to restore
them to the King (James) if within that time there were not a Peace concluded.

King James having thus deposited his Son-in-law's Patrimony in the Hands of
the Spaniards in the Low Countries; now by the Direction of Buckingham (not
only the Dictator over the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, but over
the King himself, and 'twas feared more over the Prince) upon pretense that the
Earl of Bristol was too remiss in prosecuting the Prince's Suit at Madrid,
resolves to deposite the Prince in the Power of the Court of Spain, there to
remain as an Hostage till he can procure the Infanta to be his Spouse.

This was such an Adventure, as Don Quixot never dreamed of in any of his; that
because the King, the Prince his Father, was poor at home, and despised abroad,
therefore by making his only Son an Hostage in another King's Court, where the
Maxims both of Religion and State were directly contrary, he should think to
persuade the King of Spain to overturn all, and also get such a Portion as was
fourfold more than any Prince before had, to enrich himself, and to make War
against the King of Spain, or Emperor, which the Spaniard esteemed all as one;
and also that the King of Spain should restore the Palatinate, because the King
knew not which way else to do it: Yet this Adventure must be run, because
Buckingham would have it so; so pur-blind, nay, stark-blind, does Poverty and
Covetousness make Man's Understanding and Reason.

But that we may take all before us, let us see in what Esteem King James was
with the Spaniards, which might encourage him to pursue this Adventure. In
their Comedies in Flanders, they imitated Messengers bringing News in haste,
that the Palatinate was likely to have a numerous Army shortly on foot: For the
King of Denmark would shortly furnish them with a thousand Pickled-Herrings,
the Hollanders with one hundred thousand Butter-Boxes, and England with one
hundred thousand Ambassadors: They pictured King James in one place, with a
Scabbard without a Sword; in another, with a Sword which no body could draw
out, tho diverse Persons stood pulling at it: In Brussels they painted him with
his Pockets hanging out, and not one Penny in them, and his Purse turned upside
down: In Antwerp they pictured the Queen of Bohemia like a poor Irish Mantler,
with her Hair hanging about her Ears, with her Child at her Back, and the King
(James) carrying the Cradle after her; and every one of the Pictures had
several Motto's expressing their Malice. Such Scorns and Contempts were put
upon the King (James) and in him the whole Nation. See the Preface to the
History of the first 14 Years of the Reign of King James, and Wilson, fol. 192.

But tho Buckingham pursued this Match with such Eagerness, yet when it came to
his Management in Spain, where the King's Proclamations forbidding Men to talk
of State Affairs had no effect, he proceeded wrong in every step of it; and to
gratify his Ambition and Personal Disgusts, was the first and principal
Instrument to break it off: but that we may not insist upon Generals;

1. The Prince's coming to Spain, and thereby putting himself into the King of
Spain's Power, brake all the Earl of Bristol's Measures, whereupon the
Negotiation, and all the Particulars of the Marriage was settled, and the
Negotiation was put into a new Form. See Rushw. Collect. fol. 286.

Objection. This was but a Charge by the Earl of Bristol against the Duke, who
prosecuted the Earl of High Misdemeanors, and therefore no Proof against the
Duke.

Answer. Yet the Honor of so great a Statesman, and faithful a Counselor as
the Earl was, who had so honorably served the King in seven foreign Embassies,
and had by the Expense of 10000 l. saved Heidelburg from falling into the Hands
of the Spaniard; and having upon the Dissolution of the last Parliament given
the King 500 l. upon the Benevolence, and never received a Check from the King
in all his Negotiations, but always honorable Testimonies from him for his
faithful Services, before Buckingham broke in upon him, may go a great way.

But it seems to me to be a clear Proof upon Buckingham, for Bristol twice
answered Articles preferred against him, without any Reply; whereas rather than
Buckingham should answer Bristol's Charge, King (Charles) dissolved his second
Parliament.

2. Buckingham had not learned the Verse which is taught to every Schoolboy,
Quum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more; for being French bred, he appeared in a
French Garb (most hateful to the Spaniards) and by his Familiarity with the
Prince, he seemed rather the Prince's Guardian and Companion, than Follower,
which disrelished the Court of Spain, and the Spaniards in general, who are
grave, sober and wary.

3. He by contrary Methods opposed all the Earl of Bristol's Methods, nay, fell
at odds with him, tho, without Comparison, he was the ablest Statesman in all
King James his Councils.

4. Whereas all other Ambassadors and Statesmen, in all great Affairs, make
their Court to the King's Council, and prime Ministers of State, to attain
their Ends, Buckingham fell at open Defiance with Olivares (prime Minister of
State in Spain) and 'twas generally said, made his Court to the Countess, which
she acquainted her Husband with, and instead of the Countess, put a tainted
Whore to Bed with him.

5. The Earl of Bristol in the 9th Article of his Charge against him, shows
what a Scandal Buckingham gave by his Personal Behavior in Spain; and also
employing his Power with the King of Spain for procuring Favors and Offices,
which he bestowed upon base and unworthy Persons, for the Recompense and Hire
of his Lust. These things as fit neither for the Earl of Bristol to speak, nor
the Lords to hear, he left to their Lordships Wisdom, how far they please to
have them examined: It having been a great Infamy to this Nation, that a Person
of the Duke's great Quality and Employments, a Privy-Counsellor, and
Ambassador, eminent in his Majesty's Favor, and solely in Trust with the
Prince, should leave behind him in a Foreign Court so much Scandal as he did by
his ill Behavior.

6. The Earl of Bristol's sixth Article against Buckingham is, That his
Behavior in Spain was such, that he thereby so incensed the King of Spain and
his Ministers, that they would admit of no Reconciliation, nor farther Dealings
with him: Whereupon he seeing the said Match would be to his Prejudice, he
endeavored to break it, not for any Service to the Kingdom, nor of the Match
it self, nor for that he had found (as since he pretended) the Spaniards did
not really intend the said Match, but out of his particular Ends and
Indignation: And the 7th Article says,

7. That after he intended to cross the said Match, he put in practice diverse
undue Courses, as making use of the Prince's Letters to his own Ends, and not
as they were intended; as likewise of concealing things of high Importance to
the King (James) and thereby to overthrow the King's Purposes, and advance his
own Ends.

Nor had my Lord Keeper Williams any better luck in this Adventure of
Buckingham's than the Earl of Bristol or Olivares; for tho the Prince's going
into Spain was concealed from the Keeper as well as Council, yet after the Duke
was gone, the Keeper's Letters followed him to Madrid, wherein the Keeper
advised him to be circumspect in all his Actions, that no Offense might be
taken at any of them by the King and Ministers of Spain; and to be advised by
the Earl of Bristol, not only as a most able Statesman, but above all others,
the most experienced in the Manners of the Spaniards and Court of Spain: but
this Buckingham took as ill Manners in the Keeper, and was an occasion of his
quarrelling with him, as you may read in the Life of the Lord Keeper, written
by the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry.

But neither the danger of the Prince in Spain, nor the cross-grained going of
the Match any way abated the King's Favor to his beloved Scholar and Disciple
Buckingham; but he sent after him the Patent of being created a Duke, there
being not another of England: So that now he is become Duke, Marquess and Earl
of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villiers, Baron of Whaddon, Great
Admiral of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Principality of Wales,
and of the Dominions and Islands of the same, of the Town of Calais, and of the
Marches of the same, and of Normandy, Gascoign and Guienne, General Governor of
the Seas and Ships of the Kingdom, Master of the Horse to the King, Lord
Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, and of the Members of the
same; Constable of Dover-Castle, Justice in Air of all the Forests and Chases
on this side of Trent, Constable of the Castle of Windsor, Gentleman of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in
his Realms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Knight of the most Honorable
Order of the Garter.

But tho all others worshipped this prodigious Favorite; yet Archbishop Abbot
(a Prelate of Primitive Sanctity and Integrity) would not flatter neither the
King nor his Favorite in their Courses, so dangerous to the Church and State,
and dishonorable to the King; and, tho in Disgrace, he wrote this following
Letter to the King, which you may read in Rushworth, fol. 85.

May it please your Majesty;M
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid by my Silence I have neglected the
Duty of the Place it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to place
me in: But now I humbly crave leave I may discharge my Conscience toward God,
and my Duty to your Majesty; and therefore freely to give me leave to deliver
my self, and then let your Majesty do what you please. Your Majesty has
propounded a Toleration of Religion; I beseech you to take into your
Consideration, what that Act is, what the Consequence may be: By your Act you
labor to set up the most Damnable and Heretical Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, the Whore of Babylon: How hateful will it be to God, and grievous to your
Subjects, the Professors of the Gospel, that your Majesty, who has so often
and learnedly disputed and written against those Heresies; should now show your
self a Patron of those wicked Doctrines, which your Pen has to the World, and
your Conscience tells your self are superstitious, idolatrous and detestable?
and hereto I add what you have done by sending the Prince into Spain, without
the Consent of your Council, the Privity or Approbation of your People; and
although you have a Charge and Interest in the Prince as the Son of your Flesh,
yet the People have a greater, as Son of the Kingdom, upon whom, next after
your Majesty, are their Eyes fixed, and their Welfare depends; and so tenderly
is his going apprehended (as I believe) however his Return may be safe; yet the
Drawers of him into this Action, so dangerous to himself, so desperate to the
Kingdom, will not pass away unquestioned and unpunished. Besides, the
Toleration which you endeavor to set up by your Proclamation, cannot be
without a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your Subjects see that you
will take to your self the Ability to throw down the Laws of the Land at your
Pleasure. What dread Consequence these things may draw afterward, I beseech
your Majesty to consider, and above all, lest by this Toleration and
discountenancing the true Profession of the Gospel, wherewith God has blessed
us, and this Kingdom has so long flourished under it, your Majesty does not
draw upon this Kingdom in general, and your self in particular, God's Wrath and
Indignation.


I have heard my Father say, that King James kept a Fool called Archy (if he
were not more Knave) whom the Courtiers, when the King was at any time
thoughtful or serious, would bring in with his antic Gestures and Sayings, to
put him out of it. In one of these Modes of the King, in comes Archy, and tells
the King he must change Caps with him; Why? says the King: Why who, replies
Archy, sent the Prince into Spain? But what, said the King, will thou say, if
the Prince comes back again? Why then, said Archy, I will take my Cap from thy
Head, and send it to the King of Spain: which was said troubled the King sore.

But if we look back into Spain, we shall see things of another Complexion
than when Buckingham came into it: For now he is disgusted, he put* the Prince
quite out of the Match, as that tho all things were agreed upon the coming of
the Dispensation from Rome, so as King James said all the Devils in Hell could
not break the Match (yet his Disciple and Scholar could) tho the Duke had
certified the King the Match was brought to a happy Conclusion, and the Match
publicly declared in Spain, and the Prince permitted Access to the Infanta in
the Presence of the King, and the Infanta was generally styled the Princess of
England; and in England a Chapel was building for her at St. James's, and the
King had prepared a Fleet to fetch her into England, which only proved to bring
back his Son.

How things (especially actuated by Love) should stay here, may seem strange;
yet such an Ascendant had Buckingham over the Prince, that the Affront put upon
him (Buckingham) must quite deface the Prince's vowed Love and Affection to the
Infanta; but how to prevail with King James to comply, might have an appearance
of some Difficulty, since the King had set his Rest upon it, and had quarelled
with the Parliament, and dissolved them in great Anger and Fury for but
mentioning it.

After the Duke had gained the Prince to break, or at least not to observe the
Conditions of the Treaty of the Marriage with the Infanta, so solemnly sworn to
by both the Kings and the Prince; let us now see how he behaved himself to King
James afterward: but this will be better understood if we look back, and see
how things stood before the Prince's and Duke's Arrival in Spain.

The Prince's going into Spain, was not only kept secret from King James' s
Council, but from my Lord Keeper Williams, tho the King confided in his
Abilities above all the other of his Council: but when it had taken vent, the
King asked the Keeper what he thought, Whether the Knight Errant's Pilgrimage
(meaning the Prince's) would prove lucky to win the Spanish Lady, and to convey
her shortly into England? Sir, answered my Lord Keeper, If my Lord Marquess
will give Honor to Conde Duke Olivares, and remember he is the Favorite of
Spain; or if Olivares; will show honorable Civility to my Lord Marquess,
remembering he is a Favorite of England, the Wooing may be prosperous: but if
my Lord Marquess should forget where he is, and not stoop to Olivares; or if
Olivares, forgetting what Guest he has received with the Prince, bear himself
haughtily, and like a Castilian to my Lord Marquess, the Provocation may be
dangerous to cross your Majesty's good Intentions; and I pray God, that either
one or both do not run into that Error.

The Answer of the Keeper took such Impression upon the King, that he asked the
Keeper, if he had wrote to his Son and the Marquess clearly, and upon what
Guard he should stand. Yes, said the Keeper, and to that purpose I have
dispatched some Pacquets: Then continue, says the King, to help me and them in
those Difficulties with your best Powers and Abilities, and serve me faithfully
in this Motion, which, like the highest Orb, carries all my Raccalta's, my
Counsels at present, and Prospects upon the future with it, and I will never
part with you. Which you may read in the first part of the Keeper's Life, fol.
115. tit. 127.

The Keeper hereupon continues to prosecute this Advice to the Marquess (after
Duke) but hereby lost the Duke's Favor, who ever after sought all means to
ruin the Keeper, which tho he could not effect in King James his Reign, he did
it in the first Year of his Son's.

But when the King understood, that the Contraventions of the Duke with
Olivares and Bristol was like to make a Rupture in the Treaty, he then began
seriously to consider with himself the fickle State he stood in both at home
and abroad; if the Marriage succeeded not; all the two Subsidies he had granted
him by the Parliament, and the Benevolence he had raised after upon his
Subjects by his own Authority, was expended, and a great Debt contracted
besides; he also, besides the Benevolence, stood upon ill Terms with his
Subjects, for petitioning him against the Spanish Match, and asserting their
Privileges, by imprisoning them after he had dissolved the Parliament, the like
whereof was never before done by any of his Predecessors: and now Buckingham
had so violently caused a Rupture of the Match, wherein he placed his sole
Felicity, he had not Courage so much as to frown upon him, who could contribute
no Relief, whereas he dissolved the Parliament, and imprisoned the Members upon
their Advice against the Match, who could have relieved him in his Necessities;
besides, he now saw that Buckingham, by his Audacity, more worshipped the Sun
in its Rise than in its Declination: Now did he not know to whom he should
complain, nor was there any about him but the Keeper who durst give him any
Advice.

In case a Rupture happened, the King after all this wild Expense of Foreign
Embassies, and the Charge of his Son's Voyage to Spain, would be despised by
all Foreign Princes and States, in case he did not endeavor to recover his
Son-in-law's Patrimony, which would, in all appearance, bring on a War between
him and the Emperor, and King of Spain, who kept nothing from him, and
therefore had no cause to make War upon either.

Besides, in case the King made War for the Recovery of the Pa^atinate, he
could not hope to do it upon his own single account, but in Conjunction with
Foreign Confederates, and above all with the States of the United Netherlands
(who now had renewed the War against the King of Spain, the Truce made between
them and the King of Spain in 1609, being expired.) But how unjust would this
be, for the King to make War upon the Emperor, and King of Spain, who kept
nothing from him, and join with the Dutch herein, who, against the Treaty made
between the King and them but three Years before, viz. in 1619, kept from the
King and his Subjects the Isles of Amboyna, Seran, Nero, Waire, Rosingen,
Latro, Cambello, Mitto, Larica, Lantare, Polaway and Machasser in the
East-Idies, and Cabo de Bon Esperanza in Africa. But the Impolicy of such an
Alliance would be as great as the Injustice of it, for hereby the English must
lose the benefit of the Spanish Trade, which above all others enriched the
Nation, and the King his Customs, which above any other did arise from it.

These Considerations fixed in the King's Mind, fearful of any War, so cleft
his Heart, That, as the Bishop of Litchfield observes, he effected neither, yet
he submitted himself to be ruled by some, whom he should have awed by his
Authority, but wanted Courage to bow them to his Bent. A Prince that preserves
not the Rights of his Dignity, and the Majesty of his Throne, is a Servant to
some, but a Friend to none, and least to himself; as you may see in his Book,
fol. 167. tit. 173.

In these Perplexities the King saw no visible Means under Heaven to relieve
him, but by closing with his next Parliament; and it was observed, that some
Impressions were gotten into the King's Mind, that he was so resolved to be a
Lover of Parliaments, that he would close with the next that was called; nor
was there any likelihood that any Man's Incolumity, tho it were his Grace
himself, should cause an unkind Breach between him and his People.

This Resolution of the King's was not concealed from a Cabinet, or Cabal of
the Duke's which met at Wallingford-House, who hereupon set up to consider what
Exploit the Duke should commence to be the Darling of the Commons, and as it
were to republicate his Lordship, and to be precious to those who had the Vogue
to be the chief Lovers of their Country; and resolve that all Attempts would be
in vain, unless the Treaty of the Spanish Match were quashed, and that the
Breach thereof should fall upon the Duke's Industry; so that what the Duke did
before in spite to Olivares and Bristol, he now pursues for his own Safety, tho
the King had little reason to thank him for it. See the first Part of the
Keeper's Life, fol. 137. tit. 147. And this took such Impression in the Duke,
that the Bishop heard the Duke afterward in the Banqueting House, before the
King and both Houses of Parliament, ascribe to himself the sole Glory of
breaking the Spanish Match; and you will soon see how the Prince and Duke after
their return from Spain overawed the King, and made his Authority bow to their
Bent: for notwithstanding Buckingham blasted all the Raccalta's of his
Counsels, and the Prospect of his future Happiness placed in the Spanish Match,
yet he shall become the Duke's Advocate herein, and note his Fidelity,
Constancy and Conduct in breaking it off; and from his Disciple become his
Master, and teach him, that Dolosus versatur in Generalibus, and also keep back
the Earl of Bristol from coming to the Parliament, that he might not spoil the
^ine Tale the Duke had told; yet at other times the King would say, If he had
sent Williams into Spain with his Son, he had kept Heart-ease and Honor both,
which he lacked. See the first part of the Bishop of Litchfield, fol. 168. tit.
174.

The Duke thus doubly engaged, resolved to break the Spanish Match; and to
dispose the King (James) to it, the Prince writes to him, That he must look
upon his Sister (the Queen of Bohemia) and her Children, never thinking more of
him, and forgetting he ever had such a Son. Though it be evident the generous
Spaniards were far enough from entertaining such a thought, however
Buckingham's Behavior might have prompted them to it, that by the Authority of
Litchfield and Rushworth, they entertained him with all imaginable Esteem, as a
truly noble, discreet and well-deserving Prince; however the Prince himself had
given them Cause sufficient to have detained him, if the Prudence of Bristol
had not been greater than Buckingham's Rashness and Zeal to break off the
Match, solemnly sworn to by the Prince and Buckingham himself, and this upon
the Day when the Prince parted from the King of Spain from the Escurial, as you
may see in the Bishop of Litchfield's Life of Dr. Williams, and Rushworth, fol.
284, 285.

For though the King of Spain and the Prince had solemnly sworn to accomplish
the Marriage, and to make the Espousals within ten Days after the Ratifications
should come from Rome, to which purpose the Prince made a Procuration to the
King of Spain, and Don Charles his Brother, to make the Espousals in his Name,
and left it in the Earl of Bristol's hands; yet he (the Prince) left in the
Hands of one of the Duke's Creatures, Mr. Edward Clarke, a private Instrument,
with Instructions to the Earl of Bristol, to stay the Delivery of the Proxies
till farther Direction from him. But when this private Instrument was delivered
to Bristol, he told Buckingham's Favorite that it must for a time be
concealed, lest the Spaniard coming to the knowledge of it, should give Order
to stay the Prince. So that the Duke left the Earl's Instrument as perplexed
and confounded when he went out of Spain, as he had made the Treaty of Marriage
when he came into it.

The Temper and Dissimulation of the Duke is so strange at his taking leave of
Olivares, as is I believe without all Example, and also without any Care of the
Safety of the Prince; for the Duke told him, after he had delivered the
Instrument to stay the Delivery of the Proxy, That he was obliged to the King
and Queen and Infanta in an eternal Tie of Gratitude, and that he would be an
everlasting Servant to them, and endeavor to do the best Offices for
concluding the Match, and strengthening the Amity between the two Crowns; but as
for himself (Olivares) he had so disobliged him, that he could not without
Flattery, make the least Profession of Friendship to him.

Nor was the Ingratitude and Dissimulation of the Prince less than that of
Buckingham: for when the King of Spain had brought the Prince to the Escurial,
where the Prince and Duke (after the delivery of the Instrument for staying the
Proxy) solemnly swore the Treaty of Marriage, as you may read in Rushworth,
fol. 285. and the King and Prince had sworn a perpetual League of Friendship,
as the Bishop of Litchfield says; the King at their Departure declared the
Obligation which the Prince had put upon him (the King) by putting himself into
his Hands, a thing unusual with Princes, and protested he earnestly desired a
nearer Conjunction of Brotherly Affection, for the more entire Unity between
them. The Prince answered him, magnifying the high Favor which he had found
during his Stay in his Court and Presence, which had begotten such an
Estimation of his Worth, that he knew not how to value it, but would leave a
Mediatrix to supply his own Defects, if he (the King) would make him so happy,
as to continue him (the Prince) in the good Opinion of her his Dear Mistress.
Yet the Prince so soon as he came on Shipboard, was observed to say, That it
was a great Weakness and Folly in the Spaniards, after they had used him so
ill, to grant him a free Departure; and soon you will see both the Prince and the
Duke urge the King (James) to break off the Match so solemnly sworn by them
all, and make War upon the Spaniards, which was so dangerous to the Parliament
to mention.

Having thus taken a View of the Duke's Prudence and deep Insight in Mysteries
of State in managing this Match, where King James's Proclamation could not
restrain Men from talking of State Affairs: We will now take a View of the
Duke's Profession in Religion, that another may better judge, whether he were
more eminent in Religion or State Policy; and herein I will take the Earl of
Bristol's Charge upon him to be a full Proof, since the Earl answered the
Duke's Charges against him twice, first before King James, and afterward in
Parliament in the 2d of King Charles, without any reply; and King Charles his
dissolving the Parliament, rather than the Duke should come to a Trial upon the
Articles which the Earl exhibited against him.

1. The Earl, in the said Articles, charges the Duke, that he did secretly
combine with the Conde of Gundamor Ambassador from the King of Spain, Anno
1622, to carry the Prince into Spain, to the end he might be informed in the
Roman Religion, and thereby have perverted the Prince, and subverted the true
Religion established in England.

2. That Mr. Porter was made acquainted therewith, and sent into Spain, and
such Messages at his Return framed, as might serve for a Ground to set on foot
this Conspiracy; the which was done accordingly, and thereby the King and
Prince highly abused, and their Consents thereby gotten for the said Journey,
viz. after the Return of the said Mr. Porter, which was about the latter end of
December or beginning of January, 1622. whereas the Duke plotted it many Months
before.

3. That the Duke at his Arrival in Spain, nourished the Spanish Ministers, not
only in the Belief of his being popishly affected, but did (both by absenting
himself from all Exercises of Religion constantly used in the Earl of Bristol's
House, and frequented by all other Protestant English, and by conforming
himself to please the Spaniards in diverse Rites of their Religion, even so far
as to kneel and adore the Sacrament) from time to time give the Spaniards Hopes
of the Prince's Conversion, the which he endeavored to procure by all means
possible; and thereby caused the Spanish Minister to propound far worse
Conditions for Religion than had been propounded by the Earl and Sir Walter
Ashton, settled and signed under the K. and Prince's Hand, with a clause of the
K. of Spain's Answer, Dec. 12. 1622, that they held the Articles agreed on
sufficicient, and such as ought to induce the Pope to grant the Dispensation.

4. That the Duke having several times moved and pressed the King (James) at
the Instance of the Conde of Gundamor, in the presence of the Earl of Bristol,
to write a Letter to the Pope, and to that purpose having once brought a Letter
ready drawn wherewith the Earl of Bristol by his Majesty being made acquainted,
did so strongly oppose the writing any such Letter, that during the Abode of
the said Earl in England, the Duke could never obtain it; but not long after
the Earl was gone, he (the Duke) procured such a Letter to be written from the
King (James) to the Pope, and to have him styled Sanctissime Pater.

5. That the Pope being informed of the Duke's Inclination and Intention in
point of Religion, sent unto him a particular Bull in Parchment, for to
persuade and encourage him in the Perversion of the Prince.

But how steady soever the Duke was in his French Garb in Spain, and of
Compliance with the Spaniard in the Popish Religion; yet he was not so when he
returned into England, for then he turns quite contrary, and assumes a popular
Way, and joins with the Prince, and thereby overruled the King as they
pleased, and closed with the Nobility, and Puritan Party, opposite to Spain: As
you may read in Rushworth, fol. 107.

Nor was the Duke's Covetousness, and sacrilegious Desires of robbing the
Church's Patrimony, less than his Hypocrisy in Religion; for whilst he was in
this Godly Fit, he treats with Dr. John Preston (Head of the Puritan Party) how
the King might seize the Dean and Chapter Lands, as you may read in the Bishop
of Litchfield's Life of Doctor Williams, 1st Part, fol. 202.

After the Return of the Prince and Duke into England, and Bristol left in
Spain, both contrive how to ruin the Earl of Bristol, bound up with contrary
Instructions; and to dissolve the Prince's Match with the Infanta, so solemnly
sworn by both Kings, and the Prince; and could find no other Pretense to do it,
but by the King's Letter to the Earl of Bristol, before he delivered the Powers
for consummating the Marriage, to procure from the King of Spain, either by
public Act or under his Hand and Seal, a direct Engagement for the Restitution
of the Palatinate and Electoral Dignity, by Mediation or Assistance of Arms;
but in regard this must be now insisted upon, let us see how this stood during
the Treaty.

In all the Treaty for this Match, the Restitution of the Palatinate was laid
aside, as Rushworth observes fol. 91. and my Lord of Bristol in his Defense
against the Duke's or King's Charge, fol. 302. says, that his Instructions from
King James the 14th of March 1621, were express, that he should not make the
Business of the Palatinate a Condition of the Marriage; and that of the King's
of the 30th of December 1623 (I think it was 1622) were fully to the same
Effect: But now the whole Treaty which was so solemnly agreed upon and sworn to
by both Kings and the Prince, and that the Marriage should be consummate within
10 days after the Dispensation came from Rome, which it did about the beginning
of December 1623, must be all dashed without the Restitution of the Palatine to
his Country and Electoral Dignity, which being perplexed with such Variety of
Interests, as the Duke of Bavaria's having possessed himself of the upper
Palatinate; and the Restitution of the Palsgrave, being an Act of the Emperor
and Empire, was not in the King of Spain's Power: Nay the Proxies left with the
Earl, would not admit of a Treaty in this Case, for the Marriage was to be
consummate within ten Days after the Arrival of the Dispensation from Rome.

The Earl of Bristol for not obtaining these new, impossible and inconsistible
Conditions, is recalled from his Embassy, and a new Treaty of Marriage between
the Prince and the Princess Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter of Henry the
Fourth of France, is as suddenly set on Foot, as that of Spain abruptly broke
off; and that by this time the King of Spain and the Earl had frequent Advice
of the Prince and Duke's Designs to ruin the Earl. The King of Spain therefore
made a threefold Proffer to the Earl, either to write to the King (James) and
if need were to send a particular Ambassador, to mediate for him, to satisfy
the Earl's Fidelity and Exactness in all the Treaty; or to make him a Blank
wherein the Earl should set down his own Conditions both in Title and Honor in
Spain: whereunto the Earl answered, He was sorry and afflicted to hear such
Language, and desired they should understand, that neither the King, nor Spain,
were beholden to him: For whatever he had done, he thought fit to do for his
Master's Service, and his own Honor, having no Relation to Spain; and that he
served a Master, from whom he was assured both of Justice and due Reward;
nothing doubting but his own Innocence would prevail against the Wrong intended
by his powerful Adversaries; and were he sure to run into eminent Danger, he
had rather go home and cast himself at his Majesty's Feet and Mercy, and
therein comply with the Duty and Honor of a faithful Subject, though it should
cost him his Head, than be Duke, or Infantado of Spain; and that with this
Resolution, he would employ the utmost of his Power to maintain the Amity of
the two Crowns, and to serve his Catholic Majesty: and thirdly, the King of
Spain desired him in private to take 10000 Crowns to bear his Charges; but the
Earl answered one would know it, viz. the Earl of Bristol, who would reveal it
to his Majesty (King James.) Now if any Man can show in any Authority ancient
or modern, wherein a Treaty of this Nature was thus begun, thus managed, and
thus broken off; wherein a Noble Lady of highest Birth and noblest Fortune,
adorned with all the Excellencies of Beauty in her Person, and the more
excelling Virtues of her Mind, in all the Perfections requisite in her Sex, was
thus baulkt, and see her self made a Stale, to advance the Avarice and covetous
Desires of others, he shall be my great Apollo. So we'll leave this Affair
here, and see what Comfort King James had of his Affairs elsewhere.

In the Year 1619, King James, and the Dutch States, entered into, and concluded
a Treaty of Trade between the English and Dutch in the East Indies; at this
time, and for many Years before, the English had at Amboyna (one of the
Scyndae, or Setibe Islands lying near Seran, which had several smaller Islands
depending upon it) five several Factories, two at Hitto and Lerico, and two at
Latro and Cambello, in the Island of Seran, but the principal of them was at
Amboyna: Amboyna was, and is the principal Place in all the East Indies, where
Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves and Spice grow; and from these Factories the
English supplied, not only England and Europe with Spice, but Persia, Japan,
and other Countries in the East Indies.

The Treaty of Commerce between the King and the Dutch States, was scarce three
Years old, when the Dutch, in the East Indies, contrive how they may dispossess
the English of the Spice-Trade, which above all others, is the best in the
East Indies, at least which was then, or now is known. It seems, says my Author
William de Britain, in his Treatise of the Dutch Usurpation, fol. 14. that the
English in all these Islands were better beloved than the Dutch, and had built
a Fortress in Amboyna for the Safety of Trade, which, the Dutch having two
Hundred Soldiers there, forced from the English; and thereupon feigning a Plot
between the English and Japonesses, (I think he means the Natives of Amboyna)
to betray the Fortress again to the English, the Dutch with Fire and Water in
an horrible manner, massacred many English, and seized upon the English
Factories there to the Value of four hundred thousand Pounds, and made the rest
of the English Slaves, and sent them into other Islands, which the Dutch had
possessed themselves of: This was in the Year 1622.

Nor did the Dutch stay here, but seized upon the English Factories in Seran,
Nero, Waire, Rosingen, Latro, Cambello, Hitto, Larica, Lantare and Poloroone,
possessing themselves of their Goods and Factories there, and took 1800
English, which they sent into other Islands and Plantations, which they had
forced from the Indians.

Let Us see now how highly King James resented these things; he only sent to the
Dutch Ambassador, and told him, He never heard, nor read a more cruel and
impious Act than that of Amboyna: But I do forgive them, and I hope God will,
but my Son's Son shall revenge this Blood, and punish this horrid Massacre; nor
never further vindicated his own Honor, or his Subjects Blood, and loss of
their Goods and Trade herein. Whereas about a Year before, when he heard of the
Commons horrid Invasion upon his Prerogative, by asserting their Rights and
Privileges; in a Fury he dissolves the Parliament, and sick as he was, (or
seemed to be) to the indangering of his Health, he came in a hurry from
Theobalds, called his Council and Judges about him, and propria Manu cut the
Commons Protestation out of their Journal Book, and committed many of their
Members close Prisoners without Bail or Main-prize, and banished others.

That we may take a better View of the latter end of this Reign, and the
following one of King Charles, it will be convenient to look into Holland; and
herein observe, That Barnevelt and the Dutch States, after they had retrieved
their Cautionary Towns from King James, Barnevelt, assisted by Hugo Grotius,
nourished a Faction in Holland, called the Arminian, from Arminius, who
maintained 5 Heads, contrary to what Calvin had taught in his Institutions,
which was the Doctrine of the Church set up in Holland, and the other United
Provinces. By this Faction thus countenanced by Barnevelt and Grotius, they
endeavored to have deposed Maurice, Prince of Orange, State-holder, tho he,
and his Father and Uncles were the principal Instruments, whereby the Dutch
became States: But Maurice proved too hard for them, and cut off Barnevelt's
Head, and had hanged Grotius, if his Wife had not conveyed him away in a great
Chest, pretending it contained Arminian Books: This was in the Year 1620.

Tho Barnevelt and Grotius propagated the Arminian Tenets to have deposed the
Prince of Orange, and advanced their Democratical Government, yet the
Churchmen of England who preached the King's absolute Power, and exalted his
divided Will from the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation, above his Royal
Will in Governing by them, promoted these Tenets; and those that opposed them
were styled Puritans.

The principal Stickler herein was Dr. William Laud, a Man of a most turbulent
and aspiring Disposition; and one of the first Acts for which he was taken
notice of, was, to marry the Earl of Devonshire to the Lady Rich, (Mother to
Robert Earl of Warwick, and Henry Earl of Holland) when her Husband was alive;
but this was so far from advancing him, that the King was highly incensed
against him for it.

Yet Laud's aspiring Humor could not contain him in a private State, but
follow the Court he would, yet could never arrive higher than to be one of the
King's Chaplains, by means whereof he sometimes got the King's Ear. The King
hated the Presbyterian Government, and had got the Bishops in Scotland to be
re-ordained by three of the English Bishops, as a distinct Order, which the
Kirk in Scotland took for an abominable Usurpation over them; and also in the
Year 1618, got the five Articles (commonly called The five Articles of Perth)
to be settled, as more agreeable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England, but this was to the further Indignation of the Kirk-party: and
herein King James set up his rest, as having gained an high Point; but tho the
King hated the Presbyterian Government, yet he opposed the Arminian Tenets.

Archbishop Abbot observed of him, when he was at Court, he was Buckingham's
only inward Counselor, sitting sometimes with him privately whole hours, and
feeding his Humor with Malice and Spite; and when he was at Oxford, his
Business was to pick Quarrels in the Lectures of public Readers, and to
advertise them to the Bishop of Durham, Neal, (the great Countenancer of the
Arminian Tenets, and Promoter of the King's Prerogative) that he might fill the
Ears of King James with Discontents against the honest Men that took pains in
their Places, and settled the Truth (which he called Puritanism) in their
Auditors: As you may read in Rush. fol. 444.

Nor could Laud forbear when he could get the King's Ear, but he urged him more
than once, to promote the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England in
Scotland after the obtaining the passing of the five Articles at Perth; this
frighted King James, who better knew the Temper of his Countrymen, and how
difficultly he had got the Articles of Perth to pass, that Laud, ignorant of
the Temper of the Scottish Nation, should be so audacious to put the King upon
this, which might (as it after did) embroil all Scotland in Tumults and Wars,
and now becomes more averse to Laua's Promotion than before.

But this was no Consideration to Buckingham; whether the King would or nor,
Laud should rise: And soon after Williams was made Lord Keeper, the Bishopric
of St. David's fell, and Buckingham resolved Laud should have it; and the Keeper
must be the Man to propound it to the King, and receive no Denial. But it is fit
to observe here, in what an humbling manner this Promotion was accomplished on
the part of Laud; and take it as it was sent me by a Gentleman, with the
Attestation of Col. L. and R. L. Esquire who often heard Mr. Francis Osburn speak
of it as a certain Truth, and who had taken notice of it in some of his Works
not made public. As soon as Laud had Information that the foresaid Bishopric
was vacant, he hastens to wait upon the Duke of Buckingham for that Preferment,
but found the Duke was not stirring; but being impatient of Delay, prevails
upon one of the Duke's Gentlemen to acquaint him he had earnest Business with
his Grace, and begged immediate Admittance; which being granted, the Doctor
enters his Grace's Chamber, and finds him a-bed with a Whore: the Duke asks his
Business; Laud told him, the Bishop of St. David's was dead, and that he came to
beg his Grace to recommend him to the King for the vacant See. The Duke told
him, that he had been represented to him as the proudest Man alive, and
therefore he could not, in Honor, recommend him to the King: Laud assures his
Grace, that what had been said of him upon that Head, was utterly false, and
the effect of Malice, etc. for he was so far acquainted with himself, as that
he knew himself to be the humblest Man alive: I Will try that presently, says the
Duke, and so as a Testimony of his great Humility, orders him, Spaniel-like, to
take several Turns over and under the Bed, (his Grace, and his Whore all the
while lying in it) which he did to Content; and when 'twas over, Well, says the
Duke, now I believe you, and you shall have the Bishopric of St. David's.
Williams, who knew the Disposal of the Seal was as Buckingham pleased, durst do
no otherwise than become Laud's Advocate to the King; but the King was at first
utterly averse from it, giving Laud's Marriage of the Lady Rich, and his urging
the King not to rest at the five Articles of Perth, for some Reasons: but the
Keeper persisting, and alleging how sorry Laud was for these, the King at last
said, And is there no hoe, but you will carry it! then take him to you; but on
my Soul you will repent it; and so went away in Anger, using other fierce and
ominous Words, which were divulged in Court, and are too tart to be repeated,
as you may read, fol. 64. tit. 75. in the Life of Archbishop Williams.

It Is observable, that Benefits conferred upon Ambitious Men, never create any
Obligation of Gratitude; on the contrary, ill Men generally turn the Benefits
received, to the Ruin and Overthrow of their Benefactors: More likely Instances
hereof are rarely to be found than in Laud and Buckingham; this having received
his first Admission into the King's Favor by the Mediation of the Archbishop
to the Queen Ann, none else being able to persuade her to it; yet before the
Archbishop could bring the Queen to it, she often told him, My Lord, You and
the rest of your Friends know not what you do; I know your Master (the King)
better than you all: for if this young Man be once brought in, the first
Persons that he will plague must be you that labor for him; yea, I shall have
my part also, the King will teach him to despise and hardly entreat us all,
that he may be beholden to none but himself; as you may read in his own
Narrative in Rushworth, from fol. 438, to fol. 461.

But Laud's Contrivance to ruin Williams after Bishop of Lincoln, takes up
almost a Volume, reported by the Bishop of Litchfield, and by what villainous
Instruments, Perjuries, Subornation, and keeping back of Witnesses, expunging
and razing Records, and by displacing Sir Robert Heath from being Lord Chief
Justice, because he would not do Laud's Drudgery, and bringing in Sir John
Finch, who would jurare in Verba Magistri, as well as throw down the Bounds of
the Forests to make the King's Subjects Inheritances to be a Prey to wild
Beasts: yet after Laud had perpetrated all these, he confessed he never read the
Commission by which he acted. See the second Part of the Bishop of Lincoln's
Life.

However, Laud could make no great Progress of his Malice against the Keeper in
the Shortness of the Reign of King James, after he became Bishop: for the King
had the Keeper's Parts and Learning in high Esteem, tho Buckingham both hated
and feared the Keeper for them, no great sign of a wise Statesman, (see the
Bishop of Litchfield's Life of Archbishop Williams, Part 1. fol. 148. tit.
156.) and had so little Wit as to say so: Yet Laud, now a Bishop, from a
Stickler and Informer against those who opposed the Arminian Tenets, now
becomes a Patron and Promoter of them; all Court-Favour now looked that way,
and the Opposers of them were discountenanced, and ranked in the Degree of
Puritans; all the Youth generally ran that way, and the Schools in both
Universities rung loud upon those Tenets, and from thence were dispersed into
all Parts of the Kingdom.

The King having spent the two Subsidies granted in Parliament, and the
Benevolence, which he had by his own Authority raised all over England, for the
Recovery of the Palatinate, upon the Prince's Expedition into Spain;
Buckingham, to his Project of getting the Dean and Chapters Lands, propounds
the Sale of all the Crown Lands: but this meeting with many Difficulties, and
being dissuaded from the farther Prosecution of it, by the powerful Reasons of
my Lord Keeper Williams; there was now no other means left to get Money, but by
calling a Parliament: And now Buckingham courts the popular Humor, and appears
most forward for to make appear in Parliament the Reasons which induced him to
persuade the Prince to break off from the Match with Spain; which tho it took
at present, yet it was but short-lived, for the Treaty of the Marriage between
the Prince and Daughter of France spoiled all: But this was not known during
the sitting of the Parliament, which met upon the 16th of February 1623-24.

We hear of no Proclamation now against talking of State Affairs, the debating
of them in Parliament is not Suitor ultra crepidam; on the contrary, the King,
in his first Speech to them the 19th of February, tells them, He craves their
Advice, and that he would advise with them in Matters concerning his Estate and
Dignity, and that he had ever endeavored, by this and the like ways, to
procure and cherish the Love of his People toward him: So he does hope, and
his Hope exceeded by Faith, that never any King was more beloved by his People,
etc. Let any Man compare this with what the King said and did last Parliament,
and after, and judge of the Sincerity of this part of the King's Speech,
especially when he remembered himself better, when in his last Speech to this
Parliament, he boasted he had broken the Necks of three Parliaments, which were
all that were in his Reign, but this.

But these were but Generals, of which he complains; afterward, having learned
it of his Scholar Buckingham, in particular he asks their free Counsels in the
Match of his Son; the debating of which, last Parliament, gave him so great
Offense. Now at this time the King had broke off the Match in Spain, and was
treating another with France, which was greedily entertained in the French
Court, and some Progress made in it; of which the King never, that I can find,
or do believe, mentioned one word to the Parliament.

The next Particular which the King communicated to them was of his Scholar,
but now his Master, Buckingham, (in whom he (the King) ever reposed the most
Trust of his Person) that he should be ever present with the Prince in Spain,
and never leave him till he returned again safely to him; which he did, tho not
with that Effect of the Business expected, yet not without Profit; for it
taught him (the King) this point of Wisdom, Qui versatur in generalibus is
easily deceived, and that Generality brings nothing to good Issue, but that
before any Matter can be fully finished, it must be brought to Particulars; for
when he thought the Affair had been, before their going, reduced to a narrow
point, (but there is no point in Generalities) relying upon their general
Propositions (of which I do not find neither the King, nor the Prince, or
Buckingham after him named one) he found, when they came there, the Matter
proved so raw, as if it had never been treated of, they generally giving them
easy way to evade, and affording them means to avoid the effecting any thing.
But it seems there were Particulars which the King would not then discover, but
left them to the Prince and Buckingham to relate.

As for a Toleration of the Roman Religion, As God shall judge him, he said, he
never thought, nor meant, nor never in word expressed any thing that savoured
of it. How was Archbishop Abbot mistaken, when he wrote his disswasive Letter
against the King's Proclamation for the Toleration of Religion to Roman
Catholics? See Rushworth, fol. 85. And how was my Lord Keeper Williams
mistaken, after the King had directed him and other Commissioners to draw up a
Pardon for all Offenses past by Roman Catholics, with a Dispensation for those
to come, obnoxious to any Laws against Recusants; and then to issue forth two
general Commands under the Great Seal, the one to all Judges and Justices of
Peace, and the other to all Bishops, Chancellors, and Commissaries, not to
execute any Statute against them; and tho the Keeper past the Pardon as fully
and amply as the Papists could desire to pen it, yet the Keeper put some stop
to the vast Prohibition to the Judges and Bishops, for the Reasons he gave?

First, Because the publishing of this General Indulgence at one push, may
beget a general Discontent, if not a Mutiny; but the instilling thereof into
the Peoples knowledge by little and little, by the Favors done to Catholics,
might indeed loosen the Tongues of a few particular Persons, who might hear of
their Neighbors Pardon, and having vented their Dislike, would afterward cool
again; and so his Majesty might by degrees with more convenience enlarge his
Favors.

Secondly, Because to sorbid the Judges against their Oaths, and the Justices
of Peace, who are likewise sworn to execute the Laws of the Land, is a thing
unprecedented in this Kingdom, and would be a harsh and bitter Pill to be
digested without some Preparative: But this Delay disgusted the Spanish
Ambassador; which you may read in Rushworth, fol. 101.

And as God was his Judge, he never thought, nor meant, nor ever in Word
expressed any thing that savoured of a Toleration of the Popish Religion: So
God was his Judge, and he spoke as a Christian King. Never any wayfaring Man
that was in the Deserts of Arabia, and in danger of Death for want of Water to
quench his Thirst, more desired Water, than he did thirst and desire the good
and comfortable Success of his Parliament, and Blessing upon their Counsels,
that the good Issue of this may expiate and acquit the fruitless Issue of the
former, and prayed God their Counsels may advance Religion and the public
Weal, and they of him and his Children. You may read the Speech at large in
Rushworth, fol. 115, 116, 117.

But tho the King gloried that he had ever endeavored to procure and cherish
the Love of his People to him, which the Lords and Commons did represent; yet
the Commons could remember a time not out of mind with the King; for they chose
that honorable Gentleman Sir Thomas Crew (newly returned from his Exile into
Ireland, whither the King had sent him, as one of the ill-tempered Spirits who
advised him against the Spanish Match, and presumed to assert the Privileges of
the Commons) for their Speaker.

After the Ceremonies of Opening the Parliament, and the Choice of a Speaker
was over, the first thing that appeared upon the Stage of Affairs, was the
Narrative of the Proceedings in the Spanish Match, made by the Duke of
Buckingham, and assisted by the Prince: Which you may read at large in
Rushworth, from fol. 119, to 125.

I shall not descant upon this long Narrative, but leave the Answering of it to
the Earl of Bristol; but only take notice of the Preamble of the third Article
of the Duke's Narrative, and the latter part of the fourth.

The Preamble of the third Article is, It is fit to observe this Passage, which
is the thing whereupon all his Highness's (the Prince's) subsequent Actions did
depend: He had never staid a Sennight longer in Spain; he had never left any
Proxy with Bristol; he had never taken the Oath at the Escurial, or ever so
much as have written a Letter of Compliment to the Lady, but that he had still
before his Eyes, as his Cynosure, the Promise made by the Conde (I think the
Duke meant Olivares) for the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Why was this Treaty between King James and the Conde? Or if the Restitution of
the Palatinate were the Foundation upon which the whole Treaty moved, Why was
it not so much as mentioned in all the Treaty, so solemnly sworn to by both
Kings, the Prince, and Buckingham himself? Nay, King James himself, by two
several Expresses to the Earl of Bristol, the first of the 14th of May 1621.
and the other of the 30th of December 1623. commanded him, That he should not
make the Business of the Palatinate a Condition of the Marriage; as you may
read in Rushworth, fol. 302.

For the better understanding of Buckingham's Narrative in the fourth Article,
it is fit to take notice, That the Reason in the Instrument for not pursuing
the Proxies of the Marriage so solemnly sworn to by the Prince, and Buckingham
himself, was not for the Restitution of the Palatinate, but (forsooth) for fear
the Infanta might retire into a Cloister, and so deprive the Prince of a Wife;
tho the Infanta, so far as the Gravity of the Spaniards would permit, ever
expressed an entire Affection to the Prince: so that when the Prince took leave
of the Infanta, she seemed to deliver up her Heart to him, in as high
Expressions as that Language and her Learning could with her Honor set forth:
for when the Prince told her, His Heart would never be out of Anxiety, till she
had passed the intended Voyage, and were safe on the British Land; she
answered, with a modest Blush, That if she were in danger upon the Ocean, or
discomposed with the rolling brackish Waves, she should cheer up her self, and
remember all the way, to whom she was going: As you may read in the Life of
Williams Lord Keeper, fol. 161. tit. 168. And Mr. Rushworth, fol. 104. says,
She caused many divine Duties to be performed for the Prince's Return.

In the Proxies left with the Earl of Bristol, there was a Clause inserted, De
non revocando procuratore; as much as to say, irrevocable: And because the Earl
did in his Letter to the Prince, of the First of November in 1623, press this
vehemently to the Prince, the Prince vowed openly before both Houses, that he
had never by Oath nor Honor engaged himself not to revoke those Powers, more
than by the Clause De non revocando procuratore, inserted in the Instrument it
self; and then he conceived the Clause to be matter of Form, and tho
essentially of no binding Power, yet usually thrust into every such Instrument;
and that the Civilians hold, That it is lawful by the Civil and Canon Law, for
any Man to revoke his Proxy of Marriage, notwithstanding it has the Clause De
non revocando procuratore inserted in it: Therefore the Duke concluded, as to
this point, That the Earl of Bristol, in charging this Matter so highly upon
the Prince, had much forget himself.

Can any Man believe, that when the Prince made the Procuration to the King of
Spain, and his Brother, to his Espousals with the Infanta in his Name, and left
it in the Earl of Bristol's hands, with the Clause De non revocando
procuratore, that he then had consulted with the Civilians, that he might
revoke it when he pleased; or that this Marriage, nine Years in treating, was
not founded upon the Honor and Oaths of the Kings, the Prince, and of
Buckingham himself, but upon the Niceties and Quirks of the Civilians? Or did
it become the Prince, or the Duke either, who when he parted from the King of
Spain at the Escurial, solemnly to swear the Treaty of Marriage, and the
Furtherance of it by all that was in his Power, in the presence of the Earl of
Bristol, and Sir Walter Ashton, as you may read in Rushworth, fol. 285. and now
in the face of the King and Parliament, to plead a Nicety of the Civilians, to
absolve the Prince and himself? Now let us see what the Earl of Bristol says
for himself, for the Duke's Charge upon him for Proceedings upon this Match.
His Reasons were,

1. For that he had a Warrant under the Prince's hand, for his Proceedings to
consummate the Match.

2. It was the main Scope of his Embassy.

3. He was enjoined by the King and Prince's Commission under the Great Seal.

4. He had positive Orders under his Majesty's hand (King James) since.

5. It was agreed by Capitulation, that it should be within so many days after
the coming of the Dispensation.

6. The King (James) and Prince signified by their Letters to him, at the same
time when they discharged him of his Commandment touching the Infanta's entering
into Religion, that they intended to proceed in the Marriage; which Letters
bear date the 8th of October 1623.

7. The Proxies were to that end left in his hands; and after again renewed,
after the Prince's return into England.

8. That he (the Earl) had overthrown the Marriage without Order; for tho Sir
Walter Aston and himself had used all possible means for gaining time, and
deferring the Desponsories, yet the King of Spain caused it to be protested,
that in case the Earl should insist upon the deferring the Desponsories, he
would free himself from the Treaty by the Earl's infringing the Capitulations:
And in truth, although the King of Spain should have condescended to have
prolonged the Desponsories until one of the Days of Christmas, as by the Letter
was required; yet the Prince's Proxies had been before that time expired, and
he durst not, without a precise Warrant, put such a Scorn upon so noble a Lady,
whom he then conceived was like to have been the Prince's Wife, as to nominate
a Day of Marriage, when the Proxies were out of date, and he himself had sworn
to the Treaty.

9. He (the Earl) could not, in Honor and Honesty, but endeavor to perform
that public Trust reposed in him, when the Proxies were deposited in his
hands, with public and legal Declaration, with an Instrument by a Secretary of
State to the King of Spain, leading and directing the Use of them: and the same
being then Instrumentum Stipulatum, wherein as well the King of Spain was
interested by the Acceptance of the Substitution, as the Prince by granting
the Proxies; he could not in Honesty fail the public Trust without clear and
undoubted Warrant; which, so soon as he had, he obeyed. See Rushworth, fol.
301, 302.

The Duke's stating the Question, super totam materiam, was*

Whether this, being the full Effect and Product of this Negotiation, he had
opened to them (the Parliament) be sufficient, super totam materiam, for his
Majest to rely upon, with any Safety, as well for the Marriage of his only Son,
as for the Relief of his only Daughter? Or, that these Treaties set aside, his
Majesty were best to trust in his own Strength, and to stand upon his own Feet?
So the Duke ended, That if the bringing us from Darkness to Light, did deserve
any Thanks, we must wholly ascribe it to his Highness the Prince.

Here is a Tale finely told, part inaudita altera; but the Duke shall hear
more of it, and indeed it was a Net so spread in the sight of every Bird, that
it was a wonder it should catch any: for at this time the Match was quite broke
off with Spain, and another entered upon with France, when it must be suposed,
forsooth, the Spanish Match was in Treaty, and now must be broken off by Advice
in Parliament, which was before such a Mystery of State as not to be meddled
with in Parliament.

But while the Prince and Duke were wrapped up in security of the Parliament, as
well as the King's Affections, and that now the Duke was become as well the
Peoples as the King's Favorite, a new Accident happened, out of which, if the
Prince and Duke had not been extricated by the matchless Wit and lively
Industry of the Keeper, in all appearance it would have put both Prince and
Duke out of the King's Favor and Affections, dissolved this beloved
Parliament, and have brought such a train of mischievous Consequences as could
not have been foreseen, or prevented. I desire to be excused if I do not cite
the Bishop of Litchfield's words in the Life of the Lord Keeper, for I think
the Case will more clearly appear without his Paraphrases and Glosses.

While the Marriage between the Prince and Infanta was in Treaty, the King of
Spain sent Don John, Marquess Inoiosa, his Ambassador to be resident in
England; a Man of true Spanish Gravity and Severity, and a most rigid Promoter
of the Popish Interest in England; so that he was taken notice of to be the
most surly and unpleasing Man that ever came to the Keeper about any Business.

If this Man were thus during the Treaty, it could not be expected he would
become better natured upon the breaking of it; and the Duke of Buckingham was
as jealous of him, that he should spoil the Narrative he had made of the
Proceedings in the Spanish Match, as he was of the Earl of Bristol, and
therefore would never admit the Marquess to have any private Audience of the
King in the Duke's Absence; so that Sir Walter Aston wrote from Spain, that it
was complained of, that Marquess Inoiosa had advertised thither he had not been
able to procure a private Audience of the King tho he often desired it, but
what the Duke assisted at.

Inoiosa, impatient of any longer Delay, about the latter end of April 1624,
contrived this Expedient to put the following Paper into the King's Hand; he
and Don Carlo de Colonna came adventurously to White Hall, and whilst Don Carlo
held the Prince and Duke in earnest Discourse, Inoiosa put this Paper into the
King's Hand with a Wink, that the King should put it into his Pocket, wherein,

1. He terrifies the King, that he was not, or could not be acquainted with the
Passages either of his own Court, or of the Parliament, for he was kept from
all faithful Servants that would inform him by the Ministers of the Prince and
Duke, and that he was a Prisoner as much as King John of France in England, or
King Francis at Madrid, and could not be spoken with, but before such as
watched him.

2. That there was a strong and violent Machination in hand, which had turned
the Prince, a most obedient Son, to a quite contrary Course to his Majesty's
Intentions.

3. That the Council began last Summer at Madrid, but was lately resolved on in
England, to restrain his Majesty from the Exercise of the Government of his
Kingdoms; and that the Prince and Duke had designed such Commissioners under
themselves, as should intend great Affairs, and the Public Good.

4. That this should be effected by beginning of a War, and keeping some
Companies on foot in this Land, whereby to constrain his Majesty to yield to
any thing, chiefly being brought into Straits for want of Moneys to pay the
Soldiers.

5. That the Prince and Duke's enclosing his Majesty from the said Ambassador,
and other of his own Loyal People, that they might not come near in private,
did argue in them a fear and distrust of a good Conscience.

6. That the Emissaries of the Duke had brought his Majesty into Contempt with
the potent Men of this Realm, traducing him for slothful and unactive, for
addiction to an inglorious Peace, while the Inheritance of his Daughter and her
Children is in the Hands of his Foes; and this appeared by a Letter which the
Duke had writ into Holland, and they had intercepted.

7. That his Majesty's Honor, nay his Crown and Safety, did depend upon a
sudden Dissolution of the Parliament.

8. They loaded the Duke with sundry Misdemeanors in Spain, and his violent
Opposition to the Match.

9. That the Duke had divulged the King's Secrets, and the close Designs
between his Majesty and their Master King Philip, about the States of Holland,
and their Provinces, and labored to put his Majesty out of the good Opinion of
the Hollanders.

10. That the Duke was guilty of most corrupt dealing with the Ambassadors of
diverse Princes.

11. That all these things were carried on in the Parliament with an
headstrong Violence, and that the Duke was the cause of it, who courted them
only that were of troubled Humors.

12. That such Bitterness and Ignominies were vented in Parliament against the
King of Spain, as were against all good Manners and Honor of the English
Nation.

The 13th is a flat Contradiction to the Precedents, wherein they made the
Prince privy to dangerous things; yet in this they say, That the Puritans (of
whom the Duke was Head) did wish they could bring it about, that the Succession
of the Kingdom might come to the Prince Palatine and his Children, in right of
the Lady Elizabeth.

In a Postscript, the Paper prayed the King, That Don Francisco Carondelet,
Secretary to the Marquess Inoiosa, might be brought to the King, when the
Prince and Duke were sitting in the Lords House, to satisfy such Doubts as the
King might raise, which was performed by the Earl of Kelly, who watched a fit
Season at one time for Francisco, and for Padre Maestro a Jesuit at another
time, who told their Errand so spitefully, that the King was troubled at their
Relations.

How far the Spanish Ambassador Carondelet, and the Jesuit Maestro, could make
good this Paper, I cannot tell, nor does the Bishop say; however the King was
apprehensive, that the Parliament was solicitous to engage him in a War for the
Palatinate; which he so dreaded, that, as the Bishop says, he thought scarce
any Mischief was so great as was worth a War to mend it; wherein the Prince did
deviate from him, as likewise in his Affection to the Spanish Alliance: But he
stuck at the Duke more, whom ^e defended in one part to one of the Spanish
Ministers, yet at the same time complaining, That he had noted in him a
turbule^^ Spirit of late, and knew not how to mitigate it, so that casting up
the Sum he doubted it might come to his turn to pay the Reckoning.

These Thoughts so wrought upon the King, that his Countenance fell suddenly,
that he mused much in Silence, and that he entertained the Prince and Duke with
mystical and broken Speeches: this nettled them both, and enquiring the Reason,
they could not go further, than that they heard the Spanish Secretary and the
Jesuit Maestro had been with the King, and understood that some in the
Ambassador's House had vaunted, that they had nettled the Duke, and that a
Train would take fire shortly to blow up the Parliament.

In this Perplexity the King prepared to take Coach for Windsor, to shift
Ground for some better Rest in this Unrest, and took Coach at St. James's Gate,
and the Prince with him, and found a slight Errand to leave Buckingham behind;
as the King was putting his Foot into the Coach, the Duke besought him, with
Tears in his Eyes, and humble Prayer, that his Majesty would let him know what
could be laid to his Charge to offend so good and gracious a Master, and vowed
by the Name of his Savior he would purge it, or confess it: The King did not
satisfy him, but breathed out his Disgust, that he was the unhappiest alive to
be forsaken of them that were dearest to him, which was uttered and received
with Tears from his own Eyes, as well as the Prince's and Duke's, and made
haste to Windsor, leaving the Duke behind: this was upon Saturday at the end of
April.

The Duke forlorn, retires to Wallingford-House, and was in such Confusion and
Distraction, that when my Lord Keeper, (who had notice of all these things, and
was more careful of the Duke than he could be of himself) came to him, he found
the Duke lying upon his Couch, in that immovable Posture, that he would
neither rise up nor speak, tho the Keeper invited him to it twice or thrice by
courteous Questions. The Keeper told him by the Faith of a deep Protestation,
that he came purposely to prevent more Harm, and to bring him out of that
Sorrow into the Light of the King's Favor; That he verily believed God's
directing Hand was in it, to stir up his Grace to advance him to those Favors,
which he possessed, to do him Service at this Pinch of Extremity.

The Keeper besought the Duke to make haste to Windsor, and to show himself to
the King before Supper was ended; to deport himself with all amiable Addresses,
and not to stir from him Day nor Night, for the Danger was, that some would
thrust themselves to push on the King to break up the Parliament; and the next
degree of their Hope was, upon the Dissolution of the Parliament to see his
Grace committed to the Tower, and then God knows what would follow; the Keeper
besought him to be secret, and be quick and judicious in the Prevention: More
might not be said, because the Loss of Time might lose all. The Duke thankt
him, and made haste to Windsor before he was looked for, and was as inseparable
from the King as his Shadow.

The Fineness of the Keeper's Wit, in unriddling this Mystery, is equal to that
of Cicero, in finding out the Bottom of Catiline's Conspiracy; and by like
means, viz. by Women, tho after a different manner: For Fulvia of her own
accord discovered Catiline's Conspiracy, in Spite and Emulation to Sempronia;
but the Keeper bribed one of Fulvia's Stamp, to get an Insight into this
Design, which so perplexed the King.

It seems to me that the Prince and Duke had a Jealousy that the Spanish
Ambassador might infuse something into the Keeper, which might spoil the
Narrative which the Duke made in Parliament of the Spanish Match; and therefore
the Keeper had given express Orders, that neither the Spanish Ambassador, nor
any of his Train, or Followers, should come at him, whereby the Keeper had been
secluded for a Month from any Intelligence from thence.

But before, Don Francisco Carondelet, the Ambassador's Secretary, was
frequently at the Keeper's; he was contrary to the Ambassador, as well by
Birth, for he was a Walloon, not a Castilian, and Arch-D^a^on of Cambray, as by
Nature, being learned, and of a free and pleasant Dispo^^tion; whereas the
Spanish Ambassador was most austere and sour, so as there was a great Intimacy
between the Keeper and him, and out of him the Keeper got, what a Servant the
Secretary was to some of our English Ladies of Pleasure; but above all to one
in Mark-lane, who by her Wit so managed the Secretary, that he could keep no
Secret from her which she would have had made known: With her the Keeper held
Correspondence, and presented her bountifully, though he told the Prince he had
never seen her; and by her the Keeper had the rough Draught of the De^^gn of
the Paper which the Ambassador had put into the King's Hands: The Keeper had
also notice of an English Priest, who lived in Drury Lane, which the Secretary
loved above any other, and was dearer to him than his own Confessor, but
whether the Keeper came to the Knowledge of this by the Lady in Mark-lane, or
from the Secretary himself, the Bishop does not say.

The Commons had drawn up a Remonstrance against the Liberty which the Priests
assumed, which the King called a Stinging one, and which put the Priests into a
great Terror; and in this Terror, he sent his Pursevant Captain Toothbie, to
seize the Priest in Mark-lane, and not to commit him to Prison, but to keep him
at his own House till further Order.

The Secretary soon heard of this, and was confounded what to do for the
Priest's Delivery* he knew no other means to do it, but by my Lord Keeper, and
from him he was banished; yet in this Extremity, he sent to the Keeper, to beg
of him to see his Face but that Day, tho he never saw him more: this was it the
Keeper de^^red, yet he seemed very unwilling to admit him; however if the
Secretary came about eleven of the Clock at Night, the Keeper would order one
of his Servants to let him in at the Backdoor of the Garden.

When the Secretary came into the Keeper's Presence, he told the Keeper, That
nothing but a Matter as dear to him as his own Life, should have forced him to
break Rule to offend his Lordship with his Presence, and bewailed the Disaster
of his Confrere's Attachment, and most passionately implored the Keeper to
compass his De^iverance.

And would you have me, says the Keeper, run such an Hazard to set a Priest at
Liberty, a dead Man by our Statutes, when the Eye of the Parliament is so
vigilant upon the Breach of Justice, especially in this kind, to the sadding of
godly Men, who detest them that creep hither out of Seminaries, above all other
Malefactors, because they come with an intent to pervert them who have lived in
the B^som of our Church?

My Lord, says Francisco, (accenting his Words with passionate Gesture) let not
the Dread of this Parliament trouble you, for I can tell you, if you have not
heard it, that it is upon Expiration: and then the Keeper picked out of him the
Heads of the Articles in the Paper the Ambassador had given the King, with all
the Reasons, Circumstances, and distorted Proofs and Expositions to confirm
them; and about two in the Morning dismissed the Secretary, and ordered the
Pursevant to release the Priest, with Caution that he should cross the Seas
that Day, or the next.

The Keeper was as happy in his Memory, as in his Wit and Invention; for after
the Secretary was gone, he neither slept, nor stirred out of the Room, till he
had digested all the Secretary had told him in Writing, with his Observations
upon each Particular; and when he had trimmed up a fair Copy, (but what it was
the Bishop says not) he carried it to the Prince at St. James's: This was upon
Tuesday morning, after the King went to Windsor.

The Prince read the Charges, and admired at the Virulency of them; with the
Antiscripts of the Keeper, which were much commended, whereupon he caused his
Coach to be made ready; but before he went, the Keeper humbly begged of him to
conceal the Matter for two Reasons: First, for searching into the King's
Counsels, which he would not should be opened: Secondly, that when he had found
them out, to discover them, tho to his Highness; which the Prince promised, and
then went to Windsor. When he came there, he called for the Duke, and showed
him the Paper privately, with the Apology in the other Column: the Duke humbly
thankt the Prince, that his Case was interwoven with his Highness, and their
double Vindication put into one Frame; and besought the Prince to know what
Vitruvius had compacted a Piece of Architecture of such Vicinity in so short a
time, but could not obtain it.

So they forthwith desired a private Hearing of the King, and gave the Schedule
to his Majesty's Consideration; the King read it deliberately, and at many
Stops said, 'twas well, very well, and drew the Prince and Duke near to him,
and embraced them both, protesting he sorrowed much, that he had aggrieved
them, with a Jealousy fomented by no better than Traitors: And that you may
know, said the King, how little you shall pay me for Reconciliation, I ask no
more but to tell me who is your Ingineer, that struck these Sparks out of the
Flint to light the Candle, to find the Groat which was lost. The Prince stood
mute, and the Duke vowed, he knew not the Author. Well, said the King, I have a
good Nostril, and will answer mine own Question; my Keeper had the main finger
in it, I dare swear he bolted the Flower, and made it up into Past. Sir, said
the Prince, I was precluded, by my Promise, not to reveal him, but I never
promised to tell a Lie for him; your Majesty has hit the Man: And God do him
good for it, says the King; I need not tell you both what you owe him for this
Service; he has done himself this Right with me, that I discern his Sufficiency
more and more. This you may read in the Keeper's Life, Part 1. from fol. 195,
to fol. 200. and much more of the Bishop, but I think but little more of the
Keeper. And tho the Spanish Ambassador received a sore Rebuke here, and was
sent back into Spain, the Bishop says he received no Frown nor Disfavour there.

Now let us see how the Duke requited the Keeper for his Service, which was but
in May: In the beginning of Michaelmas-Term following, the Duke persuaded my
Lord Chief Justice Hobart to tell the King, or give it under his hand, that my
Lord Keeper was not fit for the Place, and he would undertake to cast the
Keeper out, and put my Lord Hobart into his place; but my Lord Hobart said,
Somewhat might have been said at first, but he should do my Lord Keeper great
wrong that said so now. See fol. 201.

However, such was the Temper of the Times, that both Houses chimed in with the
Duke in his Narrative, and justified him against the Spanish Ambassador, who
took great Offense at the Duke's Relation* as reflecting upon his Master's
Honor, and demanded his Head for Satisfaction.

The King was so pleased with the Parliament's Justification of the Duke, as we
have showed before, that as he had been his Favorite Somerset's Advocate, to
plead his Cause against the Opinion of Archbishop Abbot, to make the Countess
of Essex to be virgo intacta, and so a fit Wife for Somerset; so now he becomes
his Disciple Buckingham's Advocate, to make him a Favorite to the Nation: and
because of the Excellency and veracity of his Speech, which should dispose the
Nation to it, we'll give it you verbatim, as it is to be seen in Rushworth,
fol. 127.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Might have nothing to speak in regard of the Person whereof you spoke, but
in regard of your Motion, it were not civil; for if I be silent, I shall
neither wrong my self, nor that Noble Man which you now spoke of, because he is
well known to be such an one as stands in no need of a Prolocutor or
Fide^ussor, to undertake for his Fidelity, or well carrying of the Business:
And indeed, to send a Man upon so great an Errand whom I was not to trust for
the Carriage thereof, were a Fault, in my Discretion, scarce compatible to the
Love and Trust I bear him. It is an old Saying, That he is a happy Man that
serves a good Master; and it is no less true, That he is a happy Master that
enjoys a faithful Servant.

The greatest Fault (if it be a Fault) or at leastwise the greatest Error, I
hope, he shall ever commit against me, was, his desiring this Justification
from you, as if he had need of any Justification from others toward me; and
that for these Reasons.

First, Because he being my Disciple and Scholar, he may be assured he will
trust his own Relation. Secondly, Because he made the same Relation to me which
he did afterward to both Houses, so as I was formerly acquainted with the
Matter and Manner thereof; and if I should not trust him in the Carriage, I was
altogether unworthy of such a Servant: He has no Interest of his own in the
Business: He had ill Thoughts at home for his going thither with my Son, although
it was my Command, as I told you before; and now he has as little Thanks for
his Relation on the other part, (he has the Thanks of the Parliament) yet he
that serves God and a good Master, cannot miscarry for all this.

I have noted in the Negotiation, these three remarkable things, Faith,
Diligence, and Discretion, whereof my Son has born Record unto me; yet I cannot
deny, That as he thought to do good Service to his Master, he has given an ill
Example to Ambassadors in time to come, because he went this long Journey upon
his own Charge: This will prove an ill Example, if many of my Ambassadors
should take it for a Precedent. He run his Head into the Yoke with the People
here for undertaking the Journey; and when he had spent there 40 or 50000 l.
(where should he have this Money?) never offered his Account, nor made any
Demand for the same, nor ever will: I hope other Ambassadors will do so no
more. I am a good Master, that never doubted him, for I know him to be so good
a Scholar of mine, that I say, without Vanity, he will not exceed his Master's
Dictates: and I trust the Report not the worst he made, because it is approved
by you all, and I am glad he has so well satisfied you, and thank you heartily
for taking it in so good part, as I find you have done.


Did ever any old experienced King (as he styles himself) so dote upon a young,
raw, and unexperienced Gentleman, (bred up in no sort of Learning or Business,
and scarce before he became a Courtier, unless in his Infancy, breathed any
other than French Air) as in the face of the Nation, to magnify an invidious
Tale, told by the Duke, to the Offense not only of the Spanish Ambassador,
conversant in the whole Affair, but also without hearing the Earl of Bristol,
who was the greatest Statesman of England, if not in Europe, and who had so
honorably performed several Embassies, to the Honor of the King, so far as
the thing would bear, and so manifoldly owned by the King? That this Scholar of
the King's, unacquainted with the Treaty, should break in upon the Earl, and
not only unravel all, but quarrel with him, and in another King's Court with
the prime Minister of State, by whom he might best have attained his End, if he
designed any.

However, the Parliament address themselves to the King, and represent to him,
That he cannot in Honor proceed in the Treaty of the Match with Spain, nor the
Palatinate; and the Commons offer the King three Subsidies and three
Fifteenths, for carrying on the War for the Recovery of the Palatinate, in case
the King will break off the Treaties: which the King accepted, protesting to
God, a Penny of this Money should not be bestowed but upon this Work, and by
their own Committees; and the Commons took him at his Word, and appointed
Treasurers to receive the Money, and a Council of War to disburse the same.

But the Commons having granted these Subsidies, drew up a Petition against the
License the Popish Party had taken during the Treaty with Spain. He was so
nettled at it, that he called it a Stinging One; and hearing the Commons were
entering upon Grievances, he could not endure it, and upon the 29th of May
adjourned the Parliament to the 2d of November 1624, and from thence to the 7th
of April, lest the King should hear of another stinging Petition, or a
Disturbance in the French Treaty: but at this Adjournment he told them, at
their next Meeting they might handle Grievances, so as they did not hunt after
them, nor present any but those of Importance; yet I do not find the Parliament
ever met again, at least never did any thing: However the King passed a General
Pardon, and the Parliament censured Lionel Earl of Middlesex, Lord Treasurer,
for Corruption in his Office, 50000 l. to the King, and to be imprisoned in the
Tower during the King's Pleasure, which was but three days after the
Adjournment of the Parliament; for upon the first of June he was set free.

Whilst these things were doing in Parliament, the Earl of Bristol was recalled
from his Embassy; but before his Arrival, the Duke dealt by all means, that the
Earl might be committed to the Tower before he should be admitted to the King's
Presence: But fearing the Marquess Hamilton, and my Lord Chamberlain, would
oppose him herein, the Duke pressed them that they would concur in it; vowing
(as Somerset did to Sir Thomas Overbury) he intended the Earl no hurt, but only
feared, that if he should be admitted to the King's Presence, he would cross
and disturb the Course of Affairs: but neither of these Lords would condescend
thereunto. This was attested by my Lord Chamberlain before the House of Lords.

This De^^gn of the Duke's failing, the Duke, to terrify the Earl from
returning into England, writ to him, that if he kept not himself where he was,
(in Spain) and laid hold of the great Offers which he heard were made unto him
(the Earl) it should be the worse for him.

At Bourdeaux the Earl heard of the Aspersions cast upon him by the Duke in
Parliament; of which, the Earl did boldly afterward in the House of Lords, in
the second Parliament of Car. 1. and in the Presence of the Duke, affirm, That
there was scarce any one thing concerning him in the Declaration, which was not
contrary to, or different from Truth.

From Bourdeaux the Earl took Post to get into England, to vindicate himself
from the Asper^ons which the Duke had cast upon him in Parliament: but when he
came to Calais, tho he sent over to have one of the King's Ships allowed him,
and for which public Orders were given; and tho the King (James) had Ships
which lay at Boloign, which might have every day been with him in three Hours,
and the Wind fair, yet none came, tho the Earl waited for one eight Days; so
that he was forced to pass the Sea to Dover in a Boat and six Oars.

When the Earl was landed at Dover, he was, by a Letter from my Lord Conway (a
Creature of the Duke's) commanded in the King's Name to retire to his House,
and not to come to Court, or the King's Presence, until he had answered to
certain Questions, which his Majesty would appoint some of the Council to ask
him: but this was not out of any ill meaning to him, but for fear the
Parliament should fall too violently upon him; and this the Duke said to some
of his Friends, was the Reason of the Earl's Restraint.

Hereupon the Earl humbly petitioned the King he might be exposed to
Parliament, and that if he had not served the King honestly in all things, he
deserved no Favor, but to be proceeded against with all Severity; but received
Answer from the King, That there should be but few days past before he would
put an end to his Affairs: but the Parliament was adjourned before the few days
passed, nor did he ever put an end to them. You may read the further
Contrivances against him by the Duke, in Rushw. from fol. 259, to 265.

After the Adjournment of the Parliament (or, if you will, the Dissolution of
it) tho the Earl of Bristol could not obtain Admission into the King's
Presence, yet he obtained Leave to answer to all the Duke had, in his Absence,
charged upon him in Parliament; and withal wrote to the Duke, that if he, or
any Man living, was able to make Reply, he would submit himself to any thing
which should be demanded: which tho the Duke presumptuously said, That it is
not an Assertion to be granted, that the Earl of Bristol by his Answer had
satisfied the King, the Prince, or himself, of his Innocence; yet it so
satisfied the King, that when the Duke after pressed the King that the Earl
might submit, and acknowledge his Fault, the King answered, I were to be
accounted a Tyrant, to engage an innocent Man to confess Faults of which he was
not guilty. Tho the Earl said he could prove this upon Oath, yet the Duke wrote
to him, that the Conclusion of all that had been treated with his Majesty was,
that he (the Earl) should make the Acknowledgment as was set down in that
Paper, tho at that time the King sent him word, that he would hear him against
the Duke, as well as he had heard the Duke concerning him; and soon after the
King died; which Promise of the King's, the Earl prayed God did the King no
hurt: however, the Earl obtained Leave of the King to come to London, to follow
his private Affairs. Mr. Rushworth therefore errs a little in point of time,
where he says, fol. 149. the Earl was committed to the Tower in King James his
time; for he was not committed till the 15th of January 1625. in the first Year
of King Charles, as you may see in Stow's Life of King Charles, fol. 1042.

We have now done with the Spanish Match, at least during this King's Reign;
yet the King's Desires of seeing his Son married, which he shall never see,
were as impatient as those of getting the Infanta's huge Portion: and to that
end, before the Meeting of the Parliament, and while the Treaty with the
Infanta was yet breathing, the King sent my Lord Kensington (after Earl of
Holland) to feel the Pulse of the French Court, how it beat toward an Alliance
between the Prince, and Princess Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter of Henry
IV. of France. A serene Heaven appeared in France upon the Motion; not a Cloud
to be seen in all the French Horizon; Lewis the King telling my Lord
Kensington, he took it for an Honor, that he sought his Sister for the sole
Son of so Illustrious a King, his Neighbor and Ally; only he desired he might
send to Rome, to have the Pope's Consent, for the better Satisfaction of his
Conscience. And now you shall see how a little French Artifice could work upon
the Conscience of our wise and pacifick King, which we will give verbatim as
the King says it, in return to the French King, and which you may read in Mr.
Howel's Life of Lewis XIII. fol. 63.

Most High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince.
OUR dear and most beloved good Brother, Cousin, and ancient Ally: Although the
deceased King of happy Memory was justly called Henry the Great, for having
reconquer'd by Arms his Kingdom of France, tho it appertained to him as his
proper Inheritance, (so here King James determined his Title to France) yet you
have made a greater Conquest; for the Kingdom of France, though it was regained
by the victorious Arms of your dead Father, it was his de Jure, and so he got
nothing but his own; but you have lately carried away a greater Victory, having
by your two last Letters, so full of cordial Courtesies, overcome your good
Brother and ancient Ally, and all the Kingdoms appertaining to him: for we
acknowledge our Self so conquered by your more than brotherly Affection, that we
cannot return you the like; only we can promise and assure you, upon the Faith
of an honest Man, that you shall always have Power, not only to dispose of our
Forces and Kingdoms, but of our Heart and Person, and also of the Person of our
Son if you have need, which God prevent, praying you to rest assured, that we
shall not only be so far from cherishing or giving the least Countenance to any
of your Subjects, of what Profession soever of Religion, who have forgot their
natural Allegiance to you, but if we hear the least inkling thereof, we shall
send you very faithful Advertisement; and you may promise your self, that upon
such Occasion, or any other which may tend to the Honor of your Crown, you
shall always have Power to dispose of our Assistance as if the Cause were our
own. So upon Assurances that our Interests shall be always common, we pray God,
most High, most Excellent, most Puissant Prince, our most dear and most beloved
Brother and Ally, to have you always in his most holy Protection. Newmarket the
9th of February 1624. Your most affectionate Brother, Cousin, and ancient Ally,

James K.


So prodigal was King James of his Promises, and so negligent in their
Performance, whether they were in his power or not. Now let us see what became
of this bluster of Words, and how the Interest of King James was common in this
very Treaty, with the most High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince, his
most dear, and most beloved Brother, Cousin and Ally, Lewis.

Lewis, whilst King James was intent upon his Pleasures, and pursuing the
Spanish and French Matches, had taken almost all the Inland Cautionary Towns
which the Reformed held in France, and about the Beginning of this Treaty, by
the Interposition of his Mother, had made Cardinal Richlieu prime Minister of
State, who shall serve her as Buckingham shall serve the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Laud his Patron Williams, Lord Keeper; and to Richlieu did
Lewis commit the Management of this Treaty, another-guess Minister of State
than Olivares was in Spain, and shall pay Buckingham his own again with
Interest.

Nani, lib. 5. fol. 205. observes of Richlieu, that the King had no Inclination
to him, there being a certain natural secret Aversion to those, who with an
Ascendant of Wit exceed: Sure it is, the Cardinal possessed rather the Power of
Favor than the Favor it self; nevertheless, he had the Great Art how to fix
the mutable and suspicious Genius of the King, and the inconstant Nature of the
People, governing as with a supreme Dictatorship, the one and the other, even
to his Death.

Richlieu had his Eyes in all the Corners of the Court of England, and was
thoroughly informed of the King's Fondness of this Match, and of the
Insufficiency of Buckingham to encounter him in the Transactions of it; and
therefore how sweetly and desiredly soever the Proposition was embraced in
France, yet in the Treaty Richlieu stood upon his Tip-toes, now that of Spain
was broke off.

In the first place, he would not abate one Iota of the Articles of Religion
and Liberty to the Popish Recusants, which was agreed upon in Spain; nay, he
raised them higher: for it was but sit, he said, His Master, who was the eldest
Son of the Church, should not abate any thing of what was granted to the
Catholic King: if there had been nothing else, this would have caused another
stinging Petition from the Commons (as the King called it) if ever they had met
again.

And though her Portion was but 800000 Crowns, (not one tenth of the Infanta's)
yet the Consideration of it must be 18000 l. per Ann. Jointure, (which her Son
increased to 40000 l.) and besides, the King (James) shall give her 50000 l. in
Jewels, whereof she shall have the Property, as of those she has already, and
also of what she shall have hereafter: The King also (James) shall be obliged
to maintain her and her House; and in case she come to be a Widow, she shall
enjoy her Dowry and Jointure, which shall be assigned in Lands, Castles, and
Houses, whereof one shall be furnished and fit for Habitation, and the said
Jointure be paid her wheresoever she shall desire to reside; she shall also
have the free Disposal of all the Benefices and Offices belonging to the said
Lands, whereof one to be a Duchy or County.

And in case she survive her Husband, her Dowry shall be returned to her
entirely, whether she live in England or not: and in case she die before her
Husband, without Children, the Moiety of her Portion to be returned: yet this
Portion must one half be paid the Year after the Contract, the other half the
Year after that.

Having taken a view of the Temporal Articles of this Treaty, let us see what
was agreed to in those which referred to Religion.

The Articles of Marriage of the King of Great Britain, with Madam Henrietta
Maria of France.
THIS Negotiation was so happy, that it caused the King to consent to all the
Articles which were demanded for the Catholics, and that his Majesty gave
Charge to his Ambassadors to agree to them: they signed them with the Cardinal
at Paris the 10th of November 1624, with these Considerations,

That Madame the King's Sister should have all sort of Liberty in Exercise of
the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, and all her Officers and her
Children; and that they should have for this Purpose a Chapel in all the Royal
Houses, and a Bishop with 28 Priests to administer the Sacraments, and the Word
of God, and to do all their Offices.

That the Children which should be born of that Marriage, should be nourished
and brought up by Madame in the Catholic Religion, until the Age of 13 Years.

That all the Domestics which she should carry into England should be French
Catholics, chosen by the Most Christian King; and when they died, she should
take other French Catholics in their Places, but nevertheless by the Consent
of the King of Great Britain.

That the King of Great Britain, and the Prince of Wales his Son, should oblige
themselves by Oath, not to attempt by any means whatsoever to make her change
her Religion, or to force her to any thing that might be contrary thereto; and
should promise by writing in the Faith and Word of a King and Prince, to give
Order that the Catholics, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, who have been
imprisoned since the last Edict against them, should be set at Liberty.

That the English Catholics should be no more enquired after for their
Religion, nor constrained to take the Oath, which contains something contrary
to the Catholic Religion: That their Goods that have been seized since the
last Edict, should be restored to them.

And generally that they should receive more Graces and Liberty in Favor of
the Alliance with France, than had been promised them in consideration of that
of Spain.

The Deputation of Father Berule, Superior General of the Fathers of the
Oratory to his Holiness, to obtain the Dispensation for the aforesaid Marriage.
THE Instructions which were given to Father de Berule, were to render himself
with all Diligence at Rome, to obtain the Pope's Dispensation, and to this
Effect to represent to his Holiness, That the King of Great Britain having
demanded of the King his Sister Madame Henrietta Maria, for a Wife for the
Prince of Wales, his Son; his Majesty hearkened the more willingly to this
Proposition, in that he esteemed it very profitable toward the Conversion of
the English, as heretofore a French Princess married into England, had induced
them to embrace Christianity: but the Honor which he had vowed to the Holy
See, and particularly to his Holiness, who baptized him in the Name of Pope
Clement VIII did not permit him to execute the Treaty without having obtained
his Dispensations. That this Marriage ought to be looked upon, not only for the
Benefit of the English Catholics, but of all Christendom, who would thereby
receive great Advantage: That there was nothing to be hazarded for in Madame,
seeing that she was as firm in the Faith and in Piety as he could desire: That
she had a Bishop and 28 Priests to do their Duties: That she had not a
Domestic that was not Catholic, and that the King of Great Britain, and the
Prince of Wales, would oblige themselves by Writing, and by Oath, not to
solicit her directly or indirectly, neither by themselves, or by Persons
interposed, to change her Religion. On the contrary, having nothing to fear for
her, he had great Cause to hope, that she being dearly beloved of the King, who
was already well enough disposed to be a Catholic, and of the Prince of Wales,
she might by so much the more contribute to their Conversion, as Women have
wonderful Power over their Husbands, and their Fathers-in-law, when Love has
given them the Ascendant over their Spirits: That she was so zealous in
Religion, that there was no doubt but she would employ in this pious Design,
all that depended upon her Industry; and that if God should not bless
Intentions in the Person of King James, and of the Prince of Wales, it was
apparent that their Children would be the Restorers of the Faith which their
Ancestors had destroyed, seeing she would have the Charge to educate them in
the Belief and in the Exercises of the Catholic Religion till the Age of 13
Years; and that these first Seeds of Piety being laid in their Souls,
cultivated with Care at the time when they should be more susceptible of
Instructions, would infallibly produce stable and permanent Fruits, that is to
say, a Faith so firm, that it may not be shaken by Heresy in a riper Age. That
after all, the Catholics of England would receive no small Profit at present,
since the King of Great Britain, and the Prince of Wales, would both oblige
themselves upon their Faith, and by Writing, no more to enquire after them, nor
punish them when they should be discovered; to enlarge all those that had been
imprisoned, and to make them Restitution of Money and of other Goods that had
been taken from them since the last Edict, if they were yet in being; and
generally to treat them with more Favor than they could have expected from the
Alliance with Spain. And further, He had Orders to let the Pope understand,
that to render more Respect to the Church, it had been agreed that Madame
should be affianced and married according to the Catholic Form, and agreeable
to that which was followed at the Marriage which Charles IX. made of Madam
Margaret of France with the late King Henry IV. then King of Navarre. All these
things spoke themselves, and appeared so visibly, that they would admit of no
doubt; so this Father that wanted neither Spirit nor Fire, represented them
dexterously to the Pope; and his Holiness made him hope for a speedy and
favorable Answer, etc. See the Life of Cardinal Richlieu, printed at Paris
1650. fol. 14, 15.

How does this agree with the King's Speech at the opening of the Parliament,
in the 18th Year of his Reign, That if the Treaty of the Match between his Son
and the Infanta of Spain were not for the Benefit of the Established Religion
at home, and of the Reformed abroad, he was not worthy to be their King? And
how does this agree with that part of the King's Speech at the opening of this
Parliament, That as for the Toleration of the Roman Religion, as God shall
surely judge him, he said, he never thought nor meant, nor never in Words
expressed any thing that savoured of it?

Do not Religion, Truth, and Justice support the Thrones of Princes? and
Hypocrisy, Falsehood, and Injustice undermine and overthrow them? What future
Happiness then could either the King or Prince hope to succeed this Treaty,
sworn to by them both, so diametrically contrary to the Laws and Constitutions
of this Nation, wherein the Majesty of the King, as well as the Safety of the
Nation, is founded? and to govern by these, and observe this Treaty, will be
impossible. What Peace could the Prince find at home, even in his Bed, when an
imperious French Wife shall be ever instigating him to break his
Coronation Oath, to truckle to that imposed upon him by her Brother of France?

These Pills, how bitter soever, must be swallowed by the King, rather than his
Son shall be balked a second time; nay, it seems they were very sweet to him:
For Mr. Howel, in the Life of Lewis III. says, fol. 66. that King James said
passionately to the Lords of the Council of the King of France;

My Lords, the King of France has wrote unto me, That he is so far my Friend,
that if ever I have need of him, he will render me Offices in Person,
whenever I shall desire him: (the Truth of this you will see by and by.)
Truly he has gained upon me more than any of his Predecessors; and he may
believe me, that in any thing that shall concern him, I will employ not only my
Peoples Lives, but my own; (Bravely spoken, and like K. James) and whosoever of
his Subjects (Lewis's) shall rise against him, either Catholics or others,
shall find him (James) a Party for him (Lewis). It Is true, if he be provoked to
infringe his Edicts, he shall impart as much as in him lies, by Counsel and
Advice, to prevent the Inconveniences. Who ever expected he should do more, or
ever did?

But Venus must not have the only Ascendant in this Treaty; for the Cardinal
will have Mars to be in Conjunction with her: and 'twas high time; for at this
time Monsieur Sobiez had provided a great Fleet of Men of War (as Times went
then with the French) and had entered and surprised the Fort of Blavet in
Bretaign, and took and carried away six of the French great Men of War out of
it, and also taken the Isles of The and Oleron, which he began to fortify; and
being absolute Master of the Sea, triumphantly, with a Fleet of 75 Men of War
of all sorts, landed a considerable Force at Medoc near Bourdeaux.

The Court of France was never so alarmed as at this, notwithstanding all the
King's Victories over the Reformed by Land; and therefore the Cardinal threw
another Article into the Treaty, That King James should lend the French a Fleet
of Ships to repress Soubiez; and in lieu thereof, the French should permit
Mansfield, who had raised an Army of 10000 Foot and 2000 Horse in England, to
land at Calais; where the French should join him with another Body of Horse and
Foot, for the Recovery of the Palatinate.

But see the French Faith, and how well Lewis made good his Promise to King
James, to render him all Offices in his own Person, whenever King James
should desire him: for at this time the Army being shipped at Dover, and put over
to Calais, where being denied Entrance, and having no other Instructions, and
wanting Provisions, they lay neglected at Sea; and in this Distress a
Pestilence raged among them, so that they were forced to sail to Zealand, where
having no Orders, they were denied Landing there: and this being the most
terrible Season of the Year, in December, what by Hunger, Cold, and Pestilence,
above two thirds of them perished, before Leave could be obtained to land them
in Holland; so that they never did the King of Spain near so much Hurt, as they
had done in England before they were shipped, living upon Plunder and
Free Quarter.

These were sad Presages of future Happiness from the designed Marriage, yet
these things no ways discomposed the quiet Repose of our pacifick King: so as
he might see his only Son married to a Daughter of France, was all his
Business; no matter how. The Thirst (which God was his Judge, and as he was a
Christian King, he had contracted, equal to that of the wayfaring Man in the
Deserts of Arabia, and in danger of Death for want of Water) for the good
Success of the Parliament, is now assuaged by the granting of three Subsidies
and three Fifteenths: Here Is no mention of marrying his only Son with the Tears
of his only Daughter; and he is still ready, with the Lives of his Subjects,
and his own, to assist the most High, most Excellent, and most Puissant Prince,
his most dear, and most beloved Brother, Cousin, and ancient Ally, Lewis.

The Managers of this Treaty were, Hay a Scots-man, created Earl of Carlisle;
and the Lord Kensington, for the more Honor of it, created Earl of Holland;
two of the King's Favorites of the second Rate, but who bare no proportion to
the Sagacity, Wisdom, and Integrity of the Earl of Bristol. Bristol was all
Hear of Oak, and would not bend to Buckingham's Pride and Ambition; but they
were Willows, that were liable to every Nod and Wind of Buckingham's Breath.

But how comes Buckingham, who must have an Oar in every Boat, to be absent
from this Treaty? The Reason was, tho he were not wise, yet he was jealous,
lest King James, in his Absence, should hear Bristol against him, as the King
had promised, as well as he had heard Buckingham against him; which was so
dangerous a Rock, as our Land-Admiral would not venture to run against.

Notwithstanding all this Haste for consummating this desired Marriage, the
Thread of the King's Life was spun out before; for upon the 27th of March, Ann.
1625. he died at Theobalds, in the 58th Year of his Age, having reigned twenty
two Years complete. Having had an Ague, the Duke of Buckingham did upon Monday
the 21st before, when in the Judgment of the Physicians the Ague was in its
Declination, apply Plasters to the Wrists and Belly of the King, and also did
deliver several quantities of Drink to the King, tho some of the King's
Physicians did disallow thereof, and refused to meddle further with the King,
until the said Plasters were removed; and that the King found himself worse
hereupon, and that Droughts, Raving, Fainting, and an intermitting Pulse,
followed hereupon; and that the Drink was twice given by the Duke's own hands,
and a third time refused: and the Physicians, to comfort him, telling him, that
this second Impairment was from Cold taken, or some other Cause; No, no, said
the King, it is that which I had from Buckingham. I confess, this was but a
Charge upon the Duke, upon the Impeachment of the Commons, as you may read in
Rushworth, fol. 355, 356. yet it was next to positive Proof; for King Charles,
rather than this Charge should come to an Issue, dissolved the Parliament,
which was a Failure of Justice, tho the Commons had voted him four Subsidies,
and four Fifteenths, before it was passed into an Act.

The Character of King James.
He was the first of that Name King of England, and the first King of the whole
Isle of Britain, and the first King, since Henry the first, that was born out
of the Allegiance to the King of England, and was the first (at least since
Rich. 2.) that affected and endeavored to introduce an Arbitrary Power in
England, foreign to the Laws and Constitutions of it; and in all his Reign was
more governed by Flatterres and Favorites, than by the Advice of his
Parliament, or a wise Council.

His Flatterers and Favorites seldom spoke of him but under the Appellation of
Most Sacred, rarely I think or never before used to any of the Kings of
England; and of the Solomon of the Age, though never were two Kings more
unlike, unless it were in their Sons, Charles and Rehoboam: for Solomon died
the richest of all the Kings of the World, King James the poorest; Solomon was
inspired above all other Kings with Wisdom, and his Proverbs Divine Sentences,
for Improvement of Virtue and Morality; whereas this King's Learning, wherein
he and his Flatterers so much boasted, was a Scandal to his Crown: for all his
Writings against Bellarmine and Peron, of the Papal Power of King-Killing and
King-Deposing, were only Brawls and Contentions, and (...) Learning on one side
or the other: A Power disclaimed by our Savior when the Devil would have given
him it; and denied any such Power in this World, even when the Jews were ready
to crucify him, John 18. 36.

And as there were no Reasons for these Brawls, so was the End of them,
Arrogance on the Popish Part, to impose a foreign Power or Jurisdiction upon
the King and Kingdom, and as foolish on the King's Part, it being exploded by
the Nation, and under the severest Penalty, the asserting such a Power
prohibited; and how could the King by his Writings further secure himself and
the Nation against it?

But it seems the King was in this more zealous for himself and the
Preservation of his Inherent Birthright to the Crown of England, than for the
Honor of God and our Savior, against the Pope's Usurpations other ways; for
in his Speech at the Opening the first Parliament of his Reign, he calls the
Church of Rome a (...) Church, and our Mother Church, and if they would lay
aside their King-killing and King-deposing Doctrine, and some Niceties, (but
names them not) he was content to meet them midway.

Does not the Pope exalt himself above God, and is Antichrist, i^ forbidding
the Laity the Cup in the partaking the Sacrament a Christ's last Supper? If any
Man makes a Question of it, I Will demonstrate it by a better Syllogism, than can
be made up of Aristotle's Analyticks.

For whosoever shall forbid what another commands, exalts himself above that
other.

But the Pope forbids the Drinking of the Cup at the Sacrament to the Laity who
are Christ's Members as well as the Priests.

And our Savior commands the Cup with an Emphasis, Drink ye All of it.

Therefore the Pope exalts himself above our Savior, and is Antichrist; which
was to be demonstrated: and this Mutilation makes this the Pope's, and not a
Sacrament of our Savior's Institution.

COROLLARY.
By the same Reason, I say, the Pope exalts himself above God, in forbidding
Marriage to the Priests.

For Marriage is an Institution of God in Paradise, Genesis 2. and commanded by
God, Genesis 9. 1. and the Pope forbids the Marriage of Priests; which St. Paul
says is the Doctrine of Devils: and it is worthy Observation, that the Pope
makes Marriage to be a Sacrament, yet denies it to Priests; and our Savior
commands the Cup in the Sacrament of his last Supper to be drunk by all, yet
this is denied the Laity, and only allowed to Priests.

I say Pope Julius the 2d in dispensing with Henry the 8th to marry his Brother
Arthur's Wife, exalted himself above God.

For whosoever shall dispense with, or allow what another forbids, exalts
himself above that other.

But Julius dispensed with Henry's Marriage of his Brother's Wife.

And God forbids the Marriage of a Man's Brother's Wife, Lev. 18. 16.

Therefore Julius exalted himself above God, which was to be demonstrated.

It Is true, I do not find the Marriage of a Man's Sister's Daughter
particularly forbidden by the Levitical Law; yet by the 17th verse it is by
inference forbidden, and is abhorrent to Nature: So that when Cambyses asked
the Magi, if it were not lawful to marry his Sister's Daughter, they told him
it was not; yet like Flatterers, they told him he might do what he pleased; and
Platina (I think it is in the Life of Pope Boniface the 5th, or Honorius)
exclaims against the Emperor Heraclius his marrying his Sister's Daughter, as
an Impiety scarce ever heard of: yet three Popes successively dispensed with
Philip the 2d, Philip the 3d, and Philip the 4th, Kings of Spain, marrying with
their own Nieces, viz. their Sisters Daughters.

It were endless to enumerate the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, how
dishonorable they are to God, and his sacred Laws. I Will give Instances only in
two: 1. Their Invocation of Saints after Death, many of which are of their own
making, thereby attributing to them a concurring Power with God, in his
Omniscience, which is a robbing God of his Honor; and if Saints after Death be
not Omniscient, it were in vain to pray to them.

The other is dispensing with Men's Promises and their own, tho they have bound
themselves to the Performance of them by an Oath; whereby the Popes render
themselves Enemies of Mankind, and Humane Society: for these are founded in
Truth, and Men's mutual Performance of their Promises. That this for several
hundreds of Years has been practiced by the Popes upon those Princes and
Subjects, whom they please to call Heretics, (when the Popes are greater) is
well known to those conversant in their Histories: I Will give but one Instance
of the Liberty the Popes take to themselves herein.

Upon the Death of Pope Marcellus 2d, Ann. 1555. the Cardinals in the Conclave,
before they proceed to the Election of another Pope, mutually swore, That
whosoever should be chosen, should call a Synod in six Years, and not make more
than 4 Cardinals in two Years after the Election, and Paul the 4th was chosed.
See the Council of Trent, Anno 1555.

Some small time after this Election, Paul entered the Conclave, to declare his
Intentions of a Promotion of Cardinals; and the Cardinal of St. James's pressed
to him, and put him in mind of his Oath before his Election: but the Pope
thrust the Cardinal back, and told him, This was to bind the Pope's Authority;
that it is an Article of Faith, that the Pope cannot be bound, much less bind
himself; that to say otherwise was manifest Heresy, from which he did absolve
those who spoke it, because he thought they did not speak obstinately; but if
any should say the same again, he would give Order the Inquisition should
proceed. And this being spoken in the Conclave, was in Cathedra, and
infallible, and never since retracted by him, or any other Pope. These are the
Heresies in the Church of Rome, for which Men must be slaughtered and burnt,
and for not believing them against the Evidence of a Man's Senses to the
contrary, and against the Nature of a Sacrament, That the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament after Consecration, is Christ's organical Body and Blood: This is
that true and Mother Church which the King would meet midway, if it would let
him and his Inherent Birthright alone.

This is that Prince who to prosecute these Brawls, and to wallow in sensual
Pleasures, neglected the foreign and domestic Affairs of his Kingdom; only
Great in making himself little, and not beloved at home, and contemptible and
dishonored abroad A Prince who squandred away the sacred Patrimony of the
Crown amongst Flatterers and Favorites, thereby becoming not able to maintain
the Honor of the Nation abroad; and neglecting the Increase and Repair of his
Navy-Royal, not only rendered the Nation in an unsettled and dangerous Peace at
home, but notwithstanding the Treaty with the Dutch for License to fish upon
the Coasts of England and Scotland, suffered them with Men of War to guard
their Fisheries, and to do it whether he would or not. A Prince, that by his
dissolute Life, and profane Conversation, debauched and effeminated the Genius
of the English Nation, whereby it became more scandalized for Swearing and
Drinking, than in any Age before. A Prince that broke all the Measures by which
Hen. 8. and Queen Elizabeth were the Arbitrators of Christendom. A Prince
fearful of all his Enemies abroad, while he was only great by exercising a
Tyrannical Arbitrary Power over his Parliaments and Subjects, who could only
have made him great abroad, and honored at home; whereby he became little
beloved at home, and suffered the Dutch to redeem their Cautionary Towns upon
their own Terms, and to dispossess the English at Amboyna, and their other
Factories in the East Indies and Africa. He only stood still looking on, while
the French upon the Matter suppressed the Reformed in France; and suffered
Ferdinand the 2d to overrun, and near subdue the Protestant Princes in
Germany, as well as his own Son-in-law: And tho he were the 6th of that Name,
King of Scotland, from John, alias Robert Stuart, the Son of Robert Stuart, by
his Paramour Elizabeth Moor; yet if Sir James Melvil says true, that Cardinal
Bethoun poisoned James the 5th, he was the first of that Name who died a
natural Death, if he did so; for James the first was murdered by his Uncle the
Earl of Athol, his Grand-father's legitimate Son, in his Queen's Arms, with
eight and twenty Wounds, the Queen receiving two to defend him. This was in the
Year 1436.

James the II. was killed by the breaking of a Piece of Cannon, while he
besieged the Castle of Roxburgh, the 3d of Aug. 1460.

James the III. having his Army routed by an Army headed by his Son James, was
killed at Bannoch-Burn, by the Lord Gray, and Robert Sterling of Ker, after Sir
Andrew Brothick, a Priest, had shriven him. This was in 1488.

James the IV. was killed the 9th of December 1514, at Flowdenfield, by the
English commanded by the Earl of Surrey, and his Body never found: and if James
the 5th was poisoned, then none of these Jameses died a natural Death, neither
did King James his Mother, being put to death Ann. 1587, for conspiring the
Death of Queen Elizabeth.

After the Dissolution of the Spanish Match, the King as greedily prosecuted
the French; and tho he lived not to see it settled, yet he saw the Army raised
under Count Mansfield, for the Recovery of the Palatinate, ruined by trusting
to the French Faith in this very Treaty. When he died, he not only left an
empty Exchequer, but a vast Debt upon the Crown, yet was engaged in a foreingn
War; and the Moneys given by the Parliament for carrying it on, were squandred
away in carrying on the French Treaty, and the Nation imbroiled in intestine
Feuds and Disorders.

At his Death he left a Son and Heir, and one Daughter: Before he died he saw
his Son overruled by his Favorite, against his determinate Will and Pleasure,
and the Prince's own Honor and Interest; which was a great Mortification to
him, and which he often complained of, but had not Courage to redress: and so
strongly was (...) Favorite possessed of his Power over his Son, in the King's
Life, that the Prince little regarded his Father's Precepts, or the Counsels of
any else, after his Death; whereby he increased the Internal Feuds, Jealousies
and Discords of the Nation, which ended in a sad Catastrophe, both of the
Favorite and the King.

At the King's Death, his Daughter, with her Husband, and her many Children,
were driven into Exile and Poverty in the Dominion of the Dutch States, where
they were more relieved by the States, the Prince of Orange, and some Bishops
and Noblemen of England, than by either of the Kings, Father, or Son.

A DETECTION OF THE Court and State of England, During the Reign of King
CHARLES I. etc.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
This Reign detected to the Dissolution of the Parliament, Tertio Car.
'TWAS a strange Reign this: As this King's Father's Reign was introduced with
a horrible Plague, so was this King's with a greater, and such as no Records of
any Times before mention the like: The first 15 Years of his Reign were
perfectly French, and such as never before were seen, or heard of in the
English Nation: this brought on a miserable War in all the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and Destruction upon the King, whenas it was not
in the Power of those which first raised the War against him to save his Life,
which they would have done. Baptista Nani, in the sixth Book of the History of
Venice, An. 1625, f. 221, observes, That after the Marriage of King Charles
with the Daughter of France, the Interest of State, or rather the Passion of
Favorites, converted the Bonds of Affection into Causes of Hatred: Europe in
those times reckoned it amidst its unhappy Destiny, that the Government of it
fell upon three young Kings, yet in the Flower of their Age, Princes of great
Power, desirous of Glory, and in Interest contrary; but in this alone by Genius
agreeing, that they committed the Burden of Affairs to the Will of their
Ministers: for with equal Independency, France was governed by Richlieu, Spain
by Olivares, and Great Britain by Buckingham, confounding Affections with
Interest, as well public as private. Betwixt the Cardinal and Buckingham open
Animosities discovered themselves, for Causes so much more unadvised, as they
were more hard to be known.

When King James died, the Nation was rent into four Parties, viz. The
Prerogative, which exalted the King's divided Will from the Laws and
Constitutions, above his Royal and Legal Will: The Country, or Legal Party,
which stood for the Legal Establishment of Church and State; and the Puritan,
and Popish Parties. After the Treaties of Marriage between the Prince and the
Daughters of Spain and France, the Popish and Prerogative Parties joined for
carrying on the Court-Designs; and were opposed by the Country and Puritan
Parties: and as the Prerogative and Popish Factions grew more insolent, so the
Puritan Party gathered Strength and Reputation among the Vulgar or ordinary
People, insomuch that in Number they became more than all the other three. We
shall take a better View of this Reign, if we look a little back into the
former.

After the Treaty of the Match with Spain was broken off, King James was
perplexed what to do, he had neither Money nor Courage to make War for the
Recovery of the Palatinate; and the Wounds which he had given the last
Parliament, by Imprisoning their Members for advising him to make War for the
Recovery of the Palatinate, were yet fresh and bleeding; and yet Buckingham,
whom he durst not offend, not content to satisfy his Spite against Olivares, by
breaking off the Match, was, notwithstanding all Difficulties, nay
Impossibility of Success, still pushing on the King to declare War against the
King of Spain.

The King thereupon referred this Business to my Lord Keeper Williams, my Lord
Treasurer Cranfield, the Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hamilton, the Earl of
Arundel, the Lord Carew, and the Lord Belfast; who all agreed, that they could
not say that the King of Spain had done the part of a Friend in the Recovery of
the Palatinate, as he had professed; nor could find that he had acted the Part
of an Enemy declaredly, as the Duke objected: and indeed my Lord Keeper's
Reasons against the War governed all the rest, that saw no Expediency for War
upon the Grounds communicated by Buckingham. And 'twas more observable, that
during the whole Treaty, while Buckingham was in Spain, the Business of the
Palatinate was never mentioned; and now he is come out of it, it must be the
Cause of a War with the King of Spain.

The Keeper's Reasons were, Upon whom shall we fall? Either upon the Emperor,
or King of Spain: the Emperor had in a sort offered the King his Son-in-law's
Country again for Payment of a great Sum of Money, in recompense of
Disbursments: but where was the Money to be had? yet it might be cheaper bought
than conquered before a War was ended. For the King of Spain, he saw no Cause
to assault him with Arms: He had held us indeed in a long Treaty to our Loss,
but he held nothing from us; and was more likely to continue the State of
things in a State of Possibility of Accommodation, because he disliked the Duke
of Bavaria's Ambition, and had rather stop the Enlargement of his Territories.

The King embraced this Advice; nor did he stay here (yet did not stay long)
but spoke hardly of Buckingham, who would have put him upon making War upon the
King of Spain; and the King's Censure upon him was so bitter, (Cabal, Page 92.)
that it was fit to be cast overboard in Silence, says the Bishop of
Litchfield, f. 169, 170. tit. 175.

This Resolution of the Council was so little to the Duke's Satisfaction, that
the Bishop says in the same Tit. that it made the Duke rise up, and chafe
against them from Room to Room, as a Hen that had lost her Brood, and clucks up
and down when she has none to follow her: Nor did the Duke stop here, but
notwithstanding the fierce Anger of the King, and his not answering one of the
Keeper's Reasons, he appealed from the Judgment of the Council to the
Parliament: Sure he durst not have done this, if he had not been sure of the
Prince to second him against the Opinion and Anger of his Father.

This was the third inexpiable Crime the Keeper had committed against the Duke:
the first was his Advice to the Duke, when he was in Spain, to hold a good
Correspondence with the Earl of Bristol, and Olivares; but finding the
contrary, by a Letter to the Duke of the 28th of June, which you may read in
the Bishop of Litchfield's Life of Bishop Williams, fol. 136. tit. 146. and
another of the 22d of July, tit. 155. fol. 147. where he in gentle manner
informed the Duke, as from the King himself, how zealous the King was, not only
of fair Terms between the Duke and Earl, but of a nearer Alliance. This was
such a piece of Impudence in the Keeper, that the Bishop says in the next tit.
that it removed the Duke's Affections from the Keeper for ever; nor could this
State-Minister contain his Displeasure, but wrote to my Lord Mandevile, that
the first Action he would imbarque himself in, when he came home, should be to
remove the Keeper out of his Place. And the next Crime of the Keeper, was, The
Duke was afraid of his Wit. See the Bishop, tit. 156.

However, this Counsel took such Effect with King James, and he was so
satisfied that he had no Color of Title to make War against the King of Spain,
that when the Parliament after gave him three Subsidies, and three Fifteens,
for the Recovery of the Palatinate; and when he had raised an Army of 10000
Foot and 2000 Horse to be commanded by Count Mansfield, the King not only made
it a Condition, that Mansfield, with the Army, should not commit any Hostility
against any of the Dominions, which by Right appertained to the King of Spain,
or the Infanta Isabella, Princess of the Low Countries (or the Spanish
Netherlands) and in case he did so, from that time the King was not longer to
continue Payment of the Army, but also took an Oath of Mansfield to observe the
Conditions.

So that how powerful soever the Duke was over King James, yet in none of these
Particulars could he obtain his End; viz. in not prevailing upon the King to
make War upon the King of Spain, nor in removing the Lord Keeper, nor in having
the Earl of Bristol committed to the Tower.

After the breaking of the Spanish Match, it was observed that King James's
Temper was quite so altered, that he forgot his Recreations of Hunting and
Hawking at New Market, but whilst he was there, he remained as in an Infirmary;
and in a Fit of Melancholy, told the Earl of Carlisle that if he had sent
Williams into Spain with his Son, he had kept Hearts-ease and Honor, both
which he wanted. See the Bishop of Litchfield, lib. 1. tit. 174.

King James then began to look back upon his former Actions, in having lost the
Affections of his Subjects; and now entangled in the Difficulties which he saw
inevitably coming upon him, charged the Prince often, in the hearing of the
Lord Keeper Williams, to call Parliaments often, and to continue them, tho
their Rashness sometimes did offend him: That in his own Experience he never
got any Good by falling out with them. See the Bishop of Litchfield, lib. 2. f.
16. tit. 16.

How well King Charles observed his Father's Advice in any of these; nay, how
diametrically he went contrary, and contrary to all good Advice given him in
the very first Year of his Reign, will soon appear, and the miserable Effects
which followed.

I have heard my Father (tho not a Courtier, yet acquainted with many
Courtiers) say, that they would often pray to God that the Prince might be in the
right Way where he set, for if he were in the wrong, he would prove the most
wilful of any King that ever reigned.

Tho all must stoop to mighty Buckingham, yet that he might stand surer, who
must be his only Support but Laud, Bishop of Saint David's; who from picking
Quarrels in Lectures at Oxford, and being an Informer before, now is become
Vicegerent to Buckingham? A List of all the eminent Men for Promotion in the
Church is given in; those whom Laud would have promoted were noted (O) for
Orthodox, and whom he liked not were marked (P) for Puritans: these two stopped
up both the King's Ears from any other Doctrines in Church or State, but what
was infused by them; so early did King James's Prophecy to my Lord Keeper
Williams, when he was so importunate to have Laud preferred, begin to be
fulfilled. Before a Year goes about, you shall see Buckingham set the King at
odds with the Parliament, and yet engage him in a War against Spain; and before
another goes about, engage the King in another against France, to satiate his
Spite and Revenge against Richlieu, for crossing him in his Lust; and after 13
Years, Laud shall be the Firebrand to set all the three Nations in the Flame
of a Civil War, as King James had foretold. But it is time to come to
Particulars.

The first Enterprise which the Duke engaged the King in, was not for the
Recovery of the Palatinate, as he pretended when he would have engaged King
James in a War against the King of Spain; but to express his Hatred against
Olivares: and therefore a Fleet must be rigged up, to make War in Spain, even
when King James's Corpse lay unburied, and at so unseasonable a time, when the
Charges of King James's Funeral were so fast approaching, and when the Charges
of the King's Ambassadors, the Earls of Carlisle and Holland, ran so high at
Paris, to outvy the French Splendour, for solemnizing the Marriage between the
King and the Queen; and these so much more augmented, by the Duke's
Preparations to fetch the Queen over, which, when the Duke shall come to Paris,
must outshine not only the Bravery of the English Ambassadors, but all that
Cardinal Richlieu could do.

From the Unseasonableness of this Expedition, let us see by what Counsels
Buckingham managed this designed Expedition; and herein take Light from a
Letter which my Lord Cromwell wrote to the Duke, and which you may read in
Rushworth's Collections, fol. 199. after the Fleet had lain so long, that the
Season of the Year was past, and most dangerous for Ships to put to Sea. The
Letter is Verbatim.

THey offer to lay Wagers the Fleet goes not this Year, and that of necessity
shortly a Parliament must be; which, when it comes, sure it will much
discontent you. It Is wondered at, that since the King did give such great Gifts
to the Duchess of Chevereux, and those that went, how now a small Sum in the
Parliament should be called for at such a time: and let the Parliament sit when
it will, begin they will where they ended. They say, the Lords of the Council
knew nothing of Mansfield's Journey, or this Fleet, which discontents even the
best sort, if not all. They say, it is a very great Burden your Grace takes
upon you, since none know any thing but you. It Is conceived, that not letting
others bear part of the Burden you now bear, it may ruin you, (which Heavens
forbid). Much Discourse there is of your Lordship, here and there, as I passed
home and back; and nothing is more wondered at, than that one grave Man is not
known to have your ear, except my Good and Noble Lord Conway. All Men say, if
you go not with the Fleet, you will suffer in it; because if it prosper, it
will be thought no Act of yours; and if it succeed ill, it might have been
better if you had not guided the King. They say, your Undertakings in this
Kingdom will much prejudice your Grace: and if God bless you not with Goodness,
to accept kindly what in Duty and Love I offer, questionless my Freedom of
letting you know the Discourse of the World, may prejudice me. But if I must
lose your Favor, I had rather lose it for striving to do you good, in letting
you know the Talk of the wicked World, than for any thing else; so much I
heartily desire your Prosperity, and to see you trample the ignorant Multitude
under foot. All I have said is the Discourse of this World; and when I am able
to judge of Actions, I will freely tell your Lordship my Mind, which when it
shall not always incline to serve you, may all my noble Thoughts forsake me.
The Success of this Expedition you will hear soon.

Thus was the King of Spain required for all the noble Favors he had shown the
King when he was in Spain. This was the Return of Buckingham's Protestation to
the King of Spain, when they parted at the Escurial, [That he would be an
everlasting Servant to the King of Spain, the Queen, and the Infanta, and would
do the best Offices he could for concluding the Business (the Match between the
Prince and Infanta) and strengthen the Amity between the two Kingdoms] to have
War made upon him, without any Declaration of it by King Charles, so soon as it
came in his Power to do it.

After Buckingham became Lord Admiral, the English Navy lay at Road unarmed,
and fit for Ruin, as you may see in Rushworth, fol. 3. This was before the
Treaty of the Spanish Match; and after the breaking of the Spanish Match, the
Duke not only neglected the guarding of the Seas, whereby the Trade of the
Nation not only decayed, but the Seas became ignominiously infested by Pirates
and Enemies, to the Loss of very many of the Merchants and Subjects of England;
as you may read in the Fourth Article of the Charge of the Commons against him,
in Rushworth, fol. 312.

Objection. But this was but an Accusation, and therefore it does not amount to
a Proof.

It ought not to be presumed, the Commons would have charged this upon him
without Proof; and I say it is strong Proof upon the Duke, since the King
dissolved the Parliament rather than the Duke should come to a Trial upon it.

However, the Navy lay thus neglected, and Seas unguarded; and tho the French
had broken the Treaty of Marriage with France, by not suffering Mansfield to
land his Army at Calais, yet the supplying the French with a Fleet to subdue
the Rochellers, must be performed: And to this end, even whilst King James lay
unburied, great Consultation between the Duke and the Marquess of Efsiat was
had how this might be done. The King had no Men of War ready, but the
Vaunt-Guard; and the French Necessities were urgent, for all this while Sobiez
rode triumphant at Sea, the French not being able to encounter him; and thereby
Rochel upon all Occasions was relieved by Sea.

However, the French must be gratified, or this hopeful Marriage with France
might be disturbed: The Duke therefore, by his Power of Lord Admiral, besides
the Vaunt-Guard, pressed 7 Ships, of the Merchants of England, into the King's
Service; viz. The Great Neptune, whereof Sir Ferdinando Gorge was Captain; the
Industry, of 450 Tuns, whereof James Moyer was Captain; the Pearl, of 540 Tuns,
whereof Anthony Tench was Captain; the Marigold, of 300 Tuns, whereof Thomas
Davis was Captain; the Loyalty, of 300 Tuns, Jasper Dare Captain; the Peter and
John, of 300 Tuns, John Davis Captain; and 7thly, the Gift of God, Henry Lewen
Captain.

The Duke, tho the Navy were unprovided with Stores and Ammunition, could find
Stores and Ammunition sufficient for furnishing this Fleet; and upon the 8th of
May caused a Warrant under the Great Seal to be issued, to call the Companies
aboard which had been raised for the French Service, with the first Opportunity
to go to such a Port as the French Ambassador should direct, and there to
expect Directions.

But see the Dissimulation and Hypocrisy of the Duke and French Ambassador
d'Efsiat; for all this while they gave out, that this Fleet should not be
employed against the Rochellers, but against Genoua, which it seems took part
with the King of Spain against the French King's Allies in Italy; and that
Vice Admiral Pennington should not take in any more French into any of the
Ships of this Fleet, than the English could master. These were the Instructions
which the Duke communicated to the Council; and with these Pennington sailed to
Diep.

But when the Fleet arrived at Diep, the Duke of Momerancy, Admiral of France,
would have put 200 Men into the Industry, and offered the like to every one of
the other Ships in the Fleet, telling them, they were to fight against the City
and Inhabitants of Rochel; with a Proffer of Chains of Gold, and other Rewards,
to all those Captains, Masters, and Owners, which should go in this Service:
which they all, with one Consent, rejected, and subscribed their Names to a
Petition to Pennington against it; whereupon on Pennington, with the whole
Fleet, returned into the Downs, and from the Downs Pennington wrote a Letter to
the Duke, by one Ingram, who saw the Duke read it, together with the last
Petition; and by Ingram, Pennington became a Suitor to the Duke to be
discharged of this Employment.

This put the Duke and French Agents to their Trumps, how to retrieve their
Game; and tho all these Transactions were concealed from the King and Council,
yet the Protestants in France had got Knowledge of this Design, and the Duke of
Rohan, and Protestants of France, by Monsieur de la Touch, solicited the King
and Council against this Design, and had good Words and Hopes from both: But
Buckingham told de la Touch, the King his Master was obliged, and so the Ships
must and should go.

But there was another Obstacle to be removed, or this worthy Design was at a
full Stop. The Duke had impressed and hired the seven Merchants Ships upon the
King of England's Account, and for his Service, and so they could not be passed
into the French Hands, without a new Agreement with the Owners: Hereupon his
Grace was pleased to take a Journey to Rochester, to settle the Agreement,
which must be as the French Ambassadors would, whether the Owners of the Ships
would or not. I will be particular herein, not only to show what a Minister of
State Buckingham was, or what Reliance there was upon his Word or Honor, but
more especially, for that the Ruin not only of the whole Interest of the
Reformed of France was a Consequence of this Action, wherein the Mercenary
Dutch State conspired also with the Duke; but it was the Foundation upon which
the French Naval Grandeur was built, as well to the Terror of Christendom, as
of England at this very Day.

My Lord Conway was the Duke's Nanny, and tho principal Minister of State by
the Duke's Promotion, yet made the Office to bend which way soever the Duke
nodded: This Lord Conway directed a Letter upon the 10th of July 1625. as from
the King, to Vice Admiral Pennington, whereby he took upon him to express and
signify to him, that his Master had left the Command of the Ships to the French
King, and that Pennington should receive into them so many Men as the French
King pleased, for the time contracted for (viz. six Months, but not to exceed
eighteen) and recommended his Letter should be his sufficient Warrant. This
Letter was delivered by one Parker to Pennington in the Downs; and the English
Merchants had constituted one James Moyer and Anthony Touchin to treat with the
French Ambassadors (which were the Duke of Chevereux, Monsieur Vollocleer, and
the Marquess of Efsiat); and at Rochester the Duke sent back a Letter to Moyer
and Touchin, to come and treat with the French Ambassadors, to settle Business
about the Delivery up of their Ships and Fraights, into the Power of the French
King.

The Propositions which the French Ambassadors made to Moyer and Touchin, were,

1. That the English Captains, and their Companies, should consent and promise
to serve the French King against all, none excepted but the King of Great
Britain, in Conformity to the Contract formerly passed between D'Efsiat and
them.

2. That they should consent and agree, in consideration of the Assurance given
them by the Ambassadors, to the Articles of the 25th of March before, (which
you may read in Rushworth, fol. 328.) whereby the French King should be Master
of the said Ships by indifferent Inventory, and that they, by him, should be
warranted against all Hazards and Sea Fights; and if they miscarried, then the
Value of them to be paid by the French King, who would also confirm this new
Proposition within 15 Days after the Ships should be delivered to his Use, by
good Caution in London.

3. That if the French King would take any Men out of the Ships, he might; but
without any Diminution to the Freight, for or in respect thereof.

To these, Moyer, in the behalf of the Merchants, answered, 1. That their Ships
should not go to serve against Rochel. 2. That they would not send their Ships
without good Warrants. 3. Nor without sufficient Security, to their liking, for
the Payment of their Freight, and Rendition of their Ships, or the Value
thereof: for the Ambassadors Security was by them taken not to be sufficient,
and they protested against it, and utterly refused the peraffetted Instrument.
Hereupon Sir John Epstey and Sir Tho. Dove dissuaded the Duke from this
Enterprise, telling him, he could not justify nor answer the Delivery of the
Ships.

However, Buckingham's Dictatorship would not admit of Justice or Reason, but
he commanded Moyer, and the rest, that they should obey the Lord Conway's
Letter, and return to Diep, to serve the French, and that so was the King's
Pleasure, (tho the King told the Duke of Rohan's Agent, de la Touch,
otherwise); yet privately, at the same time, the Duke told them, that the
Security offered by the Ambassadors was sufficient, and that tho they went to
Diep, they might, and then should keep their Ships in their own Power till they
had made their own Conditions.

Hereupon, the Duke of Chevereux and Vollocleer constituted D'Efsiat their
Deputy, to treat with the Merchants at Diep for the Delivery of their Ships
into the French Power; but with him the Duke sent Mr. Edward Nicholas, his
Secretary, with Instructions, by word of Mouth, to execute the King's Pleasure
by my Lord Conway's Letter, for putting the Merchants Ships into the French
Power, upon the Conditions peraffetted at Rochester by the three French
Ambassadors. But the Captains of the Ships refused to submit to the Conditions,
tho Mr. Nicholas, in the King's Name, from Day to Day threatened them, and
vehemently pressed them to deliver up their Ships upon the former Propositions.

Hereupon D'Efsiat (to have further Instructions from the Duke) entered into a
new Treaty with the Merchants, and like a French Merchant, got Letters to be
sent into England, that the Peace was concluded with those of the Religion in
France, and that within 14 Days the War should break out in Italy, with a
Design upon Genoua, a matter of great Importance against the Spaniard. Hereupon
the Duke procured the King to write a Letter to Pennington, dated July 28. to
this effect.

HIS Majesty did thereby charge and command Captain Pennington, without delay,
to put his Highness's former Command in Execution, for consigning the
Vaunt-Guard into the hands of the Marquess D'Efsiat for the French, with all
her Furniture, assuring her Officers, his Majesty would provide for their
Indemnity: And to require the other seven Ships, in his Majesty's Name, to put
themselves into the Service of the French King, according to the Promise his
Majesty had made to him: And in case of Backwardness or Refusal, commanding him
to use all forcible means to compel them, even to sinking; with a Charge not to
fail; and this Letter to be his Warrant.

This Letter was delivered to Pennington in the Beginning of August, by Captain
Wilbraham: Hereupon Pennington went back out of the Downs, carrying with him
the said Letters, and certain Instructions in Writing from the Duke to his
Secretary Nicholas: And about the time Pennington returned to Diep, Nicholas
threatened the Captains of the Ships, and told them, it was as much as their
Lives were worth, if they delivered not up their Ships to the French; whereupon
some of them would have come away, and left their Ships, and fled into Holland.

Upon Pennington's coming to Diep, he delivered the Vanguard absolutely into
the French Power, to be employed as they pleased, and acquainted the rest of
the Captains with the King's Command, that they should likewise put their Ships
into the French Power; which they all refused to do, unless they might have
good Security for the Delivery of their Ships, or Satisfaction for them.

Hereupon Pennington went on Shore, and spoke with D'Efsiat, and upon his
Return told the Captains, they must rely upon the Security peraffetted in
England; whereupon the Captains weighed Anchor, and prepared to be gone; upon
which Captain Pennington shot at them, and forced them all to come to an Anchor
again, except the brave Sir Ferdinando Gorge in the Neptune, more brave in
running away from this abominable Action, than charging into the midst of an
Enemy.

When the Captains came ashore, they spoke with Mr. Nicholas, who enforced
them to come to a new Agreement, which you may read in Rushworth, fol. 335. and
to deliver up their Ships into the French Power; but not one of them would take
the French Pay in the Expedition, but one Gunner, who was at his Return killed
in charging of a Cannon, not well spunged by him; and the Duke's Secretary
Nicholas had a Diamond Ring, and a Hat-band set with Diamond-Sparks, given him
by the French Ambassador, for his pains taken in this noble Employment.

This was the second noble Design of this grand Minister of State Buckingham,
whilst King James lay unburied: we will now proceed to the third; wherein
you will see how well Richlieu requited Buckingham's Service, in accommodating
the French with a Fleet to subdue the Rochellers.

Tho the Duke did not personally manage the Treaty of the French Marriage at
Paris, as he did the Spanish at Madrid, for the Reasons aforesaid; yet none but
he, now the whole Treaty was consummate, and so firmly performed on the English
part, must fetch the Queen to the King: and when all the mighty Preparations
for the Magnificence of this mighty Duke were completed, away he hies to
Paris, where he arrived the 24th of May, and there he staid the full term of
seven Days, wherein he performed more wonderful Exploits than he had done in so
many Months before at Madrid. And these we will take from the noble Nani, who
was out of the Reach of Buckingham's Envy, or Flattery of the English Court,
and as near as I can, in his own Words, Anno 1625. fol. 221, 222.

Buckingham being in France to carry back Charles's Bride, it seemed, that in
the free Conversations of that Court, he had taken the Boldness to discover
something of his Inclination to the Queen, whilst the Cardinal was inflamed
with the same Passion, or rather feigned to be so, with Aversion in her, who
with Virtue equal to the Nobleness of Blood, equally despised the Vanity of the
one, and abhorred the Artifices of the other: (I think Nani herein was
mistaken, as will soon appear.) Whereupon the Factions arising among the Ladies
of the Court were not so secret, but the King was obliged to make a Noise, and
banish some; but the Contention between the two Favorites was for Power, and
Richlieu, who by reason of the Favor of the King in his own Kingdom prevailed
in Authority, procured Buckingham many Mortifications and Disgusts: The other
was no sooner arrived at London with the Bride, but to make a show of Power not
inferior, by ill using her thought to revenge himself. The Catholic Religion
served for a Pretext, whilst the Family brought out of France, according to
Contract of Marriage, practiced it: whence Disgusts brake forth to such a
degree, that the Minds of the Spouses being alienated, and Affections between
the Crowns themselves disturbed, it looked as if Discord had been the
Bride-maid at that Wedding. You Will hear more of this hereafter.

It Is observable, when Humor, not Counsel, governs Actions, how it runs into
the contrary Extremes. King James, in Confidence of being supplied of all his
Wants by the Spanish Match, in great Displeasure broke up the Parliament in the
18th Year of his Reign, and imprisoned many of the Members, for presuming to
advise him against it; and this King expected the Parliament should make good
all the Duke's Extravagancies, for the Tale which the Duke told in Parliament,
the 21 Jac. for breaking off the Spanish Match, when he kept back the Earl of
Bristol, as you heard before, from making his Defense, and proving the contrary
of what Buckingham had told.

And so confidently was the King possessed that that Parliament continued in
the same Mood, that I have heard one of Sir Edward Coke's Sons say, that tho
when King Charles came to the Crown Sir Edward would have waited upon him in
Testimony of his Duty and Service, the King would not admit him into his
Presence, yet the King sent to know of him, whether he might continue this
Parliament, notwithstanding the King's Death; which Sir Edward said could not
be, for that upon the King's Death the Dissolution followed: yet upon the
Election, not ten of the old surviving Members but were chosen again.

This Parliament met upon the 18th of June 1625. where the King laid open to
them, that the Business he called them for was, that whereas they had advised
him to break off the two Treaties, which were for the Spanish Match, and
Recovery of the Palatinate, and that his Father being thereby engaged in a War
for the Recovery of the Palatinate, they would now assist him in the carrying
of it on. The Speech you may read in Rushworth, fol. 175, 176.

But Mr. Rushworth is mistaken, and I wonder Nalson and Franklin took no notice
of it, that my Lord Keeper Coventry did second it; for it was my Lord Keeper
Williams, whose quaint and learned Speech you may read in the second Book of
the Life of the Keeper, by the Bishop of Litchfield, fol. 9, 10. Nor was
Williams displaced till the 23d of October following, as you may see fol. 27.

The Commons, before they entered upon Grievances, Sir Edward Coke moving it,
to ingratiate themselves with the King, voted him two entire Subsidies; and the
last Parliament, but the Summer before, gave his Father three Subsidies and
three Fifteens, which were more than ever any Parliament granted the King in
threefold the time before. But that we may better look forward, look a little
back.

King James upon the Rreach of the Spanish Match, put forth a Proclamation for
putting the Laws in Execution against Popish Recusants; but upon the first of
May, King Charles sent this Warrant to my Lord Keeper Williams.

Charles Rex,

RIght Reverend, and Right Trusty, etc. Whereas we have been moved, in
Contemplation of our Marriage with the Lady Mary, Sister of Our dear Brother,
the Most Christian King, to grant to Our Subjects, Roman Catholics, a
Cessation of all and singular Pains and Penalties, as well Corporal as
Pecuniary, whereunto they be subject, or any ways may be liable by any Laws,
Statutes, Ordinances, or any thing whatsoever, or for or by reason of their
Recusancy or Religion, in every Matter or thing concerning the same: Our Will
and Pleasure is, and we do by these Presents authorize and require you upon the
Receipt hereof. That immediately you do give Warrants, Order and Directions, as
well unto all our Commissioners, Judges, and Justices of the Peace, as also
unto all other our Officers and Ministers, as well Spiritualas Temporal,
respectively to whom it may appertain, that they, and every of them do forbear
all, and all manner, and cause to be forborne all manner of Proceedings against
our said Subjects Romans Catholics, and every of them, as well by Information,
Presentment, Indictment, Conviction, Process, Seizure, Distress, or
Imprisonment, or any other Ways and Means whatsoever, whereby they may be
molested for the Causes aforesaid. And further also, That for time to come, you
take notice of, and speedily redress all Causes and Complaints, for or by
reason of any thing done contrary to this our Will: and this shall be unto you,
and to all to whom you shall give such Warrant, Order or Direction, sufficient
Warrant and Discharge in that Behalf. And this is so much more remarkable, that
this Warrant was granted when Buckingham was so busy in setting out the Fleet
against the Rochellers.


Here was a Suspension of the Laws with a Witness, by the King's absolute Will
and Pleasure, notwithstanding all the Officers by Law were under the
Obligations of their Oaths to the contrary: and for the First Fruits of this
Warrant the King granted upon the 10th of May, a special Pardon to twenty Roman
Priests, of all Offenses committed by them against the Laws.

Can any Man now believe, that the Parliament 18th Jac. should be so jealous,
that the Spanish Match would be a Door to let in a Toleration of Popery, and
therefore advised the King to break off the Match with Spain; and yet this
Parliament should be so purblind, as not to see this put in Execution, at the
Instance of the French in this King's Reign; especially whenas the Spaniards
(unless in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) were the English Friends and Allies,
and with whom the English had a most beneficial and gainful Trade for 22 Years
in King James's Reign, whereby they became doubly more enriched, than in the 44
Years Reign of Queen Elizabeth; whereas the French, as they were a Neighboring
Nation, were ever faithless and Enemies to the English Nation, and with whom it
always had a Trade to the English Loss, as much to the enriching France, as to
the impoverishing the English?

Hereupon the Commons sent Sir Edward Coke with a Message to the Lords to
desire their Concurrence in a Petition to the King against Recusants, which was
agreed to, and presented to the King, who answered, That he was glad the
Parliament were so forward for Religion, and assured them, they should find him
as forward; that their Petition being long, could not be presently answered.

Nor were the Commons less alarmed, at the countenancing the Arminian Sect,
whose Tenets, next to Laud, Mr. Richard Mountague propagated; and about the
latter end of King James his Reign, published a Book entitled, A new Gag for
an old Goose; which the Parliament took notice of, and referred it to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who disallowed it, and sought to suppress it, and
ended in an Admonition given to Mountague: but after King James his Death, who
was an Enemy to these Tenets, Mountague then printed it again, and dedicated it
to King Charles, now Buckingham and Laud ruled all.

Hereupon the Commons brought Mountague to the Bar of their House, and
appointed a Committee to examine the Errors therein, and gave Thanks to the
Archbishop for the Admonition to Mountague, whose Books they voted to be
contrary to the Articles established in the Parliament, to tend to the King's
Dishonor, and Disturbance of the Church and State, and took Bond of Mountague
for his Appearance.

But the King intimated to the House, that the things determined concerning
Mountague, without his Privity, did not please him, for he was his Servant and
Chaplain in ordinary; and that he had taken the Business into his own Hands:
whereat the Commons seemed much displeased.

This was the first Breach between the King and Commons: and here let us see
what hasty Steps Laud took to fulfill King James his Prophecy of him, in making
Dissensions, and to be a Firebrand to set the Nation on fire, by fomenting and
exasperating the Factions in it. In this Act of Mountague, you may observe a
twofold Crime: First his Contempt and Disobedience to the Church of England,
(which Laud pretended so much to exalt) and to the Parliament, that his Book
being questioned in Parliament, and by the Commons committed to the
Archbishop, who not only disallowed and suppressed it; but Mountague being
admonished against it, he should upon King James his Death presume to reprint
it, in Defiance to the Metropolitan of England, contrary to his Canonical
Obedience, and to the Commons; thereby to make a Dissension between the King
and them. And secondly, his being so audacious, as to dedicate it to the King,
thereby to engage the King in defense of his Arrogance and Disobedience; and
for a Reward of this special Piece of Service, before King James was two Months
dead, to be made the King's Chaplain in Ordinary, to be thereby protected from
Justice.

But if it be asked how it does appear, that Laud was concerned in this Act and
Promotion of Mountague; I answer, there is a threefold Reason to induce the
Belief of it: First, the end for which this Book was wrote, for Promotion of
Arminian Tenets, whereof Laud was so great a Stickler. Secondly, none else but
Laud could have such an Ascendant in things of this kind, and to cause to early
a Promotion for such a piece of Service: but Thirdly, which clears the
Question; when the King's Necessities caused him to call another Parliament,
about six or seven Months after, Laud fearing the Commons falling again upon
Mountague, as they did, Laud sounded the King by Buckingham, whether the King
would leave Mountague to the Parliament; and finding the King determined to do
it, in great Zeal, said, I seem to see a Cloud arising and threatening the
Church of England, God in his Mercy dissipate it, as you may read in Rush. f.
203. as if the questioning a seditious and a disobedient Fellow to his
Superior in the Church, were a Cloud to threaten the Church of England.

If Laud was the first that sowed Dissension between the King and Parliament
upon the Pretense of the Church of England, Buckingham shall be the second,
upon the Account of the Church of Rome: and herein you will see the Temper of
Buckingham to any which should presume to give him good Counsel.

The Dissension between the King and Commons began with Mountague at London,
where the Plague than raged, and all England over, so that most of the Members
shrunk away, to flee the Danger of it, and those that staid were in danger of
their Lives: This put the King into a mavelous Strait what to do, for his
Necessities, as Buckingham managed Affairs, and his being imbroiled in the
Spanish War, were such as the Subsidies granted the King his Father the last
Year, and those granted the King now, could not support.

Hereupon the King calling a Council at Hampton Court what to do, the King
proposed upon the 10th of July to adjourn the Parliament to Oxford; which was
mainly favored by the Duke: my Lord Keeper Williams opposed the Proposition
for two Reasons; First, That the Infection had overspread the whole Land, so
that no Man that traveled from his own Home, knew where to lodge in Safety;
that the Lords and Gentlemen would be so distasted to be carried abroad in so
mortal a time, that it is likely when they came together, they would vote out of
Discontent and Displeasure; that his Majesty was ill counseled to give
Offenses in the Bud of his Reign, tho small ones. Secondly, the Parliament had
given two Subsidies at Westminster; tho they removed to Oxford, it is yet the
same Sessions; and if they alledg, it is not the Use of the House to give twice
in a Sessions, (tho I wish heartily they would) yet how shall we plead them out
of Custom, if they be stiff to maintain it? It is not fit for the Reputation of
the King, to fall upon a probable Hazard of a Denial. The Duke which heard this
with Impatience, said, That public Necessity must sway more than one Man's
Jealousy.

The Keeper hereupon besought the King to hear him in private, and acquainted
the King, That the Duke had Enemies in the House of Commons, who had contrived
Complaints, and made them ready to be preferred, and would spend time at Oxford
about them. And what Folly were it to continue a Sessions that had no other
Aim, but to bring the Duke upon the Stage? But if your Majesty think that this
is like an Hectic, quickly known, but hardly cured; my humble Opinion is, That
the Malady or Malice, call it what you will, may sleep awhile after Christmas;
there is no time lost in whetting the Sith well. I hope to give an Account by
that time, by undertaking with the chief Sticklers, that they shall supersede
their Bitterness against your great Servant, and that Passage to your weighty
Counsels may be made smooth and peaceable.

But why, said the King, do you conceal this from Buckingham? Good Sir, said
the Keeper, fain would I begin at that End, but he will not hear me with
Moderation: And because it was the Mishap of the Keeper to give the first
Notice of this Storm that was gathering, the Duke in Defiance bid him and his
Confederates do their worst, and besought the King, that the Parliament might
be continued, and he would confront the Faction, tho he looked upon himself in
that Innocence that he presumed they durst not question him.

Buckingham's Will must be a Law; so on the 10th of July the Parliament was
adjourned to Oxford, to meet the first of August: But, to sweeten them, the
Keeper in the Presence of both Houses, in the King's Name, promised them, That
the Rigor of the Law against Popish Priests should not be deluded: Here see
the Levity of the King, and the Dominion Buckingham had over him; for upon the
12th of July the King caused a Warrant to be sealed to pardon six Roman Priests.

When the Parliament met at Oxford, the Speaker had no sooner taken his Chair,
but a Western Knight enlarges the Sense of his Sorrow, that he had seen a
Pardon for six Priests bearing test July 12th, whereas but the Day before it,
when they were to part from Westminster, the Lord Keeper had promised in the
King's Name, before them all, that the Rigor against the Priests should not be
deluded. Hereupon the Members were in such a Heat, that they strived who should
blame it most: What! their Hopes blasted in one Night? But for the Lord Keeper
that brought the King's Message, and knew it best, and for a Bishop to set the
Seal to such a Warrant, for him to do wrong to Religion, it was enormous.
Hereupon Mr. Bembo, a Servant to the Clerk of the Crown, confessed he brought
the Writ to the Keeper to be sealed, but it was stopped; Mr. Devike, Servant to
Sir Edward Conway, brought it from his Master, but it could not speed. It was
my Lord of Buckingham's hard Hap to move the King to command the Warrant to be
sealed, in his Sight, at Hampton Court the Sunday following. The Commons
hereupon turned about to clear the Keeper and commend him; but what pleased the
Parliament at Oxford, did not please the Court at Woodstock, where this had not
pleased the King.

The Commons in this Heat desired a Conference with the Lords in
Christ-Church-Hall in the Afternoon, where Sir Edward Coke opened the Complaint
sharply against my Lord Conway, and like an Orator did slide away with a short
Animadversion upon the Duke; the Commons enlarged hereon, that the Duke that
put the King upon this, was the highest in the King's Favor; and that all the
important Places of Honor, and Offices by Sea and Land, were in his Disposal;
which you may read at large in the Life of the Lord Keeper, par. 2. fol. 14,
15. tit. 14, 15.

The Lord Keeper at Woodstock was censured by the Duke and his Creatures for
this; the Keeper therefore unsent for, comes to Woodstoock, and thus applies
himself to the Duke.

My Lord, I am come unsent for, and I fear to displease you: yet because your
Grace made me, I must and will serve you; though you are one that will destroy
that which you made, let me perish: yet I deserve to perish ten times, if I
were not as earnest as any Friend your Grace has, to save you from perishing.
The Sword is the Cause of a Wound, but the Buckler is in fault if it do not
defend the Body. You brought the two Houses hither, my Lord, against my
Counsel; my Suspicion is confirmed that your Grace will suffer for it. What Is
now to be done, but to wind up a Session quickly? The Occasion is for you,
because two Colleges in the University, and eight Houses in the Town are
visited with the Plague. Let the Members be promised fairly and friendly, that
they may meet again after Christmas; requite the Injuries done to you with
Benefits, not Revenge, for no Man that is wise will show himself angry with the
People of England. I have more to say, but no more than I have said to your
Grace above a Year past at White Hall; confer one or two of your great Places
upon your fastest Friends, so shall you go less in Envy, and not less in Power.
Great Necessities will excuse hard Proposals and horrid Counsels: St. Austin
says it was a Punick Proverb in his Country, Ut habeas quietum tempus perde
aliquid. At the Close of the Sessions declare your self to be forwardest to
serve the King and Commonwealth, and to give the Parliament Satisfaction. Fear
them not when they meet again in the same Body, whose ill Affections I expect
to mitigate; but if you proceed, trust me with your Cause when it comes into
the House of Lords, and I will lay my Life upon it, I will preserve you from
Sentence, or the least Dishonor. This is my Advice, my Lord; if you like it
not, Truth in the end will find an Advocate to defend it. The Duke replied no
more but, I will look to whom I trust, and flung out of the Chamber with
Menaces in his Countenance.

Mr. Rushworth, fol. 202. says, that the Keeper told the Duke in Christ-Church,
when the Duke rebuked him for siding against him, in that he engaged with
William Earl of Pembroke, to labor the Redress of Grievances, That he was
resolved to stand upon his own Legs; and that the Duke should answer, If that
be your Resolution, look you stand fast. Where Mr. Rushworth had this, I cannot
tell: but this being so unlike the Keeper's Carriage to the Duke, both in King
James's time and after, and also to the Narrative before set forth by the
Bishop of Litchfield, who being the Keeper's Chaplain, could have a better
Inspection herein than Mr. Rushworth could have had; but especially since the
Reasons which the Keeper put into the King's hands, which you may read in the
Life of the Keeper, par. 2. tit. 18. to satisfy the King of his Carriage while
the Parliament sat at Oxford, being so contrary to what Mr. Rushworth says, I
incline rather to believe the Bishop.

However, the Commons presuming to enquire into Buckingham's Actions, are
censured at Woodstock for spiteful and seditious, and therefore not fit to
continue, but to be dissolved; which being understood by the Keeper, with Tears
and Supplications he implored the King to consider, there was a time when his
Father charged him, in the Keeper's Hearing, to call Parliaments often, and to
continue them, though their Rashness might sometimes offend him; that by his
own Experience, he never got good by falling out with them. But chiefly, Sir,
said he, let it never be said that you kept not good correspondence with your
first Parliament; do not disseminate so much Unkindness through all the
Counties and Boroughs of your Realm; The Love of your People is the Palladium
of your Crown. Continue this Assembly together to another Session, and expect
Alteration for the better; if you do not, the next Swarm will come out of the
same Hive.

The Lords of the Council did almost all concur with the Keeper, but it wanted
Buckingham's Suffrage, who was secure that the King's Judgment would follow him
against all the Table. Thus far the Bishop.

But there was another Cause which the Bishop does not mention, but Mr.
Rushworth does, fol. 336. which caused the hasty Dissolution of this
Parliament. Captain Pennington was come to Oxford from delivering the Fleet
into the French Power, to give an Account of the Reason of it; but by the
Duke's means was drawn to conceal himself, and not to publish in due time his
Knowledge of the Premises, as it shortly after appeared: and if this should have
been made known, it would not have been in the Power of the Keeper to have
brought off the Duke from Sentence, or the least Dishonor: so upon the 12th of
August the Parliament was dissolved; but before their Dissolution the Commons
made this following Declaration.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament,
being the Representative Body of the whole Commons of this Realm, abundantly
comforted in his Majesty's late gracious Answer touching our Religion, and his
Message for the Care of our Health, do solemnly vow and protest, before God and
the World, with one Heart and Voice, that we are resolved, and do hereby
declare, that we will ever continue most Loyal and Obedient Subjects to our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles; and that we will in a convenient
time, and in a Parliamentary way, freely and dutifully do our utmost Endeavors
to discover and reform the Abuses and Grievances of this Realm and State, and
in like sort to afford all necessary Supply to his most excellent Majesty upon
his present Occasions and Designs: Most humbly beseeching our said dear and
dread Sovereign in his Princely Wisdom and Goodness, to rest assured of the
true and hearty Affections of his poor Commons; and to esteem the same to be
(as we conceive it is indeed) the greatest worldly Reputation and Security that
a just King can have; and to account all such as Slanderers of the Peoples
Affections, and Enemies to the Commonwealth, that shall dare say the contrary.
But the mighty Buckingham shall not only dare to say, but dare to do the
contrary: so much easier is it, in such a Reign, for a Favorite to ruin a
Nation, than for a Nation to have Justice against a Favorite.

Here let us stay a little, and see what state the King had brought himself to,
within less than five Months, after he became King.

First, he took Mountague to be his Chaplain, a virulent, seditious,
ill-natured Fellow, to protect him from his Contempt against his Metropolitan
and the Parliament, for publishing new-fangl'd Opinions, to the Disturbance of
the Peace of Church and State; and when the Commons questioned Mountague for
them, he took part with him against them, alleging he had taken the Business
into his own Hands, whenas he took Mountague into his Power, to protect him
from the Justice of them and his Metropolitan, but never took other Notice of
Mountague's Business.

Secondly, He took upon him, in Compliance with a foreign Prince and an Enemy
to the Nation, to dispense with the Laws against Romish Priests; which, by the
Constitutions of the Nation, he could not do.

Thirdly, He broke his Word with the Parliament concerning the Execution of
these Laws, within a Day, or two at most, after he gave it.

Fourthly, He made War upon the King of Spain, without any Declaration of War;
whereas just Princes demand Reparations for Wrongs done, and endeavor to
compound their Differences amicably, and in case of Refusal, then to proclaim
War: and this not only against his Father's Counsel, but the Advice of his
Father's Council.

Fifthly, Without the Advice of his Council, he lent the French a Fleet to
subdue the Rochellers, and the Reformed in France, tho they had given him no
Offense, and the French King had perfidiously broke his Promise with his Father
and himself, in denying Mansfield's Army to land.

Sixthly, He had, against the Advice of his Father, broke the Bonds of Amity
between him and his Subjects, by the Dissolving of the Parliament, whereby he
lost the only Means to support him in his War against Spain: And now Buckingham
stood ready primed, to engage him in a War against France; yet in this
deplorable state no free Counsel must enter the King's Ears, which must be open
to nothing but what Buckingham and Laud infused; a sad Presage to what
followed, as well upon Buckingham and Laud, as upon the King himself. Now let us
see the Success of the War against the Spaniards.

Besides the Fleet designed against Cales, the King fitted up another Fleet, in
conjunction with the Dutch States, to block up Dunkirk, as well as he had lent
a Fleet, in conjunction with the Dutch, to subdue the Rochellers; but this
being sent out to Sea about the middle of October, the most perilous Season of
all the Year for great Ships to put to Sea, (a Consideration either not
understood, or not regarded by our Land-Admiral Buckingham) a terrible Storm
arose, which separated and dispersed both Fleets so, as gave the Dunkirkers an
Opportunity to put to Sea with 22 Men of War, and 4000 Land-Soldiers. This
alarmed the Council, lest these should land either in England or Ireland,
whenas in neither any Provision was made to oppose them, especially in England,
where the Earl of Warwick had Orders to dismiss 300 of the Trained-bands of
Essex, that were to secure Harwich: however, it is fit here to mention the noble
Act of that Earl, in building Langard-Fort on Suffolk side, to secure the
Entrance into the Port, the most famous of all the English Eastern Coast, and
which is yet continued to this day. But the Season of the Year was such, as
prevented this Fear; for I find no other Account of the Design of the Dunkirk
Fleet.

Nor had the Design upon Cadiz more Success than that upon Dunkirk; for a
furious Storm arose in their Passage (it may be the same which separated the
English and Dutch before Dunkirk) which so scattered the Fleet, that of 80, no
less than 50 were missing for 7 Days.

This was but the Beginning of the Misfortunes of this miserable Expedition;
for the Confusion of Orders was such, as the Officers and Soldiers scarce knew
who to command, or whom to obey: so that when the Fleet arrived at Cadiz, a
Conquest, which would have paid the Charge of the Voyage, and to the Honor of
the English, offered it self; for the Spanish Shipping in the Bay of Cadiz, lay
unprovided of Defense, so as the surprising them was both easy and feasible:
but this was neglected; and when the Opportunity was lost, the Army landed, and
Sir John Buroughs took a Fort from the Spaniard, but was forced to quit it
again; for the Soldiers finding therein great store of Spanish Wines, so
debauched themselves, that had the Spaniards known the Condition they were in,
they might have destroyed them all.

Hereupon they were put on board again, and the General, my Lord Wimbleton,
designed to stay 20 Days to wait for the Spanish Plate-Fleet, which was daily
expected from the West Indies; but the evil Condition of the Fleet, by reason
of a general Contagion, enforced the General to abandon the Hopes of so great a
Prize: so having effected nothing, he returned home with Dishonor in November
following.

This gave no small Occasion of Clamor, that a Fleet so well provided and
manned, should land their Men in an Enemies Country, and return without some
honorable Action: but where the Fault lay, could not be found out; nor was any
punished for failing to perform his Duty. Yet the General for some time was not
admitted into the King's Presence, and some of the Colonels of his Army accused
him, and some Seamen aggravated the Accusation: Hereupon the General was
examined before the Council, and he laid the Fault upon others in the Fleet,
who let the King of Spain's Ships pass without fighting them, according to
Order; and they on the other hand said, they had no Order from the General to
fight.

But how miserable soever the Success of this Fleet was, yet it must not be, in
the King's Judgment, ascribed to any Improvidence either in the setting forth,
or Conduct after it; But to God's Pleasure (who is the Lord of Hosts, and unto
whose Providence and good Pleasure his Majesty does and shall submit himself,
and all his Endeavors) not to give that Success as was desired. See the King's
Declaration for Dissolving his second Parliament, which you may read in
Rushworth, fol. 412.

But since the King had no better Success against the King of Spain by open
Force, upon the Return of the Fleet he gave strict Command, That no Subject of
the Realm of England should have any Trade or Commerce with any of the
Dominions of the King of Spain, or of the Arch-Dutchies in Flanders, upon pain
of Confiscation of both Ships and Goods that should be found upon Voyage of
Trade into any of their said Dominions. But hereby the Loss manifoldly fell
more upon the English than Spaniards; for these Trades, above all others, were
the most beneficial and gainful to the English; and by the Peace which the
King's Father made with Spain and the free Trade which the English thereby
enjoyed in Spain and Flanders, the Nation became doubly more enriched than in
the long Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which was double as long as K. James's,
after he had made this Peace: Thus as the King by breaking of the Parliament
disabled himself of Means for carrying on the War against Spain, so by this
Inhibition of the English to trade with Spain, he disabled his Subjects from
giving him such Assistance as otherwise they might. But these were no
Considerations, where Buckingham and Laud governed all: and those worthy and
honorable Statesmen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Keeper Williams, and
the noble Earl of Bristol, were not only discountenanced, but disgraced, and
not permitted to come into the Council.

How unsuccessful soever the Expedition was, yet another Fate attended that
Fleet lent to the French; for the Dutch joining a Fleet in conjunction with the
French Fleet commanded by the Duke of Momerancy, fought the Fleet of the
Rochellers, and utterly subdued it, and then reduced the Isles of Rhee and
Oleron to the French Power. But tho the miserable Fate of the Reformed began
here, yet the Dishonor of the English Nation shall soon after follow it; so
that now Richlieu might write, florebunt Lilia Ponto.

Tho the King dissolved the first Parliament to prevent their impeaching
Buckingham, yet it was not in Buckingham's Power to supply the King's
Necessities, but they put him upon the Necessity of calling another. And here
you may see the little Artifices the King's grand Ministers of State put him
upon for the attaining his Ends, and how quite contrary they succeeded.

There were five Persons whom the Duke took to be his Enemies (if they were not
so, he had given them Cause enough to be so) two of them were Peers, and three
of them Commoners; the Peers were the Earl of Bristol and Bishop of Lincoln,
the Commoners were Sir Edward Coke, Sir Robert Phillips (a Person whose Memory
I revere, and should be glad I knew any of his Descendants, to whom I could
acknowledge it) and Sir Thomas Wentworth: these Persons, the Duke feared, would
be leading Men in both Houses, and was resolved, that to his Power he would
keep them out. He was sure the Earl and the Bishop, as Peers of Common Right,
would have their Writs of Summons; and was as sure the other three would be
chosen Members of the House of Commons.

In looking a little back you will better see forward. You have heard how, by the
Duke's Power, in King James's Reign, the Earl of Bristol was first kept back
from coming into England, and after he was come over, was kept under Restraint,
and denied Admission into the King's Presence, lest he should have spoiled the
Duke's fine Tale in Parliament concerning the Spanish Match: and also after he
had answered every Particular of it, without any Reply, and that after King
James had promised the Earl should be heard in Parliament against the Duke, as
well as the Duke had been against the Earl, King James fell sick, and died
thereupon before the Parliament met again.

After King James's Death, the Earl wrote a most humble Letter to King Charles,
imploring his Favor, and desiring the Duke's Mediation, which the Duke
answered the 7th of May 1625, that the Resolution was to proceed against him,
without a plain and direct Confession of the Point, which he (the Duke) had
formerly required him to acknowledge; and in a courtly manner told him, That he
would advise him to bethink himself in time what would be most for his good.

In the mean time the Earl received his Writ of Summons to the Parliament;
whereupon the Earl sent to the Duke, that he would do nothing but what was most
agreeable to his Majesty's Pleasure; which the Duke answered, I have acquainted
his Majesty with your Requests toward him, touching your Summons to the
Parliament, which he takes very well, and would have you rather make your
Excuse for your Absence, notwithstanding your Writ, than to come your self in
Person.

Hereupon the Earl desired a Letter of Leave under the King's Hand, for his
Warrant; but instead thereof, he received from the Lord Conway an absolute
Prohibition, and even to restrain and confine him, as he had been in King
James's time, tho the Earl was freed from it by King James: and in this
Restraint the Earl continued three Quarters of a Year; during which time, he
was removed from all his Offices and Places he held during that King's Life:
and tho he had laid out the greatest part of his Estate for their Majesty's
Service, and by their particular Appointment, he could never be admitted so
much as to clear his Accounts; yet hereof the Earl never made the least
Complaint.

Upon the King's Coronation, when Princes usually confer Acts of Grace and
Favor, the Earl addressed himself to the Duke, and then became an humble
Suitor to the King for his Grace and Favor; to which he received an Answer so
different from what the King's Father and the King himself had given him, since
the Earl's Return into England, that the Earl knew not what Construction to
make of it.

After the Writs of Summons for the meeting of this Parliament were out, the
Earl addressed himself to my Lord Keeper Coventry, to be a Suitor to the King
in his behalf, that the Privilege, which of right is due to every Peer, might
not be denied him; which not taking effect, the Earl petitioned the House of
Peers, to mediate to the King for his Writ, which was granted, but accompanied
with a Letter from the Keeper not to take his Place in Parliament.

As Bristol was the worthiest Statesman in either of these King's Reigns, and
whose Integrity in all these Varieties of Employments, none but Buckingham and
Conway presumed (at least that I can find, or ever heard of) so much as to carp
at; so Lincoln's quaint and excellent, not pedantick Learning, both in
Divinity, History, the Civil and Canon Law, and not a Stranger to our English,
excelled all others: These were adorned with a lively and excellent Elocution,
and with a wonderful promptness and presence of Mind, in giving Judgment in the
most nice and subtle dark Points of State, and accompanied with an
indefatigable Industry in Prosecution of them. These Parts were so well
observed in him by King James, that without any Solicitation of Buckingham, or
any other, but whilst he solicited for another, the King conferred the Lord
Keeper's Place upon him, as you may read in his Life, fol. 52. tit. 62. and
after, unsought for, the King promised him the next Avoidance of the
Archbishopric of York, or any other Ecclesiastical Preferment; and so steady
stood he in King James's Favor, that Buckingham's Attacks could no ways shake
him in it.

In Chancery he mitigated the Fees, and all Petitions from poor Men were
granted gratis; and was so far from prolonging Suits, that in the first Year he
ended more than in seven Years before, yet with such Caution, that he would
have some of the Judges, but principally Sir Henry Hubbard, to be assisting; so
that notwithstanding his Celerity in Dispatch in all the five Years of his
being Lord Keeper, not one of his Orders, neither by Parliament, nor by the
Court of Chancery, were ever reversed.

Cardinal Richlieu is much celebrated for the Speech he made in the Convention
of Notables, which you may read at large in Howel's Life of Richlieu, f. 162,
163, 164. to excite the French to carry on the Cardinal's ambitious and ungodly
Designs, after the King had so prodigally expended not only his Father's
Treasure, but doubly more than the ordinary Revenues of France upon his
Favorites, and the manifold Wars both at home and abroad, which Richlieu had
entangled him in.

Let any Man compare the Keeper's Speech at the opening the first Parliament of
King Charles, which you may read in the Keeper's Life, the second Part, f. 9,
and 10. with that of Richlieu's, and judge if the Rhetoric and Elegancy of it
comes any way behind that of his, (after the King's Father and this King had
squandered much more than the Revenues of the Crown upon their Favorites, and
this King had entangled himself in the Articles of the French Match, and
without Means engaged himself in a War with Spain, and that against his
Father's and the Keeper's Advice) in exciting the Parliament to a Compliance
with the King's Will, tho with a different Fate; for Richlieu attained his Ends
by his Speech, whereas the Keeper's Downfall was a Consequence of his.

But above all, the Keeper excelled himself (if I may be Judge) in three things;
one was in his Speech in the House of Peers, about the Peers taking the Oaths;
the second, his Reasons he gave the French Ambassador Voll^cleer, against
dispensing with our Penal Laws against Romish Priests, which you may read at
large in the first Part of the Keeper's Life, fol. 214, 215, 216, 217, 218,
219, 220, 221, 222. The third Speech was, when the Earl of Essex moved the
House of Lords, in the Year 1640, that the Bishops might be expelled the House,
not their Persons, but their Order; which you may read at large in the second
Part of the Keeper's Life, from fol. 168, to 176. And sure the History of the
Keeper's Life had been a nobler Work, if it had been related without the loose
and impertinent Glosses of the Bishop of Litchfield, whereby he does so often
disturb and break the Thread of the Story, and by preaching himself, more than
writing his History, makes it confounded, so as it is difficult to pursue it.
See the Speech in the first Part of his Life, f. 76, 77.

After the Parliament was dissolved at Oxford, all Heads were set at work to
find some fault against the Keeper, to out him of his Place, but none could be
found; hereupon they made a Proposition, which the Keeper made to King James,
That the Office of Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, should be Triennial, so
that after three Years the King should make another, and the Keeper having
enjoyed the Place above four Years, to be the Reason that he should surrender
the Seal.

When the Keeper had notice of this, in a pathetical Letter to the King, (which
you may read in his Life, in the second Part, f. 24.) he implores his Majesty's
Favor, that he may retire with an Assurance of his Majesty's Grace, and be
admitted into his Presence to make some humble Requests to him, which the King
granted. The first of his Requests was for the King's Favor in general, which
the King granted, and gave him his Hand twice to kiss upon it. Secondly, That
the King would take away none of his Church-Preferments, as he had graciously
promised, till he had given him better in lieu of them: the King answered, It
was his Intention. Thirdly, That the King would remember his Father's Promise,
seconded by him, that he would place him (the Keeper) in as good a Bishopric,
or Archbishopric, as he could: the King said, There was no such place void;
when any fell, it would be then time enough to make his Request. Fourthly, That
his Majesty would dismiss him freely and absolutely, without any Command from
the Table, but to leave it to the Keeper's Discretion to forbear: the King
said, He ever intended it so, and never said a word to the contrary; but
expected he should not offend by voluntary Intrusion. Fifthly, That the King
would declare to the Lords, that the Keeper had willingly and readily yielded
to his Majesty's Pleasure, and that he parted in the King's Favor and good
Opinion, and was still his Servant: the King said, He would, but that he looked
that no Petitions be made for him by any Man at that time, but only for his
Favor in general. Sixthly, The Keeper besought the King to make an Atonement
with the Duke upon or without Examination of the Information which the Duke
received against him: the King said, It became not him, a King, to take up
Quarrels between his Subjects, and that the Duke had never expressed any such
Enmity to him, against him (the Keeper). Seventhly, The Keeper besought the
King, that whereas the Keeper had a Pension by Direction of the King's Father,
and wherewith the King was acquainted, of 2000 Marks per Annum to the Viscount
Wallingford, and had disbursed 3000 l. down upon it, either to buy the said
Pension, or extinguish it, or to assign it to be paid out of the Tenths or
Subsidies of his Bishopric, as before he had appointed to receive it out of
the Exchequer: the King said, Assignments were naught, but he would take Order
with his Treasurer to buy it, or pay for it, as should be most convenient.
Eighthly, The Keeper besought the King to bestow the next Prebendary in
Westminster upon his Library Keeper, as his Father had promised, or that he
might resume his Books again: the King said, It was full of Reason. Ninthly,
The Keeper besought the King to ratify a Grant made by his Father of four
Advowsons to St. John's-College in Cambridg, whereof two he had bought with his
Money, and two the King gave him for the good of the Society: the King said, He
would ratify the Grant, and give way to amend any Errors in the Form, or in
passing of it. Tenthly, The Keeper besought the King, that he might retire to a
little Lodge which my Lord Sandys lent him, where the Lord Conway might receive
the Seal; which the King granted. Lastly, The Keeper besought the King, that
the King would not be offended with him, if upon his Discharge Reports were
made that he was discontented, which he protested he was not, giving over so
comfortably: the King said, He would do him that Justice, and that he little
valued Reports; and thereupon gave the Keeper his Hand to kiss at parting:
which you may read in the second Part of the Keeper's Life, Tit. 28.

But the Bishop says in the next Tit. the forlorn Keeper felt the Heaviness of
this Lightness, who thought he had obtained much, but (excepting the four
Advowsons confirmed to St. John's-College) he mist all that he sought for and
expected; nor could he ever get a Farthing of his Pension, nor bring it to an
Audit to his dying-day; nor did the Keeper's Enemies stop here, but sought to
provoke against him the King's Displeasure, with things which were neither
consistent with the King's Honor, nor scarce to be born by the Temper of Human
Nature; and were so hasty in it, that the King's Promise, that the Bishop of
Lincoln (now no more Lord Keeper) should enjoy the King's Favor, was scarce
three Months old, when they put not only the King out of mind of his Promise,
but the Bishop out of the Duty of his Place, but that Laud should perform it,
whether the Bishop would or not.

It has been said with what Difficulty the Bishop of Lincoln (for so we must
now call him) procured Laud the Bishopric of St. David's; and the Bishop staid
not there, but retained him in his Prebendary at Westminster, and so after gave
him a Living in the Diocese of St. David's of 120 l. per Annum, to help his
Revenue. These two last, being Additions to Laud's Preferment, coming from the
Bishop of Lincoln voluntarily, and unsought for by Laud, he by Mr. Winn
returned his Thanks to the Bishop with this Expression, His Life would be too
short to requite his Lordship's Goodness.

But these Favors were not eighteen Months planted when Laud became the
Bishop's sharpest Enemy, as you may read in the first Part of his Life, f. 108.
and his Malice grew so high, that the Countess of Buckingham, the Duke's
Mother, took notice of it, which the Archbishop Abbot takes notice of, Rushw.
f. 144. as well as the Bishop of Litchfield.

As Acts of Grace and Favor usually were accompanied by our Kings at their
Coronation, so in this King's Reign the quite contrary must be practiced, not
only to the Earl of Bristol, but much more to the Bishop of Lincoln; for he was
not only denied to do his Homage to the King with the rest of the Spiritual
Lords at the Coronation, but his Office as Dean of Westminster, in assisting
the Archbishop in the Solemnity of it; and yet this too must be done by Laud,
as the Bishop's Substitute, whether he would or not.

This was the first noble Favor the King extended to the Bishop, according to
his reiterated Promise, when they parted. The second was, he was denied his
Writ of Summons as a Peer in Parliament, which met in four days after the
Coronation, viz. Feb. 6. which was due ex debito Justitiae, and which was never
denied to Prisoners, or condemned Persons even in his Father's time; and at
last, when he obtained it, yet he must not presume to sit in Parliament, and
had much ado to have his Proxy left with the Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Andrews,
as you may read in the second Part of his Life, f. 69.

But tho the Privilege of Peers a little eclipsed the Power of the mighty
Buckingham, yet he was resolved to keep Sir Edward Coke, Sir Robert Phillips,
and Sir Thomas Wentworth out of the Commons House by the King's Prerogative (as
it has been of late used) in making them Sheriffs, whether they be returned by
the Coroner's Inquest of the Counties or not; and by this Prerogative Sir
Edward Coke was made Sheriff of the County of Bucks, Sir Robert Phillips of
Somerset, and Sir Thomas Wentworth of Yorkshire. It made a mighty Noise and an
Inquiry, which otherwise would not have been, that Sir Edward Coke, in his
extreme Age, now 77 Years old, and who had been Chief Justice of both Benches,
and Privy-Counsellor, should be made a Sheriff of the County, and the more, for
that Sir Edward Coke took Exceptions to the Oath of a Sheriff, whereupon it was
altered.

These were the Counsels which governed this King in the Infancy of his Reign.
Now let us see the Success.

The Commons were so far from granting Subsidies now, as in the last
Parliament, before Grievances were redrest, that upon their first Meeting they
fell upon Examination of Grievances, and the Miscarriage of the Fleet at Cadiz,
the evil Counselors about the King's Misgovernment, and Misimployment of the
King's Revenue, and an Account of the three Subsidies and three Fifteenths
granted the 21st of King James: That new Impositions and Monopolies were
multiplied, and settled to continue by Grants; Customs enhanced by the new Book
of Rates; and that Tunnage and Poundage was levied, tho by no Act of
Parliament; and the Guard of the Seas neglected.

However, these were Generals, but the first Particular fell upon Mountague in
five particular Articles, wherein he had broken the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, and disturbed the Peace both of the Church and Commonwealth.

1. Whereas by the Articles of the Convocation holden in the Year 1^62, it is
determined, That the Church of Rome is, at present, and has been for above 900
Years past, so far wide from the Nature of a true Church, that nothing can be
more; he, the said Mountague, in several places of the Book called, The Answer
to the Gagg, and his other Book called, The Appeal, advisedly affirms and
maintains, That the Church of Rome is and ever was a true Church since it was a
Church.

2. Whereas in the 16th Homily of the second Book of Homilies it is declared,
that the Church of Rome is not built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles; and in the 23d Article, that Transubstantiation overthrows the Nature
of a Sacrament; and in the 25th Article, that the five other Sacraments are not
to be accounted Sacraments; yet he the said Mountague maintains in his Book,
called, The Answer to the Gagg, That the Church of Rome has ever remained firm
upon the same Foundation of Sacraments and Doctrine instituted by God.

3. In the 19th of the same Article it is maintained, That the Church of Rome
has erred not only in their Living and Matters of Faith, and Ceremonies; he,
in his Book called, The Gagg, does maintain, that none of these are
controverted in their Points between the Papists and Protestants: and tho in
the 35th Article it is resolved, that the Sacrifice of Masses, in which it is
commonly said the Priest did offer Christ for the Quick and the Dead, to have
Remission of Pain and Guilt too, is a blasphemous Fable, and dangerous Deceit,
this being one of the controverted Points between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome; he, in his Book called, The Gagg, does maintain, That these
controverted Points are of a less and inferior Nature, of which a Man may be
ignorant without any danger of his Soul at all; and a Man may oppose this or
that without peril of perishing for ever.

4. Whereas in the second Homily, entitled, Against the Peril of Idolatry, and
approved by the 37th Article, it is declared, That Images teach no good Lesson,
neither of God or Godliness, but all Error and Wickedness; he, the said
Mountague, does maintain, Images may be used for the Instruction of the
Ignorant, and Excitation of Devotion.

5. That in the same Homily it is plainly expressed, That the attributing
certain Countries to Saints, is a spoiling God of his Honor, and that such
Saints are but Dii tutelares of the Gentile Idolaters; yet the said Mountague,
in his Book entitled, A Treatise concerning the Invocation of Saints, affirmed
and maintained, That the Saints have not only a Memory, but a more peculiar
Charge of their Friends; and that it may be admitted that some Saints have a
peculiar Patronage, Custody, Protection and Power, as Angels also have over
certain Persons and Countries by special Deputation, and that it is not Impiety
so to believe. And whereas in the 17th Article it is resolved, That God has
certainly decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from Curse and
Damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, to bring them by
Christ to everlasting Salvation; wherefore they which be endued with so
excellent a Benefit of God, be called according to God's Purpose, working in
due season, they through Grace obeying the Calling, they be justified freely,
walk religiously in good Works, and at length by God's Mercy attain to
everlasting Felicity: He the said Mountague, in his Book called, The Appeal,
does maintain, That Men justified may fall away and depart from the State they
once had, and may again arise, and become new Men possibly, but not certainly
nor necessarily. And the better to countenance this Opinion, he has in the
same Book wilfully added, and falsely charged diverse Words in the said 16th
Article, and in the Book of Common Prayer, and so misrecited and changed the
said Places he does alledg in his said Appeal, endeavoring thereby to lay a
most malicious and wicked Scandal upon the Church of England, as if he did
herein differ from the Reformed Church of England, and from the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas, and did consent to those pernicious Errors which are
commonly called Arminianism, and which the late famous Queen Elizabeth, and
King James of happy Memory, did so piously and diligently labor to suppress.

That he had, contrary to his Duty and Allegiance, endeavored to raise
Factions and Divisions in the Commonwealth, by casting the odious and
scandalous Name of Furitans upon such as conform themselves to the Doctrine and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, under that Name laying upon them diverse
false and malicious Imputations, so to bring them into Jealousy and Displeasure
with the King, and Ignominy and Reproach of the People, to the great danger of
Sedition, and disturbance of the State, if it be not timely prevented.

That the Scope and End of his Books is, to give Encouragement to Popery, and
to withdraw the King's Subjects from the true Established Religion to the Roman
Superstition, and consequently to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, whereby
God's true Religion has been scandalized, those Mischiefs introduced which the
Wisdom of many Laws has endeavored to prevent, the Devices of his Majesty's
Enemies furthered and advanced, to the great danger of the King and all his
loving Subjects.

That he has inserted in his Book called The Appeal, diverse Passages
dishonorable to the late King, full of Bitterness, Railing, and injurious
Speeches to other Persons, disgraceful and contemptible to many worthy Divines
of this Kingdom, and other Reformed Churches beyond the Seas; impious and
profane in scoffing at Preaching, Meditating and Conferring, Pulpits, Bibles,
and all show of Religion; all which do aggravate his former Offenses, having
proceeded from malicious and enormous Heat against the Peace of the Church, and
the Sincerity of the Reformed Religion publicly professed, and by Law
established in this Kingdom. All which Offenses being to the Dishonor of God,
and of most mischievous Effect and Consequence against the Church and
Commonwealth of England, and other of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the
Commons assembled in Parliament do hereby pray, that the said Richard Mountague
may be punished according to his Demerits, in such exemplary mannner, as may
deter others from attempting so presumptuously to disturb the Peace of the
Church and State; and that the Books aforesaid may be suppressed and burnt.

This was that special Stick of Wood which Laud, in the beginning of this young
King's Reign, put into his Hand, to support him in the established Religion of
the Church of England, and afterward planted him to be one of the Cedars of
our Church, by having him made first Bishop of Chichester, and after of Norwich.

However Laud was so nettled with the Votes of the Commons; I do not find
Buckingham concerned himself in them, it may be believing this might divert the
Storm from him: but it was impossible for the Commons, in looking into the
Grievances of the Nation, but to meet Buckingham in the Front of every one of
them: And when they began their Debates concerning the Duke, they received a
Message from the King of the pressing State of Christendom, and with what Care
and Patience he expected their Resolutions of Supplies, and to let them know,
he looked for a full and perfect Answer of what they would give for his Supply,
according to his Expectation, and their Promises; and that he would not accept
of less than was proportionable for the Greatness and Goodness of the Cause;
and that it was not fit to depend any longer upon Uncertainties, whereby the
whole Weight of the Affairs of Christendom may break in upon us upon the
sudden, as well to his Dishonor, as the Shame of the Nation; and when this is
done, they may continue longer, and apply themselves to the Redress of
Grievances, so they do it in a dutiful and mannerly Way, without throwing an
ill Odor upon his present Government, or upon the Government of his late
blessed Father. You will hear further of the Care he took of Buckingham, in his
Reply to the Commons Address upon this.

The Commons, in answer, beseech the King to rest assured, that no King was
ever dearer to his People than his Majesty, no People more zealous to maintain
and advance his Honor and Greatness, and especially to support that Cause
wherein his Majesty and Allies are now engaged; and beseech his Majesty to
accept the Advice of his Parliament, which can have no other end but the
Service of his Majesty, and the Safety of his Realm, in discovering the Causes,
and proposing the Remedies of those great Evils which have occasioned his
Majesty's Wants, and his Peoples Griefs.

And therefore, in Assurance of Redress herein, they really intend to assist
his Majesty in such a way, and in so ample a Measure, as may make him safe at
home, and feared abroad; and for dispatch whereof, they will use such
Diligence, as his urgent and Pressing Occasions require.

The King, in answer to the Commons, tells them, he takes the Cause of their
presenting Grievances, to be a Parenthesis, and not a Condition; and will be
willing to hear their Grievances, so as they apply themselves to redress
Grievances, and not enquire after Grievances: That he will not allow any of his
Servants to be questioned by them, much less such as are of eminent Place about
him; that the old question was, What shall be done to the Man whom the King
honors? But now it has been the Labor of some to seek what may be done
against him whom the King thinks fit to honor; he saw they specially aimed at
the Duke of Buckingham, and wonders what had altered their Affections to him,
when in the last Parliament of his Father's time he was their Instrument to
break the Treaties, for which they did so honor and respect him, that all the
Honor conferred upon him was too little: He wot not what had changed their
Minds; but assures them, that the Duke had not meddled with, or done any thing
concerning the Public, but by his special Directions, and was so far from
gaining any Estate thereby, that he verily thinks the Duke rather impaired the
fame. He would have them hasten the Supplies, or it will be the worse for them;
for if any Ill happens, he thinks he shall be the last that shall feel it.

The Commons had yet fresh in Memory the Dissolution of the Parliament at
Oxford, about six Months before, and what Trust there was to this King's Word
for Redress of Grievances, so as it was done in a dutiful and mannerly Way,
after they had given Money; and therefore they little altered their Course from
what they had done at Oxford, yet more than Parliaments heretofore did, to have
Grievances first redressed, and then to give Supplies; for they voted to
proceed upon Grievances, and to give the King three Subsidies, and three
Fifteenths.

This gave the Duke little Satisfaction: so that the King himself became the
Duke's Advocate, and told the Commons in a Speech, which you may read in Rushw.
fol. 225. that he came to inform the Commons of their Errors and
unparliamentary Proceedings, so that they might amend their Faults: which was
enlarged by my Lord Keeper Coventry, who told them of the King's Necessities,
and his Patience in Expectation of Supplies, and of the King's Promise of
Redress of Grievances, after Supplies were granted; That the Enquiry upon
sundry Articles against the Duke upon C^nan^n Fame, was to wound the Honor and
Government of his Majesty, and of his renowned Father, and therefore it was his
Majesty's final and express Command, that they yield Obedience to those
Directions which they formerly received, and cease their unparliamentary
Proceedings against the Duke, and leave to his Majesty's Care, Wisdom, and
Justice the future Reformation of those things, which they supposed to be
otherwise than they should be; and that the King took notice, that they had
suffered the greatest Council of State (The Duke and Laud) to be censured and
traduced by Men, whose Years and Education cannot attain to that Depth, (Why
then were the old Members kept out of the House, which could have better
informed them?) and that the three Subsidies, and three Fifteenths were no ways
proportionable to supply the King's Necessities, etc. and concludes, that his
Majesty doubts not but after this Admonition, they will observe and follow it,
which if they do, his Majesty is most ready to forgive all that is past. Then
the King added, that in his Father's time, by their Persuasion, he was their
Instrument to break off those Treaties; and that then no Body was in so great
Favor with 'em as the Man they seem now to touch, but indeed his Father's
Government, and his; and that Parliaments are altogether in his Power for their
Calling, Sitting and Dissolution; and as he finds the Fruits, they are to
continue, or not to be.

But if the Commons Proceedings against the Duke were erroneous and
unparliamentary, and through the Duke's Sides wounded not only the King's
Government, but that of his renowned Father, and that the young Men in this
House of Commons had censured and traduced the King's highest Council of State;
you shall now hear of an old Statesman in the House of Lords, which shall not
only cease the Wonder, which caused the Parliament in the 21st of King James,
so to applaud the Duke, but shall wound the whole Story, which begat that great
Applause to the Duke.

You have heard before how the Earl of Bristol was stopped at Calais from
coming over into England, after his Return out of Spain; and after he came to
Dover, when the Duke could not prevail upon Marquess Hamilton, and the Earl of
Hertford, to have the Earl sent to the Tower upon his Arrival in England; how
he was stopped by a Letter from the Lord Conway, that he should not come to
Court, nor to the King's Presence, till he had answered to some Queries which
his Majesty would appoint some of the Lords of the Council to ask him, which
was not done till the Parliament was adjourned, and never met more; and how
after King James's Death the Earl was not only kept from his Liberty, and the
King's Presence, but removed from all his Offices and Employments, and not
suffered to come to an Account for the Moneys expended in the King's Service;
and not permitted to come to the Parliament which was dissolved at Oxford.

Upon the King's Summons of this Parliament, the Earl petitions the King to
have his Writ of Summons, which was never denied to any Peer, to assist in the
House of Peers; but he received an Answer by the Lord Conway, That the King was
no ways satisfied in it, and propounded to the Earl, Whether he would rather
sit still, and enjoy the Benefit of the late King's Pardon in Parliament, or to
wave it, and put himself upon Trial, for his Negotiation in Spain; and one of
these he must trust to, and give a direct Answer.

The Earl, in Answer, said, He had been already questioned upon 20 Articles, by
a Commission of the Lords, and had given such Answers, that their Lordships
never met more about that Business; and that he did not wave the Pardon granted
by King James in Parliament. These Letters you may read at large in Rushworth,
fol. 138, 139, 140.

Hereupon the Earl petitions the House of Lords, showing, that he being a Peer
of this Realm, had not received his Writ of Summons to Parliament, and desires
their Lordships to mediate with his Majesty, that he may enjoy the Liberty of a
Subject, and the Privilege of his Peerage, after almost two Years Restraint
without any Trial brought against him; and that if any Charge be brought
against him, he prays he may be tried by Parliament.

Hereupon the Lords petition the King, that not only the Earl of Bristol, but
all such other Lords whose Writs are stopped, except such as are made incapable
to sit in Parliament, by Judgment of Parliament, or some other legal Judgment,
may be summoned.

This nettled the Duke to the quick, so that he told the House the King had
sent the Earl his Writ, but withal delivered such a Letter, which the King sent
to the Earl, which I care not to transcribe, but you may read it in Rushworth,
fol. 241. wherein this great Statesman Buckingham would have the Earl judged
and censured by the King, without hearing the Earl, and thereby forestal the
Judgment of the Lords against the Earl.

It Is true indeed, my Lord Keeper Coventry sent the Earl a Writ of Summons to
attend in Parliament, but withal signified by a Letter to the Earl, that it was
his Majesty's Pleasure withal, (no doubt but by the Advice of his highest
Council of State) that the Earl should continue in the same Restraint he was,
so that he forbear his personal Attendance in Parliament.

But since the Duke could no longer otherways keep the Earl out of the House of
Lords, the King, by my Lord Keeper, signified to the Lords, that his Pleasure
was, they should send for the Earl as a Delinquent, to answer Offenses
committed against him before his going into Spain, and since his coming back,
and his scandalizing the Duke of Buckingham immediately, and by Reflection upon
himself, with whose Privity and Direction the Duke guided his Actions, and
without which he did nothing. And now Sir Robert Heath, the King's
Attorney General, exhibited eleven Articles against the Earl (it was thought
fit to leave out the other nine) which the Earl had answered to King James,
without any Reply; and in the last of these the Earl is charged with giving the
King the Lie, in offering to falsify that Relation which his Majesty affirmed,
and thereunto added many things of his own Remembrance to both Houses of
Parliament; which you may read at large in Rushworth's Collections, from fol.
153, to 158.

Hereupon the Earl exhibited a Charge of High Treason and Misdemeanors, in
twelve Articles, against the Duke, and another against the Lord Conway, of High
Misdemeanors, which you may read at large in Rushworth, from fol. 266, to 270.
And upon the Delivery of them, the Earl desired a Copy of the King's Charge
against him in Writing, and time allowed to answer, and Counsel assigned him;
and said there was a great Difference between the Duke and him, for the Duke
was accused of Treason, and at large, and in the King's Favor, and that he,
being but accused of that which he had long since answered, was a Prisoner, and
therefore moved the Duke might be put in equal Condition; which tho the House
did not, yet were not satisfied to commit the Earl to the Tower, and ordered,
That the King's Charge against the Earl should be first heard, and then the
Earl's against the Duke; yet so that the Earl's Testimony against the Duke be
not prevented, prejudiced, or impeached.

The King, in a Message to the Lords by my Lord Keeper, would have blasted the
Earl's Articles against the Duke for two Reasons (if they may be called so.)

The first was, That the Narrative made in the 21 Jac. in Parliament, trenches
as far upon him as the Duke, for that he went therein as far as the Duke. But
what then? Shall not the Earl be heard in his Defense against that Declaration
which was designed to blast the Earl's Honor and Integrity? and Justice is no
Respecter of Persons.

The other was, That all the Earl's Articles have been closed in his Breast now
these two Years, contrary to his Duty, if he had known any Crime of that nature
against the Duke; and now he vents it by Recrimination against the Duke, whom
he knows to be a principal Witness to prove his Charge against the Earl. This
is strange; for his Majesty's Reign was scarce yet a Year old, and all this
while the Earl was under a Restraint, and not permitted to come to the
Parliament, which ended at Oxford; and in his Father's Reign, after the Earl
had answered all the Duke's Articles against him, without any Reply, King James
promised him he should be heard against the Duke, as well as he was against
him, tho he lived not to make good his Promise.

Now let us see the Levity of this Prince, the necessary Concomitant of
Wilfulness, and which he pursued in every step of his Reign, without any
Remorse that I could ever find; for the Lodgment of the King's Charge against
the Earl in the House of Lords was scarce cold, whenas it was endeavored to
take the Earl's Cause out of the House, and to proceed against him in the
King's Bench. But why must this be at this time of day, and while a Parliament
was sitting? And why was not this done in the King's Father's Life, or in this
King's Reign? And why must two years pass, and this way of charging the Earl
never thought of, which now must be done in all haste? But the Lords put a full
stop to this, and for these Reasons.

1. For that in all Causes of moment, the Defendants shall have Copies of all
Depositions, both pro and contra, after Publication, in convenient time before
hearing, to prepare themselves; and if the Defendants will demand that of the
House in due time, they shall have learned Counsel to assist them in their
Defense: And their Lordships declared they would give their Assents thereto,
because in all Causes, as well Civil as Criminal and Capital, they hold, that
all lawful Help could not, before just Judges, make one that is guilty avoid
Justice; and on the other side, God defend that an Innocent should be condemned.

2. The Earl of Bristol, by his Petition to the House, complained of his
Restraint, desiring to be heard here, as well in point of his Wrongs, as in his
Accusations against the Duke; whereof his Majesty taking Consideration,
signified his Pleasure by the Lord Keeper, April 20, That his Majesty was
resolved to put his Cause upon the Honor and Justice of this House; and that
the Earl should be sent for as a Delinquent, to answer the Offenses he
committed in his Negotiations, before his Majesty's going into Spain, whilst
his Majesty was there, and since his Return; and that his Majesty would cause
these things to be charged upon him in this House, so as the House is fully
possessed of the Cause, as well by the Earl's Petition as the King's Consent,
and the Earl brought up to the House as a Delinquent, to answer his Offenses
there: and Mr. Attorney has accordingly delivered the Charge against him in
the House, and the Earl also his Charge against the Duke.

And now, if the Earl be proceeded withal by way of the King's Bench, these
dangerous Inconveniences will follow.

1. He can have no Counsel. 2. He can use no Witness against the King. 3. He
cannot know what the Evidences against him will be in convenient time to
prepare for his Defense, and so the Innocent may be condemned; which may be the
Case of any Peer. 4. The Liberty of the House will be thereby infringed, the
Honor and Justice of it declined, contrary to the King's Pleasure, expressly
signified by my Lord Keeper: all which are expressly against the Order. 5. The
Earl being indicted, it will not be in the Power of the House to keep him from
Arraignment, and so he may be disabled to make good his Charge against the
Duke.
Therefore the way to proceed according to the Directions and true Meaning of
the Order, and the King's Pleasure signified, and preserve the Liberties of the
House, and protect one from Injury, will be,

To have the Charge delivered into the House in Writing, and the Earl to set
down his Answer in Writing; and that the Witnesses on both sides be examined,
and Evidences on both sides heard, by such Course and manner of Proceedings as
shall be thought fit by the House: And if upon a full Hearing, the House shall
find it Treason, then to proceed by way of Indictment; if doubtful in point of
Law, to have the Opinion of the Judges to clear it; if doubtful in Matter of
Fact, then to refer it to a legal Trial at Law; and that the rather, for that,

1. It appears that the Earl, in the space of two Years (till now he
complained) has not so much as been questioned for Matter of Treason. 2. He has
been examined upon twenty Interrogatories, and the Commissioners satisfied,
that his Answer would admit of no Reply. 3. The Lord Conway, by several
Letters, has intimated, that there is nothing against him, but what was
pardoned by the Parliament of the 21st of Jac. and signified his Majesty's
Pleasure, that he might rest in that Security, and sit still. 4. That his
Majesty had often declared to the Countess of Bristol, and others, that there
was neither Treason nor Felony against the Earl, nor ought else but what a
small Acknowledgment would expiate.
The Earl, in Conformity to this Order, answered every Particular of the King's
Charge against him, without any Reply; but it would be a wonderful Discovery,
to find an Answer to any one Particular of the Earl's Charge, either against
the Duke, or my Lord Conway.

The Commons, at the same time, impeached the Duke of high Misdemeanors, in a
Charge of thirteen Articles, whereof that of the Death of King James was one;
but to the Displeasure of the King, so far as to commit Sir Dudley Diggs and
Sir John Elliot to the Tower for it: and the Commons sent a Message to the
Lords by Sir Nathaniel Rich, by an unanimous Vote, to commit the Duke to safe
Custody; which I do not find the Lords did, nor did the imprisoned Members lie
long in the Tower; for the King signified to the House, that Sir Dudley Diggs
did not speak the Words for which the King committed him, and soon after Sir
John Elliot was discharged.

However, the Commons ran high against the Duke, with a Protestation, That till
he were removed from meddling with State Affairs, they were out of all hopes of
any good Success, and did fear that any Money which they shall or can give,
will, through his Misemployment, rather he turned to the Hurt and Prejudice of
this Kingdom than otherwise, as by lamentable Experience they have lately found
in those large Supplies they had formerly and lately given.

But the Duke, thus doubly stormed both by the Earl and Commons, and utterly
unprovided to defend himself against either; and the King, rather than receive
the Remonstrance the Commons had prepared to present him against the Duke,
resolved to part with the Parliament rather than the Duke, and thereby lost
four Subsidies and three Fifteenths, tho the House of Peers petitioned to the
contrary: This was upon the 15th of June 1626.

The King having sent the Parliament home again, sends a long Declaration after
them, wherein he magnifies his Power of Calling, Adjourning, Proroguing, and
Dissolving Parliaments peculiarly belonging to himself, by an undoubted
Prerogative inseparably united to his Imperial Crown, of which, as of all his
other Royal Actions, he is not to give any Account, but to God only, whose
immediate Lieutenant and Vicegerent he is in these his Realms and Dominions, by
Divine Providence committed to his Charge; yet his Purpose is, so to order
himself and all his Actions, concerning the Weal of his Kingdoms, as may
justify themselves not only to his own Conscience, and to his own People, but
to the whole World: He thought fit to make a true, plain, and clear Declaration
of the Reasons that enforced him to dissolve these two last Parliaments, so
that the Mouth of Malice it self might be stopped, and the deserved Blame of so
unhappy Accidents may justly fall upon the Authors thereof.

The King says, That when he came first to the Crown, he found himself engaged
in a War against a potent Enemy. Who was that Enemy? Or at what time was any
Declaration of any War made either against his Father or him? Which after the
best Search I could ever make, I could never find any; yet this I find, that
the next day after his Father's Death, he and his Favorite the Duke were so
eager to make a War against the King of Spain, that a day must not be lost, but
Writs must be issued out to summon a Parliament, to give Subsidies to make War
against Spain. See the second Part of the Keeper Williams' s Life, fol. 4. tit.
2.

This War, the King says, was not undertaken rashly, nor without just and
honorable Grounds, but enforced for the necessary Defense of himself and his
Dominions. If this War were for the necessary Defense of the King and his
Dominions, there must be some Body that did thus offend the King and his
Dominions; but who this is, the King neither says, nor can I find.

For the Support of his Friends and Allies. This is general, so no particular
Answer can be given to it: but who these Friends and Allies were which were to
be supported, the King neither says, nor can I find.

For redeeming the ancient Honor of this Nation. It had need, for it was never
so blasted as in his Father's and his own Reign.

For the Recovery of the Patrimony of his dear Sister, her Consort, and their
Children, injuriously, and under color of Treaties of Friendship, taken from
them. The King's Father, to make good the Narrative which this King and
Buckingham made of the Spanish Treaty, told the Parliament he was deceived by
Generals, and that dolosus versatur in generalibus. If the King would have
satisfied the World how his Brother-in-law's Patrimony was taken from him by
Color of Treaties and Friendship, he should have set forth the Treaties and
Friendship, and by whom, and when sought; and by whom, and when broken: but of
this the King says not one word, and therefore that which he says stands for
nothing.

And for the Maintenance of the true Religion. Were the Ships which he and
Buckingham last Year sent to subdue the Rochellers, who had never given him or
his Father any Offense, for the Defense of the true Religion? If this was not,
what was it this King did for the Defense of the true Religion?

And invited thereunto, and encouraged therein, by the humble Advice of both
Houses of Parliament. What! all this by the Advice of both Houses of
Parliament? I cannot find the Parliament, 21 Jac. ever invited his Father to
any more, than to break off the Treaties of the Prince's Match with Spain, and
the Palatinate: But what if upon the Misinformation of the Duke ex part, the
Parliament had done all this? yet, whenas the Earl of Bristol had twice blasted
the Duke's Narrative in every particular, without any Reply, Why might not
another Parliament, upon better Information, alter what the Parliament 21 Jac.
had done? Which neither of these Parliaments did, but granted and voted him and
his Father greater Supplies than ever before were given to any of his
Predecessors in threefold the time.

But when the King entered into a View of his Treasure, he found how ill
provided he was to proceed effectually with so great an Action. It seems by
this one Action, the King only designed the War against Spain: But why does not
the King set forth the Causes why his Treasure was so ill provided? It was not
ten Months before his Father's Death, that the Parliament 21 Jac. which gave
his Father three Subsidies, and three Fifteenths, was adjourned; and his first
Parliament gave him two Subsidies more, within two or three Months after his
Father's Death: And what came of all this, but the raising ten thousand Foot
and two thousand Horse, under Mansfield, the Expedition against the Rochellers,
and to Cadiz? to neither of which latter he was ever invited by his Father, or
any Parliament.

The King makes the ^lague to be the Cause of the Dissolution of the Parliament
at Oxford; yet he might as well have secured the Members by a Prorogation, as
Dissolution.

And in this Parliament, he tells how the House of Commons voted him three
Subsidies and three Fifteenths, and after four Subsidies and three Fifteenths,
and of the Letter he sent them the 9th of June, to speed the passing these
Supplies; and how that the House, being abused by the violent and ill-advised
Passion of a few Members, never so much as admitted one Reading to the Bill of
Subsidies, but voted a Remonstrance, or Declaration, which they intended to
prefer to him (tho palliated with glossing Terms) containing many dishonorable
Aspersions upon his Majesty, and upon the sacred Memory of his deceased Father;
which his Majesty taking for a Denial of the promised Supplies, upon mature
Advisement he dissolved them. But from whence should this mature Advisement
come? We do not find the Privy Council had any hand in it, and the House of
Lords petitioned against it.

But lest the Credit of this Declaration should not find Faith enough against
the Commons Representatives, the King sends a Proclamation after it, wherein he
takes notice of a Remonstrance drawn by a Committee of the late Commons, to be
presented to him, wherein are many things to the Dishonor of himself, and his
Royal Father of blessed Memory, and whereby, through the sides of a Peer of
this Realm, they wound their Sovereign's Honor; and to vent their Passions
against that Peer, and prepossess the World with an ill Opinion of him, before
his Case was heard (who hindered it) had scattered Copies of it. Wherefore the
King, to suppress such an unsufferable Wrong, upon pain of his Indignation and
high Displeasure, commanded all who had Copies thereof to burn them. But why
was not the Duke's Cause heard? and who dissolved the Parliament to prevent it?
Had not the Earl of Bristol answered every Particular of the King's and Duke's
Charge against him? And was there not an Order of the House of Lords, the Duke
should answer the Earl's Charge against him? Where is this Answer to be found?
and why was it not?

Now see the Justice of this King, and how he made good his Promise in his
Declaration, that he would so order his Actions, as should justify him, not
only in his own Conscience, but to the whole World; for the very Day the
Parliament was dissolved, he committed the Earl of Bristol Prisoner to the
Tower, and left the Duke free, to pursue his ungodly Designs.

Here I Will stay a little, and add this Augmentation of Honor to the Escutcheon
of this noble Earl, notwithstanding this Usage: For when the Long Parliament,
in 1640, had put a full Stop to the King's Absolute Will and Pleasure, which if
it had not, God only knows where it would have ended; and after that this
King's Flatterers and Favorites, his Lord Keeper Finch, and Secretary
Winde-bank, had run into other Countries, to save themselves from being hanged
in this; and that the Earl of Manchester, after he had flattered this King and
his Father in all the Shapes of Earl, Viscount, Baron, Lord Chief Justice, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Treasurer, and Lord President of the Council; and his Son, and
the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, and both the Sir Henry Vanes, Father and
Son, and Sir Henry Mildmay, etc. sided with the Parliament against the King;
yet this noble Earl followed the King in all his Adversity, however he had been
persecuted by him in his Prosperity.

The late Keeper, as he gave his Opinion against the War with Spain in King
James's Reign, so did he against the Expedition against Cales in this King's
Reign: his Reason was, which you may read in the second Part of his Life, fol.
65. That the King must make himself sure of the Love of his own People at home,
before he bid War to such a rich and mighty Nation.

But the Keeper's Counsels were as much feared and hated by the Duke, as
Bristol's and the Commons Articles were against him; and therefore he resolved
to be rid of them all, and pursue the King's and his own Designs, without any
Control; and the very same Day the Parliament was dissolved, he caused the
Earl of Bristol to be committed to the Tower, as you may see in Stow's
Chronicle, fol. 1042. Nor would he have his Renown and Valor less known
abroad, than his Justice at home; and France shall now be the Theater upon
which he will act it, in spite of Spain, or the Parliament and Nation of
England, without whose Assistance he will act Wonders, by his own Power, and in
Vindication of his own Honor: however, some Cause must be showed by others,
since the Duke concealed the true Cause.

Rushworth, fol. 427. makes the Causes of this War to begin between the Priests
of the Queen's Family, and the Bishops, by Articles of Agreement upon the
Marriage; and that the Pope had declared them Apostates, if they should seek
for any Establishment from the King, being an Heretic; and that the Queen
sided herein with the Priests against the King, and that Unkindnesses hereupon
grew between them; so as the King informed his Brother of France, he could no
longer bear them. And much to this purpose has Mr. James Howel in the Life of
Lewis XIII. fol. 75.

But these were but Pretenses for this War; the Cause was of another
Complexion: And herein we will cite the Authority of the great Nani, who had
better Means to enquire into the Causes than either Rushworth or Howel, and was
not biased by Interest, Affection, or Flattery.

You have heard before of the Emulation between Richlieu and Buckingham, and of
their Inclinations for the Queen's Favor, and of the Queen's noble Aversions
to them both: but I think Nani was therein a little mistaken; for, if I be not
misinformed, as I think verily I am not, when Buckingham came out of France
with the Queen of England, he left, or soon after sent Sir Balthazer Gerbier to
hold secret Correspondence between the Queen and himself; and tho Richlieu
watched Gerbier narrowly, yet he brought the Queen's Garter, and an exceeding
rich Jewel to Buckingham from her.

Upon the breaking out of the Feuds in the Queen's Family, which began almost
as soon, if not before it was settled, Buckingham prevails with the King to be
sent into France to compose them, which was granted. But Nani says, the true
Motive of Buckingham's Journey being ascribed to Love, contracted in that
Court, Richlieu persuaded the King to refuse him Entrance into the Kingdom. The
Rage hereupon of the other was inflamed to extremity, and swear, since he was
forbidden to enter in a peaceable manner into France, he would make his Passage
with an Army.

Here you see the Duke was under a double Obligation, of Love and Honor; and
since he could not attain his End in Love, it is remarkable by what Steps he
proceeded to make good his Oath and Honor of entering into France with an
Army; which will be better observed if they be looked upon in their
Circumstances.

It was the 16th of August 1625, in the first Year of the King's Reign, as you
may see in Rushworth, fol. 335. that Buckingham caused the Captains of the
Fleet under the Command of Vice Admiral Pennington, to deliver it into the
French Power to fight against the Rochellers; and while the Fleet was thus in
the French Power, and after the Duke had received the horrible Affront of being
denied Entrance into France in a peaceable and loving manner, about Michaelmas
following, viz. about six Weeks after the delivery of the Fleet, the Duke, as
Lord High Admiral of England, by an extraordinary Commission, seized the St.
Peter of New Haven (John Mallerow Master) laden with Goods, Merchandise and
Money, to the value of 40000 l. upon the account of Monsieur Villiers, Governor
of New Haven, and other French Merchants, as Prize; and the Duke took out of
the said Ship sixteen Barrels of Cochineal, eight Bags of Gold, three and
twenty Bags of Silver, two Boxes of Pearl and Emeralds, a Chain of Gold, and
Moneys and Commodities to the value of 20000 l. and delivered them to Gabriel
Marsh his Servant: Whereupon there was an Arrest of two English Merchant Ships
in New Haven upon the 7th of December following, viz. 1625. whereupon by a
Petition^ from the Merchants, the King ordered, December the 28th, that the
Ship and Goods belonging to the French should be re-delivered to the French;
upon this the Court of Admiralty decreed upon the 16th of January following,
that the Ship with all the Goods (except three hundred Mexico Hides, sixteen
Sacks of Ginger, one Box of gilded Beads, and five Sacks of Ginger) should be
released from further Detention, and delivered to the Master; yet the Duke not
only detained to his own use the said Gold, Silver, Pearl, Emeralds, Jewels and
Money, but upon the 6th of February following, without any legal Proceedings,
caused the sid Ship to be again arrested and detained, as you may see in Rushw.
f. 312. And here began the seizing of our English Ships in France, which the
Duke makes one of the Causes of the War.

Object. But this is but a Charge of the Commons upon the Duke, and therefore
no direct Proof.

Answ. It is not to be presumed the Commons would have charged these things
thus particularly and positively without Proof; and I say moreover, they are to
be taken for Truth, since the King did dissolve the Parliament, rather than the
Duke should come to his Trial upon the Commons impeaching him hereupon; and
it is worth Observation, to see how without Counsel, and by contrary Extremes,
the King and Duke engaged in both the Wars against Spain and France.

The Bishop of Litchfield, in the second Part of the Life of the Lord Keeper
Williams, f. 4. tit. 2. says, The next day after King James's Death, the King
and Duke were busied in many Cares, but the chief was, for the Continuation of
the Parliament at King James's Death: the Keeper showed that the Parliament
determined with the Death of the King; then the King said, Since Necessity
required a new Parliament, his Will was that Writs forthwith be issued out of
Chancery for a new Choice, and not a day lost. The Keeper hereupon craved leave
to be heard, and said, It was usual in times before, that the King's Servants
and Friends did deal with Counties, Cities and Boroughs where they were known,
to procure a Promise for their Elections before the precise time of any
insequent Parliament was published; and that the same Forecast would be good at
this time, which would not speed if the Summons were divulged before they
looked about them. The King answered, It was high time to have Subsidies
granted for the War with the King of Spain, and the Fleet must go forth for
that purpose this Summer. To which the Keeper replied in few words, and with so
cold a Consent, that the King turned away and gave him leave to be gone,
whereas the King dissolved this Parliament, and lost four Subsidies and three
Fifteenths, to save the Duke, and make War upon France.

Concealing the true Reason for this War with France, the Duke in his
Declaration gives two other Reasons of it; the first was, the refusal of
Mansfield to land his Army at Calais, according to Agreement, whereby the
Design for the recovery of the Palatinate was frustrate. But why must this be a
Reason at this time of day? for this was done in the Reign of King James; and
when the Treaty of the Marriage with France was in being, Why was not then the
Treaty broke off upon it? And why after this in King Charles's Reign, was the
English Fleet put into the Power of the French to subdue the Rochellers, and
this Business of Mansfield's not so much as taken notice of?

The second Reason was, The French seizing our English Merchants Ships in their
Ports. But this was after the Duke had seized and made Prize of the St. Peter
of Newhaven; so here the Duke begins making Prize upon the French, and makes
War upon them for doing so by the English. However we have here a Declaration
and Reason of a War against the French, such as 'twas, tho none could be had
for the War with Spain.

Here you may see the unhappy Fate of Princes who treat their Subjects as
Enemies, and their Flatterers and Favorites as their only Friends and
Confidents: for notwithstanding the King's ill Success last Year to Cadiz, and
the King's Complaint for want of Money in the Exchequer, and the ill terms he
was at with his Subjects, not only to be put upon making a War against the King
of Spain and the Emperor, but now also against the King of France, and to have
none but Buckingham, Laud, etc. and their Para^ices to support him in all these
Wars; and what could Human Wisdom foresee of any good Success in them, being
against three the most potent Princes in Christendom?

For the Charges to maintain these Wars, almost against Christendom, the King
requires a Benevolence of the Subject, and the Nobility to lend freely: Demands
a Loan of 100000 l. from the City of London, charges the Ports of England to
furnish Ships upon their own Charges, issues out Privy-Seals for Benevolences
in proportion to the four Subsidies and three Fifteenths voted by the Commons,
grants a Commission to execute Martial Law, bille^s Soldiers, and makes the
Country pay their Quarters; the Rich who refuse to pay the Loans are assessed,
and bound over to answer at the Council Table, and the other pressed for
Soldiers. These were the Ways this King took to justify his Integrity for the
Weal of the Kingdom, so as to satisfy not only his own Conscience, but his
People, and the whole World, as he promised in his Declaration for Dissolution
of the Parliament.

But lest the King's Royal Proclamation for these things should be stumbled at,
or disputed, Sibthorp and Manwaring (two special Favorites of Laud) are set on
work to preach, that the King is not bound to observe the Laws of the Land in
his Government; and that his Royal Will in imposing Loans and Taxes does oblige
the Subject's Conscience upon Pain of Eternal Damnation.

Tho these things were settled to the Duke's Heart's Content, yet he had a
Jealousy, that in his Absence the Archbishop of Canterbury might give the King
such Counsel, as might spoil all the Glories of the Duke's Designs; and
therefore to remove him not only from the Council Table, but far enough out of
the way from coming into the King's Presence, is the Design: but to put some
color upon it, it was resolved, That the King, by a special Message, should
order the Archbishop to license Sibthorp's Sermon under his own Hand.

The Archbishop at this time was sorely afflicted with the Stone, and kept his
Bed; when Mr. Murray brought the King's Command to him, the Bishop could not
forbear to take notice of the piece of Drudgery to be put upon him, the like
whereof was never enjoined to any of his Predecessors, yet desired my Lord
Conway to leave the Sermon with him some small time to peruse, which my Lord
did.

The Bishop, instead of licensing the Sermon, made Observations upon it, how
false and inconsistible the Parts of the Sermon were to one another, and how
contrary to Antiquity and the Authority of the Scripture; for one part of the
Sermon justified Ahab's taking away Naboth's Vineyard, and he desired to be
satisfied about his Objections before he licensed the Sermon.

This gave the desired Offense: for upon the Archbishop's refusal to license
the Sermon, the Bishop of London (who had allowed John Cosins his Book, called,
The seventh Sacrament, with all the Errors which were after expunged) gave it a
great and stately Allowance, and Laud was ordered to answer the Archbishop's
Objections, and had the Bishops of Durham, Oxford and Rochester to be his
Assistants in it; and to this the Archbishop must reply without seeing the
Answer, which if he might see, he said he would batter it all to pieces; which
being denied, you may read in Rushw. f. 446, 447. how the Archbishop did
batter it all to pieces upon Mr. Murray his reading it.

For this special piece of Service in answering the Archbishop's Objections,
the Bishop of Durham, and Laud of Bath and Wells are made Privy-Counsellors;
and for the Archbishop's refusal to license Sibthorp's Sermon, he was not only
banished to his House at Ford, five Miles beyond Canterbury (a moorish
unhealthy Place) and that before he could lay in his Provisions for
Housekeeping, but the Office of High Commission is taken from him, and the
Exercise of it committed to the Bishops of Durham, Oxford, Rochester, and Bath
and Wells, which had so well answered the Archbishop's Objections to
Sibthorp's Sermon: And now things are thus settled at home.

In July the 27th the Duke is commissionated Admiral, and General of a Navy
Royal of 100 Sail, and 6 or 7000 Land Soldiers: and when he came before
Rochel, Sobiez came aboard of him, where, for several Reasons, it was agreed to
land the Army on the Isle of Oleron, and not on the Isle of Rhee; but Sobiez
going to persuade the Rochellers to join with the English, the Duke before his
return lands on the Isle of Rhee, in spite of the Opposition made by the
French; but instead of pursuing the Blow, not only neglects to take the Fort la
Pry, to secure his Retreat, and prevent the French from landing Supplies, but
stays five days, whereby Toiras the French Governor encouraged his Men, and
also got more Force and Provisions into the Citadel of St. Martins. The French
were so alarmed at this Invasion, that the King offered the Duke of Rohan and
the Rochellers any Terms to join against the English, which both refusing,
caused both their Ruins.

So that the Duke having made three false Steps, viz. his deceiving Sobiez, his
not marching after landing, and not taking in the Fort la Pry, now let us see a
fourth. The Enemy's Retreat upon the landing of the English was so hasty, that
they quitted a Well about twenty Paces from the Counterscarp which supplied the
Citadel with Water; which not being possessed upon the first coming of the Army,
the French drew a Work about it which the English could not force, and without
which Well the besieged could not have subsisted; however, the Duke resolved to
take the Fort by Famine.

We have marked four false Steps the Duke made; now observe the fifth, which
was the loss of the whole Army, and ruin of all the Protestant Party in France:
for instead of the French joining with the English for the recovery of the
Palatinate by Land, the Spaniards now join the French against the English by
Sea, to relieve St. Martins; and the Duke instead of pressing the Fort by a
strait Siege, entertains a Treaty of Surrender with Toiras, and several
Compliments past between them, subscribed, Your humble Servant, Buckingham;
and, Your humble Servant, Toiras; till Toiras got Relief of Men, Victuals and
Ammunition, and then Toiras broke off the Treaty with the Duke.

Soon after the French landed Forces, by the neglect of the English to suppress
them, and Orders were given to draw the English out of the Trenches, which the
French possess; whereupon the English were forced to retreat, and fight the
French to regain the Trenches: at last the 6th of November, the Duke makes a
vain Storm upon the Castle, and was beaten off; and upon the 8th the Duke
retreats, the French being now equal to him in Foot, and superior in Horse:
when the English were entangled in their Retreat, the Duke having neglected to
take la Pry, or build a Fort upon a narrow Lane and Causey (to secure their
Retreat) the French charged the English Horse in the rear, and rout them, who
rout the Foot in the narrow Passages between the Salt Pits; those that escaped
were lost in the Salt Pits and Ditches, and the Crowd was so great in passing a
Bridge, that many were drowned in the River: yet in this Confusion and Adversity
the Bravery of the English appeared; for a few having past the Bridge, the
French following, the English rallied, and faced about to charge the French,
who cowardly retreated over the Bridge.

Except this little Action, yet as great in Fame as any other, the English
Nation never received like Dishonor, as in this loose and unguided Conduct of
this lascivious Duke in this Expedition, of whom it may be truly said, he was
Mars ad Opus Veneris,
Martis ad Arma Venus.


Home he comes, and finds things as much in Disorder here, as he had left them
in Dishonor abroad: the Prisons full of the most eminent Gentry of England, by
a special Warrant from the King, for refusing to lend, as they were assess'd by
the Commissioners for the Loan, and Bail denied them upon return of their
Habeas Corpus's. An Army was kept on foot, when this Expedition had consumed
all that which should have paid them, which had not been done in 80 Years
before; the People fearing this was more to enslave than defend them.

In this Confusion Sir Robert Cotton's Advice is called for by the King and
Council, what is to be done; who in a long and well composed Speech, beginning
at Charles the 5th, sets forth the Design of the House of Austria, to attain an
universal Monarchy in these Western Parts of Europe: How the Design was first
checked by Henry the 8th against Charles, but more by Queen Elizabeth against
his Son Philip the 2d, they following a free Council, and thereby winning the
Hearts of a loving People, ever found Hands and Money for all Occasions. That
the only way to raise Money speedily and securely, was the Via Regia by
Parliament; other ways were unknown, untrodden, rough, tedious, and never
succeeded well. That Religion lies nearest the Conscience of the Subject, and
that there was a Jealousy of some Practices against it: and that tho the Duke
of Bucks had broken the Spanish Match out of a Religious Care that the Articles
demanded might endanger the State of the Reformed Religion, yet being an Actor
in the French Match, as hard if not worse passed than those of Spain.

Sir Robert goes on, and enumerates the Miscarriages in these two last Years,
the Waste of the King's Revenue, the Pressures upon the public Liberty of the
Subjects, in commanding their Goods without Consent in Parliament, imprisoning
their Persons, without special Cause showed; and this made good against them by
the Judges. How to obviate these he leaves to the prudent Consideration of the
Council, but like old Sir Charles Harboard, he wishes that the Duke might
appear to be the first Adviser for calling a Parliament, so that the People may
be satisfied, this Parliament should be called by the zealous Care and Industry
of the Duke.

Now the Hopes of getting Money by calling the Parliament, works more than the
Laws of God, or sacred Justice could do: for upon the 29th of January, Writs
are issued out for the Assembling of a Parliament, to meet the 17th of March
following; the Prison-Doors are opened, for the imprisoned Gentry to go abroad;
the Archbishop, the Earl of Bristol, and Bishop of Lincoln (who tho now in
Disgrace, was the first Raiser of Laud, after Bishop of London, and Archbishop
of Canterbury) have Writs to (...) in Parliament.

But see the Unstability of Resolutions not founded in Truth, Justice or
Prudence: for the next Day after the Writs for summoning the Parliament were
agreed, the King, January the 30th, granted a Privy Seal to Burlemach, for
30000 l. to be returned to Sir William Balfour, and John Da^bier, for raising a
thousand German H^rse, with Arms both for Horse and Foot, to be sent into
England, February the 28th, where was an Army already upon free Quarter, and
after grants a Commission to 23 Lords and others to raise Money upon
Impositions, or otherwise.

Thus things stood in the State before the Meeting of the Parliament. Now let us
see how they stood in the Church. Barnevelt having headed a Faction in Holland,
which called themselves Arminians, and designing by them to have deposed the
Prince of Orange, lost his Head for it about four Years before; now on the
contrary, the Arminian Faction here, which called themselves the Church of
England, ascribed all Dominion to the absolute Power of the King: The
Principals of this Faction were Neal Bishop of W^^chester, Laud Bishop of Bath
and Wel^s, and Richard Mountague afterward advanced to the Bishoprics of
Chichester and Norwich; this Faction was headed by the Duke. At this time the
Jesuits had taken a House at Clarkenwell, designing to make a College of it,
who in a Letter to the Father Rector of the Jesuits at Brussels, boast that
they had planted the sovereign Drug Arminianism, which they hoped would purge
the Protestants from their Heresy, and that it flourished, and bore Fruit in a
due Season; and they proceeded by Counsel and Consideration, how and when to
work upon the Duke's Jealousy and Revenge; and in that they gave the Honor to
those who merit it, which were the Church Catholics: they assured themselves,
they had made the Duke and the Parliament irreconcilable; and that they have
those of their Religion, who stand continually at the Duke's Chamber, to see
who comes in, and who goes out: They glory how admirably in their Speech and
Gestures, they act the Puritans, and the Cambridg Scholars shall find by woeful
Experience, they can act the Puritans better than they have done the Jesuits:
That their Foundation is Arminianism, that the Arminians and Projectors affect
Mutation.

Having thus laid the Foundation for propagating their Religion, the Jesuits
next Care was for the State; and in the first place they consider the King's
Honor and Necessities, and show how the King may free himself of his Word, as
Lewis the 11th did, and for greater Splendour and Luster; how he may raise a
great Revenue, and not be beholden to his Subjects, which was by way of Excise,
which must be by a mercenary Army of Horse and Foot. For the Horse they had
made sure they should be Foreigners and Germans, who would eat up the King's
Revenue, and spoil the Countries wheresoever they came tho they should be paid;
What Havoc then will they make there when they get no Pay, or are not duly
paid? they will do more Mischief than we hope the Army will do.

This mercenary Army of 2000 Horse and 20000 Foot was to be taken into pay
before the Excise be settled. In forming the Excise, the Country is most likely
to rise; if the Mercenary Army subjugate the Country, the Soldiers are to be
paid out of the Confiscations; they hope instantly to dissolve Trade, and
hinder the Building of Ships, by devising probable Designs, and putting the
State upon Expeditions, as that of Cadiz, and in taking away the Merchants
Ships, so that they may not easily catch, and light upon the West India Fleet.

A Jesuit and nine Priests were taken with this, and many other Papers, which
were delivered to Sir John Cook, Secretary of State; the Jesuit was condemned,
but reprieved by the King, because Sir John Cook said, The King delighted not
in Blood: and afterward the nine Priests were released by special Warrant from
the King; and the King in his Reasons for dissolving the Parliament, makes the
House of Commons Enquiry into this Business to be an exorbitant Encroachment
and Usurpation, such as was never before attempted by that House. By this you
may see the Religious care this pious Prince had for the Church of England, and
how much he regarded the Laws of England, or minded the Support of the poor
Protestants in France, or the Re-establishment of his Brother-in-law in the
Palatinate.

Thus stood things when the Parliament met the 17th of March, when the King (as
Men in a deep Lethargy, no ways sensible of their Pain, or the dangerous State
they are in) not considering the dangerous State he was in both abroad and at
home; Abroad, in that he had made War upon the King of Spain without any
Declaration of War, and that against his Father's Advice, and of his Council;
and upon the King of France, wherein himself and his Favorite Buckingham, were
the Aggressors; at Home by his unheard of Invasions upon the Fortunes and
Liberties of his Subjects, never before done by any King of England, in the
short Interval of these two Parliaments, (scarce being 9 Months) upon the
Opening of the Parliament, far unlike his Father in the last Parliament of his
Reign, when his Case was not near so dangerous as this King's (tho their
Necessities were equal, to get Money by Parliaments, when they could get it no
other Way) begins his Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THese Times are for Action: wherefore for Example sake I mean not to spend
much Time in Words, expecting accordingly that your (as I hope) good
Resolutions will be speedy, not spending Time unnecessarily, or (that I may
say) dangerously; for tedious Consultations, at this Conjuncture of Time, are
as hurtful as ill Resolutions.

I am sure you now expect from me, both to know the Cause of your meeting, and
what to resolve on; yet I think there is none here but knows, that common
Danger is the Cause of this Parliament, and that Supply at this time is the
chief End of it, so that I need but point to you what to do. All this but of
Supply is Mysterious and General, and had need of an Interpreter.

The King goes on, and says, I will use but few Persuasions; for if to maintain
your own Advices, and as the Case now stands for the following thereof, the
true Religion, Laws and Liberties of this State (never so violated by any King
of England before him) and the just Defense of our true Friends and Allies, be
not sufficient, then no Eloquence of Men or Angels will prevail.


What Parliament, or any other Council but that of Buckingham, advised him to
make War, either upon the King of Spain or France? search all the Records of
the Journals of Parliament of 21 Jac. and Rushworth, Franklin, and Bishop of
Litchfield, and see if in any one of them there be one Sentence of making War
against the King of Spain, but only to break off the Treaty with the Spanish
Match, and for the Palatinate. But admit the Parliament had upon the
Misinformation of the King and Duke, advised the King to have made War upon the
King of Spain; yet since the Earl of Bristol so shamefully blasted the whole
Story not a Year since in open Parliament, without any Reply; How was this
Parliament obliged to have made good what that had done? And since the King
dissolved the last Parliament, rather than the Duke should be brought to Trial
upon the Earl's Charge, which was a Failure of Justice, sure it had been more
to the King's Honor, not to have mentioned this to the Parliament, than that
what he had done was by their Advice.

Did this Parliament, or any other, ever advise him to put the Fleet under the
Command of Vice Admiral Pennington into the French King's Power, to subdue the
poor Rochellers, who never did him any wrong, to the Ruin of the Reformed
Interest in France, and to be the Foundation of the French Grandeur by Sea; and
then on the contrary, make War upon the French King, when he was the Aggressor?
Did ever this, or any other Parliament, advise him to take his Subjects Goods
by force, without and against Law, and imprison their Persons by his Absolute
Will and Pleasure, denying them the Benefit of their Habeas Corpus's, the
Birthright of the Subject, and to continue them Prisoners during his Will,
without allowing them a Trial by the Laws, whether they were guilty of any
Crime or not? Or to execute Martial Law, impose new Oaths, and give
Free Quarter to Soldiers, in his own Kingdom, in time of Peace?

However, the King goes on, and says, Only let me remember you, that my Duty
most of all, and every one of yours according to his Degree, is, to seek the
Maintenance of the Church and Commonwealth; and certainly there never was a
time in which this Duty was more necessarily required than now.

Was the Discharge of the Pack of Jesuits, conspiring the Ruin of Church and
State with Impunity, for the Maintenance of the Church and Commonwealth? Or was
the Commission which the King granted the next Day after the Writs for the
Assembling the Parliament, to raise Moneys by Imposition in the nature of
Excise, to be levied throughout the Nation, for the Maintenance of the Church
and State? And at the same time to order my Lord Treasurer to pay 30000 l. to
Philip Burlemac, a Dutch Merchant in London, to be by him returned into the
Low Countries, by Bill of Exchange, to Sir William Balfour and John Dalbier,
for the raising of 1000 Horse, with Arms both for Horse and Foot, for the
Maintenance of the Church and Commonwealth of England? And also to call a
Council for levying Ship Money, now he had by his own Will taken the Customs
without any Grant of Parliament, for the Maintenance of the Church and State?

I therefore judging a Parliament to be the ancient, speediest, and best way,
in this time of Common Danger, to give such Supply as to secure our selves, and
save our Friends from imminent Ruin, have called you together. Every Man must
do according to his Conscience; wherefore if you (as God forbid) should not do
your Duties, in contributing what the State at this time needs, I must, in
Discharge of my Conscience, use those other means which God has put into my
hands, to save that which the Follies of particular Men may otherwise hazard to
lose.

It Is certain a Parliament is the best way, in time of Common Danger, to give
Supplies, and secure the Nation from imminent Ruin, the Nation being most
concerned in it; yet what Parliamentary Advice did the King take the last nine
Months? If the Nation and the King's* Friends be in such imminent Ruin, the
King should have declared who those Friends were, and who they were which
threatened this Ruin. When his Father died he was at Peace with all the World,
and it was his own Wilfulness, that without any other Counsel but that of
Buckingham, he made War upon France and Spain: and let any Man read the
Passages of the short time of his Reign, and judge if the imminent Ruin of the
Nation were not from himself within, as well as without; and if the granting
him further Supplies, would not more endanger the Nation, in carrying on his
Designs in both.

Here note, Tho the King had made no Conscience of what he had done, yet he now
tells the Parliament, If they shall not do their Duties in contributing what
the State at this time needs, he must, in Discharge of his Conscience, use
those other Means which God has put into his hands, to save that which the
Follies of particular Men may other ways hazard to lose. The King should have
explained what other ways God put into his hands to govern his Subjects, than
by Justice, Judgment, and Righteousness; for all other ways are unjust and
wicked. And how any Man, how great soever, can plead Conscience to perpetrate
Injustice and Wickedness, must be unfolded by Laud, Neal, Sibthorp, Manwaring,
Mountague, Wren, Heylin, etc.

The King proceeds, and says, Take not this for a Threatening, (for I scorn to
threaten any but my Equals) but an Admonition from him that both out of Nature
and Duty has most Care of your Preservations and Prosperities.

This is Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam. What a Monster does the King
here make a Parliament? the Head so incomprehensively big, and the Body so
scornful and little? But if it ill becomes any Man to glory in his own Actions,
it worse becomes him to glory in that which he himself had not done. So that
admit the King had been so superlatively great, as to scorn all the World
besides, yet it would better have become any other to have said it, than the
King. A Parliament is a Political Body, whereof the King is the Head; and the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Representatives of the Commons, the Body;
and, What is the Head without the Body? Are not all the Members of every Body
of Use for the Head? And does not the Head stand in need of every Member of the
Body? But if the Head be overgrown, and too big, and the Body too scornful and
lean, is not this not only monstrous, but a Symptom of the Imperfection of the
whole, and that it is in a declining and dangerous State?

Yet the King tells them, The End of calling this Parliament was for Supply.
And did ever King, or other Man, before him, tell those from whom he expected
Supply, or any other Benefit, that he scorned them? and if they do not their
Duties, he would use other Means which God had put in his hands, without
telling what those other Means were? and call them Fools, and particular Men,
if they do not their Duties, to save what they may otherwise hazard to lose?
whereas heretofore the Kings of England ever thanked the Parliament upon a Bill
for Aids.

But after all this, the Parliament must not take it for a Threatening, but an
Admonition. An Admonition may be taken in a double Sense; either to instruct
another in his Duty, or to menace or threaten another, if he continues
obstinate in some Fault or Crime committed by that other: But this Admonition
of the King's in the Parliament, must not be taken for a Threatening of them,
therefore it must be for their Instruction, ignorant of their Duties.

A Parliament was called by the Saxons Wittenage-Mote, or the Conventus
Sapientum, the Meeting of Wise Men, who met together to deliberate of the
arduous and urgent Businesses of the Kingdom, and concerning the State and
Defense of the Kingdom and Church of England, and is called the Common Council
of the Kingdom, and the General Council of the Kingdom, and the Council of the
Kingdom. See 4th Institute 2. And tho the Writ of Summons of Parliaments be Ad
Tractandum and Deliberandum de certis arduis Regni negotiis, and pro statu and
defensi^e Regni and Ecclesiae Angliae concernentibus; yet the Parliaments of
England, unlike the Convention of the State of Scotland, are not tied up to
those things only which the King propounds, but are free to treat and
deliberate of all things which other ways concern the Kingdom and Church of
England. So that the great End of the Meeting of Parliaments, is to advise the
King: And all our Saxon, Norman, and British Kings, had ever Parliaments in so
high an Esteem, that we do not read any where, before these two Kings of the
Scottish Race came to reign over us, that ever any King and Parliament parted in
Disgust; whereas since King James came to be King, five or six parted in
Disgust; and God knows what would have become of the other, if King James had
not died before the Parliament met again.

Did ever any King of England before, tho he scorned to threaten the
Parliament, yet admonish them of their Duties, or otherwise he would use those
other means than by Parliament, which God had put into his hands? But Quorsum
haec? or where will the Designs of this young King stop? However, you may see
by this Speech of the King's, that those who governed him were as little
Politicians as Orators.

But good Laws often arise from corrupt Times and bad Manners: for Magna Charta
did arise from the Usurpations of K. John, and Henry III. above the Laws and
Liberties of this Nation; so did the Petition of Right the Magna Charta of this
Age, from the Usurpations of this King, since the Dissolution of the last
Parliament to the Meeting of this, little more than nine Months.

And as the old Magna Charta was no new Law, but a Declaration of the old,
restored by Henry II. King John's Father, called the Avitae Leges; so neither
was the Petition of Right, which enumerates the Breaches the King had made of
Magna Charta, and manifold other Laws, before it prays Relief against them.

But these Magna Charta's were obtained after different manners, the old by
cruel Wars: The Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and submitting to the Absolute
Will and Pleasure of the King, were Strangers to those Days; and the Bishops
were so far from those Doctrines, that they were the chief Promoters of Magna
Charta, and stigmatized the Infringers of it, the King himself not excepted,
with a dreadful Anathema.

Whereas neither Rome nor Athens could ever glory in such an Assembly as the
Commons of this Parliament were, for their Virtue and Learning; nor any Age
produce such a number of Men of the like Integrity to their Country, and humble
Obedience to their Prince. Notwithstanding the former Abuses of this Reign,
they proceeded with no Censures and Punishment of the King's evil Ministers
(except Dr. Manwaring) but only to represent to the King the Grievances of the
Nation; and did not impeach the Duke of Buckingham, as they did in the last
Parliament, nor proceed upon it, but only remonstrated to the King the Evils
which the exorbitant Greatness of the Duke brought upon the King and Nation;
and how unsafe it would be to the Nation, to grant Aids to the King which were
misemployed for the exalting the Grandeur of the Duke. However, before they
entered upon Grievances, they voted the King five entire Subsidies; which was
the greatest Tax that ever was before given to any King of England at once, and
to be paid in the shortest time. Now let us see, tho but in Epitome, how these
things were changed, and what Returns the King made the Parliament and Nation.

The Unanimity of the Commons in the Gift, was not less than the Gift was
great, being nemine contradicente; which so pleased the King, that he sent them
word by Secretary Sir John Cook, that he would deny them nothing of their
Liberties which any of his Predecessors had granted them.

Then the Commons fell upon Grievances, and voted the Imprisonment of any
Freeman by Warrant from the King or Council, without a Cause alleged, to be a
Grievance; and that the raising Moneys by Loan, and imposing an Oath upon the
Subject to discover the Value of his Estate, the Billeting of Soldiers, and
exercising Martial Law in time of Peace, were Grievances.

Then several Debates arose in the House, how the Subjects should be secured
against these in time to come. And upon the Motion of Sir Edward Coke, the
House agreed to sue to the King by Petition, the most ancient and humble
Address in Parliament, that his Majesty would give his People Assurance of
their Rights by Assent in Parliament, as he uses to pass other Acts. And
hereupon the House ordered Sir Edward to draw a Petition accordingly.

The House agreed to the Petition; and ordered Sir Edw. Coke, Sir Dudley Diggs,
Mr. Seldom, and Mr. Littleton to carry it up to the Lords. The Duke of
Buckingham and his Creatures were zealous to stop the Petition in the House of
Lords: but he was much fallen from his Luster, since his dishonorable
Expedition to the Isle of Rhee last Summer, and his Expedition to Cales. So as
his Sway in the House of Peers was much abated: Besides, the Bishops were not
at this time all of a piece; for Archbishop Abbot urged his own Case, how he
was banished from his Houses at Croydon and Lambeth, while the Duke was
prosecuting his Voyage to the Isle of Rhee, and confined to a moorish
Mansion-place at Ford, to kill him, and debarred from the Management of his
Jurisdiction, and no Cause given for it. And Dr. Williams gave most learned and
elegant Arguments for the Petition, which you may read at large in the second
Part of the History of his Life, fol. 77, 78, 79. But this stuck close to him,
that neither the King nor Laud ever after forgot it; which you may read fol.
96. tit. 93.

The Lords would not proceed to any determinate Vote, before they had heard the
King's Counsel against the Petition, and the Commons Defense of it; wherein no
less time was spent than six Weeks. The Managers for the Petition, were Sir
Edward Coke, Mr. Seldom, Sir Dudley Diggs, Sergeant Glanvile, Sir Henry Martin,
and Mr. Mason.

Besides Magna Charta, the Commons fortified the Petition of Right with six
other Acts of Parliament, explanatory of Magna Charta, viz. The Statute made in
the Reign of Edward I. commonly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo; the
Statute of 25 Edward III. where it is declared, That from thenceforth no Person
shall be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his Will, because such
Loans were against Reason, and the Fanchise of the Land. The third was the
Statute of 28 Edward III. That no Man, of what Estate or Condition soever,
should be put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor Taken, nor Imprisoned, nor
Disherited, nor put to Death, without being brought to Answer by due Process of
Law. The fourth Statute, the 25 Edw. III. 9. and the sixth, 9 Hen. III. 29.
against exercising Martial Law in times of Peace. These Statutes were so well
managed by the Commons in Defense of the Petition, that Sir Robert Heath, who
was Attorney General, and the rest of the King's Counsel pleading, tho eagerly,
yet impertinently, had nothing to say materially against them, but submitted to
the Judgment of the Peers.

However, the Lords, before they would put the Vote, entered into a Committee of
the whole House, when my Lord Say moved, That those Lords who stood for the
Liberties of the Nation, might make their Protestation, and that to be upon
Record; and that the other opposite Party should, with the Subscriptions of
their Names, enter their Reasons to remain upon Record, that so Posterity might
not be to seek who they were that so ignobly betrayed the Freedom of our
Nation: and this done, they should proceed to Vote. This struck such a Daunt
upon the other Party, that not one of them opposed it.

The Lords agreed to the Petition of Right, but with this Addition, or Saving;
We present this our humble Petition to your Majesty, with the Care not only of
preserving our Liberties, but with due Regard to leave entire that Sovereign
Power wherewith your Majesty is trusted, for the Protection, Safety, and
Happiness of the People. But the Lords did not make any determinate Vote in it,
but sent it to the Commons to advise upon. The Bishop of Lincoln was a great
Stickler for this Addition, to qualify what he had said before in the Defense
of the Petition; which did him no good, the other sticking alta mente.

When this Addition, or Saving, came down to the Commons, Mr. Noy said, To add
a Saving is not safe; doubtful Words may beget ill Construction; and the Words
are not only doubtful, and Words unknown to us, but never used in any Act or
Petition before.

And Sir Edward Coke said, This is the Multum in parvo, this is propounded to
the Conclusion of our Petition: it is a Matter of great weight; and to speak
plain, it will overthrow all our Petition: it trenches on all the parts of it:
it flies at Loans, at the Oath, at Imprisonment, and Billeting of Soldiers:
this turns all about again. Look into all Petitions of former times, they never
petitioned, wherein there was a Saving of the King's Sovereignty. I know
Prerogative is part of the Law, but Sovereign Power is no Parliamentary Word:
In my Opinion, it weakens Magna Charta, and all our Statutes, for they are
absolute without any Saving Power; and should we now add it, we shall weaken
the Foundation of the Law, and then the Building must needs fall. Take we heed
what we yield unto; Magna Charta is such a Fellow, that he will have no
Sovereign: I wonder this Sovereign was not in Magna Charta, or in the
Confirmations of it. If we grant this, by Implication we give a Sovereign Power
above all these Laws. Power in Law, is taken for a Power with Force: The
Sheriff shall take the Power of the County: what is meant here, only God knows.
It is repugnant to our Petition, grounded on Acts of Parliament. Our
Predecessors could never endure a Salvo jure suo, no more than the Kings of old
could endure for the Church, Salvo honor Dei and Ecclesiae. We must not admit
this; and to qualify it is impossible. Let us hold our Privileges according to
the Law: that Power which is above this, is not fit for the King or People to
have it disputed further. I had rather, for my part, have the Prerogative
acted, and I my self lie under it, than have it disputed.

Sir Thomas Wentworth said, If we admit of this Addition, we leave the Subject
worse than we found him; and we shall have little Thanks for our Labor when we
come home. Let us leave all Power to his Majesty to punish Malefactors; but
these Laws are not acquainted with Sovereign Power. We desire no new thing; nor
do we offer to trench upon his Majesty's Prerogative. We may not recede from
our Petition neither in part or whole.

Mr. Seldom said, Let us not go hastily to the Question: if there be any
Objections, let any propound them, and let others answer them as they think
good: If it (the Saving) has no Reference to our Petition, what does it here?
I am sure others will say it has Reference, and so must we: how far it does
exceed all Examples of former times, no Man can show the like. Then he shows
the manifold Statutes, besides Magna Charta, wherein is no such Saving. And
whereas Mr. Speaker said, The King was our Heart, and ever shall be; but then
Mr. Seldom said, We spoke of the King's Prerogative, and we are bound to say
so: but when we speak of our Rights, we are not to be imprisoned, Saving but by
the King's Sovereign Power. Say, my Lands (without any Title) be seized into
the King's hand, and I bring a Petition of Right, and I go to the King, and
say, I do by no means seek your Majesty's Title; and after that I bring a
Petition or Monstrance de droit, setting forth my own Right and Title, and
withal set down a Saving that I leave entire his Majesty's Right; it would be
improper. Then he cites many Statutes wherein there are Savings, but no ways
pertinent to this, which you may read at large in Rushworth' s Collections and
Franklin' s Annals. And, in truth, it troubles me, I am forced to curtail this,
not only in Mr. Seldom, but other Noble Persons, by reason the Treatise would
swell to a greater Bulk than I designed it.

The Lords afterward had a Conference with the Commons to fortify their
Addition, managed by my Lord Keeper, which was answered by Mr. Mason: And after
that, the Commons desired another Conference with the Lords, and ordered
Sergeant Glanvile to argue the legal part of the Petition, and Sir Henry Martin
the rational part of it; which they did so well, that at a Conference, May 26.
1628, between both Houses, the Lord Keeper from the Lords told the Commons, the
Lords agreed with them in omnibus of their Petition, only in the Alteration of
two Words, viz. [Means] for Pretext, and for the Word [unlawful] (not
warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm).

The Houses thus happily accorded, the Petition, with the foresaid Amendments,
were read two several times in the House of Commons, and then upon the
Question, voted to be engrossed, and read a third time, and the House to sit in
the Afternoon till it was engrossed and read, and ordered to be presented to
the King; in which there was not one Negative: And the Bill for the Subsidies
was read a second time, and committed; and upon Wednesday the 28th, the Lords
and Commons had a Conference about the Manner of Delivery of the Petition; and
Sir Edward Coke reported, that their Lordships were agreed, That no Addition or
Preface be used to the King, but that the Petition be preferred to his Majesty
by the Command of the Lords and Commons; and that his Majesty by be desired, to
the Content of his People, he would give his Gracious Answer in full Parliament.

In all these Transactions the King was very uneasy; fain he would have the
Money, yet was unwilling to answer the Petition. The House was aware of this,
and therefore agreed the Petition before they would pass the Money-Bill. Upon
the 12th of April, the King, by Secretary Cook, acquainted them of the
Necessity of Supply, and expected some Fruit of what was so happily begun; but
finding a Stop beyond all Expectation of so good a Beginning, the Secretary was
therefore commanded to tell them, That without any further or unnecessary
Delay, they proceed in this Business; and bid them therefore take heed, that
they force him not to make an unpleasing end of that which was so well begun.
And two Days after the Secretary quickened the Business of this Supply again.

Upon the 2d of May the King sent a Message by Secretary Cook, That as he would
rank himself amongst the best of Kings, wherein he has no Intention to invade
or impeach our lawful Liberties; so he would have them to match themselves with
the best of Subjects, not by encroaching upon that Sovereignty or Prerogative
which God had put into his hands for their Good: and that this Sessions of
Parliament must continue no longer than Tuesday come Seven-night at the
farthest: and that his Royal Intention is, to have another Session at
Michaelmas next, for the perfecting such things as cannot now be done. Now
let us see how unwillingly the King was brought to pass the Petition.

Upon the 16th of May, Secretary Cook pressed the House to rely upon the King's
Word, and that the King promised to govern them by the Laws, and that they
shall enjoy as much Freedom as ever, and that this might be debated in the
House: but Sir John Elliot answered, that the Proceedings in a Committee is
more honorable and advantageous to the King and House, with whom the House
agreed.

In the Debate of this Committee, some were for the Bill to rest, but Sir
Edward Coke' s Reasons prevailed to the contrary: Was it ever known, said he,
that General Words were a sufficient Satisfaction to particular Grievances? Was
ever a Verbal Declaration of the King, Verbum Regni? When Grievances be, the
Parliament is to redress them: Did ever Parliament rely on Messages? They put
up Petitions of their Grievances, and the King answered them: The King's Answer
is very gracious, but what is the Law of the Realm, that is the Question. I put
no Diffidence in his Majesty, the King must speak by Record, and in
Particulars, not in General: Did you ever know the King's Message to a Bill of
Subsidies? all succeeding Kings will say, You must trust me as well as you did
my Predecessors, and trust my Messages; but Messages never came into a
Parliament: Let us put up a Petition of ^^ight, not that I distrust the King,
but that I cannot take his Trust but in a Parliamentary way.

Hereupon the Commons desired a Conference with the Lords, which was managed by
Sir Edward Coke, who said,

My Lords, it is evident what necessity there is, both in respect of your
selves and your Posterity to have good Success in this Business; we have
acquainted your Lordships with the Reasons and Arguments, and after we have had
some Conference we have received from your Lordships Propositions, and it
behooves us to give your Lordships some Reasons why you have not heard from us
before now; for in the mean time, as we were consulting this weighty Business,
we have received diverse Messages from our great Sovereign the King, and they
consisted of five Parts.

1. That his Majesty would maintain all his Subjects in their just Freedom,
both of their Persons and Estates. 2. That he will govern according to his Laws
and Statutes. 3. That we shall find much Confidence in his Royal Word: I pray
observe that. 4. That we shall enjoy all our Rights and Liberties, with as much
freedom as ever Subjects have done in former times. 5. That whether we think
fit, either by Bill or otherways, to go on in this great Business, his Majesty
would be pleased to give way t^ it.
These gracious Messages did so work upon our Affections, that we have taken it
into deep Consideration. My Lords, what we had these Messages (I deal plainly,
for so I am commanded by the House of Commons) we did consider what way would
be our most secure way, nay yours: We did think it the safest way to go on in a
Parliamentary Course; for we have a Maxim in the House of Commons, and written
in the Wall of our House, That old Ways are the safest and surest Ways: And at
last we did fail upon that, which we think (if your Lordships did consent with
us) the most ancient of all, and that is, my Lords, the Via fausta, both to his
Majesty, to your Lordships, and to our selves: For, my Lords, this is the
greatest Bond that any Subject can have in open Parliament, Verbum Regis: That
is a high Point of Honor, but this must be done by the Lords and Commons, and
assented to by the King in Parliament: This is the greatest Obligation of all,
and this is for the King's Honor, and our Safety. Therefore, my Lords, we have
drawn the Form of a Petition, desiring your Lordships to concur with us
therein, for we do come with an unanimous Consent of all the Commons, and there
is great reason your Lordships should do so, for your Lordships be involved in
the same Danger: and then the Petition was read.

Upon the 20th of May, the King wrote a Letter to the House of Lords, wherein
he said, That as he had given leave to free Debates upon the highest Points of
his Prerogative Royal, which in the times of his Predecessors were ever
restrained, as Matters they would not have discussed, yet he finds it insisted
upon, that in no Cause whatsoever he and his Council could commit without Cause
showed, which, if granted, would dissolve the Frame of the Monarchy: That as he
had made fair Propositions to the Commons, which might easily preserve the
Liberty of the Subject; so he thought good to let their Lordships know, that
without the overthrow of the Sovereignty he could not suffer his Power to be
impeached; yet that he will extend it beyond the just Rule of Moderation, etc.
which he thought good to signify, the rather to shorten the long Debates upon
this great Question, the Season of the Year being so far advanced, and his
great Occasions of State not lending many more days for the continuance of the
Session.

The same day the Lords communicated the Letter to the Commons, upon which Sir
Thomas Wentworth said, it was a Letter of Grace, but the People will only like
that which is done in a Parliamentary way, and the Debate upon it would take up
much time; neither was it directed to the Commons, and the Petition of ^ight
would clear all Mistakes; for some give out as if the House we^^ to pinch the
King's Prerogative, and so the Letter was laid aside. These were while the
Petition was in debate, and before it was ag^^ed to by both Houses; but after
it was agreed upon, the second of June the King came into the House of Lords,
and having sent for the Commons, said,

Gentlemen, Am come hither to perform my Duty, I think no Man can think it
long, since I have not taken so many days in answering your Petition, as you
have spent Weeks in framing it. I am come hither to show you, that as well in
formal Things, as in essential, I desire to give you as much Content as in me
lies.

Then the Lord Keeper said; MY Lords, and ye the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the House of Commons, the King has commanded me to say unto you,
That he takes it in good part, that in Consideration of settling your own
Liberties, ye have generally professed in both Houses that ye have no intention
to lessen or diminish his Majesty's Prerogative; wherein as ye have cleared
your Intentions, so now his Majesty comes to clear his, and to subscribe a firm
League with his People, which is ever likely to be most constant and perpetual
when the Conditions are most equal, and known to be so: These cannot be in a
more happy State, than when your Liberties shall be an Ornament and Strength of
his Majesty's Prerogative, and his Prerogative a Defense of your Liberties, in
which his Majesty doubts not, but that both he and you shall take a mutual
Comfort hereafter; and for his part, he is resolved to give an Example in using
his Power for the Preservation of your Liberties, that hereafter you shall have
no cause to complain; and that they here read their own Petition, and his
Majesty's gracious Answer.

Then the Petition was read, to which the King answered, The King wills that
Right be done according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm; and that the
Statutes be put in due Execution, that his Subjects may have no cause to
complain of any Wrong or Oppressions, contrary to their just Rights and
Liberties, to the Preservation of which he holds himself in Conscience as well
obliged, as of his Prerogative.

This Answer no ways satisfied the Commons: whereupon Sir John Elliot made a
pathetick and lively Representation of the Grievances of the Nation within, and
of the Danger and Weakness of it by the Mismanagement and Abuse of the King's
Ministers; and therefore wished that it might so stand with the Wisdom and
Judgment of the House, that these Dangers and Grievances may be drawn into the
Body of a Remonstrance, and therein humbly expressed with a Prayer to his
Majesty, for the Safety of himself, and for the Safety of the Kingdom, and for
the Safety of Religion, that he would be pleased to give the House time to make
perfect Inquisitions thereof; or to take it into his own Wisdom, and there give
them such timely Reformation, as the necessity of the Cause and his Justice
does import. Sir Edward Coke seconded Sir John Elliot's Motion, and propounded
that a humble Remonstrance be presented to the King, touching the Dangers and
Means of the Safety of the King and Kingdom, which was agreed to by the House,
and thereupon the House turned themselves into a grand Committee, and the
Committee for the Bill of Subsidies was ordered to expedite the said
Remonstrance.

But this King rather than hear of what he had done, did not care what he did,
and therefore the Speaker brought a Message from the King, That his Majesty
having upon the Petition exhibited by both Houses, given an Answer so full of
Justice and Grace, for which we and our Posterity have just cause to bless his
Majesty; it is now time to draw to a Conclusion of the Session, and therefore
his Majesty thinks fit to let them know, That he does resolve to abide by that
Answer without further Change or Alteration, and so he will Royally and Really
perform unto them what he had thereby promised: And further, That he resolves
to end this Session upon Wednesday the 11th of this Month; and that this House
should seriously attend those Businesses, which may bring the Session to a
happy Conclusion, without entertaining new Matters, and so to husband the time,
that his Majesty may with more Comfort bring them speedily together again; at
which time, if there be any further Grievances not contained or expressed in
the Petition, they may be more maturely considered than the time will now
permit. But this did not disturb the Commons, but they proceeded in their
Declaration against Dr Manwaring, and the same day presented it to the Lords at
a Conference, which was managed by Mr. Pym.

The Commons impeached the Doctor upon these three Points in his Sermons of
Allegiance and Religion.

1. That he affirmed, that the King is not bound to keep and observe the good
Laws and Customs of this Realm, concerning the Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects; and that his Royal Will and Command in imposing Loans, Taxes, and
other Aids upon his People, without common Consent in Parliament, does so far
bind the Consciences of the Subjects of this Kingdom, that they cannot refuse
the same without peril of Eternal Damnation.

2. That those of his Majesty's Subjects that refused the Loan, did therein
offend against the Law of God, and against his Majesty's Supreme Authority, and
by so doing, became guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, Rebellion and Disobedience,
and liable to many other Taxes and Censures, which he in the several Parts of
his Book does most falsely and maliciously lay upon them.

3. That the Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids
and Subsidies; that the slow Proceedings of such Assemblies are not fit to
supply the urgent Necessities of State, but rather apt to produce sundry
Impediments to the just Design of Princes, and to give them occasion of
Displeasure and Discontent.

Whereupon the Commons demanded Judgment against the Doctor, not accounting his
Submission with Tears and Grief a Satisfaction for the Offense charged upon
him; and the Lords gave this Sentence.

1. That he should be imprisoned during the Pleasure of the House. 2. That he
should be fined 1000 l. to the King. 3. That he should make such Submission and
Acknowledgment of his Offenses as shall be set down by a Committee in Writing,
both at this Bar and the House of Commons. 4. That he shall be suspended for
the Term of three Years from the Exercise of the Ministry, and in the mean time
a sufficient preaching Minister shall be provided to serve the Cure out of his
Livings; this Suspension and Provision to be done by the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. 5. That he shall be disabled hereafter to have any Ecclesiastical
Dignity, or Secular Office. 6. That he shall be disabled hereafter ever to
preach at Court. 7. That his Book is worthy to be burnt: and that for the
better effecting of this, his Majesty may be moved to grant a Proclamation to
call in the said Books, that they may be burnt accordingly in London, both the
Universities, and for the inhibiting the printing thereof, upon a great
Penalty.
This Censure immediately succeeding Sir John Elliot's Representation of
Grievances, startled Laud as much as Sir John's Representation did the Duke of
Buckingham; and the King, that he might not hear of any more Business of this
kind, upon the 5th of June, commanded the Speaker to let the House know, that
he will certainly hold to the day fixed for ending the Session, viz. the 11th,
and therefore requires them, that they enter not into, nor proceed in any new
Business which may spend greater time, or which may lay any Scandal or
Aspersion upon the State-Government, or the Ministers thereof.

This put the House into a fearful Consternation, whereupon the House declared,
That every Member of the House is free from any undutiful Speech from the
beginning of the Parliament to that day, and ordered the House to be turned
into a Committee, to consider what was to be done for the Safety of the
Kingdom, and that no Man go out of the House upon pain of being committed to
the Tower. But before the Speaker left the Chair, he desired leave to go forth,
which the House granted.

Then Sir Edward Coke spoke freely; We have dealt with that Duty and Moderation
that never was the like. Rebus sic stantibus, after such a Violation upon the
Liberties of the Subjects let us take this to Heart. In 30 Edw. 3. were they
then in any doubt to name Men that mislead the King? They accused John of
Gaunt, the King's Son, the Lords Latimer and Nevil ^or misadvising the King,
and they went to the Tower for it; now when there is such a downfall of the
State, shall we hold our Tongues? How shall we answer our Duty to God and Men?
7 Hen. 4. Parl. Rot. 31, 32. 11 Hen. 4. Numb. 13. there the Council are
complained of and removed from the King; they mewed up the King, and dissuaded
him from the common Good; and why are we turned from that way we were in? Why
may not we name those that are the Cause of all our Evils? In the 4 H. 3. 21 E.
3. 13 R. 2. the Parliament moderated the King's Prerogative; and nothing grows
to Abuse but this House has Power to treat thereof. What shall we do? Let us
palliate no longer, if we do, God will not prosper us; I think the Duke of
Bucks is the Cause of all our Miseries, and till the King be informed thereof,
we shall neither go out with Honor, nor sit with Honor here; That Man is the
Grievance of Grievances; let us set down the Causes of all our Disasters, and
all will reflect on him. As for going to the Lords, that is not via Regia, our
Liberties are now impeached, we are concerned; it is not via Regia, the Lords
are not participant with our Liberties.

Mr. Seldom advised, That a Declaration be drawn under four Heads; First, To
express the House's dutiful Carriage to the King. Secondly, To tender the
Liberties violated. Thirdly, To present what the House was to have dealt in.
Fourthly, That that great Person, viz. the Duke, fearing to be questioned, did
interpose this Distraction: All this time, said he, we have cast a Mantle on
what was done last Parliament. But now being driven again to look on that Man,
let us proceed with that which was then well begun, and let the Charge be
renewed that was last Parliament against him, to which he made an Answer, but
the Particulars were sufficient, that we may demand Judgment upon that Answer
only.

In Conclusion, the House agreed upon several Heads concerning Innovations in
Religion, the Safety of the King and Kingdom, Misgovernment, Misfortune of our
late Designs, with the Causes of them: and when the Question was putting, that
it should be instanced that the Duke was the principal and chief Cause of all
those Evils, the Speaker came in and said, that the King commands for the
present, that the House adjourn till to Morrow, and that all Committees cease,
which was done accordingly. And upon the 7th of June, the King in Parliament
passed the Petition of Right, whereupon there was an universal Joy all over the
City; and the Commons returned to their own House with unspeakable Joy, and
resolved so to proceed, as might express their Thankfulness; and order the
grand Committees for Religion, Trade, Grievances, and Courts of Justice to sit
no longer, but that the House proceed only in Consideration of Grievances of
most moment; which was their Remonstrance to the King, of the weak, distracted,
and dangerous State of the Kingdom: which was done in the most pathetick and
humble manner which could be expressed, and presented to the King in the
Banqueting House, upon the 17th of June. It Is very long, and consisted of these
six Branches.

1. The Danger of the Innovation and Alteration of Religion; This occasioned
by, First, The great Esteem and Favor many of the Professors of the Romish
Religion receive at Court. Secondly, Their public Resort to Mass at
Denmark-House, contrary to his Majesty's Answer to the Parliament's Petition at
Oxford. Thirdly, Letters to stay Proceedings against them. Lastly, The daily
Growth of the Arminian Faction, favored and protected by Neal Bishop of
Winchester, and Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, whilst the Orthodox Party are
silenced or discountenanced.

2. Dangers of Innovation and Alteration in Government; occasioned by Billeting
Soldiers, by Commission of procuring 1000 German Horse and Riders for the
Defense of the Kingdom, by a standing Commission granted to the Duke to be
General at Land in time of Peace.

3. Disasters of our Designs; as, the Expedition to the Isle of Rhee, and that
lately to Rochel, wherein the English have purchased their Dishonor, with the
waste of a Million of Treasure.

4. The Want of Ammunition; occasioned by the selling 36 lasts of Gunpowder at
low Rates.

5. The Decay of Trade; by the Loss of 300 Ships taken by the Dunkirkers, and
other Pirates, within the three last Years.

6. The not guarding the narrow Seas; whereby his Majesty has almost lost the
Regality. Here note, That none of these, except Billeting of Soldiers, which
was yet continued, were contained in the Petition of Right.

Of all which Evil and Dangers, the principal Cause is the Duke of Buckingham,
his excessive Power, and Abuse of that Power; and therefore humbly submit it to
his Majesty's Wisdom, whether it can be safe for himself and Kingdom, that so
great Power should be trusted in the hands of any one Subject whatsoever.

It Is observable, how cross the King set himself against the Commons in this
Remonstrance: for in the last Parliament, when the Commons impeached the Duke,
and the Earl of Bristol exhibited Articles against him, the King ordered the
Attorney General to exhibit an Information against the Duke in the
Star Chamber, for the great Misdemeanors and Offenses complained of against
him by the Commons and Earl; thereby to have stopped their Proceeding against the
Duke in Parliament, as he would have taken the Earl's Cause out of Parliament,
and proceeded against him by Indictment. But the King hearing of this
Remonstrance of the Commons against the Duke, the Day before the Commons
presented it, viz. upon the 16th of June, caused the Attorney General to take
the said Information, and all the Proceedings to be taken off the File, for
that his Majesty was fully satisfied of the Duke's Innocence in all those
things mentioned in the Information, as well by his own certain Knowledge, as by
the Proofs taken in the Cause.

This was the first Fruit the Parliament and Nation reaped by the Petition of
Right. Now let us see the next, and whether the Commons deserved such a Censure
as the King made upon them at the Prorogation of the Parliament.

After the Commons had presented a Remonstrance of their other Grievances to
the King, they then took into Consideration the preparing a Bill for granting
his Majesty a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, as might uphold the King's
Profit and Revenue in as ample a manner as their just Care and Respect of Trade
would permit. But this being a Work of Time, and would require much Time, and
Conference with Merchants, and others; and being often interrupted by Messages
from the King, and the Shortness of Time limited by the King for concluding
this Sessions; and fearing the King might be misinformed of this Particular,
they were forced, by the Duty which they owed to his Majesty, to declare, That
there ought not any Imposition to be laid upon Goods of Merchants exported or
imported, without Common Consent by Act of Parliament.

For Manifestation whereof, they desired his Majesty to understand, That tho
the Kings of this Realm had often Subsidies granted them upon diverse Occasions,
especially for guarding the Seas, and Safeguard of Merchants; yet the Subjects
have been ever careful to use such Cautions and Limitations in these Grants,
that they did proceed not from Duty, but the free Gift of the Subjects; and
that heretofore they used to limit a time for such Grants, and for the most
part but short, as for a Year or two; and at other times it has been granted
upon occasion of War, with Proviso, that if the War ended in the mean time,
then the Grant should cease; and of course it has been sequestered into the hand
of some Subject, to be employed for Guarding of the Seas: very few of the
King's Predecessors had it for Life, until the Reign of Hen. VII. who was so
far from conceiving he had any Right thereunto, that although he granted
Commissions for collecting certain Duties and Customs due by Law, yet made none
for receiving the Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, till it was granted in
Parliament. Since his time, all Kings and Queens have had such Grants for Life,
by the free Love and Good Will of the Subjects: but whenever the People have
been grieved by laying on any other Imposition or Charges upon their Goods and
Merchandise without Authority of Law (which has been very seldom) yet upon
Complaint in Parliament they have been relieved; saving in the time of your
Royal Father, who having through ill Counsel raised the Rates and Charges upon
Merchandise to that height at which they now are, yet he was pleased so far to
yield to the Complaint of his People, as to offer, That if the Value of such
Impositions as he had set might be made good unto him, he would bind himself
and his Heirs, by Act of Parliament, never to lay any more; which Offer the
Commons did not yield to. Nevertheless, your Loyal Commons in this Parliament,
out of special Zeal to your Majesty's Service, and especial Regard of your
pressing Occasions, have taken into their Consideration, so to frame a Grant of
Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage to your Majesty, that both you might have been
better enabled for the Defense of your Realm, and your Subjects, by being more
secure from all undue Charges, be more encouraged cheerfully to proceed in
Trade; by Increase whereof, your Majesty's Profit, and likewise the Strength of
the Kingdom, would be much augmented.

But being now not able to accomplish this their Desire, there is no Course
left to them, without manifest Breach of their Duty to his Majesty and Country,
save only to make this Declaration, That the receiving Tunnage and Poundage,
and other Impositions, not granted by Parliament, is a Breach of the
Fundamental Liberties of this Kingdom, and contrary to your Majesty's Royal
Answer to the Petition of Right.

The King, who had so unwillingly heard the Commons Remonstrance against the
Duke before the Bill of Subsidies was passed both Houses, now it was past both
Houses, was resolved to hear no more of this: and therefore when this
Remonstrance concerning the Tunnage and Poundage was engrossed, and reading in
the House, the King sent for the Speaker, and the House, to the House of Lords;
where the King came so unexpectedly, that the Lords had not put on their Robes,
nor had the Commons given the Speaker any Order or Direction to deliver the
Bill of Subsidies, neither was it brought down to the Commons again, as is
usual.

When the Commons came to the Lords House, the King said, It may seem strange
that I come so suddenly to end this Session, before I give my Assent to the
Bills. I will tell you the Cause, tho I must avow, that I owe the Account of my
Actions to God alone: It is known to every one of you, that a while ago the
House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance, how acceptable every Man may judge; and
for the Merit of it, I will not call that in question, for I am sure no wise
Man can justify it.

Did ever any King of England, but this King's Father and himself, treat a
Parliament, or either House, at this rate before? At the opening of the
Parliament he calls them Fools, if they would not do as he would have them; and
now he tells the Commons, No wise Man can justify their Advice to him. I Am
sure, a wiser Man than this King, or his Father, says, He that wins Souls is
wise; and if you convert the Proposition, He that provokes them, is otherwise.
Heretofore the Kings of England, and, I believe, all prudent and civilized
Princes, ever forbore to give any Petitioners harsh Language; if their
Petitions did not please, their usual Answer was, The King will consider, or be
advised upon them.

One great End of the Meeting of Parliaments is, truly to represent to the King
the State of the Kingdom, (which is rarely done by Flatterers and Favorites,
whose Interest is contrary to that of the Kingdom) and if any thing be done in
Prejudice of the King and Kingdom, that both may be redressed in Parliament. In
the Commons Remonstrance to the King, they set forth the weak and dangerous
State of the Kingdom, equally dangerous to the King and Kingdom, in six several
Particulars: Does the King either answer or deny any one of the Particulars
otherwise, than that he is sure no wise Man can justify their Remonstrance? But
tells no Reason for this, nor from whom he had this Assurance.

Was ever any King, or Man, so great, as to be above his Interest? or less, for
being well advised in all his Actions? Nay, ought not, not only every King, but
other Men, be so much more careful and advised in all their Actions, by how
much greater they are?

The King goes on, and says, Now since I am truly informed, that a second
Remonstrance is preparing for me, to take away the Profit of Tunnage and
Poundage, one of the chief Maintenances of my Crown, by alleging I have given
away my Right thereto, by my Answer to your Petition.

So that here the King has true Information of that, but says not how he was
truly informed, which was not in being; for the Remonstrance was not passed the
Commons when the King came into the House of Lords: so that it may more
probably be, the King is not truly informed of this Remonstrance. I Am sure he
is misinformed, if the Remonstrance, as it is printed in Rushworth and
Franklin, be true, that the Commons alleged that the King had given away his
Right to the Customs by his Answer to the Petition of Right: For the Commons
denied there, that either he, or any of his Predecessors before him (which was
long before the Petition of Right) had any Right to them, before they were
granted by the free Gift of the Subject: Tho the King would take the Customs,
to which he had no Right, yet would he not permit the Commons to sit till they
could perfect a Bill to give him Duties upon Tunnage and Poundage, without
which no King of England before him claimed any other Right.

But since the King says, in his Declaration for the Dissolution of the
Parliament, that his Predecessors, time out of mind, have had these Customs,
but says not who told him so; it is fit to see when and what Customs of Tunnage
and Poundage were taken, and for what end, and how they were taken. Sir Edward
Coke, in his fourth Institute of the High Court of Parliament, fol. 32. out of
Records makes thirteen Observations upon the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage.

1. Of Poundage only, at 6 s. in the Pound, for two Years, upon Condition, etc.
And this was 47 Edw. 3. 2. 6 d. for Poundage, 2 s. for Tunnage of Wine, hac
vice. This was 6 Ric. 2. 3. 6 d. of every Pound of Merchandise, 2 s. of every
Tun of Wine, upon Condition, etc. and hac vice. This was 7 Ric. 2. 4. Sometimes
to have Intermission, and to vary, lest the King should claim them as Duties,
as 2 s. 18 d. 3 s. 5 Ric. 2. 9 Ric. 2. 10 Ric. 2. 5. 3 s. for Tunnage of Wine,
and 2 s. 6 d. for Poundage for one Year, 11 Ric. 2. 6. 3 s. for Tunnage of
Wine, and 1 s. for Poundage, hac vice, 13 Ric. 2. 7. 6 d. for Poundage, and 18
d. for Tunnage of Wines, for three Years, 14 Rich. 2. 8. 8 d. for Poundage, and
2 s. for Tunnage of Wine, 2 Hen. 4. 9. 12 d. for Poundage, and 3 s. for Tunnage
of Wine, for three Years, 4 Hen. 4. 10. 12 d. for Poundage, and 3 s. for
Tunnage of Wines, for several times, upon Condition, sometimes for one Year, 6
Hen. 4. 11. 12 d. for Poundage, and 3 s. for Tunnage of Wines, for four Years,
1 Hen. 5. 12. The like Subsidy was granted to Hen. 5. in the third Year of his
Reign, for Life, for carrying on the War against France. 13. Tunnage of Wine,
and Poundage, was granted to Edw. 4. for Life, with no Retrospect, but for time
to come, 4 Edw. 4.
These were continued to all the Kings and Queens of England, after Edw. 4. to
King Charles 1. but these were of Wines only: but these were always granted for
the guarding the Seas, and of the free good Will of the Subject.

So that the first Grant of these Duties of Tunnage and Poundage for Life,
began at Hen. 5. but that was but for that part of his Life for time to come,
being granted in the third Year of his Reign; and so were those in the Reign of
Edw. 4. which were granted in the fourth Year of his Reign: and Hen. 7. would
not take them till they were granted by Parliament: and Sir Robert Phillips,
who was a Member of Parliament (Primo Jac.) says, in his Speech in Parliament,
(Mr. Rushworth mentions it, fol. 644.) that by reason of the Sickness primo
Jac. the Parliament was prorogued, and then some were so bold, as to demand the
Duties of Tunnage and Poundage, for which they were questioned in Parliament.

But after the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage were given to King James, and
settled by a Book of Rates, King James (which none of his Predecessors ever did
before) imposed higher Duties upon several sorts of Merchandise than were
granted in Parliament, by his own Will, and so continued them to his Death; and
after his Death, his Son, by his own Will, took not only those Duties granted
by Parliament, but those imposed by his Father, neither would he permit the
Parliament to sit to establish a Book of Rates, but prorogued or dissolved them
before they could accomplish it. And this was the Right he charges the Commons
to endeavor to take away, by his granting the Petition of Right.

The King goes on, and says, This (the Right to Tunnage and Poundage, alleged
to be given away by the Commons) is so prejudicial to me, that I am forced to
end this Session some few hours before I meant, being unwilling to receive any
more Remonstrances, to which I must give a harsh Answer. And since I see that
the House of Commons begins already to make false Constructions of what I
granted in your Petition, lest it be worse interpreted in the Country, I will
now make a Declaration concerning the true Intent thereof.

The King should have declared whether he saw this false Construction of the
Commons with his own Eyes, or the Eyes of another; if with his own Eyes, Why
does he not declare wherein the Commons made this false Construction of his
Grant? Or if he saw or heard of this false Construction of the Commons from
another, the King should have said who told him so. Now let us see if the
contrary of what the King so injuriously charges the Commons with, be not true.

The Commons say, No King of England ever claimed these Customs but by the free
Gifts of his Subjects; Does the King deny this, or show that ever any King of
England claimed them otherways, or by any other Right? The Commons say, His
Father raised them to the height they then were, without Act of Parliament, or
free Gift of the People; Does the King deny this to be true? And that the King
continues to take these Customs, without any Act of Parliament, or Gift of the
People; Does the King deny this? Do not the Commons tell the King, That out of
their Zeal to his Service, and especial Regard to his pressing Occasions, they
had under Consideration so to frame a Grant of a Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage to his Majesty, that he might have been the better enabled for the
Defense of his Realm and Subjects, by being secure from all undue Charges, for
the Security of Trade, the Profit of the King, and Strength of the Kingdom?
Does the King deny this? With what Conscience and Justice then does the King
say, the Commons made false Constructions of his Answer, alleging he had given
away his Right to the Customs, by his Answer to the Petition of Right? When or
where is any such Allegation in any part of the Remonstrance?

The Commons say, that since the King will not permit them to finish their
intended Subsidy, they have no Course left, without manifold Breach of their
Duty to his Majesty and their Country, save only to make this humble
Declaration, That the receiving Tunnage and Poundage, and other Impositions,
not granted by Parliament, is a Breach of the Fundamental Liberties of this
Kingdom, and contrary to your Majesty's Answer to the Petition of Right. Does
the King show that it was not the Commons Duty to represent this to him? or
that the Commons alleged he had any Right to the Duties which he had given
away by his Answer to the Petition of Right? Now let us see the King's
Declaration of the true Intent of his Answer to the Petition of Right.

The Profession of both Houses in the time of the Hammering (spoke like a King)
this Petition, was no ways to trench upon my Prerogative (no more it did)
saying, They had neither Intention or Power is hurt it; therefore it must needs
be conceived, that I have granted to new, but only to confirm the ancient
Liberties of my Subjects: Yet to show the Clearness of my Intentions, that I
neither repent, nor mean to recede from any thing I have promised you, I do
here declare my self, That those things which have been done, whereby many have
had some Cause to expect the Liberties of the Subject to be trenched upon, and
indeed was the first and true ground of the Petition, shall not hereafter be
drawn into Example for your Prejudice; and from time to time, on the Word of a
King, ye shall not have the like Cause to complain. But as for Tunnage and
Poundage, it is a thing I cannot want, and was ^ever intended by you to ask,
nor meant by me, I am sure, to grant: Nor did the Commons ask any Grant of it,
to them, or any other.

To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of that I have
spoken at this time, to be the true Intent and Meaning of that I have granted
you in your Petition, especially you my Lords the Judges, for to you only,
under me, belongs the Interpretation of the Laws; for none of the Houses of
Parliament, either joint or separate* (what new Doctrine soever may be raised)
have any Power either to ^ake or declare a Law without my Consent: And you need
not doubt, but these shall be durante been placito-men all, who shall not
scruple to make the King's Will to be the Subjects Law; and those that will
not, shall be none of this King's Judges.

I do not find that the King, before he prorogued them, gave the Parliament any
Thanks for the Bill of Subsidies, tho greater than ever was given to any King,
as his Predecessors ever did; or if he did, it ill sorted with the Speech he
made before. But before we proceed to take a View of this King's Actions in the
Interval of this Recess of Parliament, let us a little consider the present
State of the King and Kingdom; and herein, who it was the King quarrelled with,
and upon what Account, and for whose sake: It was with the Representatives of
the Kingdom, who had so obsequiously and unanimously gratified him above what
any other House of Commons ever did to any King of England before. The Crimes
for which the King inveighed so against them were, for representing their
Grievances, and the dangerous and feeble State of himself and the Kingdom; and
to represent to him the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by taking the Customs,
as he did; yet declaring their Readiness to relieve him therein, and to
reconcile him to his Subjects. And for whom was it the King thus contended, but
for a Favorite, who against the King's Father's Will, and Advice of his
Council, without a Declaration or Reason sheed, the next Day after the King's
Father's Death (as the Bishop of Litchfield observes) excited him to make War
against the King of Spain, and after made the King to dissolve the Parliament,
to save himself from being impeached in it? And so he did the second
Parliament, and then engaged the King in a War against France, wherein he
himself was the Aggressor; and put the King upon those unheard of ways to
support these Wars, that never were practiced by any King of England before;
and in the ill Management of them, brought greater Loss and Dishonor to the
Nation than ever was before: A Favorite, who besides these, brought the Crown
to extreme Poverty, to support his intolerable Ambition and Avarice.

Here again I cannot but note the miserable State of Princes, who treat their
Subjects as Enemies, and their Favorites as their only Friends and Confidents
above other Men: for other Men's Enemies are but few, and the rest of Mankind
their Friends; but the Majesty, Glory and Honor of a Prince, is founded in the
Love and Obedience of his Subjects; and if this be lost, whereto then can a
Prince betake himself? What became of Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. (tho two of those
four Hereditary Princes, of ten after the Conquest) when they had lost the Love
and Obedience of their Subjects? and this Prince, and his Sons after him, made
haste to overtake their Fate: Not one many hundreds of private Men, but die a
natural Death, but, -- Sine Caede and Sanguine, pauci
Descendunt Reges; --
But above all, those of this Scottish Race of Kings, descended from Elizabeth
More, which it is a question, whether any one of Nine of them in a continued
Succession, died a Natural Death.

The Duke of Buckingham upon his Retreat from the Isle of Rhee, promised the
Rochellers to send them speedy Relief; and to make good his Word, sent the Earl
of Denbigh (his Brother-in-law) with a Fleet to relieve it, now close besieged
by the French King; the Earl came before Rochel the first of May 1628, where he
found the French Fleet of 20 Sail had blockt up Rochel by Sea; upon the
Approach of the Earl, the French retired toward their Fortifications, and
anchored within two Cannon shot of the Fleet, and so continued till the 8th of
May: the Earl promised the Rochellers to sink the French Fleet, when the Waters
increased, and the Wind came Westerly, it being then neap Tides; but two Days
after the Waters did increase, and the Wind became Westerly, then the Earl
being entreated to fight the French Fleet, did not, but weighed Anchor, and
came away, only four of the French Fleet at a distance pursuing the English
Fleet. Thus was the Duke's Expedition to the Isle of Rhee seconded by this of
his Brother-in-law for the Relief of Rochel. I do not find the Parliament took
notice of this, but if they had it had been to no purpose; for soon after the
Earl's Return, the King resolving not to hear of the Commons Remonstrance^
against his taking the Customs not granted by Parliament, to which he said, he
must have given a harsh Answer, upon the 26th of June, prorogues the Parliament
to the 20th of October following, and after by Proclamation to the 20th of
January.

To redeem his Brother-in-law's Miscarriage, the Duke in this Recess goes to
Portsmouth to command the Fleet there to relieve Rochel, but at Portsmouth he
is stabbed by Felton the 23d of August; yet was the Design pursued under the
Command of the Earl of Lindsey, who several times attempted to force the
Barricadoes of the River before Rochel, but all in vain; or if he had, it had
been to no purpose; for the Victuals wherewith the Rochellers should have been
relieved, were all tainted; and 'twas well the French had no Fleet there, for
the English Tackle and other Materials were all defective. This was the last
Attempt this unhappy ^ing made, either for the Relief of the poor Protestants
in France, or for the Recovery of the Palatinate; for now Buckingham was dead,
who put him upon making War with Spain and France, the King as secretly, as
before he had done suddenly, made Peace with both Spain and France.

What Is now become of the twelve Subsidies, and three Fifteenths granted to
this King's Father, and himself in less than eight years time by Parliament,
for Recovery of the Palatinate, besides Loans, Benevolences, Coat and Conduct
Money, raised by his Father and himself, without Consent of Parliament? Let any
Man show in any Records of time, that half so much in like time was raised by
any of our Kings upon any Occasions, except the Dissolution of Abbeys in Henry
the VIII's time: Search all Histories, and find any one Prince so wilfully set
to be governed by such loose, vain, wild and negligent Councils, as either of
these Princes, Father or Son.

Now let us see the Condition of these poor Rochellers, trusting to this Prince
and his Favorite; they lived long upon Horseflesh, Hides, Leather, Dogs and
Cats, hardly leaving a Horse alive, still in hopes of the Relief promised from
England: they held out so long, till but 4000 of 15000 were left alive; most of
them died of Famine, and when they began to be pinched with Extremity of
Hunger, they died so fast, that they usually carried their Coffins into the
Churchyard, and other Places, and therein laid themselves, and died; great
Numbers of them being unburied, and many Corpse eaten with Vermin, Ravens and
Birds, when the French Army entered the Town. The Outrages committed against the
Reformed Churches in France were so high, as constrained them to implore King
Charles his Aid, in these Expressions, That what they wrote was with their
Tears and Blood. But how unhappy soever this Prince's Fate was in War abroad,
yet it had been happy for him, if he had not made his Fate worse at home; and
now let us see what Steps he made toward it, even in this short Recess of the
Parliament's Meeting.

Upon the 15th of July, the King made Sir Richard Weston (who died a declared
Papist) Lord Treasurer of England; and the same Day translated Laud, (the
Firebrand of the Arminian Faction) to the Bishopric of London, whose next Step
was Archbishop of Canterbury; who that he might testify his Zeal to this
Cause, which after set all these Nations on Fire, got Richard Mountague to be
consecrated Bishop of Chichester, the 24th of August following.

This Mountague was fierce for Arminianism, and wrote a Book, called A new Gag
for an old Goose; for which he was questioned in the Parliament of 23 Jac. and
the Cause was committed to Archbishop Abbot, which then ended in an
Admonition; and though the Archbishop disallowed the Book, and sought to
suppress it, yet it was reprinted and dedicated to King Charles under the Title
of Appello Caesarem: Hereupon the Commons, 1 Car. questioned Mountague for
this, and gave Thanks to the Archbishop for what he had done; but this
displeased the King, who took the Business out of the Commons Hands: but they
had taken Bond of Mountague to appear.

I desire to be more particular herein, because Arminianism was not only turned
up Trump for the flattering Clergy to play their Game, but for the Popish Party
to undermine the Church of England, as it was established by Law, and the
Canons, Doctrine and Homilies of it; and now Mountague's Cause was recommended
to the Duke of Buckingham, by the Bishops of Rochester, Oxford, and Laud Bishop
of St. David's, as the Cause of the Church of England. Thus this Cause stood,
when the King dissolved the first Parliament the 12th of August, 1625.

But the King's Necessities, as he managed Business, forcing him to call
another; before assembled, Laud procured the Duke to sound the King, whether he
would leave Mountague to a Trial in Parliament, which the King intended to do;
whereupon this pious Man Laud said, I seem to see a Cloud arising and
threatening the Church of England; God of his Mercy dissipate it.

Note, that all those who were not of this Faction of Arminianism, were styled
by them Puritans: these Mountague treats with bitter Railing, and injurious
Speeches; and inserts diverse passages in his Appeal, dishonorable to King
James; the Commons therefore prayed that the said Mountague might be
exemplarily punished, and his Books suppressed and burnt. Yet this is the Saint
that Laud in the first Act of his Regency, as it may be called, after he became
Bishop of London, must have made Bishop of Chichester, and after Bishop of
Norwich. But this is observable, that while Neal and Laud were consecrating
Mountague, News came of the Duke's being stabbed.

This was the first step after Laud's Preferment; the next was a Pardon for
Mountague and Manwaring of all Errors by speaking, writing and printing: and
you cannot believe that Laud would be less kind to Manwaring than to Mountague;
and therefore notwithstanding Manwaring's Censure, he procured Manwaring the
fat Rectory of Stamford Rivers in Essex, and a Dispensation to hold it with the
Rectory of St. Giles in the Fields.

That you may see the Kindness of this Bishop of London to our Laws in the very
Infancy of his Power: When Felton was brought before the Lords of the Council
for murdering the Duke; Laud threatened Felton with the Rack, unless he would
confess his Inducement for murdering the Duke; but the King then in Council
refused till the Judges were consulted, and said if it could be done by Law, he
would not use his Prerogative; but though the Judges determined he could not be
put to the Rack by Law, the King was graciously pleased not to use his
Prerogative, yet this was no thanks to the Bishop of London.

Now let us see the Fruits of the Petition of Right, and the
manifold-Declarations of the King for maintaining the Laws of the Land, and the
just Rights and Liberties of the Subject; but here you may understand, that
though he had taken the Customs not granted by Parliament, yet by virtue of his
Prerogative Royal, he had enhanced the Rates, such as were never granted by any
Parliament, and declared it his absolute Will and Pleasure (besides that of
Wines) that the 2 s. and 2 d. Duties upon every Hundred of Currants by the Book
of Rates, should be advanced to 5 s. and 6 d. in the Hundred.

The first that suffered under the King's absolute Will and Pleasure, was Mr.
Chambers, who was committed by the Lords of the Council this Michaelmass-Term,
and was bailed by the Court of King's Bench; for which the Judges were checked,
having done it without due Respect to the Privy Council.

Next, Mr. Vassal's Goods were seized, for not paying the 5 s. 6 d. upon every
hundred pound Weight of Currants; upon which the Attorney General, Sir Robert
Heath, exhibited an Information against him in the Exchequer; to which Mr.
Vassal pleaded the Statute, De Tallagio non concedendo, and that this was
neither Antiqua seu Recta Consuetudo: to which the Attorney demurred, and Mr.
Vassal joined in the Demurrer; but the Court would not hear Mr. Vassal's
Counsel, and said the King was in Possession, and they would keep him so, and
imprisoned Mr. Vassal for not paying the Duty thus imposed.

About the same time, the said Mr. Chambers's Goods were seized by the
Customers, for not paying such Customs as were demanded by the Farmers: Mr.
Chambers sues a Writ of Replevin, the Barons grant an Injunction against it;
Mr. Chambers offers to give Security for Payment of such Duties as the Court
should direct; which the Court refused, unless he should pay such Customs as
demanded by the Farmers; which Chambers refusing, the Court ordered the
Officers to detain double the Value of Chambers's Goods demanded by them. The
same Course was taken with Mr. Rolls's Goods, though a Parliament Man; one of
the Commissioners saying, Privilege of Parliament extended only to Persons, not
Goods: another more boldly told Mr. Rolls, if all the Parliament were in you,
we would take your Goods.

These Proceedings so ill sorting with the Petition of Right, the King (as
Norton the Printer said) commanded the printing of the Petition, with other
Additions, besides the King's Answer; and that he had printed 1500 Copies with
the King's Answer, without the other Additions: but these were suppressed by
Warrant, and the Attorney General commanded no more should be printed, and
those which were should not be divulged. These were the Just and Religious Acts
of this pious King: and can any Man believe the Parliament at their Meeting,
should without Breach of a public Trust, sit still, and not represent these
things to the King?

The Parliament did meet according to their Prorogation the 23d of January,
1628. and debated these Practices against Church and State, which happened since
the 26th of June before: but now see the Artifice of this little Prince, rather
than hear of any thing in this kind, he commands the Speaker, Sir John Finch
(the late Lord Chancellor Finch's own Uncle) to put no Question upon Debates of
Grievances. So that the House could do nothing but sit still or adjourn, and
this continued till the 2d of March, when the Commons met and urged the Speaker
to put the Question concerning Grievances; who answered, I have a Command from
the King to adjourn the House till the 10th of March, and put no Question; and
endeavoring to go out of the House, he was held by some Members, till the
House had made this Protestation.

1. Whosoever shall bring in Innovation of Religion, or by Favor or
Countenance, seem to extend or introduce Popery or Arminianism, or other
Opinions, disagreeing from the Truth and Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a
Capital Enemy to this Kingdom, or Commonwealth.

2. Whosoever shall counsel or advise the taking or levying the Subsidies of
Tunnage and Poundage not granted by Parliament, or shall be an Actor or
Instrument therein, be likewise reputed an Innovator in the Government, and a
Capital Enemy to the Kingdom and Commonwealth.

3. If any Merchant or Person whatsoever, shall voluntarily yield, or pay the
Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, he shall
likewise be reputed a betrayer of the Liberties of England, and an Enemy to the
same.

This Act consisted in two Parts, the Speaker and the House; the Speaker's of
three Parts, a Command by the King to put no Question, to adjourn till the 10th
of March, and an endeavor to go out of the House. In the former Session of
this Parliament, Secretary Cook, the 10th of April, from the King desired the
House not to make any Recess those Easter Holy Days, that the World may now
take notice how earnest his Majesty, and We were for the public Affairs in
Christendom, which would receive Interruption by this Recess.

To which Sir Robert Phillips answered, that the 12th and 18th Jac. the House
resolved it was in their Power to adjourn, or sit; and that this may be put
upon them by Princes of less Piety; and that a Committee consider of the
House's Right. Sir Edward Coke said, the King makes a Prorogation; the House
adjourns it self: That a Commission of Adjournment the House never read, but
say, the House adjourns it self; yet here the Speaker verbally says, I am
commanded by the King to adjourn till the 10th of March.

His second Command was to put no Question. So here was a Speaker which might
not speak: what did he there then? He sits there by the King in his Highest and
Regal Capacity, under the broad Seal, to put the Question; and now if you will
take his Word, he says, he has a Command from the King to put no Question.

The third Act was his Endeavor to go out of the House; which the House,
conceiving him to be their Servant, would not suffer.

Here you may understand that the King had privately made Peace with France,
though not proclaimed at Paris till June following, and soon after with Spain;
so that in his Speech, this meeting he did not begin with, The Times are for
Action, and the Eyes of all the World are upon us; and therefore demands
Supplies in the first place, but that without loss of Time they would pass the
Bill of Tunnage and Poundage: but the House seeing the Dangers of the Church
and State, in not only pardoning, but preferring Mountague and Manwaring, and
seizing Merchants Goods, and imprisoning their Persons, even in this Recess;
they resolve to secure their Religion, and redress Grievances, before they
grant the Customs of Tunnage and Poundage: in both they could not but take
notice of the Orders of the Star Chamber, Privy Council, Judges and Customers.
And these were the Invasions upon the King's Perogative Royal, which for the
future he resolved never to suffer; yet he shall live to hear more of them.

But in regard it may seem strange, that Customs of Tunnage and Poundage, ever
since the Reign of Richard the 3d, had been granted to the Kings and Queens of
this Realm, for securing the Sovereignty of the narrow Seas, and of the English
Merchants, yet was not granted to this King: The Reason was this, the House of
Commons in their Grievances in the two first Parliaments of this King, and the
former Sessions of this, complained, that the Duke of Buckingham being Lord
High Admiral of England, neglected to guard the Seas, to the Dishonor of the
King, and endangering the Trade of England; and feared, if the Duke were not
removed, the End designed by the Parliament would be diverted, to supply the
intolerable Pride and Luxury of the Duke: but the King rather than endure this,
dissolved the two former Parliaments, and prorogued this when they were upon
settling the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage.

That the Parliament had Reason for this, it appears in their Charge against
the Duke, in the 2d Year of this King, and that in ten Years time he had
received of King James and this King 284395 l. besides the Forest of Leyfield,
the Profits of the third of Strangers Goods, and the Profits of the Moiety of
the Customs of Ireland, besides the Tricks he used to get Money, as he was Lord
High Admiral of England and Ireland, Master of the Horse, Lord Warden,
Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque Ports and the Members thereof, Constable
of Dover Castle, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests and Chases on
this side of Trent, Constable of Windsor Castle, and Gentleman of the King's
Bedchamber.

To these might have been added the Duke's Venality, in selling all Places in
Church and State, at least preferring such Men in Church, as should propagate
Arminianism, and such Judges as shall do what the King and he bid them.

Objection. But the Duke was now dead in this Session of Parliament, and so the
Reason ceasing, the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage ought to have been granted.

Answer. The King would not suffer the Commons to come at it, neither in the
last Sessions nor this: for the Religion of the Church of England, and the Laws
and Liberties of the Subject, being so shaken in this Recess, the Commons
resolve that Religion shall have the Precedence in their Debates, and make this
Vow:

WE the Commons in Parliament assembled, do claim, protest, and avow for Truth,
the Sense of the Articles of Religion, which were established by Parliament, in
the 13th Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which by the Public Acts of the
Church of England, and by the general and current Exposition of the Writers of
our Church, have been delivered unto Us. And we Reject the Sense of the Jesuits
and Arminians, and all others wherein they differ from us.

But the true Reason why the King would not take the Duties of Tunnage and
Poundage from the Commons, was, for fear the Commons should not grant the
Duties imposed by his Father, and taken by him; which he was resolved to
continue, whether the Parliament would or not.

The House had a Petition from the Printers and Booksellers in London,
complaining, that Laud Bishop of London (who had been so but from the 15th of
July last) had restrained Books written against Popery and Arminianism, and the
contrary allowed of only by him, and had sent Pursevants for many Printers and
Booksellers, who had printed Books against Popery; and that Licensing Books,
was only restrained to the Bishop of London and his Chaplains, [This is the
Patron and Saint-like Martyr of the Church of England] And all this Ado in the
House of Commons, was upon Sir John Elliot's Speech against Neal Bishop of
Winchester (a zealous Promoter of Arminianism) and Weston Lord Treasurer (a
Papist) in whose Person he said, All Evil is contracted, acting and building
upon those Grounds, laid by his great Master the Duke; and that his Spirit is
moving to these Interruptions, and they for fear break Parliaments, lest the
Parliament should break them: That he finds him the Head of all the great
Party; That Papists, Jesuits and Priests, derive from him their Shelter and
Protection, etc. But the Speaker upon Motion of the House, refused to put the
Question, being he said otherwise commanded by the King: Whereupon the House
adjourned till Wednesday the 25th, and from thence to the 2d of March; when the
Speaker again refused to put the Question, the Success whereof was said before.
What now was the Crime of the House? It was their Endeavor to preserve the
Religion of the Church of England, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subjects
of England; and since the Speaker refusing to do his Office, they could not
represent their Duty to the King, they made their Protestation in the Defense
of the Church and State: And Masters oft-times upon Disobedience of their
Servants, do that which at other times they would not have done.

The King having made Peace abroad, was resolved now to prosecute a vigorous
^ar at home against those Noble Gentlemen, who in a Parliamentary Way had
asserted the established Religion and Laws of England. The Duke of Buckingham,
who was stabbed the 23d of August before, you need not fear, had furnished the
King with Judges, Privy-Counsellors, and Star-Chamber-Men, who should do the
King's Work; and now let us see the Order and Method by which it was carried on.

Upon this very Day, viz. the 2d of March, a Proclamation was drawn for the
Dissolution of the Parliament, but not proclaimed; the King afterward doing it
himself in Person upon the 10th. But next Day Warrants were directed from the
Privy Council for Denzil Hollis, Sir Miles Hobert, Sir John Elliot, Sir Peter
Hayman, John Seldom, William Coriton, Walter Long, William Stroud, and Benjamin
Valentine Esquires, to appear before the Council next day: Mr. Hollis, Sir John
Elliot, Mr. Valentine and Mr. Coriton appeared; and for refusing to answer out
of Parliament, for what was said or done in Parliament, were committed close
Prisoners to the Tower; and Warrants were given for sealing up the Studies of
Mr. Hollis, Mr. Seldom, Sir John Elliot, Mr. Long, and Mr. Stroud, who not then
appearing, a Proclamation was issued out for apprehending of them.

The 10th of March the King comes into the House of Lords, and tells the
Reasons of his Dissolution of the Parliament, that it was the undutiful and
seditious Carriage in the lower House, but says not wherein; calls them Vipers,
who must look for their Reward and Punishment, but promises the Lords the
Favor and Protection that a good King owes to his loving and faithful
Nobility: and then the Lord Keeper dissolved the Parliament.

CHAP. II.
This Reign detected to the Second Parliament, in 1640.
JUstice like Truth is one, and consists in entire Parts, and will not admit of
more or less; but Injustice, like Falsehood and Error, is distracted into
infinite Discord and Confusion. King James upon the Dissolution of the
Parliament of the 12th and 18th Years of his Reign, without any Trial, but only
by the Prerogative of his own Will, commits several Members of Parliament to
Prison, for presuming to represent the Grievances of the Nation to him for
Redress, without Bail or Main-prize: But this King puts a face of Justice upon
his fining and imprisoning the Members of Parliament for their Debates and
Transactions in it; which was so much worse than his Father's Actions, by how
much the affixing a sacred Character to a bad Act (and Justice is sacred)
renders the Act so much worse, as Perjury is a greater Crime than simple
Falsehood; and to murder a Man under pretense of Justice, a greater Crime than
simple Murder.

The Members thus close imprisoned, after the Dissolution of the Parliament,
viz. in Trinity-Term following, Mr. Seldom was brought by Habeas Corpus to the
King's Bench, with the Cause of his Detainer; and also the same day Sir Miles
Hobert, Mr. Benjamin Valentine, and Mr. Hollis appeared by Habeas Corpus,
directed to their several Prisons, with their Counsel to argue their several
Cases. But when the Court were prepared to give their Opinions, the Prisoners
were not brought according to the Rule of Court. Then Proclamation was made to
the Keepers of the several Prisons to bring their Prisoners, but none appeared:
But the Marshal of the King's Bench said that Mr. Stroud was removed out of his
Custody the day before to the Tower, by the King's own Warrant, and so it was
done by the other Prisoners. But in the Evening the Judges received a Letter
from the King, containing Reasons why he would not suffer the Prisoners to
appear, yet that Seldom and Valentine should appear the next day; and about
three Hours after the Judges received other Letters, that upon mature
Deliberation, neither Seldom nor Valentine should appear. And the same Term
four Constables of Hertfordshire prayed Habeas Corpus's to several Pursevants,
to whom they were committed by the Lords of the Privy Council, which were
granted, but then they are committed to other Pursevants, and so they were upon
every other Habeas Corpus, so that the Constables could have no benefit of them.

The Members as well as the Constables being thus shifted from one Prison to
others, to prevent the Returns of their Habeas Corpus's, by special Order from
the King, the Attorney General Sir Robert Heath preferred an Information in the
Star Chamber against Sir John Elliot, and others of the Members therein named,
setting forth their Misdemeanors in the late Parliament, and all those
Proceedings.

But Mr. Long' s Charge was different from those of the other Members, viz. Not
for Misdemeanors in Parliament, but that contrary to his Oath, being when he
was made Sheriff, and was by his Oath to keep within his County, yet he did
come to Parliament and serve as a Member there, and in the time of Parliament
resided out of his County.

To this Mr. Long pleaded, that the Oath of a Sheriff to reside in his County,
does not exempt him from obeying the King's Commands out of the County when the
King requires it, and that by the King's Command in his highest Capacity, he
being chosen a Member of Parliament, was obliged as well by the King's Command,
as by a Trust reposed in him by his County, to serve as a Member of Parliament;
Yet by a Sentence in the Star Chamber he was fined 2000 Marks to the King, to
be imprisoned in the Tower, and to make a Submission.

But the Attorney General putting the Question to the Judges upon the
Proceedings Ore tenus in the Star Chamber against the Parliament Men, the
Judges held it the juster way not to proceed Ore tenus. And Justice Whitlock
did often and highly complain against this way of sending to the Judges for
their Opinions beforehand; and said, that if Bishop Laud went on this way, he
would kindle, a Flame in the Kingdom.

Mr. Hollis, Seldom, Stroud and Valentine, having been brought to the
King's Bench Bar by several Habeas Corpus's, and Cause of their Commitment
returned, one on a Warrant from the Council, another on a Warrant from the King
for Sedition and Contempts; and whether this was a good Return or not was
argued.

The Judges were perplexed about the Habeas Corpus, and wrote a humble and
stout Letter to the King, That by their Oaths they were to bail the Prisoners;
but thought fit before they did it, or publish their Opinions therein, to
inform his Majesty thereof, and humbly to advise him (as had been done by his
noble Progenitors in like case) to send a Direction to his Justices of his
Bench to bail the Prisoners.

But the Lord Keeper (Coventry) would not acknowledge to Justice Whitlock, who
was sent to him from the rest of his Brethren about this Business, that he had
showed the Judges Letter to the King, but dissembled the matter, and told him
that he and his Brethren must attend the King at Greenwich at a day appointed.

Accordingly the Judges attended the King, who was not pleased with their
Determination, but commanded them not to deliver any Opinion in this Case
without consulting the rest of the Judges, who delayed the Business, and would
hear Arguments in the Case, as well as the Judges of the King's Bench had done,
and so the Business was put off to the end of the Term: Then the Court of
King's Bench being ready to deliver their Opinions, the Prisoners were removed
to other prisons; and a Letter came from the King to the Judges, That this was
done because of their insolent Carriage at the Bar, and so they did not appear.

The Judges of the King's Bench were sent to by the Lord Keeper to be in London
on Michaelmas-day, and the Chief Justice and Justice Whitlock were sent for to
the King at Hampton Court, who advised with them about the imprisoned Members;
and upon the first day of the Term Mr. Mason moved for the Members to have the
Resolution of the Court: All the Judges declared, that they were contented the
Prisoners should be bailed, but that they must find Sureties for their good
Behavior; If this Addition of finding Sureties for the Members good Behavior
were part of the good Offices which the Judges did (as Mr. Whitlock says) to
bring the King to heal the Breaches, the Members had little Reason to thank
them for their Pains.

Mr. Seldom prayed that his Sureties for his Bailment might be taken, and the
Matter of the good Behavior omitted as a distinct thing: So did the rest of
the Members, whereupon the Court remanded them to the Tower; which I suppose is
extraordinary, the Court having them in their Power, and the Tower no Prison of
theirs in such Cases.

In the same Term the King's Attorney (Heath) exhibited an Information against
Sir John Elliot, Mr. Hollis, Seldom and Valentine in the King's Bench, setting
forth the Matters in effect as were in the Information in the Star Chamber: to
which the Defendants pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court; because the
Offenses are said to be committed in Parliament, and ought not to be punished
in this or any other Court, except the Parliament.

The King's Attorney moved the Court to overruled the Plea, tho he did not
demur to it; but the Court would not, and gave a day to join in Demurrer, and
to have the Point argued; and in Hillary-Term the Judges overruled their Plea,
and the Defendants were ruled to plead further, but they would not; whereupon
Judgment was given against them upon a Nihil dicit, That they should be
imprisoned, and not delivered till they had given Sureties for their good
Behavior, and made a Submission and Acknowledgment of their Offenses, and they
were also fined; and what their Fines were you may read in the Appendix of the
first Part of Rushworth's Collections.

But herein the Judges were not all of one piece, for that venerable and
honorable Gentleman Sir John Walter, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and who was
no Durante been placito-man, dissented from the rest of the Judges, whereupon
the King discharged him from his Place. I have heard my Father say, that when
Sir John received the King's Message, he returned Answer, that he was entrusted
by the King in that Office, quam diu been se gesserit, and that the Law was
free for any Man to prosecute him if he had ill demeaned himself in it; but to
forsake his Station any other way, implied Guilt, which he was not conscious to
himself of: and therefore tho the King sent him his Quietus, yet he retained
the Perquisites of his Place to his Death.

A little before the Members Sentence in the King's Bench, the King's Attorney
exhibited an Information against one Chambers a Merchant, for saying, Merchants
have more Encouragement, and are less screwed up in Turkey than in England.
Chambers confessed the Words, but he spoke them of the under Officers of the
Customs, who had much wronged him, without reflecting upon the Government; yet
the Court fined him 2000 l. and to make a Submission, which he refused as
unjust and false.

The Fine was estreated into the Exchequer, where he pleaded Magna Charta, and
other Statutes against the Fine, it not being by legal Judgment of his Peers,
nor saving his Merchandise: but the Barons would not suffer his Plea to be
filed; and afterward he brought his Habeas Corpus, but the Judges remanded
him. Thus you see what Fruits the Petition of Right (passed but the Year
before) had, and the King's repeated Declarations to maintain the Laws of the
Land, and the Liberty and Property of the Subject.

But if this Prince has not kept his Word for the time past, he will keep it he
says for the time to come, in the Declaration he made for the Dissolution of
this last Parliament. I do not find the Date of it, yet it begins with the
usual Prologue; However, Princes are not bound to give an account of their
Actions but only to God. In this the King says nothing of the Eyes of all
Christendom being upon him, but tells how the Aids granted this last Parliament
were for Payment of his Fleet and Army; and that with part of those Moneys he
began to supply his Magazines and Stores, and to put his Navy into a constant
Form and Order; and that notwithstanding the Provocations of evil Men (whose
Punishment he reserves to a due time) he will maintain the Established Religion
and Doctrine of the Church of England, and the ancient and just Rights and
Liberties of the Subject: Yet as he will maintain the Subjects Rights, so he
expects that they yield as much Submission and Duty to his Royal Prerogative,
and as ready Obedience to his Authority and Command, as had been performed to
any of his Predecessors. Then wills his Ministers not to be terrified by the
harsh Proceedings strained against them; for as he will support them by his
Authority and Prerogative, so he expects they should obey him, and that he will
receive the Customs, and the Duty of Five in the 100; and if any factious
Merchants refuse to pay, they shall be assured he will find honorable and just
means to support his Estate and Sovereignty, and preserve the Authority God had
put into his Hands: and for this, his Subjects ought to acknowledge their own
Blessedness, and for the same to be thankful to God, the Author of all
Goodness. For this you must take the Prince's Word for the next twelve Years.
But being thus great and happy at Home, let us see what is doing Abroad.

The War against France was not more inconsiderately begun about two Years
before, than the Peace made with it was secret: The first time it was made
known was when the French King besieged Privas, he proclaimed the Peace with
his good Brother of England: The Reformed were astonished and confounded, that
the King of England, who brought them into the War, should leave them out of
the Peace: Hereupon Privas surrenders, so does Castres and Nismes; the great
Rohan is forced to submit and disband. The Power of the Reformed thus rooted
up; and while the King of England is making War against the Members of
Parliament, Richlieu marches with an Army into Italy, and takes Salusses and
Pignerol from the Duke of Savoy.

Richlieu having thus secured the King of England, took no less care that the
Empire should not put a stop to the swelling Ambition of his Master, and to
this purpose enters into a Confederacy with the Protestant Princes of Germany,
to call the King of Sweden in to Germany, who next Year entered into it, where,
for eighteen Years, the French Protestant Princes joining the Swede, a most
dreadful War was raised all over Germany, so as the French had no cause to fear
any Danger thence; on the contrary, they took Brisac, and other Places, and had
opportunity to wrest Lorain from that Duke.

But King Charles prospering, as he thought, in his Domestic War, having taken
more Prisoners in it, (I mean the Members of Parliament, and Constables of
Hertfordshire) than his Father and he had done in all their Wars against
France, Spain and the Empire, for the recovery of the Palatinate, was very
unwilling to enter into a Foreign; and therefore in a kind of petitioning way,
sends Sir Henry Vane his Ambassador to the King of Sweden, to take care of the
Patrimony of his Brother, but with no better Success, yet in a more rough,
scornful and dishonorable manner than his Father's Ambassadors had with the
Emperor. But that he might seem to do something, the King sent Marquess
Hamilton with 6000 Men to assist the Swede; who, tho everywhere else
victorious, yet this Army under Hamilton had worse Success than that under
Mansfield, being starved and mouldred away almost to nothing, and yet fought
not at all; and being reduced to two Regiments, the King of Sweden would not
permit King Charles to name the Officers. [See Whitlock's M. f. 15. and
Franklin's, Anno 1630.]

The ill Success of Hamilton's Army put the King out of all Conceit of
prosecuting any Foreign War, and therefore wholly makes it his Business to make
himself more Absolute at Home. There is but one Rub in the way, viz. the great
Prop of the Church, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbot, a Prelate of most
eminent Learning, whose upright Integrity stood as an unshaken Rock against the
Innovations both in Church and State, which were now so fiercely pushed on by
the Arminians.

I find but little Action in this Year 1631, things were only preparing to what
followed; yet although Archbishop Abbot was living, the Torrent run so high in
the University of Oxford, that several of the Members were proceeded against
and censured for Sermons preached against Arminianism, and expelled the
University, and the Book of Sports and Pastimes upon the Lord's Day was
republished: Judge Richardson was so hardy as to repress them, but the Bishops
took this as an intruding upon the Ecclesiastical Power, and Bishop Laud
complained thereof to the King, and the Judge was checked for it. See Whitlock's
Memoirs, fol. 16, 17.

But in the Year 1632, this Reverend Prelate died, and thereby left room for
Laud, the Firebrand of Arminianism, to take Possession. Before we see what
follows, let us look back upon what went before: He being of a restless aspiring
Temper, in the beginning of King James his Reign got to be Chaplain to
Mountjoy, Earl of Devonshire; and to show he would be great upon any account,
he marries the Earl to the Lady Rich, tho her Husband was then alive, and had
many Children by her, viz. Robert, then Earl of Warwick, and Henry Earl of
Holland: which Act so displeased King James, that the Earl fell into his
Displeasure; and tho Laud hanker'd near twenty Years after the Court to get
Preferment, principally under the Countenance of Neal Bishop of Winchester, yet
the King would never endure to hear of it: But at last, by the Importunity of
Neal and others, Williams Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper, was prevailed
upon to intercede for him without any Success, till at length the Keeper told
the King, It would be hard to serve a King who could not forgive one Fault. At
last he got the King to prefer Laud to the Bishopric of St. David's; but he had
not been scarce one Year in his Bishopric before he became Williams his bitter
Enemy and Prosecutor, as you may read in the second Part of the Bishop of
Lincoln's Life; and within less than three Years after he became Archbishop,
got the Bishop of Lincoln fined and imprisoned, and his Estate to be sequestered
by an Order of the Star Chamber, and at last acknowledged he had never read the
Commission by which he acted. These things see in the Bishop of Litchfield,
par. 2. fol. 125. tit. 119.

Tho Laud had never read the Commission by which he acted, yet so zealous was
he for the Execution of the Sequestration of the Bishop of Lincoln's Estate,
that he sends this Warrant to the King's Solicitor (I think Sir John Banks.) It
is his Majesty's Pleasure, that you prepare a Commission to the Prebendaries of
the Collegiate Church of Westminster, authorizing them to keep their Audits,
and other Capitular Meetings at their usual times; and to treat and compound
with the Tenants for Leases, and to pass the same accordingly, choose Officers,
and confirm and execute all other lawful Acts, for the good and benefit of the
College and said Prebendaries: And to take out the Common or Charter-Seal, for
sealing such Leases and Grants as will be agreed upon by the Sub-Dean and the
major part of the Prebendaries; and also to pass all the Premises under the
Title of the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in
Westminster, during the Suspension of the Bishop of Lincoln from the Deanary of
Westminster: and for doing whereof, this shall be your Warrant. Lambeth-House,
22d of November, 1637. W. Cant. See Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 25. a.

Whether the King ever granted any such Warrant to W. Cant. non constat; for
the King never speaks to his Subjects but either personally in Parliament, or
under the Broad-seal, which here does not appear; besides, all Warrants of
Courts are signed by the Seals of the Courts, and executed by their proper and
sworn Officers, neither of which were W. Cant. or the King's Solicitor. Yet at
this rate was this Nation ridden during the Regency of W. Cant.

This Phaeton thus mounted up on high, being the first Peer of England, was yet
higher in the King's Favor, than Richlieu was with the French King. But as the
Temper of these Princes and their Favorites were different, so had they
different Fates: Lewis was steady and true to his Word, from whence he acquired
the Title of Just; Charles fickle and unstable, easily put upon things by his
Favorites, and as suddenly altering them, and doing quite contrary: from
whence it was that Lewis supported the Cardinal in all his Shocks of adverse
Fortune, and to the Indignation of his Mother; whereas Charles, in the
Adversity of their Fortunes, gave up Laud and all his Favorites as a Sacrifice
to their Enemies.

As the Fates of these Favorites were different, so were their Parts,
Richlieu's High, Generous, and the ablest Statesman of the Age; Laud's
Pedantick and Narrow. After the marrying the Lady Rich to the Earl of
Devonshire, he spent his time in seeking Preferment at Court; and in setting up
Factions in the University of Oxford for promoting Arminianism.

Richlieu was a Constant Assertor of the Privileges of the Gallican Church, and
a Hater of the Jesuits who bring in Innovations, and exalt a Papal Power above
them; whereas Laud, not only brought Innovations into the Church of England,
but was the Head of the Arminian Party, under whose Banners the Popish Party
sought to undermine and destroy the Church of England.

Richlieu laid the Foundation of the French King's Greatness by Sea and Land;
Laud put King Charles upon such Ways, as proved the Ruin of the King, Himself,
and the Church and State of England.

But before we proceed herein, let us stay a little and consider the unhappy
State of the Education of the Youth of England in Grammar Schools and
Universities.

The End designed by God and Nature, by Instruction of Youth, is, to honor and
worship God, and how to subsist and converse after they become Men; for without
the latter it will be impossible to perform the former. I say, this latter no
way conduces to the End, by breeding Youth up in Grammar-Schools, and our
Universities: for no Man lives out of Society and Commerce; and every Man
stands in need of being supplied by another, in things he stands in want of; so
that the great End by Education of Youth, is to instruct Youth how to supply
another, so as to be able by another to supply himself of such things as he
stands in need of: but this is utterly neglected in Grammar-Schools, and our
Universities; and yet double more are bred up in Grammar-Schools, and our
Universities, than the Revenues of the Church can maintain; and this Breeding
fits Youth for no Conversation and Business, but only puffs them up with a
Conceit of their Learning, when they understand not that of all Mankind they
are the most unlearned and unfit for any Business.

The Supernumeraries of these unhappy Men, who can get no Maintenance in the
Church, and by their Breeding are of no use in Church or State, yet desire to
live, but can get no Living, but by nourishing Factions against those who are
preferred in the Church and State. Poor Men! they know no better, and if this
be taken from them, they know not how to live: From whence it follows, that
unless these Supernumeraries be restrained in their Education, which cannot be
but by rooting out of Grammar-Schools, and the chopping Logic in our
Universities; whereby, I say, no rational Proposition, in any Art or Science,
was ever inferred from Aristotle, Descartes, or any since; these
Supernumeraries will as necessarily nourish Factions in England, as the Jesuits
do here, and in the rest of Christendom.

Many of these Supernumeraries got their Maintenance by being Chaplains to
Noblemen, and Gentlemen; but in both, they regarded more the Humor of the
People where they were Lecturers, and Disposition of their Patrons and
Patronesses where they were Chaplains, than the Liturgy of this Church.

The Diocese of London was too contracted to restrain the boundless Ambition of
this Bishop; for the last Parliament was no sooner dissolved, but Laud
presented the King with Considerations, for the better settling
Church Government in both Provinces, of York as well as Canterbury.

The 4th of these was, That a special Charge be given against frequent and
unworthy Ordinations; but Latet Anguis in Herba, None shall be worthy but
Arminians.

The 5th was, That special Care be had of our Lecturers in every Diocese, which
by reason of Pay, are the Peoples Creatures, and blow the Bellows of their
Sedition; But if the Bishop will not let them do this, they know no other way
to live, and willingly would not starve.

For abating the Peoples Power, the 2d Consideration is, That every Bishop in
his Diocese ordain, that every Lecturer do read in his Surplice Divine Service,
before his Lecture; which if he does, it is twenty to one, those that pay the
Lecturer will pay no more: What then becomes of the Lecturer? for there is no
other Provision made for him.

The 6th is, That if a Corporation maintain a Lecturer, that he be not
permitted to preach, till he take care of Souls within the Corporation: How
this can be, I don't understand, unless the Lectu^er have a concurring or
distinct Power from the Incumbent.

The 7th is, That none but Noblemen, and Men qualified by law, may keep
Chaplains. Yet in your Religious Care you take no care how otherways they may
subsist.

The 8th is, That Emanuel and Sydney Colleges in Cambridg, which are the
Nurseries of Puritanism, may be from time to time furnished with Grave and
Orthodox Men for their Governors, viz. Such as shall do the Arminian Work,
without any regard to the Statutes of the College.

All these Considerations must be taken for Acts of the Church of England, and
a Neglect, or Breach of them, sufficient for an Information in the High
Commission, where he is assured he shall shortly judge; and therefore his
Majesty in the 9th Consideration, (...) to countenance the High Commission, by
the Presence of some of the Privy Council, at least so often as any Cause of
Moment is to be settled.

The 10th Consideration is, That Course may be taken, that the Judges may not
send so many Prohibitions; Which if they do from any of his Censures in the
High Commission, he will proceed against them by Excommunication.

Thus you see this Icarus is not only content to take a Flight out of his
Diocese, but over the whole Provinces of York and Canterbury in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, and extends it as he pleases over the Civil.

These were the Seeds which this Bishop planted while he was Bishop of London;
you may be sure he will reap a good Crop now he is become Metropolitan of all
England. During the time of his being Bishop of London, he was looked upon as
the Rising Sun, which the flattering Students in both Universities worshipped;
but after he became Archbishop, the Learning of both Universities were Brawls
about Arminian Tenants in the Schools and Sermons, The Arminians treating their
Opponents with all taunting and reproaching Terms; and if their Opponents
retorted, they were had up into the High Commission, where the Archbishop
presided, assisted by his Ecclesiastical Judges, and Ministers of the
Prerogative Court, and some of his Majesty's Privy Council; but I do not read
of one cited for maintaining Arminian Tenants. It Is scarce credible how the
Business of this Court, the Star Chamber, and Council Table swelled, and what
cruel and unheard of Censures were made, especially in the Star Chamber,
against all sorts of People, who did offend either against the King's
Prerogative Royal, or the Archbishop's Injunctions, which must be obeyed as
Articles of the Church of England: The Thunder of them was not restrained
within the Bounds of England, but terrified almost all Scotland, who were
bitter Enemies to Arminianism.

At this time of day the Court-Bishops disclaimed all Jurisdiction from the
King in Bastwick's Censure, who was to pay 1000 l. Fine, to be excommunicated,
debarred of his Practice of Physic, his Books to be burnt, and his Person
imprisoned till he made a Reclamation, and all this for maintaining the King's
Prerogative against the Papacy. See Whitlock's Memoirs.

The Bounds of England were too narrow to restrain this Man's Ambition; and
therefore before he had been two Months Archbishop, viz. the 8th of October,
1633. he advised the King (...) make a Reformation in the Church of Scotland;
not by Confe^^ in Parliament, but by his Prerogative Royal: the Beginning (...)
this Reformation must begin at the King's Chapel Royal, when the English
Service, the Surplice, and the receiving the Sacrament^ is enjoined; and that
the Lords of the Privy Council, the Lord of the Sessions, and the Advocate,
Clerks, Writers to the Priv^ Signet, and Members of the College of Justice, be
commande^ to receive the Sacrament once every Year in the said Chappe^ and the
Dean to report to the King, who does, or who does (...) obey; and the
Archbishop had a Warrant from the King, to (...) Correspondence with the
Bishop of Dunblane, and to communicate to him his Majesty's farther Pleasure
herein. And so we leave the Affairs of the Church here for a while, and see how
Affairs stood in the State since the Dissolution of the last Parliament.

In the last Parliament among many famous Members, Sir Thomas Wentworth and Mr.
Noy excelled; Sir Thomas for his admired Parts, and natural and easy Elocution;
Noy, as a most profound Lawyer; both zealous Patriots for the Rights and
Liberties of the Subject. And upon the 12th of February, 1628. when the Debates
for granting Tunnage and Poundage to the King, was in the House of Commons, Mr.
Noy argued, We cannot safely give, unless we be in Possession, and the
Proceedings in the Exchequer be nullified, as also the Information in the
Star Chamber, and the Annexion to the Petition of Right; for it will not be a
Gift but a Confirmation; neither will I give without the Removal of these
Interruptions, and a Declaration in the Bill, that the King has no Right, but
by our free Gift; if it will not be accepted as it is fit for us to give, we
cannot help it; if it be the King's already, we do not give it: So that these
two must be reckoned among those Vipers, which the King declared at the
Dissolution of the Parliament, and must look for their Reward of Punishment.

The Reward of Punishment, which these two Vipers had, was, that Sir Thomas
Wentworth was made Lord President of the North, and Mr. Noy Attorney General;
Sir Thomas strained the Jurisdiction so high, that it proved the Ruin of the
Court, and the Rise of the Fame of Mr. Edward H^de (after Chancellor of
England) for the Speech he made in 1641, against the Abuses committed in it,
whilst Sir Thomas was President; and Noy, now he is become Attorney, is become
the most intimate Confident of the Archbishop, and as forward in Informations
in the Star Chamber, High Commission and Council Table, as Sir Robert Heath
was, who is made Chief Justice in the Common Pleas, to make room for Noy to be
Attorney General.

But while the King was erecting this new Principality over his Subjects, which
none of his Ancestors or Predecessors before his Father and himself ever
pretended to in England; it is fit to look a little abroad, and see how the Case
stood there.

The Dutch, the next Year after that his Father had given up the Cautionary
Towns, which Queen Elizabeth kept, and delivered up to him by her Death, well
knowing the Poverty of King James, and the ill Terms between the King and his
Subjects, took the Boldness to fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland,
with their Busses and other Vessels guarded by Men of War, in Defiance of him;
and now Grotius (no doubt set on work by some of his Countrymen) perceiving
how intent King Charles was in erecting his new Dominion over his Subjects,
that he became careless of all his Foreign Affairs, took the Impudence to write
a Mercenary Treatise, called Mare Liberum, wherein he will not allow the King
to have any Title to the Sovereignty of the British Seas, or his Subjects any
more Right to fish in them, than the Dutch, or any other Nation. But how
consistible this Treatise is to Truth, Antiquity, the sacred Scriptures, or to
Grotius himself, or to the Practice of his Countrymen, is now fit to be
enquired into. And since I have as well as I can asserted the Laws and
Constitutions of my Country at home, I will with that Sincerity that becomes an
Englishman, endeavor to vindicate the Honor of it abroad, especially in our
King's Sovereignty of the British Seas, which Grotius so absurdly in his Mare
Liberum, endeavors to rob them of.

An Answer to Grotius his Mare Liberum, wherein is showed how often he
contradicts himself; how ignorant he is in all Principles and Methods in
Reasoning; and how impossibly contrary his pretended Arguments are to Sacred
History, and all ancient Authority.

But before we enter hereupon, it is fit to see, how the Case stood before
Grotius wrote his Mare Liberum, as well in reference to the King of England's
Claim, as how the Case stood between the King and Dutch, when Grotius wrote his
Mare Liberum.

And that we may avoid the endless Confusions, which Grotius above all other
Writers abounds in, I require these Premises.

First, That God made all things in the Waters, as well as upon the Earth, for
the Use of Man.

Secondly, That no Man upon the Waters, as well as on the Earth, did live out
of Society.

Thirdly, That in Society the Offices of commanding and obeying are necessary.

Fourthly, That Anarchy is as abhorrent among Men upon the Waters, as upon the
firm Land; and as impossible for Men to subsist in the one as in the other.

Fifthly, Piracy by Sea, is a Crime equal to Theft by Land.

Sixthly, Killing a Man by Sea, without lawful Authority, is a Crime equal to
Murder by Land.

Note, Grotius answers not one of these Principles, nor shows by any Authority,
when or where the Dominion of the Seas was by Usurpation: Whereas the contrary
has been practiced by Kings and States, as old as there are Records of any
times; but only feigns Premises, not only contrary to the Authority of sacred
History, and all Antiquity, but such as are absurd, blasphemous, and
impossible, considering the Nature of Man: But these are not said in his Mare
Liberum, but in his Preface and Treatise of War and Peace. So that to have
answered these in this Treatise, would have swelled it to a much greater Bulk
than intended; but if God please, I shall hereafter answer these in a Treatise
by it self.

The Principles thus premised, we proceed to enquire what Sovereignty the Kings
of England have claimed in the British Seas, bordering upon England and
Ireland, since that Kingdom became subject to the Crown of England; and leave
it to unbiassed Readers, whether the Kings of England claimed any thing
contrary to any of these Premises.

The Claims which the Kings of England make to the Sovereignty of the British
Seas, are threefold:

1. To protect their Subjects in all their just Employments upon the British
Seas, from all Hostility by Enemies; whereof the Fishing in these Seas are the
chief. 2. To prevent Hostility by other Nations in these Seas. 3. To receive an
Acknowledgment from all Nations for their Protection in these Seas, by striking
their Flag in Submission to the King's Men of War which protect them.
By this Dominion of the British Seas, the Kings of England more secure their
Subjects from foreign Invasion, than any other Potentates in the World, how
great soever their Territories are, can do.

I will not swell this Treatise with what Mr. Seldom, Sir John Buroughs, Mr.
Camden, and others, have written of the Kings of England being possessed of these
Rights by immemorial Prescription; and of the Maritime Laws they have made, as
well in reference to their Subjects as Foreigners; nor of the Treaties they
have made with Foreign Princes, and the Compositions they have made for License
to fish in the British Seas, before the Dutch Government was formed into
States: nor was ever these Rights disputed by any of them, before Grotius did
this Year.

Nor is this Dominion in the Seas new in the World, but as old is any Records
of Time; for of old the Egyptians, Phenicians, and Athenians enjoyed it, and
set Bounds to other Nations, how far they would permit Nations to trade in them.

Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his History of the World at large, sets forth the long
Wars between the Romans and Carthaginians, in the first Punick War for this
Dominion; and the Romans being often beaten by the Carthaginians, resolved to
desist further Contention herein, till they found that it was to little purpose
to strive to extend their Dominion by Land, if the Carthaginians were Masters
at Sea.

So that the Dominions of the Seas, which beat upon the Shores of Princes, are
not new, or only usurped by the Kings of England, but used by other Princes and
States of old.

From more ancient, to descend to more recent times; the Ve^etians claim the
Sovereignty in the Adriatic Gulf, tho the Venetian Territories on either side
of it are not one sixth part of it; and cause all Ships, even of the King of
Spain and Great Turk, whose Territories on both sides the Gulf are fivefold
more than the Ve^etians, to pay Customs and other Duties.

In the Year 1630, Mary the Sister of the Queen of Spain being espoused to the
Son of the Emperor Ferdinand, the Viceroy of Naples provided a great Fleet to
transport her to Triesti; but tho the Venetians were involved in a War abroad,
and infected with a Plague at home, they would not permit it; but conveyed her
by a Fleet of their own. See Jo. Palatius de Dom. Maris, l. 2. c. 6.

In the Year 1638, a Turkish Fleet entering the Gulf without License, was
assaulted by the Venetian Admiral, who sunk diverse of their Vessels, and forced
the rest to fly to Valona, and there besieged them, tho the City and Port were
in the Dominion of the Great Turk: yet tho a dangerous War was like to have
ensued hereon, the Venetians, rather than lose their Dominion, insisted on
their Right, and concluded an honorable Peace with the Turk; wherein it was
agreed, That as often as any Turkish Vessels did without License enter the
Gulf, it should be lawful for the Venetians to seize upon them by force, if
they would not otherwise obey, (see the Justification of the second Dutch War
by K. Charles II. page 58) and the Grand Signior prohibits all Nations, except
his Vassals, to enter the Euxine or Black Sea, as also the Red Sea.

Dr. Stubbe, in his Justification of King Charles the Second's Dutch War, page
126. says the Danes and Norwegians would not permit either Fleming or English
to fish near Schetland without License previously obtained; and if any presumed
to fish without License, they punished them with Loss of Life and Limb, and
were obliged to repair to Berghen, and pay their Duties into the King's
Exchequer there, as appears by the Danish Records, and other Monuments
preserved in England: and this avowed to have been practiced consantly time out
of mind, Ann. 1432.

Afterward, upon the Marriage of James 3. of Scotland with Margaret the
Daughter of Christian 1. of Norway, the Rights of the Fishery upon Schetland
was transferred to the King of Scotland and his Heirs, Anno 1470. and William
Walwed, a Scots Lawyer, c. 3. de Dominio Maris, says, That in the past Age,
after a most bloody Quarrel between the Scots and Hollanders about the Fishery,
the Matter was at last composed in this manner.

That in time to come the Hollander should keep at least eighty Miles from the
Coasts of Scotland: And if by Accident they were driven nearer by the Violence
of the Weather, they paid a Tribute at the Port of Aberdeen before their
Return; where there was a Castle built and fortified for this and other
Occasions.

Dr. Stubbe says, that Gerard Malinus, a most inquisitive Person, informed him,
That after the Agreement between the King of Scotland and the Hollanders, that
the Dutch should not fish within eighty Miles of the Scots Coast, lest the
Shoals of Herrings should be interrupted; King James, before his coming to the
Crown of England, did let the Fishing upon the Coast of Scotland to the
Hollanders for 15 Years: And if this happened in the Year 1594, when Prince
Henry was born, then in the Year 1609, the Term expired, when King James, by
his Proclamation, enjoined the Dutch which fished upon the Coast of Scotland,
to take Licenses. But certain it is, that the Dutch, to caress King James the
more, at the Christning of Prince Henry were his Godfathers, and presented the
Prince with 400 Ounces of fine Gold, and a Deed sealed, whereby the Prince was
yearly to receive 5000 Florins out of Camp-vere.

Mr. Stubbe says, page 131, I believe from Authors truly cited by him, The King
of Denmark receives at his Ward-House in the Sound one Dollar for a License,
and for the Seal, or Rose, a Noble of every Ship; and for every Last of
Herrings (being 12 Barrels) one Dollar. In Russia, many Leagues from the Main
(or Land) the Fishermen pay great Taxes to the King; and in most places, none
but the Natives are permitted to fish; but where the Hollanders are permitted
to fish, they pay the tenth Fish to the Emperor. The King of Sweden, amongst
the Regalities of that Crown, has that of the tenth Fish caught in his Seas;
or if not that, a Composition for the Fishery: he has also several Districts,
Channels, or Veins Royal in his Seas, which are appropriated to his particular
Use. Nor is there any Fishing permitted in the open Seas there, but by Leave
and Direction of the Governor of the neighboring Ports.

And Page 132 he says, the same is practiced by the King of Portugal in the
Kingdom of Algarsues, and the Natives pay a certain Tribute for their Liberty
to fish: And in Spain, the Duke de Medina Sidonia does rent out of the Maritime
Jurisdiction what he has in reference to Fishing, for 80000 Ducats of yearly
Revenue.

Has not Grotius a fruitful Brain, to find out those Usages by Princes and
States, in all Ages, to be Usurpation against natural Right, which lib. 1.
sect. 10. tit. 5. de jure Belli and Pacis, is immutable by God himself; and
which never any Man before presumed to question? But before we enquire into the
Causes from which Grotius assumes to himself a Power, which he denies to be in
God Almighty, let us see how the Case stood with the Dutch when Grotius wrote
his Mare Liberum, both at home and abroad.

Tho the Seas were free, Jure naturali, as Grotius says, yet I have seen a
Dutch Placart, printed the Year before Grotius wrote his Mare Liberum, viz.
1632, and which Grotius might have seen as well as I, wherein the States
prescribe when and where the Dutch shall begin and proceed in their Fisheries;
and wherein they forbid the Use of French Salt in all their Fisheries; and that
Salts used in all of them shall be three times revised in three several
Offices, upon Penalty of Forfeiture of Fish and Salt: which, by Grotius's
Doctrine, is an Usurpation of the Natural Right which every Man has in the Sea,
and immutable by God himself.

Dr. Stubbe, Page 132, says, That the Fishermen in one Year paid the States
300000 l. for the Herrings and Codfish taken upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland; besides the tenth Fish and Cask, paid for Waftage, which comes at
least to as much more, which are Duties proper to the Kings of England and
Scotland. So that if what the Kings of England ever claimed by immemorial
Prescription, be an Usurpation against natural Right, by Grotius's Doctrine, I
would be willingly informed by any of Grotius's Disciples, by what Right then
do these new States impose these things upon the Dutch, who fish in these Seas.

If the Sea be free, Jure naturali, let any Man show a Reason, how the Dutch
erect their East India and West India Companies only to trade in the
East Indies, Africa and the West Indies, exclusive to the rest of the Dutch,
without a Violation of the natural Right of the other Dutch, which Grotius says
is immutable by God.

As Grotius's Title, Mare Liberum, is absurd, and contrary to the Practice of
his Countrymen, so his Manifesto of it is not less arrogant and intolerable,
viz. To the Princes and free People of the Christian World, without so much as
the Addition of sending greeting. An Arrogance which no Pope ever assumed, yet
done by Grotius, an exotic and proscribed Traitor, for raising Arms, and
endeavoring to subvert the established Church and State of his native Country.

The Topic whereon he founds his Manifesto is general, and such as no Thief or
Rogue ever pleaded to save their Lives; viz. It is an Error not less old than
pestilent, which many Mortals, but those especially who most abound in Wealth,
persuade themselves that Just and Unjust is not distinguished by its own
Nature, but by an empty Opinion and Custom of Men; and that all Right is to be
measured by the Will, and the Will by Profit.

But who these are who maintain these Opinions, Grotius names none; if they
were his Acquaintance (which I believe none of the Kings or Free People were,
except his Countrymen were) he should have convinced them to their Faces, and
not sneakingly have cavill'd at them behind their Backs. I say, I find this by
no Nation or People so much practiced as by the Tripolins, Tunis, Algier, and
Sally-men, and his Countrymen, as will appear: And if this will not oblige all
Christian Princes and Free People to abandon all their Rights of Dominion to
the Seas, whereof they have been possessed by immemorial Prescription, and
leave all free for the Dutch to do what they please in them, then Grotius is at
a Nonplus further to enforce it in his Manifesto: If any Man can find any
thing else to do it, let him have it for his Pains, I Will not envy him. But how
hainously soever Grotius takes this old and pestilent Error, yet he allows it
in himself, L. 1. C. 1. Sect. 10. de Jure Belli and Pacis, where he makes the
Original of Human Society and the Law of Nature to be from the Will of Man, and
to be immutable by God himself: But of this more shall be said hereafter.

The first Chapter of Grotius his Mare Liberum is, to show, that Jure Gentium,
Navigation is free to all Men every where; and therefore the Dutch may trade to
the East Indies, tho the Portuguez were Lords of the whole East Indies; but
much more it would be unjust in the Portuguez to exclude the Dutch from trading
with those People there who have no Dependence upon the Portuguez, and are
willing to entertain Trade and Commerce with the Dutch.

Answer, He who accuses another of any Crime, had need take care he be not
guilty of the same himself; and if it be so old and pestilent a Crime in
Princes and States to claim a Dominion in the Sea, tho enjoyed by Immemorial
Prescription, Grotius should have done well to have showed how his Countrymen
(the beginning of whose States was in the Memory of thousands then alive)
should arrogate to themselves to be Commanders of all the Seas in the World,
Protectors of all the Kings and Princes in Europe, and Supreme Moderators of
all the Affairs of all Christendom, as you may read in William de Britain of
the Dutch Usurpation, page 20.

If it be so old and pestilent an Error in the King of England to claim an
Acknowledgment of Submission of the Dutch, for the Kings protecting them in the
British Seas; how much more pestilent an Error was it for the Dutch, Anno 1620,
without any Provocation of the English, and in time of Peace, to seize the Bear
and Star, two English Ships, in the Straits of Mallaca, going to China, and
confiscated Ships and Goods valued at 150000 l.? See William de Britain, page
18. So that it is by Grotius his Doctrine an old and pestilent Error in the
King of England, to protect all Nations in the British Seas from Piracy and
Violence, and free to the Dutch to be Pirates in the Indian Seas by a Grant
from Hugo Grotius.

If the Seas be free, Jure Gentium, for all Nations to trade with one the
other, How then came it to pass, that the Dutch excluded all Nations from
trading to Amboyna and Polloroon for Spice, to which they had no Title, but by
forcing the English from them in times of Peace, and when they received no
Injury from the English, etc. to say no worse?

And if it be so much more injurious for the Portuguez to hinder the Dutch from
trading to those Kingdoms and People in the East Indies, who have no Dependence
upon the Portuguez; I would know a Reason why it is not as highly injurious in
the Dutch by their Fort Lillo upon the Scheld, to hinder the English and all
other Nations from trading to Antwerp, and other Places in the Spanish
Netherlands, which have no Dependence upon the Dutch.

Here give me leave to observe, (tho after Grotius wrote his Mare Liberum) That
in the Marine Treaty made by King Charles the Second, Anno 1674, it was agreed
by the first Article, that the Subjects of the King should with all Freedom and
Safety sail and trade in all those Kingdoms and Countries in Peace, Amity or
Neutrality with the King, and not be hindered or molested by Military Force, or
Ships of War of the Dutch, upon any occasion of Hostility or Difference which
now is or hereafter shall be; yet this Treaty was scarce concluded, when the
English Ships trading to Antwerp, were stopped by a Dutch Man of War riding
before the Fort Lillo, and forced to go back to Flushing or Rotterdam, and
there constrained to unlade their Vessels and pay their Customs, and lade their
Goods in Dutch Bottoms, and to pay such Fraights as the Dutch pleased to impose
upon them, and this Usage notwithstanding this Treaty is still continued. I
think a like Instance cannot be given, that ever any King of England served the
Dutch or any other Nation so trading in the British Seas.

I do agree with Grotius, that God has so disposed this our Habitable Globe,
that some Places abound with things convenient and necessary for Human Use,
which the People of other Places want; and that for the Entertainment of mutual
Society and Commerce in all the habitable Places of the World, Accession may be
had by Water, which cannot be done by Land; but this cannot be done in a State
of Anarchy, or where Men live out of Society; which tho Grotius would have the
Dominion of the Sea to be, yet he gives not one Instance of it, nor how it can
possibly be: but more of this when we examine Grotius his Original of Human
Society in his Treatise, De Jure Belli and Pacis.

The second Chapter of Grotius his Mare Liberum is, that the Portuguez have not
right of Dominion to those Indies to which the Dutch trade, by the Title of
Invention, or first finding them out.

Answ. They have as good a Title as the Dutch have to their new Batavia, which
they filcht from the Natives; or to Amboyna, Polloroon, the Islands of Seran,
Nero, Waire, Basingen, Latro, Cambello, Nitto, Larica and Lantare, which they
filcht from the English, then at Peace and Amity with them.

The third Chapter is, the Portuguez have no right of Dominion to the Indies by
the Donation of the Pope.

Answ. Yet this Title is better than the Dutch have, who have no Donation but
by their own Will and Usurpation.

The fourth Chapter is, the Portuguez have no right of Dominion against the
Indians by the Title of War.

Answ. As much as the Dutch have; nor did they ever practice such Barbarities
against the Natives and other Nations trading to the East Indies, as the Dutch
have done and yet do.

The fifth Chapter is, that the right of navigating to the Indies, is not
proper to the Portuguez by the Title of Occupation; and here Grotius tells you
abundance of Fictions of Poets, and Tales of popular Orators, which may serve
better for Ballads, than Foundations of a Discourse of this Nature.

Answ. The Portuguez Title herein is better than the Dutch, for they were
Occupatants long before the Dutch were, or their Government was formed into
States.

The sixth Chapter is the same with the third, and needs no other Answer.

The seventh Chapter (tho in the Print the third) is, that the right of
Navigation is not proper to the Portuguez by the Title of Prescription or
Custom.

Answ. As Grotius puts the Case at large, I do not find nor believe the
Portuguez ever claimed or pretended to any such Custom or Prescription; so this
is a Bag of Clouts of Grotius his own setting up, and he might have saved
himself the labor of throwing Stones at it.

The eighth Chapter is, that Jure Gentium, Trade is free with all Men.

Answ. True, but this is in established Governments, and not in a State of
Anarchy, and where Men live out of Society, as Grotius drives at.

In the ninth Chapter, Grotius chews the Cud upon what he said Chapter the
fifth, and needs no other Answer.

The tenth is the same with the third Chapter.

The eleventh Chapter is, that the Trade with the Indians is not proper to the
Portuguez by right of Prescription or Custom.

Answ. This Chapter is more restrained than the seventh, yet it is so large, if
you take the Indies, as our East India Company does, from Cape Bon Speranza to
the North of China, including the East of Africa, and both sides of the Red Sea
and Persian Gulf, and the Islands which lie between the Cape of Good-Hope and
the North of China, it is more than half the Circumference of the Globe of the
Earth: But this is another Bag of Clouts of Grotius's setting up, for I do not
believe or find the Portuguez ever made any such Claim, or if they did, it
would have been impossible to have maintained it.

The twelfth Chapter is, that the Portuguez endeavor by no Equity to forbid
Trade, which if they do, I do agree with Grotius. These Premises thus learnedly
established, you need not doubt but that

The thirteenth Chapter is, that the Dutch have a Right of entertaining
Commerce to the East Indies, as well in Peace and in making Truces, as in War.

Note, I have heard a Story of the Cham of Tartary, that after he has dined, he
gives leave by sound of Trumpet to all the other Princes and Potentates in the
World to go to Dinner: so Grotius after he had bound up all Nations at Land by
his Civil Compact in his Jus Belli and Pacis, in his Mare Liberum gives the
Dutch Liberty to do what they please at Sea, by a Grant from Hugo Grotius.

But I have often wondered what should engage Grotius to write this Treatise of
Mare Liberum in favor of his Countrymen; for at this time he was a proscribed
Traitor by them, and if you will take his Word, in the Dedication of his Jus
Belli and Pacis to Lewis the 13th, he was ill used by them, unless it were as
Caius Marius did, after he was proscribed by the Senate to be an Enemy to Rome,
refused to enter Rome till his Proscription was revoked by the Senate, which
when they met to do, Marius entered Rome and massacred them; so Grotius hoped by
this Treatise to have his Proscription reversed, and that he might return home
again to set his Contrymen at Land together by the Ears, and in Tumults, as
he endeavored to have done before.

And if it be true which Grotius says, Lib. 2. cap. 2. de Jure Belli and Pacis,
that before the Civil Pact all things at Land were in common; and that no Man
had Right to any thing, but that another by the same Right might take it from
him, and that the Civil Pact was never of the Sea: Whether this does not
justify all Pirates and Robbers at Sea in all their Depredations and Piracies?
But because we see but by halves here, we will hereafter examine his Civil
Pact, and see how Men by his Reasons come to be bound up by Land and loose at
Sea, which neither Mr. Seldom, nor any other that I have seen who wrote against
Mare Liberum have done. But if it be so old and pestilent an Error in all other
Christian Kings and States, to assert their Rights and Dominion upon the Seas,
Grotius, if he had had any Ingenuity, should have admonished his Countrymen to
have avoided this old and pestilent Error before he charged all other Christian
Princes and States with it, but of this he says not one word.

But to return; Noy, how zealous soever he was against granting the King
Tunnage and Poundage, he must now find a way how the King may raise Ship Money,
besides Tunnage and Poundage not granted by Parliament, nor Ship Money neither:
The Groundwork was, that the King was in great danger by Pirates, and the King
sole Judge of the Danger: He had finished the Work, but lived not to see it put
in Execution, for he died the 9th of August, 1634, to the great regret of the
Archbishop.

In September following Sir Edward Coke died, but upon his Deathbed Sir
Francis Windebank, Laud's old Friend, by an Order of Council came to search for
seditious and dangerous Papers, by virtue whereof he took Sir Edward Coke's
Comment upon Littleton, and the History of his Life before it, written with his
own Hand, his Comment upon Magna Charta, etc. the Pleas of the Crown, and
Jurisdiction of Courts, and his 11th and 12th Reports in Manuscript, and I
think 51 other Manuscripts, with the last Will of Sir Edward, wherein he had
for several Years been making Provisions for his younger Grandchildren: the
Books and Papers were kept till seven Years after, when one of Sir Edward's
Sons in 1641, moved the House of Commons, that the Books and Papers taken by
Sir Francis Windebank might be delivered to Sir Robert Coke, Heir of Sir
Edward, which the King was pleased to grant, and such as could be found were
delivered; but Sir Edward's Will was never heard more of to this day.

I do not find that the Archbishop was the first Mover of this, nor do I find
the like was ever done before the Archbishop was Primier Minister of State;
yet this I find, that Windebank was found to be one of the Fomenters for
carrying on the Popish Design with Con Cardinal Richlieu's Chaplain, in the
Year 1640.

Sir Edward is removed by Death in September, and Sir Robert Heath in October
is removed from being Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, to make room for Sir
John Finch, as Heath before had been made Chief Justice to make room for Noy to
be Attorney General: You need not fear but that Sir John Finch (now a Favorite
of the King and Queen and Archbishop) who could put no Question when he was
Speaker, shall without Question judge Ship Money to be lawful, whatever Magna
Charta, or Petition of Right says to the contrary: Nor shall he stay here, but
be the prime Agent in breaking through the Bounds of Charta de Foresta, by
enlarging the Limits of the Forests, so as no Man, if the Parliament in 1641
had not prevented it, could tell where it would have stopped. But this was not
all the Reason why Heath was turned out and Finch put in, it was Kilvert's
Pleasure, one of Laud's Instruments, to ruin his Patron the Bishop of Lincoln,
as you may see in the second Part of his Life, fol. 118. tit. 113. and it
exceeds all Belief, by what execrable means Laud, by Finch, Kilve^t and
Windebank, conspired the Ruin of the Bishop of Lincoln, if so grave an Author
as the Bishop of Litchfield had not reported it in the Bishop of Lincoln's
Life. See the second Part, fol. 138.

The Writs for Ship Money are now issued out; the Proceedings against the
Officers for not collecting the Assessments, as Constables, Bailiffs, and other
Officers, were to bind them over to answer at the Council Board, and
Commitment, if any refused to give Bond; but if Sheriffs neglect to collect all
such Assessments in their Year, they shall stand charged with the Arrears. Thus
things at present stood, but the breaking the Bounds of the Forests was but in
Embrio, yet in a hopeful Production.

Thus things stood in the State about the end of the Year 1634. In the Church
the Archbishop had the sole Supremacy, not only in England, but in Scotland,
having got a Warrant from the King to hold Correspondence with the Bishops; and
also in Ireland, being chosen Chancellor of the University of Dublin, and
having got Sir Thomas Wentworth to be Lieutenant of Ireland, who was now as
much his intimate Confident as Noy was before.

In England, the Archbishop's Injunctions for wearing the Surplice, receiving
the Sacrament kneeling, and placing the Communion Table Altar-ways, and railing
it about, etc. were vehemently prosecuted, with the opprobrious Names of
Puritan and Schismatic fixed upon Nonconformists, with Deprivations and
Censures upon Lecturers and Chaplains who refused to come up to them; if they
did, they must forsake their Patrons, Patronesses and Flocks who provided them
Bread, so that they contended pro Aris and Focis, and otherways no Provision
was made for them. On the contrary, they retorted on the Bishops and promoted
Clergy with bitter Terms of Popishly affected, and Rags of Superstition and
Idolatry; so that the Contentions all over the Kingdom were as fierce as in the
Universities.

But it had been happy for this Nation, if the Effects of these Contentions had
been terminated in the Bounds of it: For the Archbishop in his Metropolitan
Visitation this Year 1634, summoned the Ministers of the Dutch and French
Churches to appear before his Vicar General, where all the Natives, viz. born
in England, were enjoined to repair to their several Parish-Churches to hear
Divine Service and Sermons, and perform all Duties and Payments required in
that behalf.

The Descendants of those Walloons persecuted by Alva, and of the French by
Henry II. of France, had for near ninety Years been allowed their several
Congregations by Queen Elizabeth, King James I, and had the Royal Word of King
Charles for enjoying of them: But now at once they must be turned out of them.

When these Injunctions were to be put in Execution at Norwich, the Dutch and
French Congregations petitioned Dr. Matthew Wren, that these Injunctions might
not be imposed upon them; but finding no Relief, appealed to the Archbishop,
who returned a sharp Answer, that unless they would submit, he would proceed
against them according to the Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical.

Here take notice, that as the Spanish Trade was the most enriching Trade to
this Nation; so the Trade to Hamburg, and the Countries and Kingdoms within the
Sound with our Woollen Mafactures, was the best the English had for Employment
of People Shipping and Navigation: The Company which traded into the Sound, was
called the East-Country Company, and Queen Elizabeth, and after her King James,
to honor them, called it the Royal Company.

This Trade the English enjoyed time out of mind; and the Cloths which supplied
it, were principally made in Suffolk and Yorkshire: And Ipswich as it was the
finest Town in England, and had the Noblest Harbor on the East, and most
convenient for the Trade of the Northern and Eastern Parts of the World, so
till this time it was in as flourishing a State as any other in England.

The Bishop of Norwich straining these Injunctions to the utmost, frighted
thousands of Families out of Norfolk and Suffolk into New England; and about
140 Families of the Workers of those Woollen Manufactures, wherewith Hamburg
and the Countries within the Sound were supplied, went into Holland; where the
Dutch, as wise as Queen Elizabeth was in entertaining the Walloons persecuted
by the Duke of Alva, established these English Excise-free, and House-Rent free
for seven Years; and from these the Dutch became instructed in working these
Manufactures, which before they knew not: The Consequence whereof shall be
shown hereafter.

But the Care of the Archbishop for Reformation of the Church of Scotland, was
not less than for that of England; and to that end got the King to sign a
Common Prayer Book for the Use of the Church of Scotland; and gave order to the
Bishops there, to compile certain Canons for the Government of the Church, and
there to be imposed by Regal and Episcopal Authority; and to this end Laud held
Correspondence with the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and other Bishops of
Scotland.

Whilst these things were brewing in England and Scotland, you need not fear
Ireland, now Sir Thomas Wentworth was Lieutenant there: a most dreadful War
overspread Germany; and Philip the 4th, a weak lascivious Prince, reigned in
Spain, so as Richlieu had a fair Opportunity to subdue Monsieur the King's
Brother, and overthrow the Forces raised by the Duke of Momerancy, to assist
Monsieur; wherein the Duke was unhappily taken Prisoner, and had his Head cut
off, being a young Prince of greatest Hope, the most ancient of the French
Nobility, and the last of his Line.

But the Cardinal did not rest here, but built more and better Men of War than
had been before in France, and Spain shall first find the Force of them, in
return of their Kindness in joining their Fleet with the French, in relieving
St. Martins in the Isle of Rhee, besieged by the English: And this Year 1634,
Richlieu trickt Charles Duke of Lorain out of his Duchy; and the next, the
King of France proclaims open War against Spain by Sea and Land; and in 1638
(ten Years after the Spaniards joining with the French against the English) the
French besieged Fontaraby by Land, which the Spaniards intending to relieve by
Sea, the Spanish Fleet is encountered by the French, and beaten; the French took
eleven great Ships, whereof six of them were richly laden for the Indies, and
burnt two Gallions upon the Stocks, and six others entirely finished: In the
Ships taken, besides their Equippage, and other Ammunition of War, the French
took an incredible Number of Cannons, 100 whereof were Brass, with the Arms of
the House of Austria upon them. Afterward, the French and Spanish Fleet fight
in the Mediterranean Sea, where the Spaniard is again beaten by the French; and
by Land the French take from the Spaniard Landrecy, Beaumont, and de la Valette
in the Spanish Netherlands; Perpignan (the Key of Spain, on the Foot of the
Pyrenean Hills) in the Country of Rousillion; and Barcelona, a good Port, and
the capital City of Catalonia.

In England, this Year 1635, there was great Contrivance between the
Archbishop Laud, and Bishops of Scotland, how to erect a High Commission Court
in Scotland by the King's Authority, without Consent in Parliament, for
proceeding against such as would not submit to the Common Prayer Book, and
Canons enjoined by the King, and Bishops of Scotland; and upon the 28th of
February, the Archbishop consecrated Dr. Manwaring Bishop of St. David's, a
worthy Successor to so Saint-like and pious a Predecessor; for this Bishopric
was Laud's first Preferment.

You have seen his Grace of Canterbury's Temper toward the King's Subjects;
now see how it was toward the King. His Grace being as high as England could
admit, viz. Metropolitan, and first Peer thereof, would visit both Universities
by his Metropolitan Right, and not by Commission from the King, and signified
so much to both; to which both answered, That to admit it without a Warrant
from the King, was a Wrong to the Universities; his Grace was Chancellor of
Oxford, and the Earl of Holland of Cambridg. The Cause came to a hearing before
the King and Council, the 21st of June, 1634; where the Attorney General Banks
was for his Grace against the King, Mr. Gardener, the Recorder of London, ^or
Cambridg, and Sergeant Thyn for Oxford, the Cause was shortly this.

Both sides agreed in this, that both Universities were of the King's
Foundation, and so might be visited, as they had often been, by Commission from
the King: But this would not do with his Grace, he would, to use his own Words,
visit by his own Right.

Sergeant Thyn urged against this, the King's Foundation of the University of
Oxford, and that never any Archbishop so visited: But the Recorder could not
say so of Cambridg; which happened upon this Occasion. In the Reign of Richard
the 2d Wickliff's Doctrine prevailed much in both Universities; and Arundel,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, (as zealous to suppress the Wicklevites, as
Laud was the Puritans) to suppress them did visit Jure Metropolitano; but
Oxford opposed him forti Manu: Upon this Arundel appeals to the King, who being
a weak Prince, and as zealous for the then Church, as King Charles was for
Laud's, declares the Right to be in the Bishop; so did Henry the 4th, the
Current running against Wickliff, which was after confirmed in Parliament; but
Cambridg was not in it: Yet never before did any Archbishop visit Oxford, nor
Cambridg, since the Year 1404, Jure Metropolitano, as his Grace would do; and
so the Cause went for the Archbishop.

Plumed thus in his own Feathers, all black and white, without one borrowed
from Caesar, whereby the more he assumes to himself, the less he leaves the
King, he now soars higher; the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, in their
own Names, enjoin the Removal of the Communion Table in the Parish-Churches and
Universities, from the Body of the Church or Chancel, to the East of the
Chancel, and cause Rails to be set about the Table, and refuse to administer
the Sacrament to such as shall not come up to the Rails, and receive it
kneeling; that the Book of Sports on Sundays be read in Churches; and enjoin
Adoration.

I do not find that Adoration was ever enjoined before, nor any of the
forenamed Injunctions in any Canon of the Church; sure I am, they were never
publicly put in Execution: so that whether these were any of the Canons of the
Church or not, was not understood by one of 10000; and the Lecturers, Chaplains
and Schoolmasters, who had no Maintenance from the Church, being principally
struck at by these Injunctions, make all the sinister and worst Constructions
they could invent against them; so that though those Injunctions had been
founded in the Canons of the Church, yet the contrary was believed, and so had
the same Effect as if they had not been founded in the Church-Canons.

Here I cannot omit one Passage; That several were deprived by the Bishop's
Authority, for refusing to read the Book of Sports on Sunday: Whereas King
James the 2d allowed the seven Bishops a legal Trial for refusing to enjoin the
Clergy to read his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and the Bishops were
acquitted.

That the Legality of these Proceedings might be manifest, a Proclamation was
issued out, that it was the Opinion of the Judges, that the Act of the 1 Edw.
6. 2. which ordains that Bishops should hold their Ecclesiastical Courts in the
King's Name, or by Commission from him, was repealed by the 1st of Queen Mary;
though this Act was repealed by the 1 Jac. 25. and so the Act 1 Edw. 6. 2. was
revived, and so resolved upon a full Debate in Parliament 7 Jacobi.

The Thunder of those Canons, the terrible and unheard of Execution of them in
the Star Chamber against all Opposers, by Speech or Writing, so terrified the
Puritans which would not submit, that incredible Numbers of them left the
Kingdom, to inhabit in foreign Plantations, especially in New England, where
these Ecclesiastical Canons could not well play upon them. But to restrain the
further Evasion of them, the King by Proclamation, the 30th of April, 1638,
stops all the Ports of England, to keep them in it: The Reason was, no doubt,
that they might be better instructed in the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England here, than elsewhere.

But Ship Money, notwithstanding my Lord Keeper Coventry's Charge to the Judges
last Year, that in their Circuits they should give Charge how justly the King
required Ship Money for the common Defense, and with what Alacrity and
Cheerfulness they (the Subjects) are bound in Duty to contribute; yet this did
not pass-for true Doctrine with all* for Mr. Hambden upon Advice with Holborn,
St. John, and Whitlock, denied the Payment, whereupon several other Gentlemen
refused also.

Hereupon the King was advised by the Lord Chief Justice Finch to require the
Opinion of his Judges, which he did in a Letter to them; and after much
Solicitation by the Chief Justice, promising Preferment to some, and highly
threatening others whom he found doubting, he got from them in Answer to the
King's Letter and Case, their Opinion in these Words.

We are of Opinion, that when the Good and Safety of the Kingdom in general is
concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, you may by your Writ under the
Great Seal of England, command all your Subjects of this your Kingdom, at their
Charge, to provide and furnish such number of Ships, with Men, Victuals and
Ammunition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit, for the Defense
and Safeguard of the Kingdom from Peril and Danger. And that your Majesty may
compel the doing thereof in case of Refusal or Refractoriness. And we are also
of Opinion, that in such Case your Majesty is sole Judge, both of the Danger,
and when, and how the same is to be prevented and avoided.

This Opinion was signed by Davenport, Denham, Hutton, Croke, Trevor, Bramston,
Finch, Vernon, Berkly, Crawley, and Weston. See Whitlock' s Memoirs, f. 24.

The King having previously extorted the Judges Opinions exparte, gave order
for the Proceedings against Mr. Hambden in the Exchequer, where he pleaded; and
the King's Counsel demurring, the Point in Law came to be argued on both sides.
Mr. Whitlock has a remarkable Passage of Judge Croke, concerning his Opinion in
the Case, of which he speaks knowingly, viz. that the Judge was resolved to give
his Judgment for the King, and to that end had prepared his Argument; yet a few
Days before he was to argue, upon some Discourse with some of his nearest
Relations, and most serious Thoughts of the Business, and being heartned
thereto by his Lady, who was a good and pious Woman, told her Husband upon this
Occasion, That she hoped he would do nothing against his Conscience, for fear
of any Danger or Prejudice to him or his Family; and that she was content to
suffer Want, or any Misery with him, rather than be an Occasion for him to do
or say any thing against his Conscience or Judgment.

Upon these and many the like Encouragements, but chiefly upon better thoughts,
he suddenly altered his Purpose and Arguments, and when it came to his turn,
contrary to Expectation, he argued and declared his Opinion against the King;
and so did Judge Hutton after; however the rest of the Judges gave their
Opinions against Mr. Hambden.

However the King this Year, to sweeten the Judges Opinion for levying
Ship Money, set out a Navy of sixty Men of War to disturb the Dutch Fishing on
the Coasts of England and Scotland, under the Command of the Earl of
Northumberland, who seized and sunk several of the Dutch Busses; whereupon they
sued to the King for leave to fish, promising to pay an Acknowledgment of 30000
l. per Annum. But this ill agreed with the King's Reason for levying
Ship Money, which was, that Pirates infested our Coasts to the indangering the
Safety of the Nation. See William de Britain, f. 16, 17.

But if the Dutch were thus bold upon our Coasts, by the Liberty granted them
by Hugo Grotius, they were much bolder in the East Indies, where they style
themselves Sovereigns of all the Seas in the World; for Anno 1620, they seized
upon two Ships of the English called the Bear and the Star, in the Straits of
Mallaca, going to China, and confiscated Ships and Goods valued at 150000 l. I
suppose Grotius could not give a like Instance of any Dutch Ships so used for
passing through the Channel; and last Year, viz. 1635, an English Ship called
the Bona Esperanza going toward China by the Straits of Mallaca, was violently
assaulted by three Dutch Men of War, the Master and many of the Men killed, and
the Ship brought into Mallaca, and there the Ship and Goods were confiscate
valued at 150000 l. and this very Year the Dragon and Katherine two English
Ships of Sir William Courten, valued at 300000 l. besides the Commanders and
others, who had great Estates in them, were set upon by seven Dutch Men of War,
as they past the Straits of Mallaca from China, and by them taken, the Men tied
back to back, and thrown overboard, the Goods taken out of the Ships, which
were sunk, and seized for the State.

The State and Church of England thus established in Doctrine and Discipline,
the Archbishop's next Care was, to have the same in Scotland; and herein he
was so absolute, that the King told the Marquess Hamilton, when he was his
Commissioner in Scotland, that the Archbishop was the only Englishman he
entrusted in the Ecclesiastical Affairs in Scotland: and no Care need be had of
the Church of Ireland, since my Lord Viscount Wentworth was Lieutenant there,
who, to all Intents, pursued the Archbishop's Instructions. Here let us see how
the Church stood in Scotland, before the Archbishop undertook to reform it.

James the 5th of Scotland died the 13th of December, 1542, leaving only one
Daughter, Mary, but five Days old, by Mary of Lorain his Wife, Sister to
Francis Duke of Guise, and Charles Cardinal of Lorain, two the most powerful
Princes in France, after King Henry the 2d, and the most zealously addicted to
the Popish Religion.

After the King's Death, Cardinal Beaton got a Priest (Henry Balfour) to forge
the King's Will, whereby the Cardinal, the Earls of Huntley, Argile and Murray,
were to have the Government during the Queen's Minority; but the Nobility not
believing it, chose the Earl of Arran Governor; and Henry, the King of
England, desiring to unite the Kingdoms, by marrying his Son Edward with the
Infant-Queen, sent a solemn Embassy to the Governor and Council of Scotland,
to consent to this Marriage, which was done, only the Queen Dowager, and the
Cardinal dissenting; and this was confirmed by the Parliament convened at
Edinburgh the 13th of March following: Yet the Queen Mother and Cardinal got
the Queen to be married to Francis the Dauphin, Son of Henry the 2d of France.

In this Parliament the Scots were permitted to read the Scripture in the
English Tongue, till the Prelates should publish one more correct. But in the
Year 1559, the Scots began their Reformation in Religion at Perth: the
intervening Accidents of the Scots Endeavors to reform, and the Opposition by
the Regent, the Cardinal, and the Prelates, you may read in Bishop Spotswood's
History of the Church of Scotland, and Sir James Melvil's Memoirs.

To suppress the Progress of this Reformation, the Queen Mother, who was
Regent, calls in an Army and Navy of French to oppose them: The Reformers call
in an Army and Navy of English; the English Fleet fire the French Ships in
their Harbor, and compel the French to leave Scotland; and in 1560, the Queen
Regent died, leaving Scotland in a kind of Interregnum.

In August following, a Parliament convened at Edinburgh by a Warrant from the
King and Queen, wherein the Mass and Popery were suppressed, and the
Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland in Doctrine and Discipline established; but
the King and Queen, now of France as well as Scotland, refused to confirm
either; nor was this Kirk-Doctrine and Discipline confirmed till the Queen was
deposed, and Murray made Regent in 1567.

The Reformation was purely after the Mode of Calvin, and Church of Geneva; a
Common Prayer was ordained, not strictly to be observed, but as a Pattern of
Prayer: In it were ordained four sorts of Assemblies, viz. National,
Provincial, Weekly Meetings of Ministers, and the Eldership of every Parish.

Superintendents were likewise established, whose Office was to visit the Kirk
within limited Places; these had Power to cite and deprive Ministers, but must
be assisted by some grave Ministers next adjoining, as also to ordain Ministers.

But the Hierarchy of the Church of Scotland, as they were esteemed one of the
States in Parliament, was not then, nor after taken away by Parliament, nor
their Power of Ordination and Visiting within their Diocesses; yet in
Visitation and Ordination the Superintendents had a concurring Power with the
Bishops, and the Bishops were subject to be cited and proceeded against for
Scandal, neglect of their Office, Symony, etc. by the General Assemblies.

This Reformation, viz. 1581, was subscribed by King James and all the
Household, and afterward King Charles in 1633, being crowned at Edinburgh, where
the Form ordained by the King was observed, and the King swore to observe the
Reformation as it then stood: But some Alterations were made by King James in
1610, and by the five Articles of Perth, in favor of the Bishops, and more
conformable to the Church of England.

King James, who loved the Presbyterians in Scotland no better than the
Puritans in England, Anno 1610, called a General Assembly at Glascow, wherein
these Conclusions were enacted.

1. That the Indictions of General Assemblies belong to the King by the
Prerogative of his Crown. 2. That Synods be kept twice in the Year, to be
moderated by the Archbishop and Bishop of the Diocese. 3. That no
Excommunication or Absolution be pronounced without the Knowledge and
Approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese. 4. That the Presentation of Benefices
for the time to come by Death or Lapses be directed to the Archbishop or
Bishop of the Diocese. 5. That in Deposition of the Ministers, the Bishop do
associate himself with some of the Ministers within the Diocese. 6. That every
Minister at his Admission do swear Obedience to his Majesty and his Ordinary.
7. That the Visitation of the Diocese be made by the Bishop himself; but if the
Diocese be too great, by such a worthy Minister of the Diocese as the Bishop
shall appoint. 8. That no Convention of Ministers be moderated by the Bishop,
or a Minister named by him: No Minister to speak against any of these
Conclusions.
This Year also King James, not well pleased with Presbyterian Ordination,
caused the Archbishop of Glascow, the Bishops of Brichen and Galloway, to be
re-ordained in England by the Bishops of London, Ely and Bath; and also erected
a High Commission in Scotland for ordering Ecclesiastical Affairs, which you
may read in Spotswood's History of the Church: and all these were ratified by
the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, 1612.

But King James did not stay here, but propounded to have these five Articles
to be passed the General Assembly in Scotland.

1. That the Sacrament be received Kneeling. 2. That the Sacrament be not
denied Dying Persons desiring the same. 3. That Baptism be not deferred longer
than till next Sunday after Birth, unless there be reasonable Cause to the
contrary. 4. That apposite Sermons be made upon the days of Christ's Birth,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sending the Holy Ghost. 5. That the
Minister in every Parish catechize Children, so as to be qualified to be
confirmed by the Bishop in his Visitation.
These five Articles with some Difficulties passed the General Assembly at
Perth, 1618, which were agreed to by a Parliament convened at Edinburg, 1621.

Thus the Church stood in Scotland when the Archbishop Laud would make it
conformable in all Points to that he was now establishing in England. The first
Step he moved herein, was by preferring the Bishops in Scotland in almost all
Preferments before the Nobility; so that of thirteen, nine were
Privy-Counsellors, and Spotswood, Archbishop of St. Andrews, was Chancellor,
and others were of the Exchequer; and Maxwell, Bishop of Ross, contended with
the Earl of Traquair to be Lord-Treasurer; and were Sticklers to have Tithes,
and Impropriations, and the Abbots Lands to be restored to the Church; and the
Weekly Meetings of the Ministers are termed Conventicles by the Bishops. Tho
the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland were Calvinism, yet all Countenance and
Encouragement by the Bishops were given to the Professors of the Arminian
Tenets: So that the Brawls and Contentions about them were as high in the
University of St. Andrews, as in Cambridg and Oxford.

There had not been one General Assembly since that of Perth 1618, when in 1637
the Common Prayer, Canons, and High Commission were imposed by the King's and
Bishop's Authority; and besides the High Commission, the Bishops had Warrants
from the King, to grant Commissions in their several Diocesses, to name
Assessors, Ministers and Gentlemen, which might punish Offenders. And tho the
Common Prayer, mutatis mutandis, was the same with the English, yet in the
Administration of the Sacrament the Form was the same in the Mass, without the
Exhortations in the English Common Prayer.

The first Trial how passable they would be was upon Easter Day, the Service
was read at Edinburgh, when no Tumult followed; but when it was next read, the
23d of July following, all the City was in an Uproar, and the next day the
Lords of the Council issued out a Proclamation to discharge the Tumults of the
People upon pain of Death; yet diverse Ministers at Edinburgh opposed the
reading of the Common Prayer, and petitioned the Council against it.

Harvest coming on, all things seemed quiet, but at the end of it Edinburgh
swelled with all sorts of People: the Council fearing whereto this Concourse
would tend, by three Proclamations commanded all sorts of People (not
Inhabitants, or not having Business) to depart upon Penalty of Horning and
Rebellion: Instead of Obedience, the Women and Children petition the Council
against the Common Prayer Book, and soon after the Noblemen, Barons, Ministers,
Burgesses and Commons; which were sent to the King, who commanded the
Privy Council to signify his Majesty's Aversness to Popery and Superstition. In
this Confusion the Earl of Traquair Treasurer, and Roxborough Privy Seal, go to
the King for Instructions how to proceed; their Instructions were to remove the
Session or Term to Sterling, and by Proclamation to forbid all Persons coming
to Sterling, unless they declare the cause to the Council, and procure a
Warrant for the same upon Penalty of High Treason.

This Proclamation was encountered by a Protestation of Noblemen, Barons,
Ministers and Burgers at Edinburgh, against the Roman Idolatry and
Superstition, the Common Prayer Book, Canons and High Commission: And they
enter into a solemn Covenant to maintain the Confession of Faith, subscribed by
the King's Father and his Household, 1580, and after by all Ranks of People,
1581, to which they swear a mutual Defense of one another against all Opposers;
and to this purpose they erected Tables or Persons to take Subscriptions of all
sorts of People.

Traquair could not stem the Tide, and so acquainted the King herewith, who
sends the Marquess Hamilton his Commissioner, with Instructions one way or
other to compose these Disorders. When he came into Scotland, he first demanded
of the Covenanters what they required of the King for accommodating their
Grievances. Secondly, What might be expected from them for returning to their
former Obedience, especially renouncing their Covenant. But nothing would
content them but a General Assembly and free Parliament: they forbid him the
use of the Common Prayer in the King's Chapel, and admonish him and the
Council to subscribe their Covenant. These Proceedings running so high, the
Marquess durst not pursue his Instructions, being sure they would be affronted.

The Marquess gives the King an account of these things, and desires further
Instructions, which were to gain time till the King could get a Fleet and an
Army in readiness to compel the Covenanters to Obedience, but not to consent to
the calling of a Parliament or General Assembly till the Covenant be given up;
that now his Crown and Reputation for ever lies at stake; that he had rather
suffer the first, which time would help, than the last, which is irreparable;
that the Explanation of the damnable Covenant makes him to have no more Power
than a Duke of Venice, which he will rather die than submit to: Yet without
dying he did submit to the Revocation of the Service Book, Canons,
High Commission, and the Articles of Perth, forsakes the Bishops, and by a
Proclamation, Sept. 22, 1638, commands the Covenant to be subscribed by the
Privy Council and all his Scottish Subjects; but this would not content the
Covenanters, because it came not from a General Assembly, and because the Band
of mutual Defense was not in the Proclamation.

Having gone thus far, there was no going back, and the King's Army and Navy
was not yet ready, the King therefore indicts a General Assembly to be held the
21st of November 1638, at Glasgow, and a Parliament to meet at Edinburgh the
15th of May following.

The General Assembly met accordingly, but the Marquess and the Assembly were
at Variance about the Elections and Votes of the Lay Elders, and the Bishops
sitting in the Assembly, and the Votes of the King's Assessors in it: But what
the Marquess would have, the Covenanters would not, whereupon the Marquess on
the 28th dissolves the Assembly upon Penalty of High Treason.

The Covenanters and General Assembly protest against this Dissolution, and sit
notwithstanding, yet profess all Duty and Obedience to the King in its due Line
and Course, which in plain English is, They Will do what they will; and if the
King will do what they would have him, they will be obedient Subjects. And in
this Session they depose and excommunicate all the Bishops of Scotland. To this
State within less than two Years has his Grace of Canterbury brought the Church
of Scotland, and a terrible Cloud hangs over that of England, whereby his Grace
will have the Glory of becoming a Martyr in it.

Weston Earl of Portland died in the Year 1634, and Dr. Juxton, Bishop of
London, was made Lord-Treasurer, by whose prudent Management it is said, that in
less than five Years he had lodged 900000 l. in the Exchequer; and now the King
had raised an Army of about 20000 Horse and Foot, made the Earl of Arundel
General, Lord Viscount Wentworth Lieutenant General, and Earl of Holland
General of the Horse; and had fitted up a Navy, with 5000 Land-Men commanded by
Marquess Hamilton, to compel the Scots to their Obedience, and marches at the
Head of this Army himself.

It was time, for the Scots were up in Arms too, had seized the Regalia at
Dalkeith, and brought them to Edinburgh, taken Dumbarton, and routed the Scots
who took the King's part at Aberdeen, which they likewise took.

This King's good Nature never more appeared than in his Necessities; so that
when he came to York, by Proclamation he recalled 31 Monopolies and Patents
formerly granted by him, he not before understanding how grievous they were to
his Subjects.

The Scots, that the English might have no Jealousy of an Invasion, had
resolved not to come within ten Miles of the Borders with their Army. When the
King came to Berwick, the Earl of Holland made two vain and inconsiderate
Incursions into Scotland, and upon the Approach of the Scots retreated; and
these were the only Actions of this War by the English.

Upon the Retreat of the Earl the English Army was contemned by the Scots, who
advanced to the Borders, and pitched their Tents in sight of the English,
before any notice was given of their Motion: this raised a Murmur all over the
English Army, where Provisions were not only scant, but their Bread and Biscake
moldy, nor was there any prospect of a further Supply.

However the Scots propose a Treaty of Accommodation, which the King's
Necessities compelled him to submit to, which being made (the Terms you may
read in Rushworth's and Franklin's Collections) the King disbands his Army, and
withdraws his Navy; this was all the Scots cared for; for the Treaty being upon
equivocal Terms, the Scots were resolved to make their own Interpretation, and
stand by it, and to that purpose hold Correspondence with the French King, and
style him Au Roy, and also with the discontented in England, and buy Arms and
Ammunition at Bremen and Hamburg.

To forment these Jealousies, and propagate the Popish Interest, Cardinal
Richlieu employs one Chamboy, or Chamberlain in Scotland, and Con, or Cunaeus,
his own Chaplain in England, whose chief Confidents were the Earl of Arundel,
General of the King's Army, and his Countess, Sir Francis Windebank Principal
Secretary of State, Sir Toby Mathews, Endymion Porter, English, and one Read
and Maxwel, Scots. See this at large in Rushworth's Collections, fol. 1318,
1319, 1320, 1321, to 1326.

This Year my Lord Keeper Coventry died, and Sir John Finch, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, was made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, no doubt for
promoting the Legality of Ship Money, and enlarging the Bounds of the Forests.

The Cloud rising so thick in the North, presaged a Storm, which to dissipate,
the King summons a Parliament to meet the 23d of April, 1640. the Archbishop
and the Earl of Strafford giving out, according to the Advice which Sir Robert
Cotton gave the Duke of Buckingham, that they were the first Movers of it.

At the opening of this Parliament, the King lays before them his Necessities
for Money in the first place, as he had done in all the three Parliaments
before, and that Delay was all one with a Denial, and communicates to them the
Covenanters Letter to the French King, imploring his Assistance: But the House
of Commons having found the Effects of giving Money before Grievances were
redrest, both in the 18th of his Father's Reign, and in the first of his, began
at Grievances, now multiplied by the Additions of Ship Money, breaking the
Bounds of the Forests, and Monopolies multiplied without end, the Arbitrary
Power of the Star Chamber and High Commission against those who opposed the
Proceedings of the Innovations brought into the Church, and the Imprisonment,
and unheard of Censures of their Members for their Proceedings in the House
last Parliament; so that instead of enjoying any Benefit by the Petition of
Right, the Church and State was in a manifold worse State than before: they had
now found by Experience, that no Laws or Judgments in Parliament could bind the
King's Prerogative, but that he would act quite contrary, as in the Cases of
Mountague and Manwaring, etc. and how could the Parliament rely upon his Royal
Word (which he would upon all occasions give) when they found no Assurance in
any Law, nor so many Declarations of his observing them?

However, the Commons upon the 2d of May resolved to take care of supplying the
King upon the 4th, when Sir Henry Vane told them, that the King of his Grace
and Favor upon their granting 12 Subsidies to be paid in three Years, would
forbear levying Ship Money, and abolish it; and for their Grievances, they
should rely upon his Royal Promise, and give as much time now as may be, and
after at Michaelmas next; and that the King expected a positive Answer.

Hereupon the House was turned into a grand Committee, and spent the whole Day
upon the Message, but came to no Resolution, and desired Sir Henry Vane to
acquaint the King, that the House would next day proceed upon the King's
Supply: But next Morning early, Secretary Windebank (in actual Correspondence
and Conspiracy with Cunaeus, Richlieu's Chaplain, for subverting our Religion,
and introducing Popery) commanded the Speaker to Whitehall, and the same Day
the King dissolved the Parliament, and the next Day the Lord Brook's Study,
Cabinet, and Pockets, were searched for Papers, and Mr. Bellasis and Sir John
Hotham were convened before the Council, to answer concerning Passages in
Parliament; and giving no satisfactory Answer, were committed Prisoners to the
Fleet, till further Order from the King and Council; and Mr. Crew was committed
close Prisoner to the Tower, till further Order from the Council; and no Cause
showed in either of these Warrants.

The greatest Objection against Hereditary Monarchy is, that Princes Ears are
always open to Minions, Flatterers, and Sycophants, whereby they rarely
understand the state of their own Affairs, or of their Subjects: To attemper
this, the Wisdom of our Constitution ordains, That Parliaments be frequently
held, to represent to the King the state of the Nation, and so to inform him of
Grievances, that they may be redressed. And so inviolably has this mutual
Correspondence between the King and Parliament been observed in all Ages, that
I do not believe any King or Queen of England, and of the English Race since
Henry 3. ever dissolved one Parliament in Displeasure, before King James;
whereas of eight Parliaments, these two Kings, of the Scottish Race, dissolved
seven in Displeasure. Yet never did Parliaments, in any Reign, demean
themselves more cheerfully to any King than to these two: and I challenge any
one to show, that in any one respect they entrenched upon any just Prerogative
of either of these Kings, or did any Act not warranted by former Precedents.

It Is true, Queen Elizabeth would not endure to have the Parliament to meddle
with the state of the Church as 'twas established, nor hear of declaring a
Successor; and when either of these were moved contrary to her express Order,
she would commit the Members, but easily dismiss them; otherwise, I believe in
no Age any Member of Parliament was ever committed or censured by any King of
England before King James, for debating or reasoning of the state of the Nation
or Church.

In the 20th of Edward 3. John of Gaunt, the King's Son, the Lords Latimer and
Nevil, were accused in Parliament for misadvising the King, and were sent to
the Tower for it; and Henry 4. Rot. Parl. 5. upon the Complaint of the Commons
against four of his Servants and Counselors, that they might be removed,
declared openly, That tho he knew nothing against them in particular, yet he
was assured that what the Lords and Commons required of him, was for the Good
of himself and Kingdom; and therefore he banished them, and at the same time
declared he would do so by any other who should be near his Royal Person, if
they were so unhappy as to fall under the Hatred of his People.

Whereas this King, tho the Duke of Buckingham were accused of more Crimes in
Parliament, than is recorded of Pierce Gaveston, and the Spencers in Edw. 2d's
time, and of the Duke of Ireland, Tresilian, and Belknap, in Rich. 2d's time,
and of the Death of this King's Father to boot; yet rather than the Duke shall
be brought to Trial, the King dissolves the second Parliament of his Reign: And
in his Declaration for dissolving the three Parliaments, calls the questioning
his Ministers an Invasion upon his Prerogative, and that through them they
endeavored to wound their Sovereign's Honor and Government.

Since the Statute De Tallagio non Concedendo, in the Reign of Edward the I, I
think no mention has been made that ever any King of England taxed the Subject
before this King and his Father, except Edward the IV by Benevolence, for which
his Memory is bitterly stained in the Parliament-Roll of the second Chapter of
Richard the III, tho it be not in the printed Statutes; and by a Loan demanded
in the Reign of Henry the VIII by Cardinal Wolsey, the raising of which had
near raised a Rebellion; which when it came to the King's Ear, he laid the
Blame upon the Cardinal, and said, he would not rend his Subjects from the Law,
and forbid further proceeding in it.

Archbishop Abbot excepts against his Licensing Sybthorp's Sermons, for that
the King's taxing Loans by his own Authority, was neither by the Laws nor
Customs of England: the King in his Answer says, He did not stand upon the Laws
and Customs of England, for he had a Precedent for it, and would insist upon
it. The Archbishop replied, He thought it was a Mistake, and feared there was
no such Precedent; and that Henry the VIII desired but the sixth part of Men's
Estates, but the King required the full six Parts, so much as the Men are set
at in the Subsidy-Book. And when the Commons in the third Year of his Reign
made a Remonstrance against the King's taking Tunnage and Poundage, not granted
by Parliament, the King calls this a detracting from their Sovereign, and
commands all who have or shall have any Copies of it, to burn them upon Pain of
his Indignation and high Displeasure.

The King for Causes of dissolving this Parliament, (the last he shall ever
dissolve) begins with the usual Style, That he well knows, that the Calling,
Adjourning, Proroguing and Dissolving Parliaments are undoubted Prerogatives
inseparably annexed to his Imperial Crown; of which he is not bound to give any
Account, but to God alone, no more than of his other Regal Actions. But quid
gloriaris? Did ever any King of England say this before his Father and himself?
Or in what Common Law, or Acts of Parliament is this to be found? Or if he had
such Power, Why does the King so often boast of it? Sure it had been better
done by another than himself. Is this a time of day, when this Prince had lost
all his Honor abroad, to magnify himself that he has Power to dissolve
Parliaments at home, and thereby obstruct those Ways by which he might unite
himself to his Subjects, and then glory that he is only accountable to God for
all his Actions? Nebuchadnezzar's Boast, Is not this the Babel which I have
built? was but a Bauble to this. He said this but once, and God sent him seven
Years among Wild Beasts; and he saw his Pride, and he repented: This King upon
all Occasions makes his Boasts; but I do not find he ever repented of any of
them.

But admit the King had this Power, and also that the Opening, Adjourning and
Proroguing Terms, and granting Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and times of
their Sitting and Continuance for Executing Justice, be Prerogatives
inseparable to the Imperial Crown, of which he is accountable to God only: Yet
if he shall not open the Terms, or grant Commissions of Oyer and Terminer; or
if he does refuse to have Justice done between himself and Subjects, or between
his Subjects, but instead thereof prorogue or adjourn Terms, and withcall his
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and declare to Him only belongs the Power of
opening the Terms, and of granting Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and that
he is only accountable to God for all his Actions; would not this be a Failure
of Justice? and can any Man believe that he would be God's Vicegerent herein
for the Good and Benefit of his Subjects?

The Act of the 25 of Edward the III determines what Treasons are cognisable by
the King's Judges, but the other Treasons at Common Law are only determinable
in Parliament; and one of the chiefest Ends in calling Parliaments, is when the
Judges themselves, or Ministers of State becoming corrupt, and too great for
the ordinary Courts of Justice, they may be punished in Parliament: it is
therefore greater Injustice, and infinitely more dangerous to the King and
Subjects, to deny the Nation this Right, than to deny Justice to particular
Subjects.

The King is Head of the Commonwealth, and the Laws and Constitutions of the
Nation unite them into one Body; which if they cease, there is neither King nor
Commonwealth; and by the 4 Edw. 3. c. 4. Parliaments shall be holden every
Year; and by 36 Edw. 3. c. 10. Parliaments shall be holden once a Year, and
oftener, if need be, that Grievances and Mischiefs be redrest: How then does it
become the King to glory, that the Calling, Adjourning, Proroguing and
Dissolving Parliaments are undoubted Prerogatives, inseparably annexed to the
Imperial Crown? which in plain English is to say, It is a Prerogative
inseparable to the Imperial Crown, to rend himself from his Subjects, and to
make himself neither King, nor the Nation his Subjects.

But if the King be accountable only to God for his Actions, how comes it that
he so often appeals to the People by these Declarations against their
Representatives, or rather against the People and their Representatives, to his
own Minions and Flatterers; which are worse than any other Rebels and Traitors?
for these appear barefaced what they are, whereas those steal away the Love and
Obedience of his Subjects, and provoke them either to be Rebels and Traitors,
or careless to assist him against such as are: And this was the Case of Edward
the 2d and Richard the 2d; and now it comes fast upon this unhappy King, for so
hereafter he will ever be.

In September this Year the Dutch fell upon a Fleet of the Spaniards in the
Downs so furiously, as, being 53 in Number, made them cut their Cables, and run
23 of them on Shore, whereof 3 were burnt, 2 perished on the Shore; the
Remainder of the other 23 were deserted by the Spaniards, and manned by the
English to save them from the Dutch, the other 30 put to Sea, of which only 10
escaped: Yet the King, however he gloried in being styled Sovereign of the
British Seas, took no Care to vindicate this against the Dutch, to whom he was
now become as contemptible as to his Scottish Subjects. Now let us see how things
stood in Scotland.

After the Pacification between the English and Scots, yet full of Jealousy on
either Part, the King sent for 14 of the principal Covenanters to come to him
at Berwick, which the Scots refused, and only sent Montross, Lowden, and
Lowthian; these three Lords seemed much mollified by what the King had granted,
and promised all Obedience to the King.

The King urged Hamilton to be his Commissioner, which he refusing, he made
Traquair, but tied him up to close Instructions, and in August he indicts a
General Assembly: the Bishops protest against it; and the Covenanters
supplicate the Commissioners and Council, that Episcopacy be declared unlawful,
and the Covenant subscribed by all the Scottish Nation; which the Commissioners
verbally consented to.

Here you must understand, that the Covenanters make the Kirk a distinct Table
or Body from the Civil, of which Christ Jesus is the only Head; and that the
Parliament is obliged to pass all the Acts of a General Assembly: so that
though by many Acts of Parliament, the Bishops Sitting and Voting in Parliament
is ordained and confirmed; yet the voting Episcopacy to be unlawful, has
rescinded all those Acts of Parliament: for Sublata Causa, tollitur and
effectus.

Upon the 30th of October in 1639, the Parliament met; but upon the Difference
between the Houses and the Earl of Traquair, about naming Lords of the
Articles, the Earl prorogues them to the 14th of November, which the Parliament
protest against, and declare all Proceedings in Parliament to be as valid, as
if no Prorogation had been.

The Parliament hereupon appoint a Committee to represent this to the King, and
in the mean time to expect the King's Answer, and make the Earl of Dumfermling
and the Lord Lowden their Deputies to do it, who coming without Warrant from
the Earl of Traquair, were commanded back again without Audience.

Then the King commands the Commissioner Traquair to prorogue the Parliament to
the second of June in 1640, and that Traquair should come and give an account
of the Matters proposed in Parliament; and Traquair having gotten one of the
Letters which the Covenanters had sent to the French King for his Protection
and Assistance of the Covenanters, subscribed by Rothes, Montross, Lesley,
Mountgomery, Lowden and Forester, brings this with him, and delivers it to the
King, for which the Scots would never forgive the Earl, but ever after deemed
him an Incendiary.

This yet being unknown to the Covenanters, they petition the King to permit
them to send some of their Members to vindicate their Proceedings; which the
King did, and they sent the Earl of Dumfermling and Lowden again. The King when
they came to London claps Lowden close Prisoner in the Tower, and expected that
this Confederacy between the Scots and French, would be a means to procure the
Parliament to assist him more powerfully against the Scots: but the King having
dissolved the Parliament, he as suddenly dismissed him as before he had committed
him, which did the King no good.

This unhappy King would as easily be excited to give harsh language as be put
upon sudden Actions, and as soon leave them, and often proceed quite contrary:
And now the King taxes the Scots Proceedings to be Traitorous and Rebellious,
and causes a Paper published by the Scots after the Pacification to be burnt by
the Hand of the common Hangman; but the Scots insisted their Proceedings to be
according to the Covenant, which they could not start from, and that therein
they were the King's most Dutiful Subjects.

Things could not long stay here, but upon the 20th of August in 1640, the
Scots enter England with an Army of about 22000 Men, commanded by General
Lesley, to deliver a Petition for Reformation of Religion and State, and to
justify their Proceedings, and begin as the King did at the opening of all his
Parliaments, with the Necessity of their Proceedings.

The King the same day the Scots entered England, posts to York, having made the
Earl of Northumberland General of his Army, the Earl of Strafford
Lieutenant General, and my Lord Marshal, the Earl of Arundel, General of his
Forces on the South Side of Trent.

When the King came to York, his first Care was to stop the Scots from passing
the River Tine, and commanded the Lord Conway and Sir Jacob Astly to oppose
them; but the Scots having the advantage of the Ground, and sixfold more in
number than the English, force their Passage at Newborn, about five Miles from
Newcastle to the West, and take Newcastle, and after Durham, and tax the
Counties of Northumberland and Durham at 850 l. a day, but the Rents of the
Papists and the Church of Durham they take over and above.

The King instead of fighting the Scots, is encountered with Complaints from the
Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Durham and Northumberland, of the Miseries of their
Condition; then with Petitions from many of the Nobility, the City of London,
and other Places, for a free Parliament: upon this the King assembles a great
Council of the Nobility to advise what to do.

Now things are brought to the Point Richlieu had designed them: The King in
these two Expeditions had spent all the 900000 l. he before had lodged in his
Exchequer, and now had two Armies to maintain in the Bowels of his Kingdom,
when he not only had no means to pay either, but also without doubt the Scottish
Army were Pensioners to France.

The Lords advise a Truce, which is accepted, and all agreed, but how to pay
the Armies till a Parliament meet, was a Question: the Scots coming for all the
English Men's Gudes, demand but 40000 l. per Mensem, but, like their Country
Pedlars, fall to 25000 l. which is agreed; which, with the Charge of the
English Army, would amount to 60000 l. per Mensem, to save the Country from
Free Quarter.

In this Treaty the King named the Earl of Traquair to be assistant to the
English Peers; but the Scots excepted against him as an Incendiary, and one to
be brought to Punishment; the King submits, and leaves him out. But how to
provide Money to pay both Armies till the meeting of the Parliament, which was
to meet the third of November, is the Question: The King had not Credit, it
could not be had but from the City of London, which was upon ill Terms with the
King; for Alderman Atkins, Sir Nicholas Ranton, and Alderman Geere, were by
Order of the Council, in Prisons in London, and the Attorney General had Orders
to draw an Information against them in the Star Chamber, for refusing to return
the Names of such as were able to lend upon a Loan of 200000 l. demanded by the
King.

The Lords therefore of the Great Council write to the City of London,
signifying the King's gracious Resolution of calling a Parliament, wherein he
promised all Grievances to be redrest, the Miseries of the Country, if the
Armies were not paid; and not less than 200000 l. could prevent them, and the
Lords would give their Bonds for the City's Security; whereupon the City lent
the Money, and then the Treaty was adjourned from Rippon to London. But that we
may better see how things stood at the opening of the Parliament, let us look
back a little.

After the King had dissolved the Parliament, May the 5th, he left the
Convocation sitting, who frame an Oath, wherein they swear never to consent to
alter the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and
Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to
stand (which was interpreted to be Jure Divino.) They also made sixteen Canons,
and Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, for refusing to subscribe the Oath and Canons,
was suspended: Being encouraged by Mountague, Bishop of Norwich, and Laud' s
Creature, who, Goodman said, had in his Person visited, and held Correspondence
with the Pope's Nuncio, and received his Letters in behalf of his Son, who was
then traveling to Rome, and by his Letters had extraordinary Entertainment
there.

Nor did the Convocation stay here, but granted the King a Benevolence of six
Subsidies to be paid in six Years, the Refusers to be suspended and
excommunicated: To such an Extremity did the Clergy push things in this techy
and disorderly time. But any Man may easily guess the Spring which set all
these Wheels in motion. And it is observable, that the Clergy, who now taxed
their fellow Subjects without Consent of the Commons, shall ever hereafter be
taxed by the Commons, without the Consent of the Clergy.

CHAP. III.
A Continuation of this Reign to the Death of the King.
UPon the third of November the Parliament met, and the Nation, which for above
fifteen Years had been ridden by a more than French Government, now look upon
the Parliament (I mean the Houses) to become their Redeemers; and by how much
more Honor the Nation gives them, so much less they leave to the King: And
here again you may see the unhappy Fate of Princes, who treat their Subjects as
Enemies, and Favorites as their only Friends and Confidents: For the first
that forsook the King and run beyond Sea, was Canterbury's old Friend,
Secretary Windebank; next after him flies Finch, and after the Earl of Arundel;
and scarce one of his old Favorites, I mean before the Scots Troubles, stood
by him, except my Lord Cottington: Secretary Cook was either really or
politickly sick; Juxton, Bishop of London, indifferent, and in all the Wars
lived in the Parliament Quarters, but all the rest sided with the Parliament
against him: Only Laud and Strafford are laid in Prison, and after put to Death.

Nor were the Factions less pliable to entertain these Minions and Favorites,
than they were forward to join with them: I Will give you one Instance herein; In
this Parliament all those who would not join them were called Delinquents; and
upon a Debate in the House of Commons, concerning an Order in the Star Chamber
signed by my Lord Privy Seal, Secretary Cook, and others, it was moved to send
for Secretary Cook as a Delinquent: Another Member (my nearest Relation, from
whom I had this) moved, That since Sir John Cook was aged and infirm, and
above a hundred Miles off, and my Lord Privy Seal in Town, therefore that the
House should proceed against my Lord: To whom Mr. Pym replied, That whatever my
Lord's ante Acta Vitae were, yet since he now went right, that all ought to be
forgotten.

Nay, so zealous were these new-converted Minions and Favorites, that rather
than forsake their Seats in Parliament, they will lose their Places at Court. You
have heard how my Lord Privy Seal became Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, after which the King made him Earl of Manchester, Lord
Privy Seal, and President of the Council; my Lord Keeper Coventry was upright
in all his Decrees, but my Lord Privy Seal sets up the Court of Requests to
have a concurring Jurisdiction with the Chancery; and Men whom my Lord Coventry
did not please, brought their Causes into the Court of Requests; so that in a
short time the Practice of this Court swelled so much, that my Lord Privy Seal
made more Clerks and Attorneys than ever was known before.

King Charles sent to the Bishop of Ely, that he (the King) would have
Hatton-House in Holborn for Prince Charles his Court, and that the King would
be at the Charges for maintaining the Bishop's Title, tho the Bishop told me it
cost him many a Pound: so in the Bishop's Name a Suit was commenced in the
Court of Requests for Hatton-House. Before the new Buildings were built,
Hatton-Garden was the ^^nest and greatest in or about London, and my Lady
Hatton had planted it with the best Fruit, Vines and Flowers which could be
got; but upon commencing this Suit she destroyed all the Plantations, yet
defended her Cause with all Opposition imaginable: But at last in 1639, notice
was given to my Lady to hear Judgment; and at the day my Lady appeared in
Court, when my Lord Privy Seal demanded of my Lady's Counsel, If they had any
more to say, otherwise, upon his Honor, he must decree against my Lady.
Hereupon my Lady stood up and said, Good my Lord, be tender of your Honor, for
it is very young; and for your Decree I value it not a Rush, for your Court is
no Court of Record: And the Troubles in Scotland growing higher, the King had
no Benefit of the Decree, nor my Lord any Credit in his Court ever after.

Nor were the Descendants of many of the King's Favorites more faithful to the
King than their Fathers, as the Lord Kimbolton, Sir Henry Vane, jun. Sir John
Cook, Henry Martin, etc.

Now when it was too late, like a Man who begins his Business the last day of
the Term, the King seems to alter his Countenance, and indulge another sort of
Men in Church and State, who were opposite to the Principles in Bishop Laud's
Regency. Dr. Williams censured and imprisoned in the Tower, has all the
Proceedings against him in the Star Chamber and High Commission reversed, and
taken off the File; and Mountague, Bishop of Norwich, dying in the beginning of
the Parliament, Dr. Hall is translated from Exeter to Norwich, and Dr.
Brownrig, a most learned and zealous Anti-Arminian, is made Bishop of Exeter,
etc. my Lord Chamberlain Pembroke is removed, and the Earl of Essex put in his
place; Sir Robert Holborn made Attorney General, and Oliver St. John Solicitor,
both which were Mr. Hambden's Counsel against the Legality of Ship Money.

But neither these Actions, nor the King's repeated Royal Word could gain
Credit with the Parliament, (I mean the Houses) who tho at another time they
would have dreaded a standing Army, now resolve to maintain two, till their
Grievances were redrest: And sure now it was a lamentable State the King was
reduced to; he that before, rather than hear of what he had done, did not care
what he did, and therefore dissolved four Parliaments, now every day hears of
what he had done, yet cannot help it. His Judges, which before had refused to
bail his Subjects committed by the King without Cause, are themselves now
committed against the King's Pleasure, and no Bail to be taken for them: The
King's Customers, who by the King's Order seized and sold the Merchants Goods
for non-payment of Duties not legally imposed, are themselves seized, and fined
more than they are worth.

Herein the King was only passive, but the Houses would not stay here; but tho
the Commons at first impeached the Earl of Strafford before the Lords in their
Judicial Capacity, wherein the King's Consent was not actually necessary, yet
they after proceeded against him by Bill, wherein the Attainder must be
actually assented to by the King, personally, or by Commission, which the King
did, my Lord Privy Seal and the Earl of Arundel (I believe very unwillingly)
being Commissioners; and the same day passed an Act, That the Parliament should
not be Prorogued, Adjourned, nor Dissolved without their own Consent, which
proved as great a Grievance as the King's proroguing and dissolving them at
Pleasure. And the passing these Laws so frightened my Lord Treasurer Juxton, the
Master of the Court of Wards, and the Governor of the Prince, that they all
resigned their Places.

Besides these, the King passed an Act for a Triennial Parliament to meet, if
not by usual means, then by others, whether the King would or not. And an Act
for the utter abolishing the Star Chamber and High Commission Courts: And to
make it a Praemunire in every one of the Privy Council to determine any Causes
cognisable at Common Law: An Act to abolish the Court of the Council and
President of the North; and an Act to rescind the Jurisdiction of the Court of
Stanneries: An Act to repeal the Branch of a Statute made the first of Eliz.
cap. 1. to authorize Ecclesiastical Persons, natural born Subjects of England,
to reform Errors, Heresies, Schisms, etc. An Act for declaring Ship Money, and
all Proceedings therein void: An Act for ascertaining the Bounds and Limits of
the Forests as they were in the 20th Year of King James: And an Act to prevent
the vexatious Proceedings touching the Order of Knighthood. These Acts thus
passed, the Houses thought themselves secure enough, and so paid off and
disbanded the English and Irish Armies, and sent the Scots into their Country
again.

The much greater part of the Gentry, and also of the Members of both Houses,
would have been content to have staid here; and many believed if the Parliament
had met at York or Oxford, they would; but this could not be without disgusting
the City of London, from which only the Loan of 200000 l. could be raised for
Payment of the Armies till Provision could be made by Parliament.

But it was decreed that things should not rest here; and that the Faction in
the House of Commons might get a Majority at one Vote, as they ordered it, they
voted all those who had been instrumental in Monopolies, or in Ship Money, or
Collectors of the Customs, out of the House, and others to be chosen in their
Places: And the Rabble in the City in Tumults exclaimed against the Bishops and
Popish Lords Votes; hereupon the Bishops enter their Protestations against all
Proceedings till they might sit and vote freely, whereupon they are committed
to the Tower, and a Law was passed to disable the whole Hierarchy for the
future to have any Place in Parliament.

As the Scots began their Reformation with a Covenant, so the Commons began
theirs with a Protestation, wherein they Promise, Vow and Protest in the
Presence of God, to maintain the true Protestant Religion expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and, according to their Duty and Allegiance,
to maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal Person and Estate, the Power and
Privilege of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subjects, and to preserve the
Union and Peace between the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland: but
herein was the Difference between the Scots and English; the Scots would
improve their Covenant, and establish it in England, but the English scarce
ever after care for their Protestation.

However, the Commons prevail with the Lords to take it, and then impose it
upon the Nation, upon the Penalty of being deemed Malignants and Disaffected.

The King, little pleased with what he had done, and less with what the Houses
had done without him, follows the Scots into Scotland, and there cajoles the
Covenanters with all Courtship imaginable; makes Lesley, the Scots General,
Earl of Leven, and confers other Honors upon the Covenanters; calls a
Parliament, and consents to the Extirpation of the Hierarchy, and establishes
Presbytery as fully as the Kirk of Scotland could desire: The Scots at present
promise all Duty and Obedience to him, but how well the King found it, in a
short time will appear.

Whilst the King was thus busied in Scotland, a horrible and hellish Massacre
was perpetrated in Ireland by the Irish upon the English, wherein it is computed
above 200000 Protestants, Men, Women and Children, were butchered; after which
followed an universal Rebellion, excepting in Dublin, Londonderry and
Inniskillen, which was headed by the Pope's Nuncio, a most proper Head for such
a Body: Yet so intent were the Factions in England and Scotland in establishing
their Designs, that little care was had of the miserable Relics of the
Protestants in Ireland.

It appears evident to me, that Richlieu's Scarlet was deep died in the Blood
of the poor English in this Massacre, for these Reasons.

1. That the Scots, who at this time were Pensioners to France, were not meddled
with in their Lives and Fortunes, as you may see in Sir Richard Baker, f. 315.
a, b.

2. The King being in Scotland when he heard of the Massacre of the English and
Rebellion of the Irish, he moved the Parliament of Scotland, then sitting, for
a speedy Relief to the English, which they refused. And it is strangely
observable, That tho the Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland brake out the 23d of
October, yet the King did not proclaim them Rebels till the first of January,
and then by Proclamation gave a strict Command, that no more than forty of them
should be printed, and that none of them should be published, till his
Majesty's Pleasure was further signified.

Upon the King's going into Scotland, the Parliament prorogued themselves to a
certain Day; But the Commons appointed a Committee to prepare Business against
their next Meeting, yet send Spies to observe all the King's Actions; and after
the King's Return to London, which was upon the 25th of November 1641, the
House of Commons upon the 5th of December make a Remonstrance of all the King's
Miscarriages abroad, and of the Grievances and Illegalities of his Ministers at
home, from the beginning of his Reign; and that the King might be sure to see
it as well as hear of it, they print and publish it.

The King not being used to such Language, was stung to the quick by the
Commons Declaration; and to retaliate it in Act, upon the third of January
enters the House of Commons, and demands five of their Members to be tried for
High Treason, for holding Correspondence with the Scots: Than which he could
not have done a more imprudent Act; for by it he unravelled all that he had
done in Scotland, by involving the Scots in the same Crime.

But the Members had their Agents in the King's most secret Councils, and had
notice of the King's coming before, and so the five Members were withdrawn.
This Act of the King did not only set the House in a Flame, and put the City
into Tumults, but brought Petitions from Buckingham-shire, (where Mr. Hambden,
one of the Five Members, was Knight) that the Privileges of Parliament might be
secured, and Delinquents brought to condign Punishment. All this while poor
Ireland lay bleeding.

The King, as unstable in his Resolutions as inconsiderate in his Actions,
retracts all he had done, and promises not to do so again: But to no purpose,
for the Members resolve not to trust his Royal Word, Prerogative, and absolute
Will and Pleasure, and therefore will tear the Power of the Militia from him.
Rather than suffer this, tho upon the Pretense of Tumults, the King resolves to
leave London.

But before the King left London, my Lord Mayor Sir Richard Gurney, Sir George
Whitmore, Sir Henry Garoway, and other principal Citizens, waited upon the
King, and engaged, if he would stay, they would guard him with 10000 Men, if
occasion were; and told him, If he went, he would leave the City open for the
Members to do as they pleased, and that they were sure to be first undone; the
King told them he was resolved: Then Sir Henry Garoway said, Sir, I shall never
see you again. However, his Eldest Son, Mr. William Garoway (a worthy
Gentleman, who yet lives) went with the King, and followed him in all his Wars.

The worthy Citizens proved true Prophets; for soon after the King left London,
the Members imprisoned my Lord Mayor, Sir Henry Garoway, Sir George Whitmore,
and all others whom they suspected would be faithful to the King; and then in
London began to assume the Power of the Militia.

After the King left London, he went to York, and from thence went toward
Hull, but is shut out of the Town by Sir John Hotham, whom the King proclaims
Traitor; and now before it came to Sword and Pistol, Men began a War with their
Pens: And herein it is observable, that the Writers for the King chiefly
maintained his Cause out of Sir Edward Coke's Pleas of the Crown, which by
Order of the King's Council, was upon Sir Edward's Deathbed, seized as
dangerous and seditious; and I do not find any who wrote for the Parliament,
ever used any one Topic out of it to justify their Cause; tho it and Sir
Edward's other Books of the Comment upon Magna Charta, and Jurisdiction of
Courts, were printed by Order of the House of Commons, and by them petitioned
that the King would deliver the Originals to Sir Robert Coke, Sir Edward's Heir.

Whilst things were in this Hurly-burly in England, Portugal and Catalonia
revolt from the Spaniard; which as it was a mighty Blow to Spain, so it much
conduced to the Advancing the Designs of Cardinal Richlieu in France.

In England things could not hold long at this Stay, but upon the 22d of August
the King comes to Nottingham, and hastily sets up his Standard there, and
invites all his loving Subjects to come to his Assistance against the Rebels.
Never was Nation shuffled into such unhappy Circumstances; for to join the
King, was to return to his Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Will and Pleasure;
and I have often heard several of those who followed the King in the War, say,
They as much dreaded the King's overcoming the Parliament-Party, as they feared
to be overcome by them: And the Houses had broken the Fundamental Constitution
of the Nation, so as no Man could tell where they would stay.

Now are things brought to that pass Richlieu designed them, viz. England and
Ireland in Civil Wars, and Scotland Pensioners to France, so as he might now
securely carry on his Designs of advancing the Grandeur of France, without any
Fear of Disturbance from hence. And now you may see the miserable Condition the
King's Minions and Favorites had brought upon the King, and all his Kingdoms:
Yet it is observable how great the Loyalty of the Nobility and Gentry was to
the King, that from so low Beginnings, in all Appearance they would have
subdued the Parliament-party, if the Scots next Year had not come to their
Assistance; whereas in the Reigns of Edward the 2d and Richard the 2d, though
the Grievances of the Nation were more in one Year of this King's Reign, than
in both their Reigns, yet both were expelled and lost their Lives, their
Subjects not drawing a Sword in their Defense.

An Apology.
BEfore we enter upon the War between the King and Parliament, it will not be
amiss to enquire into the Causes of it, and who first began it; and whether the
King, or Parliament, or both, designed it: And I am the rather induced hereto,
because I am told that I have unjustly charged the Parliament with beginning
the War; and that the contrary appears by a Treatise written by Tho. May Esquire of
the Causes and Beginning of the Civil Wars in England: So that the Question
between us is not who first designed the War, but who began it. But because
Designations and Intentions precede Action, I will begin, so far as appears to
me, Whether the King or Parliament first designed this War, or whether it were
not intended by both. And give me leave to show a little of Mr. May's
Partiality in the Business.

I say Mr. May is partial, where page 13 he says, after the Pacification made
with the Scots 1639, that when the King came to London, his Heart was again
estranged from the Scots, and Thoughts of Peace; he commanded by Proclamation
that Paper which the Scots avowed to contain the true Conditions of the
Pacification, to be disavowed and burnt by the Hands of the common Hangman: So
that he makes the Scots Parties and Judges in their own Case, without
mentioning the Articles of the Pacification, or what the Scots avowed to
contain the true Conditions of it. We will therefore set forth the Articles of
the Pacification, and let another Judge whether the Scots observed them, or had
any Thoughts of Peace. The Articles were,

1. The Forces of Scotland to be disbanded within 24 Hours after the Agreement.
2. The King's Castles, Ammunition, etc. to be delivered up. 3. His Ships to
depart after the Delivery of the Castles. 4. All Persons, Ships and Goods,
detained by the King, to be restored. 5. No Meetings, Treaties or Consultations
to be by the Scots, but such as shall be warranted by Act of Parliament. 6. All
Fortifications to desist, and be remitted to the King's Pleasure. 7. To restore
to every Man their Liberties, Lands, Houses, Goods and Means.
The Articles were signed by the Scots Commissioners, and a present Performance
of them on their Parts promised and expected.

The King justly performed the Articles on his part: but the Scots kept part of
their Forces in being, and all their Officers in pay; and the Covenanters kept
up their Fortification at Leith, and their Meetings and Councils, and enforce
Subscriptions to the late Assembly at Glasgow, contrary to the King's
Declaration; they brand those who had taken Arms for the King, as Incendiaries
and Traitors, and null all the Acts of the College of Justice, as you may read
in Mr. Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 29. So that tho the King performed all the
Articles of Pacification on his Part, the Scots performed not one on their
Part. Nor did the Scots stay here, but published a Paper very seditious against
the Treaty, which is that which Mr. May speaks of: I do not find the Copy of
it; but even Mr. Whitlock (no great Friend to the King's Cause) calls it so.
Nor did the Scots stay here, but levied Taxes at ten Marks per Cent. and made
Provision for Arms, as you may read in Sir Richard Baker's History, f. 408. and
more at large in the second part of Rushworth's Collections; and all this
before the King commanded the Scots Paper to be burnt by the Hand of the Common
Hangman: And therefore the King justly commanded the Scots Paper to be burnt by
the Hand of the common Hangman.

And Mr. May says, The honest People of both Nations began to fear another War.

But why does Mr. May say, the honest People began to fear another War? Was it
honest in the Scots to break all the Articles of the Pacification, to keep
their Forces in a Body, and their Officers in Pay, contrary to the
Pacification; to raise Taxes, and make Provision of Arms; and after all, these
honest Men to begin to fear another War?

Mr. May goes on, and says, The King in December told the Council, he intended
to call a Parliament in England in April following: But rational Men did not
like it, that it was deferred so long; and that the Preparations for a War in
Scotland went on in the mean time.

The last part is gratis dictum by Mr. May, nor does he mention any Preparation
for a War, in any one particular; nor do I find this said by any other: But
admit the King had made Preparation for a War with Scotland, yet by all Laws of
God and Man, the King might justly have done it, after the Scots had broken all
the Articles of Pacification, kept an Army on foot against it, levied Taxes by
their own Authority, and made Provision of Arms without the King's Authority,
which besides the Perfidiousness of the Scots, is Treason in the highest
degree: And I would be glad to be informed by what other means the King could
vindicate his Honor, or relieve his oppressed Subjects, otherwise than by a
War.

Mr. May goes on, and says, They (these rational Men) were likewise troubled
that the Earl of Strafford, Deputy of Ireland, a Man of deep Policy but
suspected Honesty, one whom the King then used as a bosom Counselor, was first
to go into Ireland, and call a Parliament in that Kingdom.

And what then? Why might not the King call a Parliament in Ireland, as well as
in England or Scotland? And if these rational Men did not like it (as he says)
that a Parliament should be deferred so long in England, why should these
rational Men be so troubled that the King should call a Parliament in Ireland?
Nor does Mr. May give any Reason why they should be so troubled.

Besides, Mr. May says, The King at that time had broken up the Parliament in
Scotland, which the Scots complained of (the Business of State depending) as a
great Breach of their Liberties, and against the Laws of that Kingdom.

So here again, Mr. May makes the Scots Parties and Judges in their own Cause,
and is not ingenuous in thus charging the King at random, and not showing what
Business of State was then depending: It Is fit therefore to show what Business
of State was then depending, before Mr. May's rational Men should be so
troubled at the King's breaking up the Parliament.

The Scots having, as before said, violated all the Articles of Pacification on
their part, and persecuted the Loyal Scots, expressly contrary to the
Pacification, as Incendiaries and Traitors, levied Taxes, provided Ammunition
of War, and kept an Army on foot: The Parliament, over and above these, formed
these Demands to be made to the King.

1. That Coin be not meddled with, but by Advice in Parliament. 2. That no
Stranger be to command or inhabit in any Castles of the King's, but by their
Advice. 3. That no Honor be granted to any Stranger, but such as have a
competency of Land-Rent in Scotland. 4. No Commissioner or Lieutenancy but for
a limited time. And next, they protest against the Precedence of the Lord
Treasurer and Lord Privy Seal, as not warranted by any positive Law. See Baker,
408.
These were the Businesses of State which Mr. May speaks of; which added to
what the Scots usurped before, I would know what Regality would be left for the
King, and a Reason why Mr. May's rational Men should be so troubled for the
King's dissolving the Parliament.

Mr. May drives on, and says, Upon which they sent some Lords into England, to
entreat the King for a Redress of such Injuries as they had received since the
Pacification; which were, that the Parliament was broken up before any Business
done. If they made it their Business to divest the King, as they did, of his
Rightful Regalities, the King had reason therefore to break them up.

That Edinburgh Castle was garrisoned with far more Soldiers than was needful.
So here the Scots are Parties and Judges in their own Cause; and you need not
doubt, but that so many Soldiers as shall be able to defend the Castle, shall
be judged by the Scots to be more than is needful.

That Dunbritton Castle was garrisoned by English Soldiers. And why might not
the King do it? for the English as well as Scots were his Subjects. But I dare
say, if these had been the honest rational Englishmen May speaks of, neither
he nor the Scots would ever have complained of it.

That the Scots which traded to England and Ireland (sure they mean Pedlars
prohibited by Law) were enforced to take new Oaths, contrary to their Covenant,
and altogether contrary to the Articles of Pacification: Whereas their Covenant
is a new Oath contrary to their Allegiance: And if there were any such new
Oaths, why do neither the Scots nor Mr. May name them? or if any such were
imposed, that was so far from being altogether contrary to the Articles of
Pacification, that I say they were not contrary to any one Article of the
Pacification; unless the Scots or Mr. May could make new Articles of
Pacification, and other than those before mentioned.

The King, Mr. May says, imprisoned those Lords, sending one of them, the Earl
of Lowden, to the Tower, and commanded a Charge of High Treason to be drawn
against him, concerning a Letter which the Scottish Covenanters had written to
the King of France (French King had been as well) for his Assistance, and
Lowden had subscribed it: But the Accusation was frivolous, easily answered,
and came to nothing, because these Letters were not sent at all; and besides,
it was before the Pacification, upon which an Oblivion of all things were
agreed.

So here are two impertinent and frivolous Answers to excuse a most treasonable
and rebellious Conspiracy, to bring in a foreign Power into Scotland; for it
was subscribed by Rothes, Montross, Lesley, Mar, Montgomery, Lowden, and
Forrester, under the Title of Au Roy, or our King, to Lewis 13. The first is,
That those Letters were not sent at all, because they were intercepted by the
Earl of Traquair, the King's Commissioner in Scotland. If Mr. May had not been
a Christian, yet the very Heathen, by the Light of Humane Nature, could have
informed him, that* -- Scelus intra se tacitum qui cogitat ullum,
Facti Crimen habet. --


And if Conspiracies of Rebellion and Treason against Princes shall be esteemed
frivolous, unless they evade into Actions, Princes and States too would be in a
very unsecure state, and all Counsel and Endeavors to prevent them would be
vain and frivolous; and I say, here was a double Overt Act in this Conspiracy,
one the Conspirators Meeting, the other the Subscribing the Paper.

The other Answer, That the Pacification was after the Subscription, and so
there was an Oblivion upon it: But the Pacification was reciprocal between the
King and Scots; and if the Scots first broke the Pacification, as they did, let
them take all that followed; and therefore the King had no Reason to perform
his Part, nor the Scots to complain, if the King had hanged and quartered
Lowden.

The War, Mr. May says p. 16. went on, the Earl of Strafford commanding in
Chief, the Earl of Northumberland not being in Health, who was appointed
General. But if Mr. May had been ingenuous and impartial, he should have told
on which Side the War began, which he does not; but only says, the Scots had
not been backward, for having been debarred of their Trade, and lost their
Ships by Seizure, they entered England with an Army, expressing their Intentions
in writing to the English, and bringing with them a Petition to the King.

Admit all this to be true, the Scots should first have represented this to the
King, and what was their Loss by being debarred of their Trade, and the Value
of their Ships so seized; and upon Denial, to have granted Letters of Reprizal
till they had recovered Satisfaction: but of this Mr. May says not one Word,
nor do I find or believe, the Scots ever did demand Satisfaction before they
entered England in open Hostility, and in Defiance of the King and English
Nation; and for the Manner of bringing their Petition to the King, it was
without Precedent, or such as never was done by any other People; for they
entered England, and maintained their Army by Plunder and Rapine upon the
English; and when Lesley came to Newborn upon Tine, he craves leave of my Lord
Conway, ordered by the King to guard the Pass there, to pass with his Petition
to the King, which my Lord Conway granted, with a considerable Number, but not
with his Army. Hereupon Lesley, who had the Night before planted nine Pieces of
Cannon on Northumberland side, by force of them passed the Tine, and killed and
took 300 English Prisoners, and after took New Castle, and seized four great
Ships of the English, laden with Corn, and imposed a Tax of 350 l. a day upon
the Bishopric of Durham, and 300 l. a day upon the County of Northumberland,
upon pain of Plundering; and the Scots committed many Injuries and Insolences
upon the English where the Scots quartered; as you may read in Mr. Whitlock's
Memoirs, fol. 34, 35.

Thus was the state of things altered. Mr. May says, page 34. it should be page
18. And that War which was intended for an Enslavement of both the Nations
(truly said, but untruly intended) became the Bond of Concord between them. God
defend the Nation for time to come, of such Concord, or such Causes of it.

The Parliament, Mr. May says, began with Matters of Religion: diverse Ministers
who had been of good Lives and Conversations, conscientious in their ways, and
diligent in their Preaching, and had by the Bishops and those in Authority,
been motested and imprisoned, for not conforming to some Ceremonies which were
imposed on them, were now by the Parliament relieved and recompensed for their
Suffering: and others who had been scandalous, either for loose wicked living,
or else Offenders in way of Superstition (both which, to discountenance the
Puritans, had been frequently preferred) were censured and removed. Here Mr.
May is right, but yet partial, in that he does not tell how that the Orthodox
Clergy, as the Bishops of Lincoln Williams, Dr. Hall of Norwich, Dr. Prideaux
of Worcester, Dr. Brownrig of Exeter, Dr. Morton of Durham, etc. and all the
Orthodox Anti-Arminian Heads of both Universities, and also Dr. Saunderson, Dr.
Featly, and many others, underwent the same Fate with those Ministers which Mr.
May speaks of.

Page 38. which should have been 24. Mr. May says, That the Parliament ordered
that the Scots should be recompensed for all their Charges and Loss by that
mischievous War which the King had raised against them. Here Mr. May is not
only partial and unsincere, but the contrary hereof is true; for the Scots in
the former War took up Arms and seized the Regalia at Sterlin, took Towns in
Scotland, and other ways committed Acts of Hostility before the King raised
Arms to suppress them, as is before; and so they did in this latter, raise Arms
in Scotland before they invaded England, before the King raised any Army. [See
Whitlock's Mem. fol. 276.] Where Mr. May had this, unless framed by himself, I
cannot tell; but Sir Richard Baker recites the Demand at large, and the Commons
Answer to them. And this Mr. May speaks of, is the sixth Demand, Wherein they
desire, from the Justice and Kindness of the Kingdom of England, Reparations
concerning the Losses which the Kingdom of Scotland has sustained, and the
vast Charges they have been put unto, by occasion of the late Troubles. To
which the Commons answer,

That the House thinks fit, that a Friendly Assistance and Relief shall be
given toward the Supply of the Loss of the Scots; and that the Parliament did
declare, that they did conceive that the Sum of 300000 l. is a fit Proportion
for their Friendly Assistance and Relief, formerly thought fit to be given
toward the Supply of the Loss and Necessities of their Brethren of Scotland;
and that the Houses would in due time take into Consideration the Manner how,
and when the same shall be raised. Now let any Man show out of Mr. May, where
that mischievous War, which the King had raised against them, is to be found.
If Mr. May had been a faithful Historian, he should have made Truth, and not
the Distempers of a distracted Time, nor the Clamours of his prejudiced Brain,
to have been the Measures of his Story.

He should have set forth, how like Pedlars they treated the English in their
Particulars in their 8th Demand of 514128 l. -- 9 s. besides the Loss of their
Nation to 440000 l. Yet they did not give in that Account with an Intent to
demand a total Reparation of all their Charges and Losses, but were content
(good Men) in some measure to bear a Remnant.

Mr. May should have set forth, how perfidiously the Scots dealt with the
English Nation, when in their Remonstrance, at their first coming in, they
professed, that they would take nothing of the English, but for Money or
Security; whereas they plundered and taxed Northumberland, New Castle, and the
Bishopric of Durham; so that those Places could not recover their Losses in 20
Years, as Sir Benjamin Rudyard in open Parliament charged them: and that the
English formerly established the Scots Reformation at their own bare Charges;
whereas the Scots presumed to require a greater Sum than was ever given the
King. Which you may read more at large in Sir Rich. Baker, fol. 417.

These are the Parliament's Brethren, for whose Brotherly Assistance they voted
300000 l. toward a Supply of the Losses and Necessities (note that) of our
Brethren of Scotland, and that the Parliament would in due time take into
Consideration the Manner of raising, and Days of Payment; and in the mean time,
leave New Castle, Northumberland, and Durham, a Prey to these devouring Scots.
But lame-footed Vengeance shall overtake this Fraternity, and that by no
visible Power at present, but what shall arise from among themselves. I could
add many more Particulars of Mr. May's Partiality and Insincerity; but this
already said is sufficient: And now it is time to enquire whether the King or
Parliament, or both, designed the ensuing War, and who first designed it; tho
the Distemper of the Times was so distracted and variable, that it is hard to
judge of Intentions by Actions.

The Royalists excuse the King from any Intention of a Civil War in England, in
that he protected no Man from the Justice of the Parliament, and that he had
put away all those which the Parliament called Evil Counselors, both in Church
and State, having made Mr. St. John his Attorney, and Mr. Holborn his
Solicitor, both which were his Antagonists in imposing Ship Money; and upon his
going into Scotland, made the Earl of Essex Chamberlain, and General of his
Forces on this side Trent; and in the Church reversed all the Proceedings in
the Star Chamber against the Bishop of Lincoln, and preferred Dr. Hall from
Exeter to the Bishopric of Norwich, and made Dr. Brownrig Bishop of Exeter,
and Dr. Prideaux Bishop of Worcester, who were the most Learned of the Church
of England, and most opposite to the Arminian Tenets, and of most exemplary
Life and Piety; and before his going into Scotland, passed all Bills presented
to him by the Houses, even that of not dissolving the Parliament without their
Consent; which he would never have done, if he had had any Intention of raising
a War against them, or a Civil War in England.

Mr. May, p. 43. it should be p. 25. tells us of a twofold Treason against the
Parliament, (if you will take his word) and that the King was knowing of both;
one was to have delivered the Earl of Strafford out of the Tower, but Sir
William Balfour the Lieutenant would not consent to it: Here note, The King
made Balfour, a Scot, Lieutenant of the Tower, one of the greatest Places of
Trust in England, without any Complaint of the Parliament; whenas the
Parliament of Scotland, in their second Demand made to the King, would have no
Stranger to command or inhabit in any Castles of the King's without their
Consent.

The other part of this Treason, chief of all the rest, (But why all, when but
two?) Mr. May says, was a Design to bring up the English Army, which was in the
North, and not yet disbanded; this Army they had dealt with to engage against
the Parliament's sitting, and (as they alledg) to maintain the King's
Prerogative, Episcopacy, and other things against the Parliament it self.

This Charge is so false, as well as partial, as no Man who had any regard to
Truth, Honesty, or Fairness, would have so exposed himself; for if the King's
Prerogative be not maintained, he can neither govern his Subjects nor protect
them from Foreign Enemies, and Episcopacy is one of the Constitutions of the
Nation; and how the maintaining these can be against the Parliament, had need
of a wiser Head than Mr. May's to show: But these two are not all Mr. May says,
but there were other things against the Parliament, (if there had been other
things, I do not think Mr. May would in Modesty have concealed them); but since
Mr. May has not given the Causes of this chief Treason, I will do it, and not
follow Sir Richard Baker, nor Franklin, lest they should be deemed to be
partial to the King's Cause, but Mr. Whitlock, whom no Man believes to be so,
who, fol. 44. b. says,

June 19th, It was voted that the Scots should receive 100000 l. of the 300000
l. the Scots by a Paper pretended Necessity for 125000 l. in present; the
Parliament took off 10000 l. of 50000 l. which they had appointed for the
English Army, and ordered it for the Scots.

The Lord Piercy, Commissary Wilmot and Ashburnham (Members of Parliament)
sitting together, and murmuring at it, Wilmo^ stepped up and said, That if such
Papers of the Scots could procure Moneys, he doubted not but the Officers of
the English Army would soon do the like; and this caused the English Army to
say, The Parliament had disobliged them.

The Officers put themselves into a Juncto of sworn Secrecy, and drew up some
Heads by way of Petition to the King and Parliament for Money for the Army, and
not to disband before the Scots; to preserve the Bishops Votes and Functions,
and to settle the King's Revenue.

The Army tainted from hence, met and drew up a Letter or Petition, which was
showed to the King, approved and signed by him with C. R. and a Direction to
Captain Leg, that none should see it but Sir Jacob Ashley, (it should have been
Astly) the main drift was, That the Army might be called up to attend the
Safety of the King's Person, and Parliament's Security; or that both Armies
might be disbanded. Where is this chief Treason lodged, unless in Mr. May's
Brain? Or, where is the King's Prerogative mentioned? But as the Times then
went, Mr. May took liberty to say what he list to humor them, the Scots must
be obeyed in whatsoever they demand, and it must be chief Treason in the
English to petition.

Mr. May, p. 32, 33. will have the King's going into Scotland to be a Design to
raise War against the Parliament of England, and to that end tells a Story of a
Scots Writer, that published, that it was to engage the Scots against the
Parliament of England, with large Promises of Spoil, and offering Jewels of
great Value for Performance of it; but he names not the Scot, and leaves it
uncertain for the Reader to judge by what fell out afterward: But if he (the
King) did, it was a matter of great Falsehood (Mr. May says) having as yet
declared no Enmity against the English Parliament: From the same Author, he
says, it was to make sure of those Noblemen of that Kingdom he doubted of, as
not willing to serve his turn against England; and true it is, that about
September Letters came to the standing Committee at Westminster, that a
Treasonable Plot was discovered there against the greatest Peers of the
Kingdom, (but says not which Kingdom) upon which the standing Committee,
fearing some Mischief from the same Spring, placed strong Guards in diverse
Places of the City of London. But in all this the Fox is the Finder, and Mr.
May as partial and false as in all he said before.

The truth was, Jealousies and Fears were fomented by the Parliamentarians, and
even by the Members themselves, against the King and Royalists: But Mr.
Whitlock, tho of like Affection with Mr. May, yet a much more impartial
Representer of the Actions of those Times, fol. 49. a. represents it thus:

The Marquesses of Hamilton and Argyle withdrew from the Parliament in Scotland
upon Jealousy of some Design against their Persons; but upon Examination of
that matter by the Parliament there, it was found to be a Misinformation, yet
the same took fire in our Parliament, upon the Surmises of some; whereupon the
Parliament here appointed Guards for London and Westminster, and some spoke
(...) without Reflection upon the King.

The Royalists charge the Parliament, at least the Commons, with a Design to
raise War against the King, and to make him odious to the People, after he had
granted all the Parliament desired of him, and given up those whom they called
evil Counselors, to their Justice, for their Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom after the King's return out of Scotland: which because of the
Extraordinariness of it we will recite it verbatim, as is said by Mr. Whitlock,
f. 49. b.

The House of Commons prepared a Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom,
wherein they mentioned All the Mistakes, Misfortunes, Illegalities and Defaults
in Government since the King's coming to the Crown, the evil Counsels and
Counselors, and a malignant Party; that they have no hopes of settling the
Distractions of this Kingdom for want of a Concurrence with the Lords.

This Remonstrance was somewhat roughly penned, both for the Matter and
Expressions in it, and met with great Opposition in the House, insomuch as the
Debate of it lasted from three a Clock in the Afternoon till ten next Morning;
and the sitting up all Night caused many of the Members, through Weakness or
Weariness, to leave the House, and Sir B. R. (I think he means Sir Benj.
Rudyard) to compare it to the Verdict of a starved Jury.

When the Vote was carried, tho not by many, to pass the Remonstrance, Mr.
Palmer, and two or three more, made their Protestation against this
Remonstrance, for which they were sent to the Tower.

This Remonstrance was presently printed and published by the Parliament,
contrary to the King's Desire, and before his Answer made to it, which came
forth shortly after to all the Heads of it.

Now let any show a Precedent, when one State in Parliament appealed to the
People, and arraigned the King, and the other two States, unheard, and against
the King's express Desire, and he shall be my great Apollo. And if the End be
first considered in every Action, what could be the End of publishing this
Remonstrance? Or how could it tend to the settling the Distractions of the
Kingdom? I make this difference between Reproof and Reproach; Reproof is
privately to admonish another of such Speeches and Actions as tend to the hurt
of his Reputation and Fortune, so as this other may avoid them for the future;
Reproach is to divulge the Speeches and Actions of another, to the lessening of
the Fame and Credit of that other: Reproof is the Act of a Friend, Reproach of
an Enemy. And was this a time of day for the Commons thus to reproach the King
for his past Actions, after he had redressed all their Grievances, and given up
his Evil Counselors to their Justice? Or, was it ever known before, that when
the King had redressed Grievances, they should be after ripped up to reproach
him?

The first Effects of this Remonstrance, Mr. Whitlock mentions, is, That during
this time, and taking the opportunity from these Differences between the King
and Parliament, diverse of the City of the meaner sort came in great Numbers and
Tumults to Whitehall, where, with many unseemly and insolent Words and Actions,
they incensed the King, and went from thence in like Posture to Westminster,
behaving themselves with extreme Rudeness toward some of the Members of both
Houses: and tho the King sent to the Lord Mayor to call a Common Council to
prevent these riotous Assemblies, yet I do not find the Commons took any Care
herein; and how these Actions of the Commons tended to settle the Distractions
of the Nation, or the Relief of Ireland, let any impartial Man judge. But of all
this Mr. May takes no notice, yet does of the Parliament's petitioning the King
for a Guard for the Security of their Persons, being informed of a Plot
contrived against them, (such another as that of Scotland) and the Earl of
Essex to command it, which tho the King denied, he promised to take care for
their Safety.

Since Mr. May had no better luck with his Scottish Plot, he will be sure of one
now, by the King's entering into the House of Commons attended by 300 Gentlemen,
and seated in the Speaker's Chair, and demanded five Members, viz. Mr. Hollis,
Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Stroud, to a fair Trial, and
would be as careful of their Privileges as ever any King of England was. But in
regard Mr. May is so short and partial in this, we'll state the Case as
reported by Mr. Whitlock, f. 50. a.

The King being informed that some Members of Parliament had private Meeting
and Correspondence with the Scots, and countenanced the late Tumults from the
City, he gave a Warrant to repair to their Lodgings, and to seal up the Trunks,
Studies and Chambers of the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Hollis,
Sir Arthur Haslerig, and Mr. Stroud, which was done, but their Persons were not
met with.

The King caused then Articles of High Treason, and other Misdemeanors against
those five Members, to be exhibited.

1. For endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government, and
deprive the King of his Legal Power, and to place on Subjects an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power, by foul Aspersions on his Majesty and Government, to alienate
the Affections of his People, and (...) make him odious. 2. To draw his Army to
Disobedience, and to side with them i^ their Traitorous Designs. 3. That they
traitorously invited and encouraged a Foreign Power t^ invade England. 4. That
they traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Right and Being of
Parliament. 5. For endeavoring to compel the Parliament to join with them
(...) their Traitorous Designs; and to that end have actually raised and
countenanced Tumults against the King and Parliament.
This great Breach of Parliament-Privilege (Mr. May says) happened in a strange
time to divert the Kingdom from relieving Ireland: And did not the Commons
Remonstrance against the King and House of Lords do so too? And when Men,
especially Princes, are reproached and defamed, regular Actions are not always
consequent.

The Censures of the King's Act was variously scanned by Men of different
Affections: The Royalists said, Privilege of Parliament extends not to Treason,
Felony, or so much as Breach of the Peace. And the Commons frame and publish a
Declaration, That there was never such an unparalleled Action of any King to
the Breach of all Freedom, not only in the Accusation of their Members,
ransacking and searching their Studies and Papers, and seeking to apprehend
their Persons; but now in a Hostile Way, He (the King) threatened the whole Body
of the House. This was Jan. 5. 1641.

And after the Commons published another Vote, That if any arrest a Member of
Parliament by Warrant from the King only, it is a Breach of Privilege; and that
the coming of Papists and Soldiers to the number of 500 armed Men (Mr. May
says but 300, and Mr. Whitlock says, with his Guard of Pensioners, and followed
by about 200 of his Courtiers) with the King to the House, was a traitorous
Design against the King and Parliament.

They vindicate the five Members, and declare, That a Paper issued out for
apprehending them, was false, scandalous, and illegal, (How could they tell
before they heard both Parties?) and they ought to attend the Service of the
House, and require the Names of those who advised the King to issue out that
Paper, and the Articles against the five Members: Which if the King had done,
they would have been exposed to more Violences of the Rabble than those which
befell the Bishops, and other Members of Parliament, by a great Number of
Persons which came from the City to Westminster, where they offered many
Affronts to the Bishops and others in a tumultuous manner. See Whit. Mem. f.
51. a. But of this no notice was taken by the Commons or Lords that I can find;
so that as the Temper of the Times then went, it was a notorious Breach of
Privilege in the King to demand five Members to answer Articles of
High Treason, but none in the Rabble in a tumultuous manner to affront and use
Violence to the Bishops and others who were coming to do their Duties and
Service in Parliament.

These Actions Mr. May, p. 41. calls petitioning by the Rabble, and many times
to utter rude Speeches against some Lords, whom they conceived to be evil
Advisers of the King, which, however it was meant, produced ill Consequences to
the Commonwealth, and did not so much move the King to be sensible of his
grieving the People, as arm him with an Excuse of leaving the Parliament and
City for fear of what might ensue upon such tumultuous Concourse of Men. And
why was not this a reasonable Excuse for the King to leave the Parliament and
City, when they countenanced these Tumults, and the King had not Power to
suppress them?

Mr. May goes on, and says, Upon this ground twelve Bishops at that time
absenting themselves, entered a Protestation against all Laws, Votes and Orders,
as Null, which in their Absence should pass, by reason they durst not for fear
of their Lives come to perform their Duties in the House, having been rudely
menaced and assaulted. And why might not the Bishops enter such Protestation?
for if it be a Maxim in all Assemblies, that Plus valet contemptus unius, quam
consensus omnium, then does the Contempt and Affront of a whole Order of Men,
who have a Right of Suffrage, much more render the Actions of the rest invalid?

However, Mr. May goes on, and says, Whereupon it was agreed by both Lords and
Commons, that this Protestation of the Bishops was of dangerous Consequence,
and deeply entrenched upon the Privilege and Being of Parliaments; they were
therefore accused of High Treason, apprehended, and committed Prisoners to the
Tower. And I say, a time shall come, when in Parliament these Men, who run thus
high against the Bishops and established Church of England, shall be prosecuted
by a contrary Extreme, and the Church by Law exalted higher than it was before.

Mr. May goes on, and says, Thus was the Parliament daily troubled with ill
Work, whereby the Relief of Ireland was hindered. If they were thus troubled,
they may thank themselves for beginning these Troubles, as well by the Commons
Remonstrance against the King and Lords, as by their countenancing the Tumults.
By this time things were so envenomed, as would admit of no Lenitives,
especially by the Commons; and the King went from London to Hampton Court, and
sent a Message to the Parliament, and advises them, To digest into one Body all
the Grievances of the Kingdom, and send them to him, promising his favorable
Assent to those Means which should be found most effectual for Redress, wherein
he would not only equal, but excel the most indulgent Princes. The Parliament
thanked him; but nothing but having the Militia at their Disposal would secure
their Fears and Jealousies.

This was as new in England as the perpetuating the sitting of the Parliament;
and if the King should grant it, it would be a total Subversion of the
Monarchy: For the Parliament being perpetual, and having the Power of the
Militia, the Government must be either a Commonwealth, or an Oligarchy, and the
King insignificant in it; yet have it the Parliament would, notwithstanding
other Grievances, and the deplorable State of Ireland: And therefore upon the
26th of February they tell the King plainly, That the settling the Business of
the Militia will admit no more Delay; and if his Majesty shall still refuse to
agree with his two Houses of Parliament in that Business, and shall not be
pleased upon their humble Advice to do what they desire therein, that then for
the Safety of his Majesty, of Themselves, and the whole Kingdom, and to
preserve the Peace thereof, and to prevent future Fears and Jealousies, they
shall be constrained of themselves, without his Majesty, to settle that
necessary Business of the Militia. See Whit. M. f. 54. a.

Here it is observable, That as the King feigned a Necessity to raise Ship Money
for the Good and Safety of the Kingdom in general, when the whole Kingdom is in
danger; the Judges gave their Opinion, That the King may by his Writ under the
Broad Seal of England, command all his Subjects of this Kingdom to provide and
furnish such Number of Ships, with Men, Victuals, and Ammunition, and for such
time as the King shall think fit, for the Defense and Safeguard of the Kingdom
from such Peril and Danger; and that by Law the King may compel the doing
thereof, in Case of Refusal and Refractoriness; and that in such Case the King
is sole Judge, both of the Danger, and when and how the same may be prevented
and avoided: So now the Parliament pretending a Necessity for the Safety of the
King and of Themselves, and the whole Kingdom, and to preserve the Peace
thereof, will tear the Militia from him. In this State things could not stand
long at a Stay.

Mr. May, p. 47. will have the Queen's going into Holland with her Daughter,
and carrying with her the Crown-Jewels of England, and pawning them there,
whereby she bought Arms for the War which ensued, that it was then designed by
the King against the Parliament: but if Mr. May had been sincere, he should
have told too, as Mr. Whitlock does, f. 59. a. how the Parliament took 100000
l. of the 400000 l. they voted to be raised for Ireland; and whether this was
not for the War which ensued in England.

Mr. May, p. 48. recites three Votes of Parliament, 1. That the King's Absence
so far remote (being then at York) from his Parliament, is not only an
Obstruction, but may be a Destruction to the Affairs in Ireland.

2. That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament, shall declare what the Law
of the Land is; to have this not only questioned and controverted, but
contradicted, and a Command that it should not be obeyed, is a high Breach of
the Privilege of Parliament.

3. That they who advised the King to absent himself from the Parliament, are
Enemies to the Peace of this Kingdom, and justly to be suspected to be
Favorites of the Rebellion in Ireland. But Mr. May should have added, that it
is not the King's Presence in London, or any other Place, but his assenting to
Bills presented to him, which he may do by Commission as well as Personally,
that enacts them into Laws; and that the King after he went from London, passed
the Bill for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament, and that no
Clergyman should exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction; which the King did with
remorse enough, and only to humor and appease the Temporal Lords and Commons
in Parliament; and the Bishops in Parliament are one of the 3 States of
England. The King moreover in his Absence, upon a Motion by the Parliament, put
Sir John Byron from being Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir John Conniers to
succeed him; and refers the Consideration of the Government, and Liturgy of the
Church, wholly to the two Houses: see Whitlock's M. f. 53. b. But nothing less
than the King's parting with the Militia would satisfy the Parliament, which
the King would not part from: so now it is left fair for indifferent Men to
judge, whether the King or Parliament, or both, designed the ensuing War. And to
proceed to set forth who began it.

I have said in the first Page of this King's Reign, or p. 153, That the first
Fifteen Years of it were perfectly French, and such as were never before seen
or heard of in the English Nation; this brought on a miserable War in all the
Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Destruction upon the King,
when is was not in the Power of those which first raised the War against him,
to save his Life, which they would have done.

I am told, that the last Part of this Paragraph, is an unjust Charge upon the
Parliament, in that they acted defensively in this War, and that the King first
raised Arms; and this by the Authority of Mr. May.

If I be mistaken, I have the Authority of him who could best know; I mean the
King at his Death, who declared, That he never did begin the War with the two
Houses of Parliament, as all the World knows; that they began with him; it was
the Militia they began upon; they confessed that to be his, but they thought fit
to have it from him: and to be short, if any body will look into the Dates of
those Commissions, theirs and his, and likewise to the Declarations, they will
see clearly, that they began these unhappy Troubles, not he. See Whit. Mem. f.
369. a. and all the Writers of those times.

If this be not Authority sufficient to show the Parliament began the War; the
first Scuffle between the King and Parliament, was about the Business of Hull,
where the Parliament had committed the Charge of the Town and Magazine to Sir
John Hotham, one of the Members of the Commons, who was sent down thither to
remove the Magazine to London: but the Country of York petitioned it might
still remain at Hull, for securing the Northern Parts, especially the King
residing there.

Hereupon the King taking a Guard of his Servants and some Neighboring Gentry,
upon the 23d of April went to Hull, but contrary to Expectation, found the
Gates shut, and the Bridges drawn up, by Sir John, and his Entrance denied,
though but with 20 Horse; which so moved the King, that he proclaimed Hotham a
Traitor, and sends to the Parliament for Justice against him.

To this the Parliament return no Answer; but justify Sir John Hotham, and
order that the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace do suppress all Forces which
shall be raised, or gathered together against Hull, or to disturb the Peace;
nor did they stay here, but put the Power of the Militia in Persons nominated
by them, excluding the King in ordering any thing together with them; and
authorized Hotham, by his Warrants, to raise the trained Bands in Yorkshire, to
march with their Arms into Hull, where he disarmed them, and turned them home
again. See Whit. Mem. f. 55, 56. So I submit this to Judgment, whether this was
not raising Arms against the King, being done by Subjects, and contrary to the
King's Command; and if the King did increase his Guards, yet this was
subsequent to the excluding the King from having Power in the Militia, and
Hotham's Raising Arms, and Disarming the Trained Bands of Yorkshire.

Mr. May says, p. 55. the Parliament being then intent upon settling the
Militia by Land, took care also to seize the Navy into their Hands, and ordered
the Earl of Warwick to be Admiral, to put this in Execution: but the King had
chosen Sir John Pennington to that place instead of the Earl of Northumberland,
and sent a Command to the Earl of Warwick, to resign the Place to him
(Pennington:) But the Earl chose rather to obey the Ordinance of Parliament,
and with great Courage and Policy got the Fleet into his Hands, tho many of the
Captains stood out against him; but the Earl deprived them of their Commands,
and possessed himself of the Ships, taking shortly after another Ship called the
Lion, of great Import, coming out of Holland and laden with Gun-power, which
proved a great Addition to his Strength. So here was a double Beginning of the
War by the Parliament, both in seizing the Fleet, and taking the Lion, and this
before the King committed any Act of Hostility.

And for the carrying on this War, (which Mr. May calls the Cause) the
Parliament upon the 10th of June, made an Order for bringing in Money and
Plate, to raise Arms for the Cause, and the Public Faith for Repayment to them
which brought it in. So here the Parliament raised Money, as well as Forces,
for carrying on the War, before the King levied any: And so I leave it to
Judgment who first began the War.

Objection. The Parliament raised Arms for their own Defense, and Security of
the Nation.

Answer. This is said, but of no kin to Truth or Reason: for Men defend what
they are possessed of, and the King was possessed of the Militia and Fleet, when
the Parliament ravished both from him; nor did the King use either against the
Parliament, when they invaded them. Besides, the King (at least, as he
declared) endeavored to defend the established Religion, and Laws of the Land;
whereas the Parliament contended to abolish the Established Religion, and to
exalt themselves above the Laws of the Land.

Objection 2. That the King had so often violated the Laws and Constitutions of
the Nation, and governed so Arbitrarily, that the Parliament could have no
Security for the future to prevent his so doing again, so long as the King was
possessed of the Militia.

Answer. The Case was not the same then, when the King resolved to have no more
Parliaments, as now, when the King had made this Parliament perpetual, and had
passed the Triennial Bill, for Parliaments to meet whether he would or no: And
tho Favorites and Flatterers instilled those things into the King, when they
were without any Fear or Apprehension of being questioned by a Parliament, yet
now the Parliament had so severely prosecuted and punished such Men, and being
perpetual, or at least to meet Three Years after every Dissolution, none would
presume to advise the King in things derogatory to his Honor, and the Interest
of the Nation. And now we proceed to the ensuing War.

The Parliament, before the King set up his Standard at Nottingham, Aug. 22,
Voted, That an Army should be raised for the Defense of the King and
Parliament; that the Earl of Essex should be Captain General of the Army, and
the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse.

The War began first between the Marquess of Hartford for the King in the West,
and the Earl of Bedford for the Parliament; the Earl being worsted by the
Marquess at Sherborn-Castle. Goring got into Portsmouth, and held it for the
King; but could not hold it long, for the Country joining with Sir John
Meyrick, forced him to surrender, who thereupon went into Holland; and my Lord
Say, St. John's, and Weemen, with Colonel Whitlock, enter Oxford, and keep it
for the Parliament.

But the Face of Affairs soon changed; for the King having made the Earl of
Lindsey his General, and the Parliament the Earl of Essex; upon the 23d of
October the Armies met, and fought at Edghil, with uncertain Victory, which
both sides claimed: the Earl of Lindsey was mortally wounded, and taken
Prisoner; the Right Wing of the King's Horse, commanded by Prince Rupert, brake
the Left Wing of Horse of the Parliament's, which Prince Rupert pursued too
far, tho with great Slaughter; but the King's left Wing of Horse was broken by
Sir William Balfour, Sir Philip Stapleton, and the Lord Fielding.

However the Victory was uncertain, the Success was not so, for the King took
Banbury Town and Castle, and Oxford; and Prince Rupert took my Lord Says House
at Brought, and made Excursions near London: whereupon the Parliament recalled
Essex to defend themselves.

And it was time, for the King was marching toward London, having taken
Reading and Henley; and at Brentford both Armies fought, Essex being assisted
by the Trained Bands and Apprentices of London, and the King was forced to
retreat; and if Essex had followed, in all Appearance the King would have lost
his Army, not having Bullet enough to have maintained one quarter of an Hour's
Fight: and toward the latter end of the Year, Prince Rupert storms
Cirencester, and puts many of my Lord Stamford's Regiment to the Sword, and
took 1100 Prisoners, which were used with great Barbarity; and Colonel
Nathaniel Fines, in the West, was routed by Prince Rupert; and in the North,
Sir John Hotham was beaten by the Forces commanded by the Earl of Cumberland,
Sir Fran. Worsley, Sir Marm. Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glenham.

This Year there was a Treaty of Peace at Oxford; the Parliament's Propositions
were, That the King should disband his Army, return to the Parliament, leave
Delinquents to Trial, and Papists to be disbanded.

That a Bill be brought in for abolishing Episcopacy, etc. and such other Bills
as should be presented for Reformation; Recusants to abjure Papacy, to remove
malignant Counselors, to settle the Militia as the Parliament desired, to
prefer to Offices such as the Parliament should name, and to take in all that
were put out of Commissions of the Peace.

A Bill to vindicate the Lord Kimbolton, and five Members; to enter into
Alliances for the Palatinate, and to grant a general Pardon, excepting to the
Earl of New Castle, Digby, and others.

To restore Parliament-Members to their Offices, and to restore their Losses.

The King proposed,

That his Revenue, Magazines, Ships, and Forts, be restored; That what had been
done contrary to Law and the King's Right may be recalled; That all illegal
Power claimed, or acted by Order of Parliament, be disclaimed: And as the King
will consent to the Execution of all Laws concerning Popery and Reformation, so
he desires a Bill for preserving the Common Prayer against Sectaries; that all
Persons excepted against by this Treaty, may be tried per Pares, with a
Cessation of Arms, and a free Trade.

This Treaty began March 4. 1642, and broke off April 15. following, viz. 1643.
But this is observable in this fickle King, that four Days before the Treaty
broke off, the King said, he was fully satisfied, and promised to give the
Parliament-Commissioners his Answer in Writing, according to their Desires; but
because it was past Midnight, he would have it drawn up in Writing, and give it
them in the Morning: but instead thereof, the King gave them a Paper quite
contrary to what was concluded the Night before. Whitlock's Mem. fol. 65. a.

The Treaty of Peace thus broke off, both sides proceed in War. The Queen this
Year, about the beginning of May, landed at Scarborough in Yorkshire, from
Holland, having avoided a Squadron of Men of War designed by the Parliament to
intercept her, and brought abundance of Arms, and about 3000 Soldiers, and was
proclaimed Traitor by the Parliament, and after joined with the King and his
Army at Edg-Hill in Warwickshire. And if the Parliament prospered so ill last
Year, they succeeded worse this; for the Earl of Northampton enters Litchfield,
and drives the Parliament's Forces into the Close; and after that defeats Sir
John Gell, and Sir W. Brereton, but the Earl was slain at the Head of his
Forces: and the Earl of New Castle, in the North, overthrew the Parliament's
Forces commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax at Bradforth; and Sir William Waller is
defeated in the West; Prince Rupert takes Bristol, and Prince Maurice, Exeter,
Biddiford, Barnstable, Appleford, and Dartmouth: The great Hambden is routed,
and mortally wounded at Chalgrave Field by Prince Rupert. And now the King had
two conquering Armies in the North and West, and the Parliament none
considerable to oppose either; so that if either the King, or the Marquess of
New Castle, had marched to London, in all Appearance either Army would have
found little Opposition: but instead hereof, the King sits down and besieges
Gloucester, and the Marquess of New Castle comes before Hull.

This gave the Parliament an Opportunity to recruit Essex's Army, and to enter
into a Treaty to procure the Scots to bring an Army into England again for to
assist the Parliament.

In this Treaty a double Consideration is remarkable; first, The Instability of
humane Actions, which are founded in Passion and Prejudice, for there was but
one Year between this Treaty and the National Protestation by the Parliament,
to Maintain the true Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England (which Passage Mr. Whitlock in his Memoirs, fol. 43. has left
out) and according to their Duty and Allegiance, to maintain and defend his
Majesty's Royal Person and Estate, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties
of the Subjects, and to preserve the Union between the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; and this to be taken by all Englishmen: but now the
Scots would not stir one Step, unless the Parliament of England would join with
them in their Covenant, which ill agreed with their Protestation; which the
Parliament submitted to.

The other, was a Discovery of a Spark, which soon after broke out into such a
Flame, as consumed the Covenant, Presbytery, the Parliament, King, and Church
and State of England; for tho during the Prosperity of the King's Affairs this
Fire was covered, yet when young Sir Henry Vane (who was one of the
Parliament's Commissioners, and one who loved the Presbyterian Government no
better than the Episcopal) saw that the Parliament would submit to the Scottish
Covenant and Discipline, he stiffly opposed it singly, and at last carried it,
that the Nations should join in a Solemn League: and the Scots would have
Church Government to be according to the Example of the best Reformed Churches;
but Sir Henry Vane insisted to have it according to the Word of God only, and
carried both points. Afterward, one of Sir Henry's Fellows expostulated with
him, why he should put them to so much Trouble about such needless Trifles? Sir
Henry answered, He was mistaken, and did not see far enough into the matter;
for a League showed it was between two Nations, and might be broken upon just
Reasons, but not a Covenant; and that Church Government, according to the Word
of God, by the Difference of Divines and Expositors, would be long enough
before it were determined, for the learned held it clearly for Episcopacy; so
that when all agreed, we may take in the Scots Presbytery. See the Life of
General Monk, p. 23, 24. written by his Chaplain Dr. Gumble.

The Parliament having recruited the Earl of Essex's Army, he forced his
Passage, and relieved Gloucester; the King's Army retreat to Newbury, where it
was charged by Essex, and worsted; and in the Fight, the Ornament of the Age,
the learned and most ingenious Lord Falkland, tho weary of his Life, and
presaging his own Destiny, was slain, as were the Earls of Sunderland and
Carnarven.

If the King's Army had such bad Success before Gloucester, my Lord of
New Castle had worse before Hull; for lying in a moorish unhealthy place, in a
sickly season of the Year, viz. September and October, the whole Army fell into
Fluxes and other Distempers, so as they were forced to raise the Siege, having
done nothing considerable in it: besides, at this time Lyn-Regis in Norfolk (a
Place near as considerable as Hull) was seized by the Gentry of Norfolk, and
might have been relieved, if New Castle had not been engaged in besieging Hull.
Tho the English and Scottish Parliament agreed in their Solemn League and
Covenant, yet so did not Sir John Hotham and his Son with the Preferment of Sir
Thomas Fairfax and others in the North, so that Sir John Hotham refused to
serve under Fairfax. Hereupon the Parliament intended to have displaced Hotham;
which when he heard of, both he and his Son treated with the Marquess of
New Castle to deliver Hull to the King; and the Parliament suspecting the
Design, sent Sir Matthew Bromton (Sir John's Brother-in-law) to seize both
Father and Son: which Sir John little suspecting till it was too late, fled to
Beverly, where he was seized by his own Soldiers, and carried to Hull, from
whence Sir Matthew sent both Father and Son to London, where soon after both
lost their Heads.

When the Parliament sent Commissioners to invite the Scots to come to their
Assistance, the King sent Letters to dissuade them from it, urging the manifold
Grants he had given to them when he was in Scotland last, which completed all
they could ask; and their solemn Protestations to be for ever his Majesty's
most obedient Subjects. See the Act cited by Sir Rich. Baker, fol. 514. That it
should be detestable Treason in the highest degree, for any of the Scots
Nation, conjunctly or singly, to raise Arms or any military Force upon any
Cause whatever, without the King's Commission. But now, unprovoked by the King,
and against his express Command, they in open Hostility enter England a second
time against him; so little Faith or Honor was to be trusted to from these
Covenanters: for the Scots having made their Market with the King, resolve to
improve it with the Parliament, and besides their Pay, or Wages of Iniquity,
will have the Covenant and Kirk-Government imposed upon the English as well as
Scots Nation; and tho the King's Letters were signed by 19 Lords, the Scots
ordered them to be burnt by the common Hangman; and in order hereunto, General
Lesley, now Earl of Leven, upon the 16th of January enters into England again,
with an Army of above 20000 Scots. The King, to add Reputation to his Arms,
summoned the Members of Parliament which followed him, to meet at Oxford upon
the 22d of January, where they voted the coming of the Scots to be Treason and
Rebellion: but because they would not come up to the King's Desire, in Voting
the Members at Westminster to be no Parliament, the King, in great Displeasure
with them, and in his Letters to the Queen, calls them his mungrel Parliament;
such was the Kindness the King showed those Noble Lords and Gentry for
sacrificing their Lives and Fortunes for his Service. And to oppose the Scots,
the King makes a Cessation of Arms with the Irish, and draws back into England
the English which he sent to oppose the Irish; but these were every where
beaten, 1500 of them cast away by Sea, and the greatest Body of them commanded
by Sir Michael Ernley, Major General Gibson, Sir Francis Boteler, and Colonel
Monk (who shall unravel all the Parliament and Scots were now weaving) were
totally routed and dispersed by Sir Thomas Fairfax, joining with Sir William
Brereton near Nantwich; and all these, with Colonel Gibs, Harmon, Sir Ralph
Dawns, with 14 Captains, 26 Ensigns, and other inferior Officers, and 1500
common Soldiers, taken Prisoners, with the loss of their Cannon and Baggage: So
that, as Sergeant Whitlock observes, f. 79. a. these Irish never did the King
any considerable Service. But to sweeten this, Prince Rupert at the close of
this Year beat Sir John Meldrum a Scot, who besieged Newark, and his Army
surrendered up their Arms: Upon which the Parliament-Garisons in Gainsborow,
Lincoln, and Sleford, quitted these Places to the King's Forces. And here we
will end the Year 1643. and take notice how Mr. Sergeant Whitlock, f. 64. b.
errs in point of Time, where he says the Scots passed the Tyne in 1642, under
General Lesley to assist the Parliament; and f. 67. a. he says, the Queen was
brought to Bed at Exeter of the Princess Henrietta Maria, (which for ought
appears, was before the Queen landed from Holland) for she was born the 20th of
June 1644. See Sir Rich. Baker's Hist. f. 434. a.

Anno Reg. 20. Dom. 1644.
The Wonders which succeeded these two Years in England will better appear if a
View be taken of the present Posture of Affairs, as they stood in the beginning
of this Year: England and Scotland are united in one Solemn League and
Covenant; in January last, Lesley (or Leven) entered England with an Army of
18000 Foot, and 3500 Horse and Dragoons, and soon after the Earl of Calendar
entered England with an Army of 10000 Scots more; these commanded by old and
experienced Officers; and the English Parliament's Armies were commanded by as
brave and resolute Commanders as were to be found in Europe: The Fleet wholly
at the Parliament's Devotion, and so was the City of London. So that if you
look upon the Superstructure, nothing could appear more strong and lasting.

And all this time you hear little of Oliver Cromwell, more than that he was a
Captain of Horse, and being of a bold and active Spirit, secured the Town of
Cambridg for the Parliament, and was very diligent in obstructing several
Levies for the King in Cambridgshire, Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk: For these
Services he had a Commission to be a Colonel of Horse, and having an
insinuating and canting way of preaching, and seeming very Godly, raised such a
Regiment of Horse as was no where to be found; the Riders, spirited with Zeal
to the Cause, yet not of the Scots mode: and to secure them without, Oliver
took care to provide them able Horses, and to be well armed and accoutred; so
as every one of them, beside Sword and Pistol, had Pot, Back and Breast,
Musquet-proof.

He was Nephew to Sir Oliver Cromwell, who had a very great Estate, but his
Father being a younger Brother, had not above 300 l. per Annum, as was said.
Their Name originally was not Cromwell, but Williams, and the Name of Cromwell
was by this Accident: When Cromwell Earl of Essex fell, in the Reign of Hen. 8.
he had Cromwell's Ancestor in his Service, who was a Person of lively Parts, and
industrious in Business, which Hen. 8. observing, took him into his Sereice,
but upon all occasions called him Cromwell; and the King being asked the Reason,
answered, He called him so in Cromwell's time, and would continue to call him so
still; and this continued down to Sir Oliver's, and our Cromwell's time.

Our Oliver being of a turbulent and aspiring Disposition, his Father's
contracted Fortunes could not support his Extravagancies, whereby he was like
to have fallen into those Troubles which usually attend such Follies; and to
prevent them he sets up for New England, where he becomes a most zealous
Promoter of their Cause: But this could not long continue him there; for in
their first planting themselves they were poor, so as he could not find Means
and Opportunity to support his Extravagancies, and so back he came again into
England.

About the Year 1638, the Undertakers to drain the Fen-Lands in Lincolnshire
and the Isle of Ely, set up; this Undertaking was mainly opposed by the Town of
Cambridg, fearing it would spoil their Navigation between Cambridg and
Lyn-Regis, whence Cambridg was supplied with Sea-Coal, Wine and other
Provisions.

When the Writs were issued out for calling the second Parliament in 1640,
Oliver sets up to be chosen Burgess for the Town of Cambridg, assuring them
that if he were chosen, he would make it his Business to overthrow the Project
of draining the Fens. But tho by this Project he got to be chosen, yet after he
became Protector he most industriously promoted the Project of draining the
Fens.

But tho Cromwell was of a turbulent and aspiring Spirit, yet before the Civil
Wars broke out in England, he was not conversant in any Military Discipline,
nor indeed of any other Learning, or just or lawful Calling: His Person was of
a robust and coarse Complexion, his Face red, so was his Nose, (I fancy like
the Roman General Sylla's) great and straked with blew Veins. In promoting his
Cause and Interest he was most industrious and indefatigable: These Qualities
were observed and feared by some both of the King's and Parliament's Party,
before they came to be publicly known and put in Execution. I Will give an
Instance or two hereof.

When the King summoned the Members of Parliament of his Party to meet at
Oxford in January last, Williams Archbishop of York was likewise summoned,
with whom the King privately consulted what Course was best to be taken in the
present Circumstances of his Affairs: the Archbishop advised him by all means
to come to an Agreement with the Parliament; for since the Scots were come into
England in such numerous Armies, and the English of the Parliament's Party in
these two last Years having acquired a Military Knowledge, it would in all
appearance be impossible for the King long to withstand their Forces; but above
all, he advised the King to get Cromwell over to his side, if possible;
otherways to take him off by any means, or he would be the King's Ruin; as you
may read more at large in the second Part of the Bishop of Litchfield's Life of
Williams.

Nor was Cromwell less terrible to the Earl of Essex, and the Scots
Commissioners, than to the King's Party; so that one Evening the Earl and
several of his Confidents, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton and Sir John
Meyrick, and others, with the Scots Commissioners, were in Consultation how to
get rid of Cromwell, and sent to Sergeant Whitlock and Maynard about it, who
came, and Essex told them, that he sent for them to have their Advice and
Counsel upon a Matter of great Importance concerning both Kingdoms; in which
the Lords Commissioners of Scotland are concerned for their Kingdom, as we for
ours, and they as well as we know your Abilities and Integrity, and are
desirous of your Counsel in this great Business; which both the Sergeants
promised faithfully to give. But here take notice, That as the English
Parliament called those who were opposite to them Malignants, so the Scots
called those opposite to them Incendiaries.

At the Desire of Essex, the Chancellor of Scotland (Lowden) spoke as follows.

Mr. Maynard and Mr. Whitlock;
I Can assure you of the great Opinion both my Brethren and self have of your
Worth and Abilities, else we should not have desired this Meeting with you: And
since it is his Excellency's (Essex his) Pleasure, that I should acquaint you
with the Matter upon whilk your Counsel is desired, I shall obey his Commands,
and briefly recite the Business to you.

You ken vary we will that Genesis Lieutenant Cromwell is no Friend of ours; and
since the Advance of our Army into England, he has used all underhand and
cunning Means to take off from our Honor, and the Merits of this Kingdom, an
evil Requital of all our Hazards and Services; but so it is, and we are
nevertheless fully satisfied of the Affections and Gratitude of the good People
of the Nation in general.

It is thought requisite for us, and for carrying on the Cause of the two
Kingdoms, that this Obstacle or Remora be removed out of the way, whom we
foresee will be no small Impediment to us in the good Design we have undertaken.

He not only is no Friend to us and the Government of our Church, but he is
also no well-willer to his Excellency, whom you and we have all Cause to love
and honor; and if he be permitted to go on this way, it may, I fear, endanger
the whole Business; therefore we are to advise of some Course to be taken for
Prevention of this Mischief.

You ken vary we will the Accord betwixt the two Nations, and the Union by the
solemn League and Covenant; and if any be an Incendiary between the two
Nations, how he is to be proceeded against. Now the Matter is wherein we desire
your Opinions, what you take the meaning of the Word Incendiary to be, and
whether the Lieutenant General be not sike an Incendiary, as is meant thereby;
and whilk Way wad be best to proceed against him, if he be proved sike an
Incendiary, and that we may clepe his Wings from soaring to the Prejudice of
our Case.

Now you may ken, That by our Law in Scotland, we clepe him an Incendiary, wha
kindles Coals of Contention, and raises Differences in the State, to the
Public Damage; and he is Tanquam Publicus Hostis Patriae. Whether your Law be
the same or not, you ken best, who are mickle learned therein, and therefore we
desire your Judgment in these Points.


Mr. Whitlock answered first, and after a short Preface said, The Sense of the
Word Incendiary is the same with us as your Lordship has expressed to be by the
Law of Scotland, One that raises the Fire of Contention in a State, that
kindles burning hot Flames of Contention; and so it is taken in the Accord of
the two Kingdoms.

Whether Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell be such an Incendiary between the two Kingdoms
as is meant by this Word, cannot be known but by Proofs of his particular Words
and Actions, tending to the kindling of this Fire of Contention between the two
Nations, and the raising of Difference between us.

If it do not appear by Proofs he has done this, he is not an Incendiary; but
if it can be made out by Proofs, that he has done this, then he is an
Incendiary, and to be proceeded against for it by the Parliament, upon his
being thus accused for those things.

This I take for a Ground, That my Lord General and Lords Commissioners of
Scotland, being of so great Honor and Authority as you are, must not appear in
any Business, especially of an Accusation, but such as you shall see
beforehand clearly will be made out, and be brought to the Effect intended.

Otherwise for such Persons as you are, to begin a Business of this Weight, and
not to have it so prepared beforehand as to be certain to carry it, but to be
put to a doubtful Trial, in case it should not succeed as you expect, but that
you should be foiled in it, it would reflect upon your great Honors and Wisdom.

Next, As to the Person who is to be accused as an Incendiary, it will be fit,
in my humble Opinion, to consider his present Condition, and Parts, and
Interest, wherein Mr. Maynard and my self by our constant Attendance in the
House of Commons, are the more capable to give an Account to your Lordships;
and for his Interest in the Army, some Honorable Persons here present, his
Excellency's Officers, are best able to inform your Lordships.

I take Lieutenant General Cromwell to be a Gentleman of Quick and Subtle
Parts, and one who has, especially of late, gained no small Interest in the
House of Commons, nor is he wanting of Friends in the House of Lords, nor of
Ability in himself to manage his own Part or Defense to the best Advantage.

If this be so (my Lords) it will be more requisite to be well prepared against
him, before he be brought upon the Stage, lest the Issue of the Business be not
answerable to your Expectations.

I have not yet heard any Particulars mentioned by his Excellency, nor by my
Lord Chancellor, or any other; nor do I know any in my private Observations,
which will amount to a clear Proof of such Matters as will satisfy the House of
Commons, in the Case of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell (and according to our Law, and the
Course of Proceedings in our Parliament) that he is an Incendiary, and to be
punished accordingly.

However, I apprehend it to be doubtful, and therefore cannot advise at this
time he should be accused for an Incendiary, but rather that Direction may be
given to collect such particular Passages relating to him, by which your
Lordships may judge whether they will amount to prove him an Incendiary, or not.

And this being done, we may again wait on your Excellence, if you please, and
upon View of those Proofs we shall be better able to advise, and your Lordships
to judge what will be fit to be done in this Matter.

Mr. Maynard agreed with Mr. Whitlock in every Particular, and only varied that
the Word Incendiary is not much conversant in our Law, nor often met with in
our Books; but more a Term of Civil Law and of State, and so to be considered
in this Case.

Mr. Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton, and others spoke smartly to the
Business, and mentioned some particular Passages and Words of Cromwell, to prove
him an Incendiary; and that he had not that Interest in the House of Commons as
was supposed, and would willingly have been upon the Accusation of him: but the
Scots Commissioners were not so forward to join with them in it. So Cromwell
escaped. But so did not Mr. Hollis and Sir Philip, about two Years after, upon
Cromwell's Accusation of them.

If it be so strange that Cromwell so bred, and having no Correspondence abroad
or at home, should in two Years time get such an Ascendant over the
Parliament's Army in England, so commanded and disciplined as aforesaid; it
will appear more admirable by what mean Persons he chiefly achieved it, as by
Pride, Whaley, Hewson, Harrison, Goff, Ven, Barkstead, Cobbet, Okey, etc.
broken Citizens, and not before acquainted with any Military Discipline.

But while this Canker-Worm was breeding in the Bowels of the Parliament and
Army, the Winds of adverse Fortune blew almost constantly in the Face of the
King's Affairs; and to tell particularly of all the Battles, Sieges and
Rencounters which happened in England in these two next Years, would swell this
Story to a much greater Bulk than I design: You may read them at large in Mr.
Whitlock's Memoirs, and Sir Richard Baker's History of Charles the First: And
to say nothing of it, would be a Gap in this Treatise, which would interrupt
the Design of it.

Upon the 29th of March, the King's Army, commanded by Genesis Forth and Sir Ralph
Hopton, was totally routed near Winchester, by Sir William Waller, Sir William
Balfour, and Sir Arthur Haslerig (and 'twas observed that two Irish Regiments
which served the King in this Fight, were the first which broke and run away:)
And soon after Captain Swanley secured Milford-Haven, Haverford-West, and all
Pembrook-shire, for the Parliament: And upon the 11th of April, my Lord
Fairfax, and his Son Sir Thomas, took Selby in Yorkshire by Storm, and in it
Col. Bellasis Governor, with most of the other Officers, and 1600 Common
Soldiers, with all their Guns, Arms and Ammunition.

To qualify these Losses in some measure, the King about the latter End of
June, fights Waller at Cropredy-Bridg, and routs him, kills 300 of his Men, and
Weems General of the Ordnance was taken Prisoner, with two Lieutenant-Colonels,
three Captains, and several other Officers, and 180 Common Soldiers, with 14
pieces of Cannon.

This small Victory bore no Proportion to the irreparable Loss the King
sustained in the North: for York being besieged by the United Forces of
Manchester, both the Fairfaxes, Father and Son, and Leven (or Lesley) General
of the Scots; Prince Rupert with all the Powers he could raise, marched to the
Relief of it, after he had relieved Latham-House in Lancashire, bravely
defended by the Countess of Darby. The Parliament Forces hereupon raised their
Siege, and the Prince fetching a Compass about, relieved York, and joined with
the Marquess of Newcastle, so as the Prince's Army was 27000 strong; with which
he marched to Marston-Moor, whither the Parliament's Army was marched before;
and upon the third of July, both Armies fought, and the Prince with the Left
Wing charged the Parliament's Right Wing, and routed and pursued them a great
Way; so did General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Major General Porter, rout
the main Body of the Parliament's Army; so that all the three Parliament
Generals, Fairfax, Manchester and Lesley gave all for lost.

But the Prince, as he did before at Edghill, pursuing the Enemy too far, gave
an Opportunity to Sir Thomas Fairfax to rally his Men, and joining with
Cromwell's Regiment of Lobsters, armed with Pot Back and Breast, fell upon the
Right Wing of the King's Army, and routed them, and also the rest of the King's
Foot, destitute of Horse, and obtained a complete Victory. In this Fight above
7000 were slain, 3000 of the King's part taken Prisoners, and 25 Ordnance, 47
Colors, 10000 Arms, two Wagons laden with Carabines and Pistols, 130 Barrels
of Powder, with all the Bag and Baggage.

After this the Parliament's Generals returned to the Siege of York, and
summoned it, which was delivered up to them by Sir Thomas Glenham, and the
Marquess of Newcastle went beyond Sea. Thus was all the North reduced to the
Parliament by the fatal Rashness of the Prince, who might have avoided the
Fight, and joined with the Marquess of Montross and Col. Clavering, who were
with 6000 Foot within two Days march of him.

The North thus subdued, upon the Matter, Essex by the Persuasion of my Lord
Roberts, marches into the West, but a different Fate attended him: For the King
followed him, and joining with Prince Maurice, followed Essex into Cornwall,
where he blocked up all the Avenues, so as Essex must either fight or be
starved; but in regard that the King had possessed himself of all the Passages,
Essex could not fight without an apparent Hazard of the Loss of his Army;
However, Sir William Balfour with 2300 Horse, brake through the King's Army,
and got to Salt-Ash, and from thence to Plymouth, which held for the Parliament.

Now were the Parliament's Foot in a wretched State, the King closely pursuing
them, and the Country People rising upon them: Hereupon Essex deserts them,
and with diverse of his Officers by Sea got to Plymouth, leaving Skippon to take
care of the rest; who upon the 2d of September capitulated, to deliver up to
the King all their Artillery, with all the Bag and Baggage; no Person under a
Corporal to wear any kind of Weapon; all Officers above, to wear only Sword and
Pistol. And so Skippon marched to Pool, which was in the Parliament's Power.

The Ill Success of Essex in this Expedition, was the Cause of Essex his Fall,
(tho the Parliament at present seemed to be otherwise disposed) and of the Rise
of Cromwell, as we shall observe.

Whilst these things were doing in the North and West, other Actions of less
Consequence happened. Sir Thomas Middleton having taken Mountgomery-Castle, the
King's Forces advanced in a much greater Body to retake it; whereupon Sir
Thomas retreated: But being joined with Sir William Brereton, Sir John Meldrum
(a Scot) and Sir William Fairfax, returned and charged the King's Party, and
took Prisoner M. G. Broughton, Lt. Col. Bludwel, M. Williams, nine Captains,
many inferior Officers, and 1500 common Soldiers: Of the Parliament's Party
Sir William Fairfax was slain with Eleven Wounds, Maj. Fitz-Symons, and about
40 Soldiers, and 60 wounded. Monmouth Town and Castle were surprised by
Massey, with the Loss only of Six Men. Lieut. Genesis Lesley in the North, fell
upon the Forces commanded by Sir Philip Musgrave, killed diverse upon the Place,
and took 100 Prisoners. My Lord Herbert, Son of the Earl of Worcester, was
beaten by Massey, who killed 50, and took 60 Prisoners; and Massey fell upon a
Party of the King's near Beachy, killed 70, and took 170 Prisoners: and Col.
Charles Fleetwood took two Troops of the King's Horse near Belvoir Castle.

From these lesser Actions we now advance to tell of Greater: The Parliament's
Army every where victorious in the North, Lesley had now an Opportunity to
return to New Castle, which he summoned to yield, which being refused, he
stormed and took it by Force; whereupon Sir John Marlay the Mayor, and others,
fled to the Castle, and would have capitulated, but were denied, and so were
forced to surrender at Discretion.

But how successful soever the Parliament's Forces were in the North after the
Fight at Marslon-Moor, the King reaped but little after the Parliament's Foot
had delivered up their Arms in the West; for Essex having joined Manchester and
Waller, resolved to hinder the King's Return to Oxford, and upon the 23d of
October rendezvouz'd the Army at Aldermaston-Park, and next Night privately
passed the Water at a Ford near Padworth, and next Morning to Bucklebury-Heath
near Newberry, where the King then was; and about 12 a Clock drew down their
whole Army between Thatcham and Shaw, and skirmished with the King's Horse;
Manchester's Troops and the London Train'd-Bands crossed the River Kennet
between Newberry and the Hill, and forced the King's Party which kept the Pass
from thence, with some Execution; but Sir Bernard Astley (Son of Sir Jacob or
the Lord Astley) coming to their Rescue, forced the Parliamentarians back again.

In the Afternoon 4000 of Essex and Waller's Horse and Dragoons, with 500 Foot,
charged the King's Forces on the West of Newberry, and forced them to retreat
in some Disorder, and some of the King's Fieldpieces were taken; Essex
followed the Success, and charged the King's Lifeguard, whom he overpowered,
and had much more endamaged, if the Lord Bernard Stuart had not come to their
Assistance, and secured their Retreat: but the Parliamentarians every way
advancing, beat the King's Army out of the Field, with the Loss of many
Colors, and two Pieces of Cannon. Sir Anthony St. Ledger, Lieutenant Colonel
Leak, Lieutenant Colonel Topping, and Captain Catclyne (elder Brother of Sir
Nevil Catclyne, my worthy Friend) were killed; and the Earl of Cleveland, and
some few others, taken Prisoners.

If the King's Affairs succeeded so ill in the West, they did worse in the
North; for Leverpool submitted to the Parliament, and Lesley had
Tinmouth-Castle (a Place which hereafter he shall be better acquainted with,
tho not in the Quality of a General of an Army, but a Prisoner) surrendered
upon Articles.

After this, Janus's Temple was shut this Year, if you begin it at January. And
now a Treaty of Peace at Vxbridg is set on foot at the Desire of the King; but
no Success attended it.

This Year, tho the Princes Rupert and Maurice followed the King in his Wars
against the Parliament, yet the Elector Palatine, Frederick, their elder
Brother, petitioned the Parliament that he might come over, and take the
Covenant; which tho at first they refused, yet afterward they admitted him,
and allowed him 8000 l. per Annum out of my Lord Petres and other Delinquents
Estates: and so he continued till after the Treaty at Munster 1648, where he
led a Life not becoming a Prince in Adversity.

The Treaty of Peace at Vxbridg not succeeding, the Parliament took the Town of
Shrewsbury, which, as it is one of the most famous of all the Towns of England,
so it stopped, on that part, the Intercourse of Wales with the Counties of Salop,
Chester, and Worcester.

But to throw a little Water into the Wine of the Parliament's Successes, Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, about the Beginning of March, routed a great Body of the
Parliamentarians in Yorkshire, and defeated the Army commanded by my Lord
Fairfax, which besieged Pomfret-Castle; and from thence marched into
Leicestershire, and defeated a great Body of the Parliament's Forces commanded
by Colonel Rossiter.

Anno Reg. 21. Dom. 1645.
We begin this Year with the Self-denying Ordinance, (tho Mr. Whitlock and Sir
Richard Baker differ a little in point of time, Sir Richard Baker says it was
this Year, Mr. Whitlock 1644.) But the Lords refused to concur with the Commons
herein; so as this Ordinance began with a Rupture between the two Houses, so
you will see it shall be the Ruin of the Parliament's, as well as the King's
Designs.

Mr. Whitlock made a fine and learned Speech against this Ordinance, which you
may read at large fol. 114, 115. of his Memoirs. The pretended Reason for this
Ordinance was, the Thinness of the House, which by Employment in the War, would
render them much thinner: To which Mr. Whitlock answered, It might be supplied
by filling up the Commons by new Elections.

He objected against the Ordinance, the Examples of the Grecians and Romans,
who had the greatest Offices both of War and Peace conferred upon their
Senators; because they having greater Interests than others, were more capable
to do them the greatest Services: and that by passing this Ordinance, they
would lay aside the General Essex, the Earls of Warwick, Denbigh, and
Manchester, the Lords Willoughby and Roberts; and of their own Members, the
Lords Gray (of Growby) and Fairfax, Sir William Waller, Cromwell, Mr. Hollis,
Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Brereton, and Sir John Meyrick.

Tho the Commons passed the Self-denying Ordinance, yet they dispensed with it
in reference to Cromwell, Skippon, and Ireton, and Sir William Waller. Hereupon
the Earls of Essex, Denbigh, and Manchester, lay down their Commissions. Here
it is observable, That the Earl of Essex, as he was the first which headed an
Army against the King, and whose Authority was so great, that 'twas believed if
he had not done it, the Parliament could not have raised an Army, is now the
first discarded by the Commons, without giving any Reason.

In this new Establishment of the English Army, Sir Thomas Fairfax was made
General, Cromwell Lieutenant General, and Skippon Major General. The Royalists
conceived Mountains of Advantages to follow (and that not improbably) from the
Divisions in the Parliament's Army, which succeeded quite contrary.

For upon the 3d of April, Fairfax having gathered his Army together at
Windsor, sent Cromwell with a Brigade of Horse and Dragoons, to intercept a
Convoy of Horse which Prince Rupert had sent from Worcester to fetch off the
King from Oxford, with a Train of Artillery to take the Field; which Cromwell
met at Islip, and routed them, took diverse Prisoners, and 200 Horse: and from
thence Cromwell marched and took Bletchingdon-House, commanded by Colonel
Windebank (Sir Francis's own Son) by Surrender upon the first Summons; for
which Windebank was sentenced by a Court Martial, and shot to Death. But
Cromwell had not so good Success at Faringdon, which he assaulted, and was
beaten off, with the loss of 200 of his Men.

The King understanding that Fairfax had a Design to besiege Oxford, sent to
Prince Rupert and General Goring to fetch him off, which they did about the
beginning of May; and the King marched toward the Relief of Chester, then
besieged by the Parliament's Forces: and Fairfax lays close Siege to Oxford.

The King relieved Chester; and in his Return, takes Leicester by Storm: This
put Fairfax to his Trumps, so that if he continued the Siege of Oxford, he
would leave all the mid-land parts of England to the Mercy of the King. So he
raises his Siege, and marches to fight the King's Army.

My Lord Astley was Lieutenant General of the King's Foot, whose Nephew was Sir
Isaac Astley, my Lord's eldest Brother's eldest Son, who married a
Cousin-German of mine; and after the War was over, my Lord Astley being at his
Nephew's, in Discourse of the Wars, my Lord told him, That upon the Approach of
the Parliament's Army, the King called a Council of War, where by the Advice of
my Lord Astley it was resolved to march Northwards, and destroy the Country
Provisions, and leave the Parliament's Army at their Election, whether they
would follow the King, or besiege Leicester: But next Morning, quite contrary
to the Order of Council, Orders were given to prepare to fight the Parliament's
Army, when there was little time to draw up the Army; so inconstant and
irresolute was the King in this, as of almost all his other Actions; and so
forward was the King herein, that he marched to meet Fairfax's Army near Naseby
in Northamptonshire. This was upon Saturday, June the 14th.

And if the Resolution to fight was inconsiderate and rash, so was the Fight;
for Prince Rupert, who commanded the right Wing of the King's Horse, charged
the left Wing of the Parliament's, commanded by Ireton, and routed them, and
wounded Ireton in the Thigh; and as before, at Edg-hill and Marston-Moor, he
pursued the Enemy so far, that he left the rest of the Army exposed to the
Assaults of the Enemy; so here he followed the Chase almost to Naseby, leaving
the left Wing of the King's Army commanded by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, open, to
be charged by Cromwell.

That which completed the Parliament's Victory, and the King's utter Overthrow
in this Fight, was, the not observing the Orders the Day before, of the King's
Retreat; for Yorkshire being oppressed by the Parliament's Forces, Sir Marmaduke
had Expectation of relieving the King's Party there, which being crossed by the
Resolution of this Day's Fight, his Brigade, as well as himself, grew
discontented; so as he no ways answered the Gallant Actions which before he had
achieved: And Cromwell having forced Sir Marmaduke to retreat, joining with
Fairfax, charged the King's Foot (who had beaten the Parliament's, and got
Possession of their Ordnance, and thought themselves certain of the Victory)
but being in Confusion and out of Order, and having no Horse to support them,
were easily overborn by Fairfax and Cromwell; and so Fairfax's Army obtained a
most absolute Victory over the King's.

We hear no more of Prince Rupert in this Fight, who, 'twas believed, was the
first Mover of it, till of his Arrival at Bristol.

In this Fight, the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Astley, and Colonel Russel, were
wounded, and 20 Colonels, Knights, and Officers of Note, and 600 common
Soldiers, were slain on the King's side; and 6 Colonels and
Lieutenant-Colonels, 18 Majors, 70 Captains, 80 Lieutenants, 200 Ensigns and
other Officers, and 4500 common Soldiers, were taken Prisoners; 12 Pieces of
Cannon, 8000 Arms, 40 Barrels of Powder, 200 Carriages, with all their Bag and
Baggage, with store of rich Pillage, 3000 Horse, one of the King's Coaches,
with his Cabinets of Letters and Papers: And the King fled toward Wales.

If the King were unfortunate in the Success of this Fight, he was not less in
the Discovery of his secret Counsels with the Queen, which were so contrary to
those he declared to the Kingdom; for in his Letter to the Queen, he declared
his Intention to make Peace with the Irish, and to have 40000 of them over into
England to prosecute the War here. And in others he complained, he could not
prevail with his Mungrel Parliament at Oxford, to Vote that the Parliament of
Westminster were not a Lawful Parliament: So little Thanks had these Noble
Lords and Gentlemen for their exposing their Lives and Fortunes in Defense of
the King in his Adversity. What then might they expect, if he should prevail by
Conquest? That he would not make a Peace with the Rebels (the Parliament)
without her Approbation, nor go one jot from the Paper she sent him: That in
the Treaty at Uxbridg, he did not positively own the Parliament, it being
otherwise to be construed, tho they were so simple as not to find it out: and
that it was recorded in the Notes of the King's Council, that he did not
acknowledge them a Parliament. See Whitlock' s Memoirs, fol. 147. a.

The Members having got these Papers, not only printed and published them, but
ordered them to be kept upon Record; and also made a public Declaration of
them, wherein they show what the Nobility and Gentry which followed the King
might trust to.

The King's Army being overthrown, the Parliament had two Armies, and the King
none, but that which was commanded by General Goring, which at that time
besieged Taunton, and sore distressed it; but it being governed by Blake (after
the famous Admiral for the Rump and Cromwell by Sea) it made indeed a wonderful
Resistance. And now you will see the King's Garrisons surrender by heaps.

For, two Days after the Fight at Naseby, viz. June 14. Fairfax sat down before
Leicester, where my Lord Loughborough was Governor, and made a large Breach
toward Newark; whereupon the Governor surrendered it.

After the Surrender of York, the Year before, the King made that noble
Gentleman, Sir Thomas Glenham, Governor of Carlisle, which he defended till
the Garrison were forced to eat Horseflesh: And the Town being besieged by the
English and Scots, Sir Thomas, to throw a Bone of Dissension between them,
delivered it up to the Scots, about a Week after the Surrender of Leicester.

From Leicester, Fairfax marches to the Relief of Taunton; whereupon Goring
drew off, and retreated to Langport, where Fairfax routed Goring, killed 200 of
his Men, took 1400 Prisoners, and pursued the rest to Bridgwater, which Fairfax
besieged, and had it surrendered upon the 23d of July.

And about that time, Pontfract Castle in Yorkshire surrendered to M. G.
Pointz; and upon the 25th of July, Sir Hugh Cholmly surrendered Scarborough
Castle to Sir Matthew Boynton; and upon the 11th of September, Fairfax stormed
Bristol, and Prince Rupert surrendered the Castle upon Terms.

Tho the City of Hereford bravely defended it self against General Lesley, and
his Scots, from the 13th of July to the 1st of September, and then forced
Lesley to raise the Siege, upon pretense of relieving his own Country, then
overrun by the Marquess of Montross; yet it was soon after surprised by
Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan.

Nor were the King's Forces in the Field more fortunate than those in Garrison;
for the King having got together a Body of about 5000 Men, most Welsh, marched
toward the Relief of Chester, then besieged by Sir William Brereton, and
Colonel Jones; but in his March, he was fought by General Pointz at
Routon-Moor, within two Miles of Chester, where the King was worsted, and the
Lord Bernard Stewart (Brother to the Duke of Richmond) killed.

The King's Affairs being thus desperate in England, all the Hopes now were of
Scotland, where Montross had conquered it from one End to the other, and had no
visible Army to oppose him; and the King, to make Scotland secure, commanded my
Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, to join Montross with their Horse: in
pursuance whereof, they marched to Sherborn in Yorkshire, where they surprised
700 of the Parliament's Foot, with their Arms and Baggage; but staying for
Carriages, Col. Copley, Lilbourn, and Alured, fell upon them, and routed them,
killing and taking 100 Officers, 300 Soldiers, and 600 Horse, with their
Furniture, and my Lord Digby's Coach: And my Lord Digby marching on with the
rest of his Forces, was set upon at Carlisle Sands, and utterly defeated; from
whence my Lord and Langdale escaped to the Isle of Man, and after into Ireland.

From Routon-Moor, the King got to Newark, where Ma^or-General Gerrard charged
the Lord Digby, lately defeated at Sherborn, with Treason: Prince Rupert, and
Maurice, the Lord Hawley, and Sir Richard Willis the Governor, sided with
Gerrard; and the Lord Bellasis, and many others, with Digby; and so did the
King, who displaced Willis, and made the Lord Bellasis Governor. This caused
great Dissension, not only in the Garrison, but in the Officers of the Army
which the King brought with him; so that the Princes Rupert and Maurice,
General Gerrard, my Lord Hawley, and Willis, forsook the King, and sent to the
Parliament for Passes to go beyond Sea.

In this forlorn state the King left Newark, and with 300 Horse got safe to
Oxford, where the Princes Rupert and Maurice (not knowing whither else to go)
came, and were seemingly reconciled to him; but upon the Return of the King's
Horse, Pointz meets and routs them. Here the King again sent to the Parliament
for a Treaty of Peace, which was rejected upon this Occasion.

Letters were taken in my Lord Digby's Coach, after his Rout at Sherborn, and
also in the Pockets of the Archbishop of Tuam, who was slain in an Overthrow
of the Irish at Sligo in Ireland; wherein the King offered the Irish a
Toleration of their Religion, themselves to choose a Governor of their own,
and to be entrusted with several Castles and Forts for their Caution, upon
Condition that they send 10000 Men into England, to assist him against his
Enemies. And with these, they found the Copy of the King's Commission to the
Earl of Glamorgan, impowering him to treat with the Rebels, viz.

CHARLES, by the Grace of God, etc. To our Trusty and Well-beloved Cousin,
Edward, Earl of Glamorgan: We reposing great and especial Trust and Confidence
in your approved Wisdom and Fidelity, do, by these Presents (as firmly as under
our Great Seal to all Intents and Purposes) authorize and give you Power to
treat and conclude with the Confederate Roman Catholics in our Kingdom of
Ireland: If upon necessity any thing be condescended to wherein our Lieutenant
cannot so well be seen, as not fit for us, for the present, publicly to own;
therefore We charge you to proceed, according to this our Warrant, with all
possible Secrecy: and whatever you shall engage your self upon, such valuable
Considerations as you in your Judgment shall deem fit, we promise, in the Word
of a King and Christian, to ratify and perform the same, of that which shall
be granted by you, and under our Hand and Seal, the Confederate Catholics
having, by their Supplies, testified their Zeal to Our Service. And this shall
be, in each Particular, to you a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Courtat Oxford, the Twentieth Day of May, 20 Car.

Glamorgan had brought his Business to some Issue, when State-Reasons enforced
Ormond, and Digby, and the Council, to imprison him; but this gave Distaste to
the Irish, who thereupon suspected double Dealings, and so neither sent over
the promised 10000 Men, nor any Aid to Westchester, tho Glamorgan was quickly
released upon the Bail of six or eight Irish Peers. The Parliament hereupon was
so incensed, that they refused either to treat with the King, or to admit him
to come to London, (see Baker, f. 473.) or this Business to end here; but
rendered all the King's subsequent Treaties with the Parliament suspected, and
the end of attaining the King's Propositions more difficult. And here you may
see how this King would prostitute his Honor and Christianity, contrary to
what he so often professed, not only to the Parliament, but also to the Duke of
Ormond, his own Party.

Now things every where go to wreck on the King's side; Dartmouth was
surrendered to Fairfax, by Sir Hugh Pollard the Governor; Sir William Vaughan,
with such Forces as he could get together, marching to relieve Chester, was
utterly routed by the Parliament's Forces, and Chester surrendered to Sir Will.
Brereton; Belvoir Castle in Leicestershire (the Seat of the Earls of Rutland)
was surrendered to General Pointz by Sir Gervais Lucas the Governor; my Lord
Hopton is beaten by Fairfax in Devonshire, whereupon Hopton accepted of Terms
from Fairfax, and disbanded his Army, and went into France: After which all the
Garrisons in Cornwall surrendered to Fairfax, except Pendennis Castle and St.
Michael's Mount: Latham-House which the Countess of Derby bravely defended two
Years against the Parliament, was surrendered in December, and Basing-House was
taken by Storm: And that which completed the Ruin of all the King's Affairs in
England, was the Surprise and Defeat of my Lord Astley at Donnington near Stow
on the Would, where he was taken Prisoner the 21st of March; and when he was a
Prisoner, he told some of the Parliament Officers, You have done your Work, and
may go play, unless you fall out among you selves.

Anno Reg. 22. An. Dom. 1646.
In this desperate State of the King's Affairs in England, the King's
Expectations in Scotland were much fallen too: For after the Defeat of my Lord
Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, the Scots had little to do in the North; so
as General Lesley had leisure to march to Newark with his Foot to join M. G.
Pointz, who had blocked it up; and David Lesley with the Horse to march into
Scotland, where Montross his Men after he had beaten Genesis Bailey at
Philipshaugh, being full of Plunder, and being a Voluntier Army, and not under
regular Discipline, disbanded in great Numbers and returned home, when David
Lesley set upon the Remainder and routed them, and gave Quarter to the rest,
whom yet he murdered in cold Blood. Here you may see the different Tempers of
the English and Scots Nation, for you find no such Acts done in England in the
Heats of all the War.

In all the War in Scotland the Marquess of Huntley obstinately refused to join
with Montross; and after the Defeat of Montross's Foot, Montross went in Person
to entreat Huntley to join in their common Interest against the Kirk, which
Huntley not only refused, but would not deign to see Montross, [yet this did
Huntley no good, for after Montross his Army was disbanded, the Kirk-Party cut
off his Head] so as Montross was forced to retreat into the Highlands, and act
defensively.

Exeter upon the 13th of April surrenders to Fairfax, which was followed by
Barnstable Town and Fort, St. Michael's Mount, Dunstan Castle, Woodstock, and
other Places of less Note.

Sir Thomas Glenham having honorably defended York and Carlisle, the King
thought no other so fit to be Governor of Oxford as he, which being blocked up
by the Parliament Forces, the King thought himself in no Security in it; for
the Parliament refused to admit him to come to London, unless he signed their
Propositions. Now the French Ambassador in the Scots Quarters advised the King
to throw himself into the Scots Power; herein you may observe, that tho
Richlieu were dead, yet Mazarine continued the Correspondence between France
and Scotland, which yet were Pensioners to France.

This being Hobson's Choice, the King only accompanied by one Hudson a
Minister, and Mr. John Ashburnham, throws himself into the Power of the Scots
then besieging Newark, this was the fifth of May.

Thus this poor Prince to avoid his present Condition, seeks Protection from
those which brought him into it; which tho he got nothing by it, yet the Scots
instead of protecting him, shall only make a Bargain and Sale of him: for
having him in their Power, they resolve to make a double Market of him, viz. To
have him to order Montross to disband his Army, and then to retire out of
Scotland, and then to sell him to the Parliament for so much as they could get:
that of Montross, it was no sooner asked than granted; but soon after he was
gone, the Covenanters seize Huntley and cut off his Head; the Parliament too
desire the King to give Order for the English Garrisons to surrender, which he
granted; so here we end the Wars in England and Scotland between the King and
Parliament at present. And now you will see how the ending of these Wars was the
beginning of the Ruin of the Parliament and Scots Covenanters; for the Scots
having got their Ends by Montross his disbanding his Army, yet the Bargain for
the Sale of the King being a mighty Matter to the Scots, required a longer
time, and the Scots would not lose one Scottish Pound they could get for him;
and therefore, tho the King put himself into the Power of the Scots the 5th of
May 1646, yet the Bargain was not concluded till January following, and then
the Scots flush of Money return home, finding all things in Peace now Montross
is gone; and the Parliament having bought the King, confine him to
Holdenby-House, a House of the King's in Northamptonshire, under the Guard of a
select Company of Covenanters, whereof Sir John Cook, Secretary Cooke's Son,
was one.

Thus this Prince, who before had shifted the worthy Members of Parliament from
one Prison to another, that they might have no Benefit of their Habeas
Corpus's, and the Constables of Hertfordshire from one Messenger to another, is
himself shifted from one Place a Prisoner to another, without any hope of an
Habeas Corpus: He that before, by his absolute Will and Pleasure, would without
any Law seize his Subjects Goods, and commit them to Prison, cannot now enjoy
his own Estate in his own House: He that before arbitrarily raised Ship Money,
has not now one Ship to command.

One would think the Covenanters had their Game sure enough, now those in
Scotland had got rid of Montross, and full of Money, and those in England had
got the King in their Power, and the King's Army utterly subdued, and both
Kingdoms united into one solemn League and Covenant; so that both may sing
their Requiem for many Years.

But see the Instability of Human Affairs, where they are not founded in Truth
and Righteousness; for the Scots Directory, Catechism and Government, sorted as
ill with the English Genius, as Laud's Liturgy, Canons and High Commission did
with the Scots; and the rigid Execution of them as insolent and tyrannical, as
the Proceedings in the Star Chamber and High Commission; and these being
general, equally offended all: and tho the Cavalier Party being under the
Hatches said little, yet the Brawls and Invectives between the Presbyterians
and other Parties, were as fierce as between the Arminians and Orthodox in
Laud's time, so that things were not like to continue long at this rate.

The Parliament having the King now in their Power, the Scots gone, yet Ireland
(I mean the English Interest in it) in a very deplorable State, and being
apprehensive of the Temper of the Army, whose Principles were
Anti-Presbyterian; and that they might in some measure ease the Country of
maintaining the whole Army, resolved that 12000 of the Army should be sent over
into Ireland to be commanded by Major General Skippon, and 6000 Horse, 2000
Dragoons, and 6000 Foot to be kept up in England, and commanded by Sir Thomas
Fairfax.

Cromwell was aware of what the Members designed, and the Members were as
jealous of Cromwell, and therefore would not dispense with the Self-denying
Ordinance, that he should be in the Army; however, Cromwell had his Agents in
it, and by the Ministers and other zealous Independants, foment their
Jealousies, that the Parliament designed to disband them without Payment of
their Arrears; and in this Ferment they chose two out of every Regiment, which
they called Adjutators, to whom they gave Power to hold Councils, and judge what
was fit to be done for the common Good.

These Adjutators were called Levellers, who cried up Liberty, and the Power of
the People, and assumed to themselves a Power in their Councils above what the
Colonels claimed.

The Proceedings of the Adjutators startled the Parliament, and in a great
measure the Colonels and Officers of the Army; so that unless Cromwell did
appear in the Army, and by his Authority did restrain the License which the
Adjutators assumed, they sat very loose in their Places.

Cromwell knew this as well as they, and that the Adjutators struck at his
Authority as well as the Officers; so that when there was a Debate in the House
of Commons how to suppress the Adjutators, Cromwell professed, and called God to
witness, That he was certain the Soldiers would at the first word of his
Command, if he were among them, throw down their Arms at the Parliament's Feet;
and solemnly swore, that he rather wished himself and his whole Family burnt,
than that the Army should break out into Sedition: And the House had so little
Wit as to believe him, and so sent him down to appease the Army.

Hereupon Cromwell ordered a general Muster of the Army upon Hownslow-Heath,
where the Army was divided, and the Levelling Party refused to come under
Cromwell's Command; whereupon Cromwell sent to the Levellers to send some to
treat of their Grievances, which they did; and when they came, Cromwell with an
undaunted Boldness pistoll'd three of the most forward of them, and seized the
rest, and then the Levelling Part of the Army submitted.

The Sectaries, of which the Army was composed, tho they had the Sword in their
Hands, yet had no face of Authority to recur to, the Presbyterian Members in
both Houses being three to one; they therefore send Cornet Joyce with a Party
of Horse to Holdenby, who the 4th of June 1647, (which was in less than four
Months after the Members had brought the King thither) take the King out of the
Parliament-Commissioners Power, and keep him in the Army.

And now this poor Prince (for so he may be truly called, since he, who before
by his absolute Will and Pleasure would take his Subjects Estates, has now no
Power to get his own) is fallen into the Hands of another sort of Flatterers
than in the former, yet these intended him no more good than the former, viz.
only to gratify their Ambition, Avarice and Treachery, by making use of the
King's Name.

These seem to lament the hard Conditions the Members impose upon him, not only
in his Liberty, but in keeping him from his Children and Friends, and allow him
both, professing they would never lay down Arms until they had put the Scepter
into his Hands, and procured better Conditions for his Friends.

In order hereunto, they seem to join the King's Interest with theirs; and in
their Declaration for Redress of Grievances, declare for the King and People,
and that the Members prefix a certain time for their sitting, so that a new
Parliament may be called, and thereby the Nation settled upon sure Foundations.

Here you may observe a new Face of the Parliament's Affairs quite inverted;
for the Army were as much in love with their being so, as the Parliament was of
their sitting: And now the Army, which was raised only to do the Parliament's
Journey-work, would only allow the Members a certain time for their sitting.
And because Denzil Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major General Massey, Mr.
Glyn, Colonel Walter Long, Colonel Edward Harley, and Mr. Ant. Nichols, were
the leading Men in the House of Commons for establishing the Covenant, and
disbanding the Army, the Army charge them with High Treason; the Charge against
them was Cant, after the Mode of the Times, That they obstructed the Business
of Ireland, to have acted against the Army, and against the Laws and Liberties
of the Subject, and were Obstructers of Justice.

Here you may see into what a Labyrinth of Distraction and Confusion Men run,
when they forsake the ways of Justice and Righteousness: For when Mr. Hollis
and Colonel Long, 4 Car. were imprisoned for performing the Trust reposed in
them by their Country, they had the Testimony of a good Conscience for their
Support, and the known Laws for their Protection; and here they knew what to
trust to, and so they insisted upon the Laws, and by them in due time were
delivered from their Imprisonment; but now the Laws and Constitutions of the
Nation were broken down, and they charged at random by the Army, they had no
Defense to recur to, but for Safeguard fled beyond Sea. What became of Colonel
Long I cannot tell, but Mr. Hollis never returned till after King Charles the
Second's Restoration; and Sir Philip Stapleton being suspected to have the
Plague, was shut out of Calais, and 'twas said died in a Ditch.

What Thanks now had Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Waller, and Major
General Massey for all their valiant Services to the Parliament, whilst Oliver
was whistling to his Cambridg Teem of Committee Men, a new Tune of the way of
Ordinances, Dispensations, Righteousness, and Providence? and whereto can they
go to find Relief?

Glyn had so little Wit, as to believe the Law would be his Protection, and so
did abide a Trial: but he was mistaken in his Measures; for tho he defended
himself with much Prudence, yet he was discharged from being a Member of the
House, and committed to the Tower during their Pleasure. But the House
proceeded higher against Sir John Maynard, and ordered an Impeachment of High
Treason to be drawn up against him; and ordered Nichols to be taken into
Custody, but he escaped from the Messenger.

The English Covenanters could not be so purblind, as not to see whereto this
tended; and were madded that they which had begun the War, and by the Aid of
their Brethren of Scotland, were in a fair Possibility of bringing it to their
Desires against the King, should not only be outed of their conceived Glory and
Reward by these Upstarts of the Army, but also the principal of them to be
persecuted and destroyed for continuing firm to their Gude-Cause.

The Militia of London was settled upon the 4th of May, in the Management of the
Presbyterians, who were very industrious in completing their Companies, both
of the Trained-Bands and Militia; but this was counter to the Design of the
Army, and judged to be a Conspiracy against it: whereupon Fairfax (who bore the
Name, tho Cromwell ruled all) upon the 10th of June sent a Letter to the
Parliament, That the Militia of the City of London might be put into the Hands
of Persons that were better affected to the Army: Which the Commons tamely
submitted to; and upon the 23d of July repealed the Ordinance of the 4th of May.

Hereupon the City met in Common Council, and resolved to petition the Commons
against it, which they did; and upon the 26th, by the Sheriffs, and some of the
Common Council, delivered their Petition to the Commons: And about an Hour
after, about 1000 Apprentices delivered another Petition, complaining, That to
order the City's Militia was the City's Birthright, belonging to them by
Charters confirmed in Parliament; for Defense whereof, they had adventured
their Lives as far as the Army: And desired that the Militia might be put again
into the same Hands in which it was put with the Parliament's and City's
Consent, by the Ordinance of the 4th of May.

Upon the reading of this Petition, the Lords revoked the Ordinance of the 23d
of July, and renewed that of the 4th of May, and sent it down to the Commons
for their Consent, and kept back some of the Commons, till the Members within
agreed with the Lords, and then they returned: And after some time, they, or
some others, upon the rising of the House, took the Speaker and thrust him back
into the Chair, and there kept him and the Members, till they enforced them to
pass a Vote, That the King should come to London: And then both Houses
adjourned for four Days.

In this Interval, the Members which favored the Army, and the Speakers of
both Houses, went to the Army, and there complained of the Violences upon the
Parliament, tho none were done to the Lords: And after the four Days
Adjournment, the Houses met, and the Lords chose my Lord Hunsdon their Speaker,
and the Commons Mr. Henry Pelham, and passed these Votes:

1. That the King should come to London. 2. That the Militia of London should
be authorized to raise Forces for the Defense of the City. 3. That Power be
given to the same Militia to choose a General. And, 4. That the 11 Members
impeached by the Army should take their Seats in Parliament.
This was upon the 30th of July.

The Citizens armed with these Powers, proceed to raise Forces under the
Command of Sir William Waller, Major General Massey, and Colonel Pointz; but
these, tho numerous, being suddenly raised, so as the Soldiers not being well
listed, 'twas like no great Opposition could be made against an old experienced
and victorious Army: Besides, the Borough of Southwark were generally for the
Army; and a Party of the Army seized upon the Block-house at Gravesend, and
blocked up the City by Water toward the East, and the Army toward the West.

The Aldermen and Common Council of the City now desert their three Generals,
Waller, Massey, and Pointz, and sent to Fairfax for a Pacification; which he
granted them upon these Terms: 1. That they should desert the Parliament then
sitting, and the 11 Members. 2. That they should recall their Declaration lately
divulged. 3. That they should relinquish their present Militia. 4. That they
should deliver up to the General, all their Forts, and the Tower of London. 5.
That they should disband all the Forces they had lately ^aised, and do all
things else which were necessary for the Public Tranquillity.


All which the City submitted to: So the Speakers and Members which had run to
the Army returned again, and annulled all the Acts and Orders which had passed
since the 26th of July last.

Here observe, That the Members which did not run to the Army, but met in Time
and Place according to that Adjournment, were as much a Parliament, as those
which continued at Westminster after the King left them; and the Members which
met at Oxford were as much a Parliament as those which met after they were
restored by the Army.

When the Members were returned, the Commons voted an Impeachment of High
Treason against the Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Middlesex, and the Lords
Berkley, Hunsdon, Willoughby of Parham, and Maynard; such a Stalking-Horse was
Treason now made, and the Crime no more than what themselves had done after the
King left them. And Sir John Gage, the Lord Mayor, Alderman Bunce, Langham,
Cullam, and Adams, were committed to the Tower for High Treason, for Forcing
the Parliament. But if this were Treason in them, before the next Year goes
round you will see Cromwell out-treason this a Bar and half. And as Sir Phil.
Gurney, Sir Henry Garoway, and Sir George Whitmore, were committed to the Tower
for adhering to the King against the Parliament; so now the Mayor and Aldermen
were committed to the Tower for adhering to the Parliament against the Army.

During these Discords and Confusions, the Scots were in great Grumble, that
the Work of Reformation, which united both Kingdoms in Adherence to their
Solemn League and Covenant, was in danger to be overthrown by the
over-spreading of Heresy and Schism; which was so much more lamented, by how
much after their Bargain and Sale of the King, both Houses voted, That if the
King refused to pass Propositions for Peace, they will do nothing which may
break the Union and Affection of both Kingdoms, but to preserve the same. This
was the 28th of December, 1646.

Now both Factions, Parliament and Army, seem to court the King; and the
Parliament sent Propositions of Peace to the King at Hampton Court, the same
they sent to the King at New Castle, when he was in the Power of the Scots:
which you may read in Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 120. b. and 121. a.

But now the Mystery of Iniquity works; for Cromwell was as fearful the King
should agree with the Parliament, as the King was unwilling to agree to them:
and therefore Cromwell gave Instructions to the Commissioners, That if the King
would assent to Propositions lower than those of the Parliament, that the Army
would settle him again in his Throne. Hereupon the King returned Answer to the
Parliament, That he waved now the Propositions sent to him, or any Treaty upon
them, and flies to the Proposals of the Army, urges a Treaty upon them, and
such as he shall make; professes he will give Satisfaction to settle the
Protestant Religion, with Liberty to tender Consciences; to secure the Laws,
Liberty and Property, and Privileges of Parliament: and of those concerning
Scotland, he will treat apart with the Scots Commissioners. See Whitlock' s
Memoirs, fol. 271. b.

Upon the reading of the King's Answer, a Day was appointed by either House to
consider of it; and that in the mean time it be communicated to the Scots
Commissioners.

There was a Report at that time, and so yet continues, (tho I cannot find the
bottom of it, yet I am confident in time it will appear) that Cromwell made a
private Article with the King, That if the King closed with the Propositions of
the Army, Cromwell should be advanced to a Degree higher than any other, as
Vicar General of England, as Cromwell was in the Reign of Henry 8.

But the King was so Uxorious, that he would do nothing without communicating
it to the Queen; and wrote to her, That tho he assented to the Army's
Proposals, yet if by assenting to them he could procure Peace, it would be
easier then to take off Cromwell than now he was the Head that governed the Army.

Cromwell, who had his Spies upon every Motion of the King, intercepts these
Letters, and resolved never to trust the King again; yet doubted that he could
not manage his Designs, if the King were so near the Parliament and City as
Hampton Court: therefore Cromwell sent to the King, That he was in no Safety at
Hampton Court, by reason of the Hatred which the Adjutators had to him, and
that he would be in more Safety in the Isle of Wight. Hereupon the King, upon
the 11th of November (while the Parliament and Scots Commissioners were
debating the King's Answer to their Propositions) at Night made his Escape,
having Posthorses, and a Ship provided for him at Southampton, accompanied
only with Sir John Berkley, Colonel Leg, and Mr. Ashburnham, and came to the
Isle of Wight; which would morally have been impossible, if Cromwell and his
Agents had not put the King upon it.

But how concealedly soever Cromwell and his Son-in-law Ireton had carried the
Business of the King's Escape to the Isle of Wight, yet the Adjutators had some
Jealousy upon them, that they designed to have the King established; and
possessed the Soldiers with much Prejudice against them. Fairfax doubting the
Event of these Practices, dismissed the Adjutators to their several Regiments,
and sent most of their Officers to their several Charges, and appointed a
General Rendezvous of the Army at Cork-bush-field between Hertford and Ware,
upon the 14th; which the Adjutators endeavored to have prevented. The next Day
many Soldiers, of five whole Regiments, mutiny'd against their Officers, and
wore Marks of Distinction to be known from the rest. Cromwell, Ireton, and some
other of the Officers, struck at by the Adjutators, were very active in
suppressing them, and seized upon some of the principal Mutineers, and one or
two of them were shot before their Troops were reduced; and most of the
Mutineers, and the Officers which favored them, were tried at Court-Martials,
and cashiered; and three of them condemned to die. And for this Cromwell had the
Thanks of the House: but it will not be long before they shall find little Joy
of it.

From the Isle of Wight, the King, upon October the 18th, sent to the Members
for a personal Treaty of Peace at London: which, after much Debate, was agreed
to, upon these four Preliminaries.

1. An Act For Raising, Settling, and Maintaining Forces by Sea and Land,
within the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Dominion of Wales. 2. An
Act For recalling all Declarations, Oaths, and Proclamations against the
Parliament, or those who had adhered to them. 3. An Act, That those Peers who
were made after the Great Seal was carried from the Parliament, may be made
incapable of Sitting in the House of Peers. 4. That Power may be given to the
Houses, to adjourn as they shall think fit.
The King, it may be, not knowing Cromwell had intercepted his Letters to the
Queen, and so trusting to Cromwell's Promises, and the Scots Commissioners
flatly protesting against these Preliminaries, as opposite to Religion, the
Crown, and Agreement of the Kingdoms; refused to sign any Propositions till a
Peace was made, which might comprehend all Interests. Which had no other
Effects, than that the Lords and Commons Voted, 1. That they will make no
further Applications or Addresses to the King. 2. That no Addresses or
Applications be made to the King by any Person whatsoever, without Leave from
both Houses. 3. That the Person or Persons that shall make Breach of this
Order, shall incur the Penalty of High Treason. 4. That they will receive no
more Messages from the King; and that no Person do presume to bring any Message
from the King to both or either Houses of Parliament, or any other Person. But
these Votes were too hot to hold long.


These Votes were so pleasing to the Army, that it was declared by a Council of
War the 17th of January, That they resolved to endeavor to preserve the
Peerage and Rights, and the Rights of the Peers of England, notwithstanding any
Scandals upon them to the contrary. Yet within little more than a Year, the
Rump, set up by the Army, shall turn them out of doors, as dangerous and
useless.

Here see what a Labyrinth Men run into when they forsake the Paths of Justice!
for as Socrates says, Plato Eutiphro, If Men in Dissension will not submit to
some certain Rule which may determine them, their Dissensions will be endless:
and that the Will of the Gods, if it be divided, cannot be the Rule to
determine Justice; for Men in obeying one God, may disobey another.

If therefore the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation may not be the Rule
which may determine the Controversies between the King, the Members, the Scots,
and the Army, then nothing can; for else, what pleased one would displease the
other.

The King would gladly have had the Law to have determined the Controversies;
for this would have vested him in his Royal Power, and by the 18th of Henry 7.
would have justified all his Subjects who fought for him. But the Members would
not submit to this, being to divest themselves of the Power they thought they
had in their hands; nor the Scots, because their Solemn League and Covenant was
enacted by no Law in England; nor least of all would it please the Army, who
nourished Designs against the King, Members, and Scots.

To such a deplorable state is this poor King and Kingdom fallen, past all
humane Relief! yet it is admirable, to consider how Divine Justice pursued the
Causers of it, even in the Series by which they were promoted. The King, who
would not have the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation to be the Rules of his
Subjects Obedience, but his Prerogative, and Absolute Will and Pleasure, cannot
now by it command one Servant: He who before, against Law, committed so many of
his best Subjects close Prisoners, whereof several died in Prison, for
asserting his Subjects Rights, without any Benefit of Law, is now, by his
Subjects, made close Prisoner against Law, and without any Benefit of it: He
who before dissolved four Parliaments, because they in all dutiful Ways would
have addressed unto him to be reconciled to his Subjects, is now denied, under
Penalty of High Treason, to have any Address made to him by any of his
Subjects: He who before had so many Forests for his Pleasure, yet not contented
with what the Law and his Ancestors had left, but would break the Bounds of
them, that his Subjects Inheritance might become a Prey to wild Beasts, has not
now a Horse, Hound, or Beast, to take Pleasure in. But these things will not
stay here; for it is the unhappy Fate of Princes, rarely in their declining
state to stay till they fall to the bottom. And here we end the Year 1647; and
hereafter shall observe the Divine Justice overtaking the other Promoters of
the Miseries both in England, Scotland, and Ireland. And if I shall ill perform
it, yet it may be a Groundwork for another to do it better.

In this Confusion the Nation began to forget the times under the King's
Government, now they saw no end of these: And tho the Essex-Men, who had the
Bounds of their Forests broke down, and were the first who petitioned the
Parliament to redress Grievances, and bring Delinquents to condign Punishment,
yet they are now the first who petition the Commons for a Personal Treaty with
the King, and then the Surrey-Men; but were differently received, and some of
the Surrey-Men killed. This was in May, 1648.

The Scots too, offended that they and their Solemn League and Covenant were
not taken notice of in the Preliminary Treaty with the King, call a Parliament,
and order the Raising an Army to deliver the King out of Prison.

The rude Entertainment of the Essex and Surrey-Men, was so far from quelling
them, that they rise in Arms in Essex, Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Wales, and the
North, and declare for the King and People: Sir William Batton too, who was
Vice Admiral of the English Fleet, goes over to Prince Charles with 17 Men of
War, and declare for the King, having set Rainsborough (made Admiral by the
Army) on Shore. This was in May and June, and soon after, viz. in June, the
Surrey-Men rise, being headed by the Duke of Buckingham, and his Brother the
Lord Francis, with the Earl of Holland.

But it was decreed, that this Prince, who for 15 Years had violated the Laws
and Constitutions of this Nation, and without any Law or just Reason had so
often imprisoned his best Subjects for endeavoring to reconcile him to his
Subjects, should now himself, being made a Prisoner against Law, find no Relief
by Law, or Endeavors of his Loyal Subjects.

For Cromwell sends Horton into Wales, against Major General Laughorn, and
Colonel Poyer, who headed the Welsh, and had seized Pembrook and Tenby-Castles:
Fairfax marches into Kent, and Rainsborough into the North, where the
Northern-Men had seized Pontfract-Castle; and the Members restore the Earl of
Warwick to be Admiral, and fit out a Fleet under him, to suppress that which
joined the Prince of Wales.

Horton beats the Welsh, and took Laughorn and Poyer Prisoners, and besieges
and takes Pembrook and Tenby: but whilst he besieged these, Hamilton, who the
Year before was released from being a Prisoner in Pendennis-Castle by the King,
for holding Correspondence with the Covenanters while he was Commissioner, now
comes into England, to discharge the King from his Imprisonment, with a
numerous Army of Scots, which Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Major General Massey, and
many English join: against these, Cromwell, after the Surrender of Pembrook and
Tenby, marches, and utterly routs them, and takes Hamilton Prisoner.

Nor were the Fate of the Kentish, Essex, and Suffolk Men better; for Fairfax
fights, and beats the Kentish Men at Maidstone; the Remainder, under my Lord
Goring (whom the King had made Earl of Norwich) cross the Thames at Greenwich,
and join the Essex Men, headed by Sir Charles Lucas, and march to Colchester,
where my Lord Capel, and many Suffolk Men, joined them: Fairfax pursues them,
and after a stubborn Siege of 11 Weeks, forces it to surrender, being reduced
to extreme Famine; and after caused Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, to
be shot to Death.

Equal to this, was the Success of the Surrey-Men; for they were routed by Sir
Michael Lewesly, and my Lord Francis killed near Kingston: But the Duke of
Buckingham and the Earl of Holland, with those which were escaped, fled over
Kingston-bridg, and were pursued by Colonel Scroop, and overtaken at St. Neots,
where Major General Dolbier is killed, the Earl of Holland taken Prisoner, but
the Duke of Buckingham escaped.

But the Northern-Men, besieged in Pontfract Castle, are not so easily subdued;
on the contrary, a Party of about 30 Horse break through the Besiegers, and
surprise Rainsborough in his Bed at Doncaster, about 12 Miles from Pontfract,
and kill him, because he refused to be carried off a Prisoner; but Pure Famine
at last forced the Besieged to surrender.

The revolted Fleet, now commanded by the Princes Rupert and Maurice, partly
cajoled by the Earl of Warwick, their former Admiral, and unwilling to forsake
their Country, Wives and Children, in great part return to the Parliament; the
rest were after pursued by Blake and Popham to Ireland, from thence to
Portugal; from whence they were forced by Blake to Carthagena, where Blake run
the Princes Ships on shore: yet the Princes having then but three Ships left,
and having no Port in Europe to protect them, seek for one in the West Indies,
where Prince Maurice is lost in a Hurricane; and Prince Rupert after got into
France, and sold the Remainder of this miserable Fleet, being two tattered
Ships, to Mazarine, to fit out himself for other Adventures.

Whilst the Army was thus busied abroad, the Members having got possession of
the Fleet, and the City of London being well affected to them, they join with
the Scottish Commissioners, and rescind the Votes of Non-Addresses to the King;
and in September appoint a Conference with the King at Newport in the Isle of
Wight, to continue for 40 Days; and to that purpose, take the King out of
Prison, and allow him the Liberty of the Island: and the King upon the Matter,
with Reluctance enough, grants the Scots and Members their own Demands.

But neither the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation, nor the Endeavors of
his Loyal Subjects, nor the joint Desires of the Scots and Members, who had
brought the King to this Condition, could protect this unhappy Prince from his
approaching Ruin: for the Army, every where victorious over the Scots and
Royalists, draw together, and make a Remonstrance against all Peace with the
King; that Justice may be done upon him; that the Crown and Church Lands, be
sold to pay their Army, and that the present Parliament be dissolved, and
another called, which they present to the Members the Twentieth of November.
And herein Cromwell and his Son-in-law Ireton were the principal Promoters.

But the Members were intent upon the King's Answer to their Propositions, and
laid aside the Army's Remostrance, which they take as a slighting of them, and
then seized the King in the Isle of Wight, and make him Prisoner in
Hurst-Castle, an unhealthy Place; and march to London, pu^^^^ Garrisons into
Whitehall, Noble-Mens Houses, and posted themselves about the Palace Yard.

Notwithstanding the Member^n^^ upon the first of December, and vote the King's
Concessions to be a sufficient Ground for a Peace; and then adjourn for a Week:
But when the Members were to meet again, they found all the Avenues to the
House beset with Soldiers, who exclude all which were not of their Faction from
entering the House, which were not one fourth part, and make the Residue
Prisoners.

So that if the Mayor, Sir John Gage, and the Aldermen his Brethren, were
guilty of High Treason for committing a Force upon the Parliament, viz. for
continuing the Militia of London in the City the Year before, how much more was
it High Treason in Cromwell and his Agents, to keep back by Force three Fourths
of the Members from entering the House, and making them Prisoners, that the
Rumps of the rest might do his Journey-work?

So farewell Presbytery, and all the Scottish Trumpery in England: nor shall
these secluded Members ever meet more, but to dissolve themselves and make room
for another Parliament, which shall legally persecute them, and their Solemn
League and Covenant, as much as they by it persecuted the King, and their
fellow Subjects, against Law. Nor was Presbytery much longer lived in Scotland,
where they shall never see it restored by this now Race of Kings, which shall
plague them with the Exercise of Archbishops and Bishops, which by their
Covenant they are sworn to abolish; and cut off the Head of the principal of
their Faction, allowing them as little place for the Exercise of Presbytery, as
they now do the Episcopal Party.

Having, tho but in Epitome, seen the various Accidents in War, whereby the
King came to be in this Distress, before we declare his End, and the manner of
it, it is fit, in short, to take notice of the several Treaties of Peace between
the King and Parliament, and the Improbability of the good Success in any of
them.

The first Propositions for Peace which the Parliament sent to the King, was
June the 2d, when the King was at York, before the War broke out, which were
Nineteen; which you may read at larger in Sir Richard Baker, f. 518. a. b.

In these Propositions no mention is made either of the Scots Covenant, or
abolishing Episcopacy; yet some of them were so inconsistent with Monarchy, and
Arbitrary in the Parliament, as the King in Honor and Conscience could not
condescend to them.

I say the King could not in Honor or Conscience condescend to the 9th
Proposition, 15 and 16 Propositions, to settle the Militia as the Parliament
have ordered (without the King) That all Forts and Castles of the Kingdom be
disposed of by the Parliament (viz. The Houses) and that the King discharge all
his Guards and Forces, and not to raise any but in case of actual Rebellion.
But how could this be done by the King, when the Militia and Forts of the
Kingdom were in the Power of the Houses?

So here the King, who by Virtue of his Office, is obliged to preserve the Laws
and Constitutions of the Nation, and to suppress all Disturbers of them at
home, and to defend the Nation from all Foreign Invasion, has no means to do
any of them.

Objection. But the King had so often violated the Laws and Constitutions of
the Nation, by being armed with these Powers, that the Nation could be in no
Safety, if they were continued in him.

Answer. It Is true, the Nation was in a very calamitous Estate herein: But if
the Members had only made it their Business how to have restrained the King
herein, and to have preserved the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation, it
would have had another Face than now, when the Members are setting up
themselves to do the same thing which they feared the King should act.

I say, the King could not in Honor or Conscience agree to the 13th
Proposition, That the Justice of Parliament (viz. the Members) should pass upon
all Delinquents, and they to appear and abide by their Censure: For Delinquent
is a Word unknown to our Laws, and so equivocal, that it may signify whatever
the Members pleased.

So that if the King had agreed to these Propositions, he would have been a
King that could neither have executed Justice, nor showed Mercy; and the Houses
have an unlimited Arbitrary Power to do whatever they pleased.

To the Propositions the King returns a sharp Answer, That the Houses contrary
to Law, had pressed their Ordinances upon the People, wrested from him the
Command of the Militia; countenanced the Treason of Hotham, and had directed to
the People Invectives against his Government, and asperst him with favoring
Papists; and therefore protested, that if he were utterly vanquished and a
Prisoner, in a worse Condition than any of his most unfortunate Predecessors
had ever been reduced to, he would never stoop so low as to grant these
Demands, and to make himself of a King of England a Duke of Venice.

But when the Covenanters in Scotland sent their Proposition to his Majesty, he
returned Answer, he would rather die than submit to them, and from a King of
England make himself a Duke of Venice: Yet the next Year of his own Accord went
into Scotland, and by Act of Parliament granted the Covenanters all they
desired, (which yet perplexed all the subsequent Treaties of Peace in England)
and more, as the Case now stood.

The next Treaty was at Oxford, in the beginning of 1643, which broke off the
15th of April, and nothing agreed to upon this Score: The Parliament
Commissioners gave such Reasons for the King to assent to one of the most
material Points of the Treaty, that the King assented to it; but being 12 a
Clock at Night, it could not then be reduced to Writing, but he promised it
should next Morning, when the King gave them a Paper quite contrary; whereupon
the Treaty broke off. See Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 65. a. b.

For in the next Treaty at Vxbridg, which was in December, 1644, the Parliament
not only insisted, that the King's Nephews, Rupert and Maurice, though Princes
Foreign born, and so no Subjects to the King of England, but many of the
principal Lords and Gentry, who assisted the King in this War, and who by the
11 Hen. 7. 18. were protected for assisting the King, should be excepted out of
Pardon by an Act of Indemnity; which if they had had no Law to have protected
them, yet the King could not in Conscience have offered them up a Sacrifice for
assisting him.

But another Difficulty arose in this Treaty, which the Parliament would have
imposed upon the King, contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation,
viz. To extirpate Episcopacy, and to impose the Scots Covenant and Directory
upon the Nation, though the Bishops were excluded their Sitting in the House of
Lords, by an Act in 1641, and none in Orders to exercise any Civil Office: So
that the Houses not content with what had been already granted, but grasping at
more, they lost all; for in the first Parliament, Car. 2. they were restored to
their Seats in Parliament again.

Objection. But if Episcopacy were Jure Divino, as the King was informed by his
English Bishops; and therefore the King could not in Conscience submit to the
abolishing of it; then it is Jure Divino in Scotland, as well as England; and
if the King of his own Accord, could go out of England, to abolish it in
Scotland, Why should the King against the Advice of both Nations, not do the
same in England?

Answer. He that shall answer for all the Actions of this Prince, shall have a
great Task: Nor can I give any other Answer to it, than that because a Man has
done an ill Act, it shall be a Precedent to him to do it again.

But if the King should have consented to abolish Episcopacy in England, and
set up Presbytery, I do not see any Benefit the King could have reaped by it,
according to the Covenanters Practice and Principles: For, if the Scots (after
the King had abolished Episcopacy in Scotland, and set up Presbytery there, and
that the Scots had thereupon promised all Obedience to the King in time to
come; and declared by Act of Parliament, That it was detestable and damnable
Treason in the highest Degree, for any of the Scots Nation either conjunctly or
singly, to levy Arms, or any Military Forces upon any Pretense whatsoever,
without the King's Command) could raise Arms, unprovoked by the King, and
against his express Command, and invade England; why should the English
Covenanters, after the King should have abolished Episcopacy in England, be
more obliged to perform any Agreement they made with the King in England, then
the Scots Covenanters were in Scotland?

When the King desired the Scots Parliament, upon the breaking out of the Irish
Massacre and Rebellion, to assist him against the Irish, they refused, because
Ireland was not subject to Scotland; and tho England be not subject to
Scotland, yet the Scots, against the King's Command, can assist by Arms the
Parliament against him: So that if the Covenant could entitle the Scots to be
so false, perfidious and treacherous to the King after he had abolished
Episcopacy in Scotland; Why should not this be a Precedent for the English
Covenanters to be so in England, after the King should abolish Episcopacy in
it, and establish Presbytery?

The Overtures for a Treaty at Oxford in November 1644, preceded that at
Vxbridg, whence, upon the King's Desire, it was adjourned, and Passes
reciprocally of safe Conduct were granted to Commissioners on both sides to
meet the 29th of January, wherein the Commissioners from Scotland were included.

The Scots Commissioners being included in this Treaty, you need not doubt but
their principal Care shall be to establish their Solemn League and Covenant,
and the Presbyterian Government as firm in England as in Scotland; and to this
end, the three first days were set apart for Religion, three other Days for the
Militia, and three other days for the Settlement of Ireland.

How humble soever the Scots were (if you will take their Word) yet the first
Debate arose between the English and Scots Commissioners concerning Precedence,
which you may read in Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 122. a. b.

But when the Business concerning Religion came to be debated, nothing less
than that Presbytery was Jure Divino would down with the Scots; nor was
Episcopacy less Jure Divino by the English Commissioners for Religion. But both
these Assertions are false and blasphemous, for Jus Divinum is so inseparably
inherent in God, as cannot be communicated to any Creature: and though God by
Divine Law or Institution did empower Bishops and Priests with Episcopal and
Priestly Power, to perform their Offices designed by God, for the planting and
continuing the Gospel; yet the Jus Divinum, from whence these Institutions were
derived, remains the same in God as before. As God by the Law of Nature gives
Parents a Dominion over their Children, and Husbands over their Wives; yet the
Divine Right which gives these Powers, is the same as before; and Parents and
Husbands have no Divine Right hereby, but a Temporal Right by Nature, or the
Law of Nature: so Bishops and Priests have no Divine Right to exercise their
Ghostly Powers, but a Spiritual Right given them by God's Law or Institution,
supernaturally or extraordinarily given. If Bishops and Priests had a Divine
Right, they might create Divine Laws, which in Terminis I believe none of them
will affirm: However you may see how the Theologues (as they call themselves)
impose by this Cant upon the World; and what endless Discords, Factions and
Wars have been raised hereby, no Man conversant in History can be ignorant of.
The Principal whereof was Dr. Steward, and Mr. Henderson and Marshall for
Presbytery: but the Zeal on both Parts being so obstinate, as well as
contradictory, would have taken up more than all their Time in these Broils, if
a Stop had not been put to them upon the Motion of the Marquess of Hartford, on
the King's Part, and the Earl of Pembrook, Mr. Hollis, and other Commissioners,
on the Parliament's; that they might proceed upon the other Points of the
Militia and Ireland.

In both these there was as little Agreement as in that of Religion, not any
one Point being agreed to by the King's Commissioners; so the Treaty ended, and
nothing concluded.

The other Treaties at New Castle, Hampton Court, and the Isle of Wight, we
have taken notice of before. So that the King was as unsuccessful in his
Treaties, as in his Arms.

The Catastrophe of this Tragedy resolves into the King himself: for this
Juncto, after called the Rump-Parliament, having thus purged the House, assume
to themselves the Supreme Power of Ordering the English Affairs; confirm the
Vote of Non-Addresses to the King, and raze the Votes of having a Conference
with the King, and the Declaration that the King's Concessions were a
sufficient Ground for a Peace, out of the Journals of the House: And vote,
first, that all Power resides in the People: Secondly, That the Power belongs
to the Peoples Representatives in the House of Commons: Thirdly, That the Votes
of the Commons have the Force of a Law without the King: Fourthly, That to take
Arms against the Representatives of the People, or the Parliament, is
High Treason: Fifthly, That the King himself took up Arms against the
Parliament, and therefore is guilty of all the Blood shed in this Civil War,
and ought by his own Blood to expiate it.

The Nation was astonished at these Votes: for the Person of the King of
England was ever esteemed Sacred; and therefore tho his Ministers were always
accountable in Parliament for using, or abusing the Name of the King, to
gratify their Ambition and wicked Designs against the King or Kingdom, yet in
no time was any King of England arraigned and judged to die by his own
Subjects; and tho Edward the Second, Richard the Second, Henry the Sixth, and
Edward the Fifth were murdered by wicked Men, yet none of these suffered upon
pretense of Justice.

But lame-footed Vengeance shall overtake both Rump and Army, and as they both
joined by Force to impose these upon the King and Nation, so both without
Force, or any Man killed in their Defense, shall be cashiered with all
imaginable Ignominy and Reproach. These Men, whom nothing but the King's and
his Loyal Subjects Blood could satiate against Law, shall by Law have their own
Blood shed in the most terrible manner the Law can inflict: these Men who would
have the Crown and Church Lands for their Avarice, shall either die or be
hanged as a Company of Beggars: Richard Cromwell, Oliver's Heir, being undone to
pay the Charge of his Father's Funeral; or those who had Estates shall forfeit
them, to increase the Revenues of the Crown.

The Regicides, to put the best Face they could upon this audacious Act, send
the Bill for Trial of the King up to the Lords for their Concurrence; but so
far were the Lords from concurring, that they threw the Bill over the Bar:
Hereupon the Rump vote the Lords dangerous and useless; yet Henry Martin said,
they were useless, but not dangerous. Then the Rumpers advise with the Judges
about the Trial of the King, who unanimously declare it against Law, and the
Scots Commissioners protest against it. But neither Authority, Law nor Reason,
would take place with those Men; so they erect a new Court never heard of
before, called a High Court of Justice for the Trial of the King, to consist of
(I think) Seventy, two thirds of which were Soldiers, who by putting the King
to Death expected the Reward of the Inheritance both of the Crown and Church.

If it be Misery to have been happy, to what a miserable State have these
cursed Minions, Flatterers and Sycophants brought one of the greatest and most
highborn Princes in the Western World, to gratify their Ambition, Lust and
Avarice? for this Prince whom they would have to rend his Subjects from their
Laws, has now no Subjects who dare protect him by the Laws: He who before so
often gloried, that to him alone belonged the Power of Proroguing, Adjourning
and Dissolving Parliaments, who never did him Wrong, but met to assist him
against those who wronged him, and to have reconciled him to his Subjects, has
now no Power to dissolve this Rump of a Parliament which will not be reconciled
to him: He who before so often called his truly Loyal Subjects, Undutiful,
Seditious and Vipers, (Terms unusual in Princes) shall hear himself called
Tyrant, Murderer, and Traitor, by his implacable Subjects: He who before so
often gloried, he was only accountable to God for all his Actions, shall be now
called to an Account by a company of Men, for Actions whereof they themselves
were much more guilty, and be sent to God to pass his Accounts there also.

For upon the 20th of January the King was haled before this Assembly, where he
was charged of Treason, Tyranny and Murder, for raising War against the
Parliament and People of England: Tho it is evident the Members seized the
Militia, the Tower of London, and Fleet, which Powers were inherent in the
King, and shut him out of Hull, and granted Commissions for levying Soldiers
before the King set up his Standard at Nottingham. But admit the King did first
raise Arms to have forced the Parliament, and first actually set up his
Standard against them, and that was a Crime, yet was the Regicides Crime
greater, who had forced the Parliament, and set up themselves instead of it.

The King, now too late, flies to the Laws of the Land for his Protection,
protests against the Jurisdiction of the Court, as established by no Legal
Authority, and declares his Life was not so dear to him as his Honor and
Conscience, and the Laws and Liberties of his People, and that he will lose his
Life, rather than submit to such a Tyrannical Court. And at last the King
desired to be heard before the Lords and Commons, in some things which
concerned the Peace of the Kingdom, and Liberty of the Subjects: but this too
was denied: And so the 4th day after this Appearance, Bradshaw the President
gave Sentence upon him to lose his Head, all the Court to the number of 67,
owning it by standing up: Which Sentence was executed the 30th of January.

The Character of King Charles the First.
THus fell one of the greatest and most highborn Princes of the Western World.
In his Person he was somewhat more than ordinarily tall, and the Composition of
it was framed in most exact natural Proportion of Parts; so that he was very
active, and of a fine Mein in his Motion, which was commonly more than
ordinarily fast: yet he appeared best on Horseback, and excelled in managing
his Horse; so that when he was in Spain, in sight of the King, Queen, the
Infanta's, and the Infanta Maria, whom he courted, or at least seemed to do so)
and innumerable other Spectators, he took the Ring in his first Course. His
Visage was long, and appeared best when he did not speak; for he had a natural
Impediment in his Speech, and would often stutter in it, especially when he was
in Passion.

To these Natural Endowments may be added, a Temperance in Eating and Drinking,
and Chastity (tho his Enemies unjustly traduced him otherways) rarely to be
found in Princes. He was born in Scotland, about two Years before his Father
became King of England; and being bred from his Infancy in a most luxurious and
flattering Court, tho he avoided the Luxury of it, yet the Flattery of it took
such deep Root in him, that he would never permit free Counsel to take any
Impression in him. In his Nature he was over parsimonious, ill becoming so
great a Prince.

He laid the Foundation of an unhappy Reign before he became King, not only in
his Dissimulation in the Treaty of Marriage with the King and Infanta of Spain,
to the Displeasure of his Father; but much more in the French Treaty, not only
in submitting to grant a Toleration of the Popish Religion, and that his
Children should be brought up under their Mother till they were twelve Years
old, but by engaging to assist the French King with a Fleet against the
Reformed in France, which he did, tho the French broke their Faith, in denying
Mansfield to land the Army at Calais raised for the Recovery of the Palatinate.

Unlike his Predeces^or Henry the Fifth, who so soon as he became King,
banished all his Flatterers and loose Companions, and betaking himself to grave
and wise Counsel, he became the most Renowned and Victorious of all our English
Kings: Charles became more wilful, and gave himself to be more governed by
Favorites after he became King than before: So that the insite Piety and
Affection which is due to Parents, and usually expressed in some mournful
Demeanor upon their Death, took no Impression in him after his Father's Death;
but contrary Passions against his Father's Counsel and Will prevailed upon him:
For next day after his Father's Death, only the King and Buckingham present,
the Keeper, Williams, coming to wait upon him; the King asked him whether the
Parliament were dissolved upon his Father's Death? Which when the Keeper told
him it was, the King commanded him to issue out new Summons for calling
another, and not to stay a day, for Subsidies must be had for carrying on a War
against Spain: and when the Keeper advised him to consider a little hereof, and
that before Writs were issued out, Interest should be made about Elections, the
King in Displeasure turned from him: Which you may read in the second Book and
second Folio of the Keeper's Life. And these two things were observable in this
Prince, That when any advised him against his Will, he would never ask it
after, or be Friends with him; and that in all his Reign, as well in Prosperity
as in Adversity, he would never own any one of his Irregularities to be so, but
justified them all to his Death.

As Henry was the most self-denying of all his glorious Actions, ascribing them
only to God; so Charles upon all occasions in all his irregular Actions,
gloried he was accountable to none but God for them.

After he was married, he became the most uxorious Husband of all our English
Kings, except Henry the Sixth; and being entangled by the Articles of Marriage,
which the Queen fostered, and the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation contrary
to them, which his Parliaments steadfastly asserted, he became both ways uneasy,
and to reconcile them was impossible. But to me it seems, how uxorious soever
the King was, yet during Buckingham's Regency (for so it may be truly called)
he had an Ascendency over the Queen, as appears by the French War in the second
Year of the King, notwithstanding all the Power of the Queen against it.

He was unaffable in his Conversation, and Approaches to him very difficult,
and those with such strained Submissions as were never required by any of his
Predecessors. As his Actions were without Counsel, sudden, and inconsiderate;
so were his Resolutions as variable and uncertain, so that oftentimes he would
change them the same day: And as his Actions were without Counsel, so were his
Designs without Secrecy, which blasted them as well at Home as Abroad.

He was so superstitiously addicted to the Arminian Clergy, which flattered
him, that I do not find, except Juxton Bishop of London, that he preferred any
others in the Church, till he fell into Adversity.

In his adverse Fortune he would betake himself to contrary Extremes, yet be as
inconstant in them as in his Actions in Prosperity: He was only constant in his
Affections to the Queen, (after he had given up his Favorites in his
prosperous Fortune to the Parliament) and her Counsels fixed steadfast in him,
tho in his Declarations to the Kingdom and Parliament he professed otherwise;
and herein he was as unhappy as he was before in his Designs in his Prosperity;
for they, whether by Fate or his own Imprudence, became known to his Enemies,
who blazed them abroad, not only to the Nation, but all the World: so that the
sincerity of his Promises and Declarations became suspected as well by his
Friends as Enemies, and all Accommodation with them more difficult; whereby it
came to pass that his Armies being subdued by them, and thereby falling into
the Hands of his Enemies, he became a Sacrifice to them in the 49th Year of his
Age, having reigned 23 Years, ten Months, and three Days, leaving six Children,
three Sons, Charles Prince of Wales, James Duke of York, and Henry Duke of
Gloucester, whereof the two elder were Exiles; and three Daughters, Mary
Princess of Orange, and Elizabeth a Virgin, who not long survived him, and
Henrietta Maria born at Exeter.

So that as King John, and his Son Henry the Third, lost all Normandy, and the
greatest part of Aquitain to the French, by endeavoring a more than Legal
Jurisdiction over their Subjects, whereby they lost their Love and Obedience;
so these two Princes, Father and Son, by raising and Arbitrary Power over their
Subjects, not only lost their Honor Abroad, but with their own Subjects, (and
for want of whose Assistance this King lost his Life) and suffered the French
to grow so great, as to endanger the Safety of their own Subjects in the Realms
of England, Scotland and Ireland.

I Will conclude this Story with one which a learned Gentleman who lived in those
Times affirmed: When the Duke of Buckingham was stabbed by Felton, 1628, the
Earl of Portland was then newly made Lord Treasurer; and the King to manifest
his Affection to the Duke, ordered the Treasurer to issue out of the Exchequer
30000 l. I think, for a solemn Funeral for the Duke: but the Treasurer
unwilling the King should be at so hateful an Expense at a time when the King
was at War with France and Spain, told the King, that the Sum laid out in
erecting a stately Tomb for the Duke, would be a more lasting Monument of his
Favor to the Duke, than a Funeral-Expence, which would be but the Work of a
Day, and soon forgot: The King assented, and several Patterns were brought, and
what the King liked the Treasurer disliked, till at last the King pitched upon
one, which he said he would have; but then the Treasurer said, Sir, what will
the World say, that you should be at such an Expense for a Favorite, when your
Father has not a Stone to cover him? which struck the King so, as he proceeded
no farther in it. I remember (I think it was in 1669.) that the Commons voted
50000 l. for the Charge of taking up this King's Body, and the solemn Funeral
of it, and to have a Monument for it; but as if it had been blasted by Fate, it
was not done, King Charles his Son, they say, forbidding it.

As to the State of the Nation, in reference to our Foreign Neighbor Nations,
at the Death of King Charles, we shall find the Dutch making their Advantage of
the English Dissensions, as before they did of the easy and remiss Nature of
King James, when in the Year 1618, they seized upon the Island of Amboyna, and
expelled the English thence, to say no worse: For Sir William Courten and Sir
Paul Pindar, at the desire of King Charles, had fitted out two Ship fraighted
with our Native Commodities to endeavor an Establishment of a Trade to China,
where our Cloths were much more useful than in the Trade to the East Indies,
where the Trade is carried on in the Torrid Zone, and so our Cloths of little
use; whereas the North and middle Parts of China are either cold or temperate,
and so our Cloths of great use there, and desirable by the Natives. At this
time the English had no East India Company, but the Trade was free to the
English, as that to Spain then was, and so now is; nor was the East India
Company incorporated till the Year 1657, by Oliver Cromwell. The Ships which Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar fitted and fraighted out, wherein the Earl
of Shrewsbury, and I have heard, the Earls of Northumberland and Warwick were
concerned, one was called the Bona Esperanza, the other the Henry Bonadventura,
which made a more hopeful Voyage to China, than can be expected to any Place in
the East Indies.

The Dutch, as jealous of a Partner in the East India Trade, as a Dotard is of
a fair Wife, the Pope of his Triple Crown, or the King of Spain of his
West Indies, set out, without any Declaration of War, two Men of War under the
Command of one Geland, to intercept these Merchantmen in the return of their
Voyage homeward; and met with the Bona Esperanza between Goa and Maccao, in the
Straits of Malacca, and take her with all her Cargo, and carry her to Batavia,
and there (without any legal Process) confiscate the Ship and all her Lading;
this was in the Year 1643. And also the same Year they seize the other Ship the
Henry Bonadventura near the Island of Mauritius, which, with all her Cargo, the
Dutch seized, nor ever made any Restitution of either to this day. How well
King Charles the Second vindicated his Subjects herein will hereafter appear;
and how impossible it became for the English to retrieve this Trade after
Oliver had established the East India Company exclusive to all other English
Men, is obvious to any Man: But what cannot Queen-Money, and a company of -- do?

It was now above thirteen Years since the Dutch, in the Year 1635, entertained
the English fled from Laud and Wren's Injunctions, whereby they acquired the
Art of making the Woollen Manufactury of Essex and Suffolk, which before the
Dutch knew not; and the Wars in England breaking out, the English did not so
fully supply the Countries within the Sound, as before; and then the Dutch were
rather Interlopers, than Competitors in the Trade of Woollen Manufacturies to
those Countries.

This want of Supply put the Silesians and Polanders upon a Necessity of being
supplied other ways, and making a Virtue of Necessity, got Artificers to
instruct the Natives of Silesia, and the Werstern Parts of Poland, by
compounding the Wools of Poland and Silesia, to make a coarse sort of Cloths*
called Slesys, which clad the poorer and ordinary sort of the Inhabitants,
whereby the English to this day have lost the Trade of coarse Cloths to these
Places, which before they solely enjoyed. This was one Reason that the Dutch
became Competitors with the English in the other Trades for Woollen
Manufactures within the Sound.

For tho the English Manufactures were much better, and could be sold cheaper
than the Dutch; yet the Dutch Navigation for foreign Vent, was manifoldly
cheaper, and more convenient than the English, in regard of the Convenience of
their building Ships proper for all Trades, which the English understood not;
for a Dutch Vessel of like Dimensions, besides the convenience of building, is
built near half cheaper than the English can, and then is navigated with less
than two thirds of the Hands.

To this Cheapness of Shipping and Navigation, is added the Advantage the Dutch
have above the English in compunding Fraights in this Navigation; for all the
Countries within the Sound stand in need of Salt, and covet drinking Wines and
Brandy: These the Dutch not only import, by the Cheapness of Navigation,
cheaper than the English can, but paying little or no Customs upon their
Importation, can vend them so much cheaper in their Trades into the Sound, as
their Navigation is cheaper, and the English Customs are more: So that if the
Navigation of the English be double dearer, when Ships of like Dimensions be
full freight, then if a Dutch Ship be full freight, and an English but half
freight, the English becomes fourfold dearer; and this became so much more to
the English, by how much the English Fraights were less after the Silesians and
Polanders had got the Art of making Slesys; from thence it followed, that the
English (by reason of the Dearness of their Navigation) could not sell their
Cloths so cheap, but the Dutch became Competitors with them, having learnt the
Art of making Cloths from those which fled into Holland to avoid Laud's and
Wren's Persecutions, in not complying with their Ecclesiastical Injunctions.

This Year 1648, at the Treaty of Munster, a Peace was made between the King of
Spain and the States of the United Netherlands, wherein they were declared free
States, and so had as free a Trade with Spain as the English; so that tho the
English upon the matter had had the sole Trade to Spain, exclusive to the
Dutch, for near forty five Years, now the Dutch were Competitors in it with the
English, as well as that into the Sound, with Woollen Manufactures.

In this Treaty too a Peace was made between the Empire and the Swede, so much
to the Advantage of the Protestants, that the Pope's Nuncio protested against
it, yet the Elector Palatine must be content with half his Country, the upper
Palatinate being given to the Duke of Bavaria (Head of the Catholic League
against the Protestants) who is made a Seventh Elector.

A DETECTION OF AFFAIRS During the INTER-REGNVM, OR In the INTERVAL between the
Death of King Charles I. and the Restoration of King Charles II.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Administration of Affairs by the Rump-Parliament.
FAith, Truth, and Piety, are rarely found in Men who follow Camps. The Army,
who in their Remonstrance would have the Parliament dissolved, and another
called which might settle the Nation; now they had got the Rump to be their
Head, whereby they may share the Church, Crown Lands, and Delinquents Estates
among themselves, regard neither Parliament nor Nation; and sure never was
there such a Generation, who so impudently out-braved Truth, and all that may
be called Sacred. If you could force a Belief into them, they first told you
they fought for King and Parliament; then they declared for the King and People
against the Parliament; and now they have taken off the King, if you will have
any Benefit of their Protection, you must engage to their Government, without
King or House of Lords, and be content with a piece of the Commons, called the
Rump.

Not content with the Death of the King, the Rump proceeds to abolish Monarchy,
and place the original Power of Government in the People, whose Representatives
they are, if you will take their Word; and voted it High Treason to restore
Monarchy, or to assist, or pray for Charles Stuart, or any of that Line;
overthrow the King's Statue, with an Exit tyrannus Regum ultimus, Nor are they
satiated with the Blood of the King, but erect another High Court of Injustice,
whereof one Lisle, an ignorant Fellow, was President; who condemns the Marquess
Hamilton, Earl of Holland, and Lord Capel, for raising Arms against the
Parliament, which themselves had destroyed.

But tho the Rump and Army were established upon these strange Principles, yet
being the Instruments of Divine Vengeance, like a Torrent broke loose from
raging Seas, in less than five Years time they overwhelm not only England, but
Ireland and Scotland, almost pulled the Dutch States up by the Roots, and made
France and Spain tremble. But that we may observe what followed, let us see what
went before.

The Scots were the first who invaded England against the King, to impose their
Solemn League and Covenant, which was more against the English Laws and
Constitutions than Laud's Service-Books, Canons, and High Commission, were
against the Scottish. In July last the Scots invaded England, commanded by the
Marquess Hamilton; in August, Cromwell routs, and utterly overthrows this Army,
and takes Hamilton Prisoner: So the Scots who began these Wars first, are the
first chastised by this English Army. But this is but the Earnest of what shall
follow.

The secluded Members who first joined the Scots, beginning first with an
equivocal Protestation, but after downright joined with the Scots in their
Covenant, are now not only turned out of the House by the Rump, but kept in
nasty Prisons, till they became as little dangerous as The House of Lords.

The horrid Irish Massacre and Rebellion succeeded in the third place: And now
the Rump, having established themselves by subduing of the Scots under
Hamilton, and deposing the secluded Members, are laying Rods in Piss to scourge
these abominable Irish. But before we proceed, let us see how things stood in
Ireland.

In October 1641. the Irish Massacre was, which succeeded in a Rebellion, in
which Richlieu's Scarlet was as deep dyed, as in the Scottish and English
Commotions. The Head of this accursed Crew was John Baptista Pennuncio, the
Pope's Nuncio, who in his Passage through France threatened he would suffer no
Man to live in Ireland that wished well to the King, or to the English Affairs.
Thus you see how all the Factions conspired against the King, the Laws and
Constitutions of England: But for these last seven Years, viz. so long as the
Distractions were continued in England, the War was pursued but by halves in
Ireland.

King Charles, in his Lifetime, had made the Marquess of Ormond Lieutenant of
Ireland, who in 1643 made a Truce with the Irish, that the King might make use
of the English in England: But the Irish kept their Faith no better in it, than
the Scots had before with the King in the Peace in 1639. For on a sudden they
rise against the Marquess (now the English are sent into England) and had
surprised him, if he had not been informed before, and escaped into Dublin: and
being in no Condition to defend it, but obliged to deliver it up either to the
English sent by the Parliament, or to the Irish, he gave it up to the English,
who make Colonel Jones Governor; and so Ormond leaves Ireland.

After the Marquess was withdrawn, the Nuncio behaved himself (like a
Churchman) with such a Despotical Tyranny, that he became intolerable, even to
the Irish themselves; who, being pressed by Jones, Coot, and Monk, combine in a
Body, and send to the Queen and to the Prince of Wales (for then the King was
close Prisoner in the Isle of Wight) to return the Marquess of Ormond, and they
would submit to his Authority, and join to expel the Scots and Parliament's
Forces. The Nuncio taking this for an Affront to his Authority (being that of
the Apostolic See, which is infallible) threatens Excommunication to them who
should not obey him; but neither he, nor his Excommunication, were obeyed, but
was forced to Capitulate with the Irish themselves to procure his Departure,
which was as shameful, as his Entrance was proud and insolent.

Upon the Marquess's Return, he entered into most dishonorable Articles with
the Irish; which yet would not please Owen To Oneal, who joined with the
Parliament's Forces, and relieved Londonderry, then besieged by the Lord Ardes.

After this Pacification with the Irish, such as it was, Ormond raises a
numerous Army, and by my Lord Inchiqueen, routs a Party of Jones's going to
Drogheda, who takes the Town, and Dundalk, Green-Castle, Newry, and Trim, and
returns Victorious to the Marquess. Hereupon the Marquess besieges Dublin, but
unfortunately sends my Lord Inchiqueen into Munster, with, if not the greatest,
the best part of the Army; Jones falls upon the Remainder, and utterly routs
them: This was in August 1649. And the same Month Cromwell lands at Dublin with
an Army of 15000 old Soldiers.

Upon this Disaster, the Irish, no more to be reconciled to the English, than
the Scots Covenanters to Episcopacy, quarrel with the Marquess; which was never
after composed: So the Marquess left Ireland again, leaving the Earl of
Clanrickard Deputy.

Cromwell, after his landing, first storms Drogheda, or Tredah, with a most
terrible Execution; and after, in less than one Year, all Ireland, upon the
matter, is reduced to the Obedience of the Rump; who take dreadful Vengeance
upon all the Irish who could be found to have had any hand in the Massacre of
the English.

The King, Charles II. having lost England and Ireland, with all their
Dependencies, except the Isles of Guernsey, Jersey, Man, and Scilly, and the
Plantations in America, which shall soon follow, set up for Scotland, and makes
the Marquess of Montross his Commissioner; who having got together about 400
Swedes, Danes, Poles, and Germans, lands them at the Wick of Cathness in April
1650, and takes Dumbeath: But Lesley having sent Major General Straughan, with
300 choice Horse, he set upon this ill composed Body of Montross, and utterly
routs them: Montross fled, but was betrayed by the Lord of Aston, who had
formerly served him.

The Covenanters, to show their Clemency and Humility, bind the Marquess in a
Chair planted backwards on a Cart, that all Men might see him, the Hangman,
with his Hat on, riding before; and upon the 28th of May 1650, by a Sentence
pronounced the Day before by the Lord Lowden, was hanged upon a Gibbet 30 Foot
high, at the Cross of Edinburg, for three Hours: after which, he was quartered,
and his Head set upon the Talbooth, and his Legs and Arms over the Gates of
Sterlin, Glasgow, Dundee, and Aberdeen. But see the Piety and Commiseration of
these humble People! They order, in the Sentence, that if he repented, so that
his Excommunication should be taken off, the Trunk of his Body should be buried
in the Grey-Friars; otherwise, in the Burrough-Moor, the Common Burial of
Malefactors. But Vengeance shall soon overtake these cruel Proceedings.

For the Kirk, sore afflicted for their deposed Brethren in England, now in
nasty Prisons, whereby Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness raged, and the Throne of
Presbytery was defaced, but being unable of themselves to restore their
Brethren, before Montross's Death, had agreed to have the King proclaimed King
of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland; yet so as to take the Solemn League
and Covenant, to give Signs of Sorrow and Repentance for his Father and
Mother's Sins, and banish and turn out of his Court all who had not taken the
Covenant, or taken up Arms for his Father. But the Kirk could not have found a
Plant so unlikely to produce the Fruit of Repentance, or to establish the
Throne of Presbytery, as this King. However, they will try what is to be done; and
to this end, send Commissioners to treat with the King at Jersey, not yet
reduced by the Rump: and a Treaty is agreed to, to be at Breda in Holland.

The King was perplexed what to do; for to be a King in Fact, he desired above
all things: but to forsake his Mother and Father's Friends, was grievous to
him; and to come to the Stool of Repentance, was full sore against his Will.
Yet to be a King, as a Man does for a Wife, he forsakes Father, Mother, and his
dearly beloved Friends, and comes to Breda: There the News comes of Montross's
tragical Defeat and Execution, which had like to have spoiled all; but over
Shoes, over Boots; on he goes, having submitted to all the rigid Terms the
Kirk-men imposed upon him. And in June 1650, arrives in Scotland, to be anew
instructed in the Discipline of the Kirk.

The Rump in the mean while were not idle, you must think; for having spued up
Presbytery in England, they scorned to chew the Cud of it from Scotland: and
therefore Fairfax having refused to command an Army against the Scots, they
send for Cromwell out of Ireland, by this time is good as reduced by him, and
declared him General of all the Forces of England, Scotland, and Ireland; who,
about the latter end of June 1650, enters Scotland, with a well-disciplin'd
rather than a numerous Army: and having taken many Places of small moment, and
often beat the Scots in Skirmishes, upon the 3d of September utterly overthrows
the much more numerous Kirk-Army at Dumbar, commanded by their old General
Lesley, 3000 Scots killed, 9000 taken Prisoners, all their Baggage and
Ammunition, and above 200 Colors, which, as Trophies, were hung up in
Westminster Hall, where the English and Scots had before taken such Pains and
Care to unite both Nations in their Solemn League and Covenant.

Whilst these things were doing, the Kirk at Edinburg were close at their
Devotion, hourly expecting the Feet of those which should bring the glad
Tidings which were at hand; when Lesley, the same Day, brings Tidings of their
utter Overthrow. Now was all their Joy turned to Lamentation and Woe, and the
Songs of Sion are like to be sung in a strange Land.

To augment these Miseries, the King, who could not submit to the rigid
Discipline of the Kirk, runs from Schole to the House of the Lord Dippon,
intending for the Highlands, where he might go to School with more Liberty. Now
all is in a Hurlyburley. After the King runs Montgomery from the Kirk,
promising the King, if he would return, the Kirk would remit part of their
Discipline: upon which, the King returned to St. Johnstons.

The King thus returned, did not please the Kirk-men, for being beaten by the
English, they rail against those that called the King in too hastily, before he
had given Marks of his Repentance and Conversion to God; and that it was not
lawful for any who were truly Godly to take up Arms for him; and for the
Advancement of the Kirk, made Kerr and Straughan Generals of the Kirk-Forces.
But Straughan runs to Cromwell, and Kerr is utterly defeated, wounded, and taken
by Lambert.

Whilst these things were thus doing in Scotland, let us see what was doing in
England: In January this Year the Rump erected a High Court of Justice, whereof
one Keeble, an ignorant Petty-fogging Lawyer, was President in Norfolk, upon
pretense of an intended Insurrection for bringing in of the King, where 24 were
condemned, and 20 executed, whereof one Mr. Hobbard, Brother or near Kinsman to
Sir John Hobbard, who after married Cromwell's Niece, and Widow of Col. Hammond,
was one. And in March following the Rump erected another High Court of Justice,
which condemned Sir Henry Hide for taking the King's Commission to be his
Ambassador at Constantinople.

The Kirk-Party now lose their Reputation; they had nothing left, but to preach
and pray, and rail: and now the Parliament and General Assembly take in all who
will take the Covenant, but all to no purpose.

For Cromwell having taken Edinburgh Town and Castle, Jedworth, Reslan and
Tantallon Castle, sends Overton and Lambert, in Boats over the Frith, who rout
Sir John Brown, and Major General Holborn, kill 2000 of their Men, and take
1200 Prisoners, and Brown himself, with 42 Colors.

Now, though Scotland were a cold Climate, 'twas too hot to hold the King and
his Army, and therefore with them he slips into England, by the Way of
Carlisle, leaving the Kirk in Lamentations and Woes, that Heresy and Schism had
overspread the Beauty of Holiness, now Profaneness and Superstition had left it.

Harrison and Lambert followed the King, and Cromwell soon after, who at
Worcester (that Day Twelve Month after he had routed the Scots at Dunbar)
utterly again routs the Scots and English, kills 3550, with Duke Hamilton and
General Forbes, and takes 5000 Prisoners, with the Earls of Rothes, Kanwarth,
Kelly, the Lord Sinclare and Montgomery, General of the Ordnance; and soon
after, David Lesley (who fought not, or but little in the Battle) is routed by
Lilburn, and taken Prisoner, with Lauderdale (who held Correspondence in
England with the Covenanting Scots) and the Lords Kenmore and Middleton: Yet
the King by a Miracle escaped, to be restored King Charles II.

But the same Fate did not attend the Noble Earl of Derby, who coming out of
the Isle of Man, with about 250 Foot, and 60 Horse, to have assisted the King,
which he joined with about 1200 raised Men in Lancashire, (where he was highly
honored and beloved) was set upon by Col. Lilburn (John's elder Brother) and
routed the 29th of August, where the Lord Widdrington, Sir Thomas Tiddersly,
Col. Boynton, Sir Francis Gamul, Major Tro^lop, Sir William Throgmorton, Col.
Leg, Col. Ratliff, and Col. Gerard, with some others, were taken Prisoners; but
the Earl tho wounded, escaped to the King at Worcester: but it was his hard
Fortune to be afterward taken, and tried by a Court Martial upon the 6th of
October, which consisted of 20 Officers and Captains, five Colonels, Maj.
General Milton, and Col. Mackworth President, at Chester; and upon the 22d was
beheaded.

When Cromwell came into England, he left Monk to command in Scotland, who
besieges and takes Sterlin-Castle by Surrender, with all the Guns, Ammunition
and Arms, Money, Jewels, and the Registers transferred from Edinburgh thither,
and quite defaced the lofty Inscription: -- Nobis haec invicta dedere
Centum sex Proavi --


About this time old General Lesley was raising an Army in Perthshire. Monk
sends Morgan and Alured to prevent it; who surprised them, and take Lesley, the
Earls of Crawford and Lindsey, the Lord Ogilby, and many other Prisoners: and
after take Dunfrise.

At this time Monk besieges and takes Dundee by Storm with as terrible an
Execution, as Cromwell the Year before had done at Tredah: Here it was, and at
Sterlin-Castle, the Scots had lodged all their Plunder and Money they had got
in England, which was so plentiful, that the English common Soldiers shared
Money by Hatfuls. The Terror of this Success frighted Aberdeen, and all the
other Towns in Scotland into Obedience; nor did it stay here, but all the Isles
of Orcades and Shetland submitted; which neither Roman nor English Force could
ever accomplish.

Now the Kirk-Party are all in Yelling and Woes, Heresy and Schism had
overspread the beauteous Discipline of Reformation: Now they cannot persecute
other Men, they exclaim and cry out they are persecuted themselves: Their
Nobles (except Argile) which are not killed, are committed to Prison, that they
might share in the Tribulations, as well as Triumphs of their Brethren in
England.

But the Tribulations of the Covenanting Party did not end in Imprisonment
only, but extended to Life; for upon the 22d of August, Love and Gibbons (two
most zealous Covenanters) were executed by a Judgment of a High Court of
Justice (as 'twas called) for holding Intelligence with their Brethren in
Scotland; so that this High-Justice, or Summum Jus, reached the Covenanters as
well as the Royalists.

Now the Rump change the Fabric of the Scottish Government, and make Itinerant
Judges, part Scots, part English, and make a Council of State of that medly;
yet allow them 30 Commissioners to sit and vote in their Parliament at
Westminster; so that tho the Crown of Scotland were independent upon the Crown
of England, yet Scotland, as well as Ireland and England, must depend upon the
Rump: And that the Scots may be the more tamely ridden, they are denied Arms,
and even Horses, unless on necessary Occasions.

The Victory at Worcester swelled the Sails of Cromwell's Ambition brim full, so
that he began to entertain Thoughts of Setting up himself; yet being a ticklish
Point, wherein he was sure to be opposed by the Factions as well as Royalists,
upon the 10th of December, he called a Meeting of diverse Members of the House,
and some of the Principal Officers of the Army, and proposed to them, That now
the old King being dead, and his Son defeated, he held it necessary to come to
a Settlement of the Nation; and that he requested this Meeting, that they might
consider and advise what was fit to be done, and to present it to the
Parliament: So much easier is it to destroy a Government, than to erect
another. And now Cromwell and his Adherents had overturned the Government of
Three Kingdoms, they are to advise and consider how to erect another: This was
the good Fight which these Men fought to destroy, and then knew not what to do.
However we'll give the Account of these Men's Opinions verbatim, as I find it in
Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 492. a. b.

Lenthal. My Lord (who made him so?) This Company were very ready to attend
your Excellency, and the Business you were pleased to propound to us is very
necessary to be considered: God has given mavelous Success to our Forces
under your Command, and if we do not improve these Mercies (Blood, Rapine and
Murder) to some Settlement, such as may be to God's Honor and the Good of the
Commonwealth, we shall be very much blameworthy.

Harrison. I think that which my Lord General has propounded as to a
Settlement both of our Civil and Spiritual Liberties, and so that the Mercies
which the Lord has given in to us, may not be cast away; how this may be done
is the great Question.

Whitlock. It is a great Question indeed, and not suddenly to be resolved; yet
it were pity that a Meeting of so many able and worthy Persons, as I see here,
should be fruitless; and I would humbly offer in the first Place, whether it be
not requisite to be understood in what way this Settlement is desired, whether
by an Absolute Republic, or with any Mixture of Monarchy.

Cromwell. My Lord Commissioner Whitlock has put us upon the right Point, and
indeed it is my meaning, that we should consider whether a Republic, or a mixed
Monarchical Government, will be best settled; and if any thing Monarchical,
then in whom that Power shall be placed.

Sir Tho. Widdrington. I think a mixed Monarchical Government will be most
suitable to the Laws and People of this Nation; and if any Monarchical, I
suppose we shall hold it most just to place that Power in one of the Sons of
the late King.

Fleetwood. I think that Question, whether an absolute Republic, or a mixed
Monarchy be best to be settled in this Nation, will not very easily be
determined.

L. C. J. St. John. It will be found that the Government of this Nation,
without something of Monarchical Power, will be very difficult to be so
settled, as not to shake the Foundation of our Laws, and the Liberties of the
People.

Lenthal. It will breed a strange Confusion, to settle a Government of this
Nation without something of Monarchy.

Desborough. I beseech you, my Lord, why may not this as well as other Nations
be governed by a Republic?

Whitlock. The Laws of England are so interwoven with the Power and Practice of
Monarchy, that to settle a Government without something of Monarchy in it,
would breed so great an Alteration in the Proceedings of our Law, that you will
scarce find time to rectify; nor can we well foresee the Inconveniences which
will arise thereby.

Whaley. I do not understand Matters of Law, but it seems to me the best way,
not to have any thing of Monarchical Power in the Settlement of our Government;
and if we should resolve upon any, whom should we pitch upon? The King's eldest
Son has been in Arms against us, and his second Son is our Enemy.

Widdrington. But the late King's third Son, the Duke of Gloucester, is still
among us, and too young to have been in Arms against us, or infected with the
Principles of our Enemies.

Whitlock. There may be a day given for the King's eldest Son, or for the Duke
of York his Brother, to come in to the Parliament, and upon such Terms as shall
be thought fit and agreeable, both to our Civil and Spiritual Liberties, and a
Settlement may be made upon them.

Cromwell. This will be a Business of more than ordinary Difficulty; but really
(a Word much used by him) I think, if it may be done with Safety, and
Preservation of our Rights, both as Englishmen, and as Christians, that a
Settlement of somewhat of Monarchical Power would be very effectual.

So that the Soldiers were for a Republic, except Fleetwood, who knew not what
to say; the Lawyers for a mixed Monarchy, and many for the Duke of Gloucester to
be King; but then Cromwell, (designing for himself) still put off the Debate to
some other Point; so the Company part without any Result at all: yet Cromwell
discovered by this Meeting the Inclinations of the Persons which spoke, for
which he fished, and made use of what he thus discerned. But this Point was too
tender to be further pressed at this time, and so we leave it, till Cromwell
shall give a further Occasion.

In October, this Year, Haines reduced Jersey to the Rump; and in January the
Isle of Barbados was surrendered to Askew, sent thither by the Rump; and in
this Month, an English Man of War meeting with some Dutch Fishermen, demanded
the tenth Herring, as a Duty for their Fishing in these Seas; which the Dutch
denying, the English sunk one of their Ships, and all the Men were lost, (see
Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 487. b.) and here began the first Quarrel between the
Rump and Dutch.

The Rump thus every where Victorious at home, yet it may be fearing they had
disgusted all Christian Princes by the Death of the King, (and already the Czar
of Muscovy had revoked all the Privileges of Trade which had been granted to
the English in the Reigns of Q. Mary and Q. Elizabeth, and continued in the
Reigns of King James and King Charles, and banished the English out of his
Dominions for putting the King to Death) upon the 11th of March sent the Chief
Justice St. John and Mr. Strickland to treat of a Coalition with the Dutch,
whose Title and Government were the same, or not unlike to the Rump's; and if
this could be obtained, both Republics being incomparably superior to all the
Kings in the World by Sea, they need not fear any Enemies abroad.

But the Dutch fearing this Coalition with England, (where the Harbors for
Shipping are more, and much better than those in Holland) would rob them of the
Trades they were possessed of, and that their rich Merchants, in case of a
Coalition, would be tempted to lay out their Moneys upon real Securities in
England, rather than to venture them in the contingent Accidents of Trade, not
only refused to enter into a Coalition, but rudely treated St. John; whose
haughty Spirit ill brooking such Affronts, made a Report of his Embassy, little
to the Dutch Advantage.

Hereupon the Rump made the Act of Navigation, designing thereby to have, in a
great measure, lessened the Dutch Trade, and increased the English; tho both
succeeded quite contrary, as hereafter we shall make it appear: Yet the
English, by virtue of this Law, took Occasion to search the Dutch Vessels, and
often to make Prize of them; whereupon the Dutch sent over four Ambassadors,
Catz, Van de Peer, Sharp, and Newport, to pacify the Rump, which they were so
far from effecting, that the Rump, upon their first Audience, upon the 15th of
April, demand the Arrears for the Dutch Fishing upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland; that the Survivors of the Dutch, assisting in the Massacre of the
English at Amboyna, should be given up to Justice; and a free Trade up the
Scheld.

The Dutch Ambassadors were surprised at these Demands, having no Instructions
thereupon; or if they had, could not have given any reasonable Answer against
them: Yet still they continued to make great Protestations of their Love and
Affection to the Commonwealth of England, and their most ardent Desire of
propagating and increasing the true Reformed Religion; yet privately gave the
State an Account how little was to be expected from the Rump by a Treaty.
Hereupon the Dutch prepare for a War, nor was the Rump herein behind hand with
them.

The Dutch in May set out a Fleet of Men of War, commanded by Van Trump,
pretending for the Security of Trade, but with Instructions not to strike Sail
to the English Flag; and upon the 17th of May came into Dover Road with 45 Sail
of Men of War, where Trump rode at Anchor, as if he defied what the English
could do to him.

Blake, the English Admiral, had but 15 Men of War, yet resolved to have an
Account of Trump what he had to do in Dover Road, and sailed directly to him:
hereupon Trump stood to the Eastward, and by that means being become Head-most
of the English Fleet, bore directly upon them; and being come within
Musket Shot of the English, Blake gave Order to fire at Trump's Flag, which
was done thrice, but instead of striking it, Trump poured in a Broadside upon
Blake, and Major Bourn at this time coming to Blake's Assistance with 8 Men of
War, both Fleets engaged from four in the Afternoon till Night, wherein there
were not less than 2000 Shot exchanged upon one and the other side; and the
Dutch had one Man of War taken and another sunk, and 150 Men slain; but the
English had not one Ship lost or disabled, and very few Men killed: This Fight
was the 19th of May. Van Trump in the Night drew his Ships on the Back of the
Goodwin Sands, and next Morning sailed back to Zealand, instead of securing the
Dutch Trade.

Hereupon the Rump set a Guard upon the Dutch Ambassadors at Chelsey; but tho
the English Fleet in this Fight received little Damage, yet that of the Dutch
was so battered, as made it unfit to fight. About this time Virginia submitted
to the Rump, but not New England, nor ever after did that I can find.

The Dutch thus balk'd in their Expectation of great things to be done by Van
Trump, and finding the contrary Success, sent a Paper to their Ambassadors in
England, which was presented to the Council of State the 20th of June, therein
taking God the Searcher of all Hearts to witness, that the most unhappy Fight
of the Ships of both Commonwealths, did happen against the Knowledge and Will of
the Lords States General of the United Netherlands, and that with Grief and
Astonishment they received the fatal News of that unhappy rash Action. A likely
matter, as if Van Trump should dare to do such an Action without their Order,
and they not punish him for it.

That they did consult and endeavor to find out what Remedy chiefly may be
applied to mitigate that raw and bloody Wound, and to that end had written to
gather a solemn Meeting of Parliament or all the Provinces, whereby they doubt
not but a Help may be found out for these Troubles, and a better hope of our
Treaty in hand for the common good of both Nations, to shun the detestable
shedding of Christian Blood (so much desired, and would be dearly bought by the
common Enemies of both Nations.) We again crave this most Honorable Council,
and beseech you by the Pledges both of common Religion and Liberty (Terms
unusual in the High and Mighty States, and never used by them to any King since
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) mean while to suffer nothing to be done out of
too much Heat, that afterward may prove neither revocable nor repairable, but
too late Vows and Wishes; but rather that you would let us receive a kind
Answer without further Delay, upon our last Request.

To this Cant, wherein God's sacred Name is exposed to cover Dutch Hypocrisy,
the Rump gave this Answer: That calling to mind with what continued
Demonstrations of Friendship and Affection, from the beginning of their
Intestine Troubles, they have proceeded with the Neighbors of the United
Provinces, they do find themselves much surprised with the unsuitable returns
they have made thereunto, and especially at the Acts of Hostility lately
committed in the very Roads of England upon the Fleet of this Commonwealth, the
matter of Fact whereof stated in clear Proofs, is hereto annexed: Upon serious
Consideration of all, and of the several Papers delivered by your Excellencies
to the Council of State, the Parliament thinks fit to give this Answer.

As they are willing to make a charitable Construction of the Expressions used
in these Papers, endeavoring to represent the late Engagements of the Fleets
without their Knowledge, and against the Minds of their Superiors; so when they
consider how disagreeable to that Profession, the Resolution and Actions of
your State, and of their Ministers at Sea, have been, even in the midst of a
Treaty offered by themselves, and managed by your Excellencies, by the
extraordinary Preparations of 150 Sail of Men of War, without any visible
occasion, but what does now appear a just ground of Jealousy in your own
Judgments, when your Lordships pretended to excuse it, and the Instructions
themselves given by your Superiors to their Commanders at Sea, they do find
too much cause to believe that the Lords States of the United Provinces have an
Intention by Force to usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy
the Fleets, that are under God, their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby to expose
this Commonwealth to Invasion, as by this late Action they attempted to do.

Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to endeavor, with God's
Assistance, as they have opportunity, to seek Reparation of the Wrong already
suffered, and Security that the like be not attempted for the future.

Nevertheless, with this Mind and Desire, that all Differences between the two
Nations may (if possible) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his
Providence shall open a way thereunto, and Circumstances shall be conducing to
render such Endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual than those of this
kind have hitherto yet been. See Whitl. Mem. f. 510. a, b.

This was the 10th of June, and on the 12th Captain Peacock and Captain Tailor
in two of the English Frigates, fought with two Dutch Men of War on the Coast of
Flanders, for refusing to strike their Top-sail; and after a short Dispute, the
English took one of them with all their Officers and Mariners, but she was so
torn that she presently sunk, and run the other upon the Sands to avoid being
taken.

Upon the 13th Blake took 26 Sail of Dutch Merchantmen near the Downs, and
three Men of War, having before staid ten more of the Holland Ships; and upon
the 29th the Rump passed these Votes.

1. That the Lords States do pay to this Commonwealth the Charges and Damages
they have sustained by their Attempts. 2. That upon Payment or securing
thereof, shall be a Cessation, and their Ships and Goods released. 3. This
being assented to and put in Execution, the Security for the time to come, to
be a firm Amity and Interest of the two States for the good of both.
Hereupon the Dutch Ambassadors the next day, viz. June the 30th, demanded
Audience of Leave to depart, which was granted; but the Rump would not recede
from demanding Satisfaction for all their Damages. Hereupon the Dutch
Ambassadors returned home.

The Dutch foreseeing a Coalition with England, or a War would necessarily
follow, and being set against the Coalition, resolved upon a War, and to that
end enter into a Confederacy with the King of Denmark against the English.

Now both Rump and States make all imaginable Preparations for War; and about
the beginning of July, Blake with a gallant Fleet went Northwards, and left Sir
George Askue to command the rest of the Fleet in the Downs, who took five Dutch
Merchant Men, and Blake in his Passage took two Men of War, and two
Merchantmen; and within a day or two after, viz. the 4th of July, Sir George
met 40 Dutch Ships, took 7 of them, burnt 4, and ran 24 on Ground upon the
French Shore, where, tho the French protected them against the English, yet
coming aboard the Dutch Ships, they plundered them.

Upon the 24th, Blake took 100 of the Dutch fishing Busses, and in them 1500
Prisoners: and about the last of July Blake fell upon the Dutch Convoy for
their Fishery in the Northern Seas, consisting of 12 Men of War, and sunk
three, and took the other nine, with all the Dutch Busses, and unloaded all
their Fish, and sent the Fishermen home; and Blake also took three of the Dutch
East-India-Men richly laden. In these Actions Blake had but 8 Men of War, and
Blake sent six of the Dutch Men of War to Major General Dean in Scotland.

Upon the 20th of August, Sir George Askue with 38 Sail of Men of War set upon
the Dutch Fleet of 55 Sail, and 15 Merchantmen near Plymouth; the Fight lasted
three days, and the Dutch lost two Ships, one sunk, the other burnt, the
English none. Hereupon the Dutch retired to the Coast of France, and Sir George
followed them, and charged them, and sunk the Dutch Admiral, and lost but one
Fire-ship, who having taken out her Men, sent her among the Dutch; but being
upon the French Coast, Sir George pursued the Dutch no further, and went
Northward to repair his Fleet.

At this time there was no Peace between the English and French, and the
Spaniards having besieged Dunkirk, the French set out a Fleet under the Duke of
Vendosme to relieve it: This Fleet was set upon by Blake in the Downs, who had
then but 7 Men of War with him, whereof the Sovereign was one; and upon the 6th
of September, Blake engaged the whole French Fleet, and took 7 of their Men of
War, and dispersed the rest; whereupon Dunkirk, and after Gravelin submitted to
the Spaniard.

Van Trump upon his Misfortune having laid down his Commission, his Command was
given to De Wit; and the King of Denmark having made a League with the Dutch
against the English, seized all the English Ships and their Effects within the
Sound or Zundt, and joined five of his Men of War with the Dutch.

But the Success of the English Fleet in these Seas was not answered in the
Levant; for Captain Bodiloe with five or six English Frigates, was set upon by
Van Galen, Admiral of the Dutch in those Seas, about the latter end of
September, with 16 Dutch Men of War, in which Encounter the Phoenix (formerly
mistaken for the Garland) was taken by the Dutch, and the English forced to
retire under the Protection of the Port of Leghorn: but Van Galen bought this
Victory with the loss of his Life; and upon the 20th of November following,
Captain Cox with two Boats of brave English in the Port of Leghorn, boarded her
and brought her off, and young Van Trump was forced to skip into the Water, to
save his Life, or being taken Prisoner.

De Wit had small Joy of his Employment, having De Ruiter joined in Commission
with him; for having fitted out so great a Fleet as the Dutch could put out,
they took their Station in October on the side of the North-Foreland upon the
Kentish Coast.

Blake having been on the Western Coast, and having taken five Dutch West India
Ships, and six Straits Ships, valued at 200000 l. hastened with his Fleet
toward the Dutch, and divided it into three Squadrons, one commanded by
himself, another by Vice Admiral Penn, and the third by Rear-Admiral Bourn; and
upon the 28th of October engaged the Dutch Fleet, and boarded and took their
Rear-Admiral, and sunk two more of them, and one was blown up; and the rest of
the Dutch Fleet was so shattered that it was forced to fly, and was pursued by
the English twelve Leagues: the English lost not one Ship, tho many of them
were disabled in their Rigging.

Van Trump thus laid aside, the ill Success of De Wit and Ruiter put the States
to their Trumps what to do; when the King of Denmark, fearing to be called to a
severe Account by the Rump for his seizing the English Ships in the Sound, in
case the Rump prevailed over the Dutch, sent a Message to them, proffering to
assist them with 20 Men of War, if they would re-establish Van Trump again in
his Command, which the Dutch did.

Van Trump thus re-established, used all possible Industry to ^it out another
Fleet, and having got 80 Sail of Men of War, and 10 Fireships, sailed directly
to the Downs, where Blake lay with about 40; and upon the 29th of November a
furious Fight was between them, which lasted from two in the Morning till six
at Night (this cannot be, considering the time of the Year, yet Baker, f. 625.
b. says it) I think it should have been from ten in the Morning: When the Dutch
Fleet, double in Number to the English, prevailed, and took the Garland Frigate,
and burnt the Bonadventure, and sunk three more: on the Dutch side, one of
their Flag-Ships was blown up, and all the Soldiers and Mariners were lost but
two, and Van Trump's and De Ruiter's Ships much damaged; and if the Night had
not favored the English, the whole Fleet would have been in danger to be lost.

After the Fight Van Trump sailed to the Westward, to convoy home the
Dutch-French Fleets; and now the Dutch were so elated by their Victory, that
they talked of nothing but blocking up the River of Thames, and forcing the
English to a Peace, but they were mistaken in their Measures.

For the Rump, with incredible Diligence and Conduct, repaired their shattered
Fleet, and fitted up another, to the Amazement of the Dutch, commanded by
Blake, Dean and Monk (newly come out of Scotland, the reason whereof you will
hear by and by) and upon the 8th of February set Sail from Queenborough with 60
Men of War, from whence they sailed to Portsmouth, where they were joined with
20 Men of War more, and from thence sailed over against Portland, half Seas
over, to call Trump to an Account for passing the Channel without the Rump's
leave: and upon the 18th of February the Southern Ships of the English Fleet
descried the Dutch Fleet, consisting of 76 Men of War, which had the Charge of
convoying 30 Merchant Ships.

Blake and Dean were in the Triumph, and with 12 Sail more engaged the Gross of
the Dutch Fleet; and the Triumph having received 700 Cannon-shot in her Hull,
was bravely relieved by Lawson (the rest of the English Fleet being not able to
come up.)

But when the rest of the English Fleet came, a most furious Fight succeeded,
wherein the Dutch had six Men of War taken and sunk, whereof one was a
Flag-Ship; but the English lost not one Ship, tho many were disabled and sent
into Portsmouth.

The next day after in the Morning, the Dutch Fleet was discerned seven Leagues
off Weymouth, whither the English plied, and in the Afternoon engaged them with
like Fury they did the day before: Trump put his Merchant Men before him, and
after the first Shock, fought retreating toward the Coast of Bulloign; but in
his way thither, the English Frigates at large took many of his Merchant Men,
and Lawson boarded and took one of the Dutch Men of War.

The next day, Sunday the 12th, early in the Morning, the English renewed the
Fight, which continued till four in the Afternoon; then the Wind proving cross
to the English at N. N. E. Trump got to Calais Sands, and the English thought
fit to pursue him no further.

In these three Fights the Dutch lost eleven of their Men of War, and 30 of
their Merchant Ships; the English lost but one Ship, the Sampson, but the
Captain, Button, and most of the Men were saved, tho the Captain was much
wounded.

This Victory of the English was so much more surprising to the Dutch, by how
much they expected Van Trump should have blocked up the River of Thames, and
obliged the English to seek a Peace: but the Success proving so contrary, the
common People in the Dutch Provinces were all in an Uproar and Tumult,
whereupon the Province of Holland (without the Consent of the other Provinces,
which was contrary to the Constitution of their Government) did privately
employ Colonel Doleman and some others (gaining to them Hugh Peter's) to try the
Inclinations of the Rump for a Peace.

Here take notice, that King Charles the Second employed one Mr. Stubbe,
commonly called Dr. Stubbe, (who was a Man of great Parts) to write a
Vindication of the second Dutch War in his Reign, whereby Stubbe had the
opportunity of inspecting all the Manuscripts relating to the English Treaty
with the Dutch in this Treaty; for the Rump refused to treat with them but in
writing: and out of these, and Leo ab Aitzma (a most faithful Collector of the
Treaties of Peace and War and Commerce between the Princes and States of his
time, and sometimes before) Dr. Stubbe has, I believe, faithfully set out this
Treaty of Peace between the English and Dutch; and therefore, tho but in
Epit^me, I shall take him for my Guide herein.

The Rump did not refuse to treat of a Peace upon just and honorable Terms,
but not in Holland or any Neutral Place; nor would they condescend to any
Treaty before Holland made the first Overtures in Writing. Whereupon the States
of Holland upon the 18th of March, by their Secretary Herbert Van Beaumont,
sent the Rump a canting and equivocal Letter, wherein I cannot find one
Categorical Proposition, and wherein the sacred Name of God is more rent and
torn than I can find in any of our Enthusiasts; of their Zeal for the Reformed
Religion, much endangered by this War, and the Joys the Enemies of it conceived
thereby; and of their Desire of preventing the further Effusion of Christian
Blood; and carried on by a pious Zeal, and in no wise constrained by any other
Consideration: That Consideration may be had what may be done for the Honor
and Glory of God, and the good of each State; whereupon, without doubt, the
good God for his Name sake, and by the Inspiration of proper and fit
Expedients, will give his Blessing, etc. Which Letter you may read at large in
Stubbe's Vindication, p. 78, 79. and in Leo ab Aitzma, p. 816, 817.

The Rump having got this Letter, and to make a further Distraction in the
States General, sent an Answer the first of April 1653, to the States of
Holland, and a Letter to the States General: that to the States of Holland was,

That the Inconveniences to Religion in general, and to the Trade and Liberties
of each Nation, were such as any man might have foreseen; and that none could
be ignorant how requisite it was for both Nations to preserve a good
Correspondence and Amity together; that the English had not omitted any thing
on their parts, but the Dutch had assaulted them in the midst of a Treaty for a
strict Union; and their Ambassadors had used such Tergiversation, as made them
justly imagine that their sense of things was different from what they now
professed. That the good Endeavors of the Parliament were answered with
unusual Preparations, Acts of Hostility, and other extraordinary Proceedings
thereupon. That they had this Comfort and Satisfaction in their own Minds
amidst the Troubles and Calamities of War, that they had with all Sincerity
done what lay in their Power to obviate all the Evils specified: That they did
look upon the Overtures of Holland, if approved by the States General, to be an
effectual means for composing this unwelcom War; however, the Parliament having
discharged their Duty, would with Patience acquiesce in the Issue of
Providence, whereof they had so gracious Experience.

That to the States General was, That there could be no doubt of the sincere
Affection and good Will which the English did bear to the United Provinces; so
that it might be well imagined, that they were really inclined, by just and
honorable means, to extinguish the Fire of War, stop the Effussion of
Christian Blood, and restore Amity between the two Nations: That as they had
not been wanting in the Beginning to prevent the ensuing Calamities, so they
were not altered with Successes from their former good Intentions: That they
were ready, upon the Grounds expressed in the Letter from the Provincial States
of Holland and Friezland, friendly to compose Differences, etc.

This Letter had the desired Effect of the Rump, for the rest of the Provinces
complained, that Holland had broke the Union, which that State would have
salved by a manifest Lie, in denying they ever wrote such a Letter: However,
the rest of the Provinces, fearing the Calamity would be common to them all if
the War continued, did consent to a Treaty of Peace with the Rump. However, the
Rump, in their Letter to the States, refused to give them any other Title than
the States General, notwithstanding the Title of High and Mighty, obtained at
the Treaty of Munster not five Years before; nor did they assume this Title,
when they returned their Answer to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.

To these Letters the States General returned this Answer to the Parliament of
the Commonwealth of England, That they always endeavored, with a good and
sincere Intention, not only to keep, but to augment more and more, all manner
of Friendship and Correspondence with the said Parliament; and would now do any
thing that might contribute to so pious and Christian an Union, desiring a
Neutral Place, and Plenipotentiaries might be appointed forthwith on both
sides. But before this Answer was returned, a new face of things happened in
England; for Oliver had turned out the Rump, and set up for himself. How this
came about, and what Steps Cromwell took to do this, is now fit to be enquired
into.

Herein I take the Confidence to say, that as the Covenanters subduing the
Royalists was the Cause of the Ruin of the Covenanting Parliament; so was
Cromwell's Victory over the King at Worcester, the Ruin of the Rump: for
Cromwell, after that Fight, having nothing to do, set his whole Thoughts how he
might, tho not under the Title of King, usurp the Dominion of these Kingdoms,
already subdued by the Rump; and the Rump improvidently enabled him to do it,
when upon the 16th of June 1650, they constituted Cromwell Captain General, and
Commander in chief within Ireland as well as England: which you may read in
Whitlock's Memoirs, page 511. a.

You have heard how Cromwell felt the Pulse of the Lawyers and Soldiers for the
Establishment of the Nation, and how the Lawyers were of Opinion, that no
Settlement could be made without some mixture of Monarchy, and that it was ^it
that the Duke of Gloucester should be entrusted with something of a mixed
Monarchy; and that Cromwell's Opinion was really that a Settlement, with
somewhat of a mixed Monarchy, would be very effectual; but this somewhat of a
Settlement of mixed Monarchy he reserved for himself: but herein he found three
Rubs, and Rump, the Duke of Gloucester, and Monk in Scotland, (who, I verily
believe, had a great Awe upon Cromwell) whereupon, to remove these two latter,
in February 1652 he got the Duke of Gloucester to be sent beyond Sea; and about
the same time, or a little before, sent for Monk into England, and found him
pliable to Cromwell's Design of setting up himself: but to cover this, he made
Monk one of the three Admirals at Sea, with Blake and Dean, tho Monk was wholly
ignorant of Sea Affairs.

These two Rubs thus removed, only the Rump stood in Oliver's way to set up
himself; but before he discovered this openly, he entered into a long Dialogue
with Commissioner Whitlock, which you may read at large in his Memoirs, fol.
523, 524, 525, 526. wherein Cromwell takes notice, as well as Whitlock, of the
Danger of a Victorious Army lying idle in Peace, more than in War; and of their
murmuring in not being rewarded according to their Deserts; and that the Army
had a strange Disgust against the Parliament for their Pride, Ambition,
Self-seeking, engrossing all Places of Honor and Profit to themselves and
Friends, and their daily breaking forth into new and violent Factions; their
Delays in Business, and Design to perpetuate themselves; their meddling in
private Matters, contrary to the Institution of Parliament; their Injustice and
Partiality in those Matters, and the scandalous Lives of some of the chief of
them: so that unless there be some Authority so full and high as to restrain
and keep things in better Order, and that may put a stop to these
Exorbitancies, it will be impossible, in humane Reason, to prevent our Ruin.

Whitlock magnifies Cromwell's Government of the Army, yet finds great
Difficulty how he could reform the Parliament, he being subordinate to them,
and having taken his Commission from them, and hopes the greater part of the
Members are not such, as Cromwell says, when great Matters come before them.

Cromwell answered, My Lord, There is little hopes of a good Settlement by them,
really there is not, but a great deal of fear that they will destroy again what
the Lord has so graciously done for them and us: we all forget God, and God
will forget us, and give us up to Confusion; and these Men will help it on if
they be suffered to proceed in their ways: some Course must be taken to curb
and restrain them, or we shall be ruined by them.

Whitlock answered, We our selves have owned them the Supreme Power, and taken
our Commissions from them; and how to restrain them after this, will be hard to
find out.

Cromwell. What if a Man should take upon him to be King?

Whitlock. I think the Remedy worse than the Disease.

Cromwell. Why do you think so?

Whitlock. As to your own Person, the Title of a King would be of no Advantage,
because you have the Kingly Power in you already; concerning the Militia, as
you are General; as to the Nomination of Civil Officers, those whom you think
fittest are seldom refused; and tho you have no Negative Vote in passing Laws,
yet what you dislike is not easily carried; and the Taxes are already settled,
and in your Power to dispose the Moneys raised; and as to the foreign Affairs,
tho the Ceremonial Part be to the Parliament, yet the Expectation of good or
bad Success, is from your Excellency; and particular Solicitations of foreign
Ministers are made to you only.

So that I apprehend indeed less Envy and Danger, but not less real
Opportunities of doing Good, in your being General, than it would be if you had
assumed the Title of King. Whitlock after enlarged himself, How dangerous it
would be to Cromwell to assume the Title, for that the main Controversy between
us and our Adversaries, is to be established in a Monarchy or a Free State, and
most of our Friends have engaged with us upon the Hopes of a Free State, and to
that end have undergone all their Hazards and Difficulties; if then your
Excellency shall take upon you the Title of a King, this state of your Cause
will be thereby wholly determined, and Monarchy established in your Person; and
the Question will be no more, whether our Government shall be by a Monarch or
Free State, but, whether Cromwell or Stuart shall be our King?

After Whitlock desired his Excellency to consider his Condition; viz. You are
environed with secret Enemies: upon your subduing the public Enemy, the
Officers of the Army account themselves all Victors, and have had an equal
share with you.

The Success which God has given us has not a little elated their Minds, and
many of them are turbulent and busy Spirits, and are not without their Designs,
how they may dismount your Excellency, and some of them get into the Saddle;
how they may bring you down, and set up themselves.

They want not Counsel and Encouragement herein, it may be from some Members of
Parliament, who may be jealous of your Power and Greatness, lest you should
grow too high for them, and in time over-master them; and they will plot to
bring you down first, or to clip your Wings.

Cromwell thanked Whitlock for his good Advice; then asked him, What were his
Thoughts for Prevention of the Mischiefs which hung over our Heads?

Whitlock advised him to make a private Treaty with the King of Scots, whereby
he did not doubt, but in the Condition the King was in, but Cromwell might
secure himself and Friends, and might make himself and Posterity as great and
permanent to all humane Probability, as ever any Subject; and provide for his
Friends, as well as secure our spiritual and civil Liberties. Cromwell heard
him, and seemed displeased, and brake off the Discourse; and his Carriage to
Whitlock, from that time, was altered.

Notwithstanding the manifold Pretensions of the Dutch and Rump, wherein God's
sacred Name was so often exposed to cover their Hypocrisy of sincere Love and
Friendship of either State to one another, and of their Zeal for Propagation of
the Honor of God, and increasing the true Reformed Religion, neither State
trusted the other, but made all imaginable Preparations for carrying on the
War; and the Rump, for Encouragement of the Seamen, ordered them some Pay
beforehand, and Subsistence for their Families in their Absence; and that for
every Ship which shall be adjudged good Prize, 40 l. per Tun, and 6 l. for
every Piece of Cannon taken or found in Prize-Ships, and 10 l. for every Piece
of Cannon which should be taken on board of any Ship they should take or fire,
to be distributed to the Seamen according to their Qualities; and that
whosoever should enrol themselves in the Parliament's Service within 40 Days,
should receive a Month's Pay, not to be passed upon Account; and Hospitals
provided for sick and wounded Men. This was in Jan. 1652.

Cromwell's Ambition to be uppermost, could no longer be suppressed; but now the
Rump being the only Obstacle, he first set the Officers of his Army to bait the
Rump, which they did with the Words Cromwell put in their Mouth, and which he
before declared to Whitlock.

During these Commotions, Doleman and Hugh Peter's, set on by the Dutch, did
make very submissive Applications to the Council of State and Rump, confessing
they were not able to contest with the Puissance of England; offering to
acknowledge to the English the Sovereignty of the British Seas, and to pay
300000 l. to the Rump: but the Dutch above all things dreading the Rump,
animated Cromwell with the Promise of a far greater Sum, in case he would depose
the Rump. See Stubbe, page 81.

If the Dutch dreaded the Rump, the Rump did not less dread Cromwell, and
therefore made their Application to Monk for Protection, but failed, for
Cromwell had gained him before, and he discovered all to Cromwell, and that he
had no Concern for them, nor Obligation to them, as you may see in Dr. Gumble's
History of Monk' s Life, page 73. So that Monk was not now of the same Mind as
he was afterward when Lambert turned the Rump out of doors.

All other Obstacles thus removed, and Cromwell heightened in his frantic
Resolutions, by the Expectation of Mountains of Gold from the Dutch, upon the
20th of April, with a Party of Soldiers with him, marched to the House, and led
a File of Musketeers in with him, and the rest he placed at the Door of the
House, in the Lobby; and entering the House in furious manner, bid the Speaker
leave the Chair, and told the House, That they had sat long enough, unless they
had done more Good (I could have told him, they had done two good Deeds for
him; one, in taking away the King's Life, to let him into his Throne; the
other, that they had made him General, to enable him to turn them out of doors)
That some of them were Whore-masters, looking toward Henry Martin and Sir
Peter Wentworth; That others of them were Drunkards, and some corrupt and
unjust Men, and scandalous to the Profession of the Gospel; and that it was not
fit they should sit any longer as a Parliament, and desired them to go away.

But the Speaker not stirring from his Seat, Col. Harrison took him by the Arm
to remove him from his Seat; which when the Speaker saw, he left the Chair:
Some of the Members rose up to answer Cromwell, but he would suffer none to
speak but himself. He bid one of the Soldiers Take away that Fool's Bawble, the
Mace; and stayed himself till all the Members were out, and then caused the
Doors to be shut up.

We will look upon this Act in a threefold Consideration; viz. In the Doers; to
whom done; and in the Manner of it.

1. The Doers were the Rump' s Servants, raised by the Rump, and no ways
provoked by the Rump. So little do Benefits received by ill Men create any
Obligation of Gratitude in those who receive them.

2. The Rump were a Parliament which were empowered to make War or Peace, or
were not; if they were not, then Cromwell and his Assistants Commission from the
Rump to judge the King to Death, and all the Acts of Hostility which they did
during these Wars, were Murder or Rapine: but if they were a Parliament, who
might grant Commissions in War, and make Laws, then Cromwell and his Assistants
were greater Rebels and Violators of the Liberties of the Nation, than either
the Irish or Scots were against the King, or the Royalists against the
Parliament; for the Irish and Scots pretended Grievances and Oppressions
against the present Powers, whereas Cromwell and his Assistants pretended not
one categorical Complaint against the Rump; and the Royalists fo^ght to
preserve the Established Laws and Constitutions of the Nation, which Cromwell
and his Assistants did not. Besides, herein Cromwell and his Assistants assumed
a Power above Regal, in deposing the Rump, if it were a Rightful Parliament,
which the King could not do without their Consent.

3. For the Manner of Cromwell's Deposing the Rump, it was so barbarous and
rude, as I do not think you will find the like among the most Savage People,
unless it were when Cromwell and his Agents deposed the Secluded Members: Yet
sure there was a Divine Justice in both; for as the Covenanting Members
expelled the Royalists for not taking the Covenant, or joining with them in the
Innovations which the Covenanters brought into the Church and State; so Cromwell
and the Rump expelled them for their Covenanting, and set up themselves instead
of them; and now Cromwell does the like by the Rump, to exalt himself.

Thus, by their own mercenary Servants, and not a Sword drawn in their Defense,
fell the Haughty and Victorious Rump, whose mighty Actions will scarcely find
Belief in future Generations; and to say the Truth, they were a Race of Men
most indefatigably industrious in Business, always seeking for Men fit for it,
and never preferring any for Favor, nor by Importunity. You scarce ever heard
of any revolting from them in England, Scotland, or Ireland, during their time,
except by the Levellers, 1649. See Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 385, 386, 387. No
Murmur or Complaint of Seamen or Soldiers employed by them either by Sea or
Land, for want of Pay: In all the Ports of England, during the Dutch War, Money
or Credit was found to pay off the Seamen whenever their Ships were designed
to be laid up. Nor do I find they ever pressed either Soldiers or Seamen in all
their Wars. And as they excelled thus in their Management of Civil Affairs, so
it must be owned, they exercised in Matters Ecclesiastic no such Severities as
either the Covenanters, or others before them, did upon such as dissented from
them.

And as the Rump were thus industrious and victorious in War, so were they not
negligent in reforming the Abuses in the Practice of the Common Laws; and to
that end, in October 1650, ordered that all the Books of the Laws be put into
English, and that all Writs, Process, and Returns thereof, and all Patents,
Commissions, Indictments, Judgments, Records, and all Proceedings in Courts of
Justice, shall be in the English Tongue, and not in the Latin, or French, or
any other Language. See Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 459. a.

The Rump further ordered a Committee for regulating the Law; and the Committee
reported the Draughts of several Laws, viz.

1. The taking away Fines upon Bills, Declarations, and Original Writs. 2.
Against Customary Oaths of Fealty and Homage to the Lords of Manors. 3. For
taking away common Recoveries, and unnecessary Charge of Fines, and to pass and
charge Land intailed, as Lands in Fee Simple. 4. For more speedy Recovery of
Rents. 5. Touching Pleaders and their Fees. 6. For more speedy regulating and
easy Discovery of Debts and Damages, not exceeding 4 l. and under. See
Whitlock' s Mem. fol. 504. a.
Whether the Rump passed these into Laws, I do not find; but if they did not,
they might have done, if Cromwell had let them alone: and they sat not four
Years and three Months.

But how industrious and victorious soever the Rump was in War, they were not
so wise in Counsel, by making the Act of Navigation: and tho we have before
demonstrated the manifold Mischiefs and Inconveniences which this Law has
brought upon this Nation, and shall more particularly hereafter (if God
pleases) in Answer to those Reasons which Sir Josiah Child and Sir Francis
Brewsier pretend in Defense of it; yet it is fit that we here show, how that the
Rump was mistaken, as well in the End, as Causes of this Law.

If we look upon Britain, it is an Island, and divided into two Kingdoms,
England and Scotland; and both these Kingdoms, before they were united under
one King, viz. James I. by imm^morial Prescriptions, were possessed of the
Sovereignty of the Sea adjoining their Coasts, wherein no Nation (before King
James I.) presumed to fish, without Agreement or Leave first obtained from
those Kings.

The first who presumed to fish in these Seas, without such License or
Agreement, were the Dutch; yet never disputed their Right to it, before Grotius
(and he only that I can find) disputed it. The Dutch Fishery upon the Coasts of
England and Scotland, is the Foundation of all the Dutch Greatness at Sea, and
wherein they employ more Shipping and Mariners than the English do in all their
foreign Trades; with this further Advantage to the Dutch, that they have all
their Mariners at home, or near home, so that they are always ready, upon all
Occasions, to serve the States; and there being but little Difference of
Climate, are healthful and strong: whereas the English in their long Voyages,
especially to the East and West Indies, are far from assisting the Nation in
time of need; and by the Diversities of Climates, and eating oversalted Meats,
and drinking sour Drinks, causes such Sickness and Mortality amongst them, that
it is a Question, whether we lose more Seamen, or make more Mariners in them;
and those which survive are so feeble, that a healthy Mariner will beat two of
them.

The Rump therefore should have considered from what Cause the Dutch were
enabled to carry on this Fishery in Foreign Trades exclusive to the English:
And first negatively, That the Dutch were not enabled to do this from any
Principals of their own, for they had neither Timber to build Ships, nor Pitch,
Tar, Hemp or Flax, or Iron for fitting them up; nor Salt to cure their Fish;
their Ports from which they fished, not half so good, or a quarter so many as
the English; and the Coasts upon which they caught these Fish, more convenient
for the English than the Dutch, and an Englishman of a stronger Constitution
than a Dutchman, and tenfold more; so that herein the English had all natural
Advantages above the Dutch. Now let us see how the Dutch could do this.

The English, tho there were tenfold more Men in England than in Holland, could
not employ one Man to ten which the Dutch employed in their Fisheries upon the
Coasts of England and Scotland, for these Reasons. First the Dutch employed and
gave Encouragement to all sorts of People in these Fisheries, as well
Foreigners as Natives; whereas Foreigners fishing from the English Ports, is
denied by a Law in England; nor are Foreigners only excluded herein, but all
the Ports of England, being Corporations, the Freemen in them make the rest of
the Nation Foreigners to them: so that the Fisheries upon the Coasts of England
and Scotland, between the English and Dutch, are of a general Freedom in the
Dutch Netherlands; and the Freemen of the Ports of England, who being few, and
generally Beggars, have few Men, and less Means, to be Competitors with the
Dutch in these Fisheries. But the Rump not considering these Causes, but
restraining this Fishery only to Englishmen, at least three Fourths English,
have made the English in no Capacity to be Competitors with the Dutch in the
Foreign Trades of the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland:
besides the Dutch had their Agents, Factors, and Correspondents in France,
Spain, Portugal, Italy, and other Places, for a Market for the Fish they
caught, whereas the Poverty of our Corporation-Men denied the English this
Benefit.

The Rump in making the Act of Navigation, did not consider that the Fish
caught on the Coasts of England and Scotland, cost nothing but the catching; so
that they who can catch them cheapest, and cure them best, are sure of a
Foreign Market against them whose Charges are more, and they ignorant in the
Curing of them: The Rump therefore restraining the English to fish in Ships 40
per Cent. dearer than the Dutch, and 40 per Cent. dearer sailed, (and who knew
not how to cure Herring and Cod-fish so well as the Dutch) has eternally fixed
the Fisheries in the Dutch, exclusive to the English, so long as the Act stands
in force; and how this has made good the Title of their Act, For Encouragement
of increasing Shipping and Navigation, let any Man, not in the Temper the Rump
was when they made this Act, judge.

The Rump should have encountered the Dutch with their own Weapons, and made all
the Ports of England, not only free to all English in these Fisheries, but to
Foreigners; and made them free to import all sorts of Timber for building
Vessels for these Fisheries; as also for rough Hemp, Flax, Pitch and Tar, for
fitting up Vessels for these Fisheries, so as we might have had the Materials
as cheap as the Dutch; and also have given Rewards and other Encouragements to
Foreigners to instruct us how to build Vessels as cheap and convenient for the
Fisheries as the Dutch, and how to cure them; and denied the Dutch the Benefit
of drying their Nets in the Fisheries, or to take in fresh Water or Provisions
in their Fisheries, as the Dutch do to the English in their Plantations in the
East Indies; and have taken off the Imposts in England, which the Dutch pay in
Holland; and then the Rump might have beaten the Dutch out of these Fisheries
without fighting with them, and made our Maritime Towns as great and
flourishing as those in Holland. But the Temper the Rump was then in would not
admit of any of these Considerations; and it is admirable to me, that all the
Parliaments since have been of the Rump's Temper herein, and never taken these
things into Consideration; tho the Coast-Towns of England are not only ruined
by the Act of Navigation hereby, and the Fisheries not only on the Coasts of
England and Scotland, but those to Iseland and Greenland, ruined only by this
Law, without possibility of retrieving them, so long as it stands in Force.

If the restraining the English, in their Fisheries, to English-built Ships,
and sailed by three Fourths English, be so pernicious to the English in our
Fisheries, the Reasons are the same in the Foreign Vent of our Native
Commodities: for obliging the English to vend the Manufactures of the Nation in
these near double as dear built Ships, and sailed by near double Men, and
permitting the Dutch to buy our Manufactures, the Dutch by their Cheapness, and
more convenient building of Ships, has outed this Nation of their Navigation to
Muscovy, and all the Kingdoms and Countries within the Sound with them, as much
to the Increase of the Dutch Navigation, as the lessening of the English.

And as this Law is so injurious to the English in our Fisheries, and Foreign
Vent of our Manufactures, so it is not less in the Importation of Foreign
Commodities, by restraining the Import of them to English-built Ships, and
sailed by three fourths English, and the Natives of those Places from whence
they shall be imported, whether they have Ships or not. I Will give but two
Instances herein, viz. in our Trades to Norway for Timber, Pitch and Tar, and
to Liefland and Prussia for rough Hemp and Flax; for which Trades the English
never built one Ship since this Act; and by reason of the Dearness and
Inconveniences of our English Ships in these Trades, the Norwegians have
increased their Navigation from 6 Ships of about 60 Tun, to above 200 of three,
four, five and six hundred Tun; and the English pay near double the Price for
these they did before the Act.

And as the Inhabitants of Liefland and Prussia, rarely or never trade with us
in rough Hemp and Flax; so the Dutch importing these by the Cheapness of their
Navigation one third cheaper than the English; and when they are made into the
Manufactures of Cordage, Sails and Nets, the Dutch, by the Act of Navigation
may import them; whereby the English in their Fisheries, and the Foreign Vent
of their Commodities, have lost the Manufactures of them, and by a Foreign
Expense buy them of the Dutch and French, as much to their enriching and
Employment of their People, as to our Impoverishment, and the Loss of employing
ours. It Is fit to give this light Touch of the Mischiefs and Inconveniences
this Act has brought upon the Nation; but hereafter I shall enlarge upon them,
when I reply upon Sir Josiah Child and Sir Francis Brewster's Defense of it, as
before.

CHAP. II.
A Continuation of this Treatise during the Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell.
WHEN Men forsake the plain and foreknown Ways of Justice and Righteousness,
they not only run into Confusion, or contrary Extremes; but these they
endeavor to sanctify by previous swearing to them, and imposing them upon
other Men. In Scotland 1638, the Scots, without the King's Consent, made their
Covenant, wherein they abjure Episcopacy, and swear a mutual Defense of one
another herein, against all Persons whatsoever, without excepting the King; and
imposed this upon all Sorts of People with Violence, and Menaces, as beating,
tearing of Clothes, drawing of Blood, and exposing thousands to Injuries and
Reproaches; and notwithstanding several Laws to the contrary, expelled all
Professors of Colleges, and Ministers out of their Places, who refused to
subscribe their Covenant. See Baker's Chron. fol. 461. a.

To encounter the Scots Covenant by a contrary Extreme, the English
Convocation, in the Year 1640, after the King had dissolved the Parliament,
imposed, without Consent in Parliament, an Oath, wherein they swear, That they
approve the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, as containing all
things necessary to Salvation; that they will not endeavor to bring in any
Popish Doctrine contrary to it: That they will not consent to alter the
Government of this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons,
etc. as it now stands, and ought by right to stand; nor to subject it to the
Usurpations and Supersttitions of Rome: That this they do plainly and sincerely
acknowledge and swear, and do it heartily and willingly. Thus was God's Sacred
Name exposed to cover their Ambitious Designs, on both sides, and for which
neither gave any Reason. Nor did this Convocation stay here, but imposed,
without Consent of Parliament, six Subsidies upon the Clergy, to be paid in six
Years, for carrying on a War against the Scots, the refusers to be suspended
and excommunicated: Thus you see now, In Nomine Domini, on both sides, these
Feuds began at the Clergy; and the King to secure the Convocation, set Guards
about Westminster Abbey.

Here let us examine and compare these two Oaths: The Covenanters in Scotland
swear, That according to their Places and Callings, they shall endeavor the
Preservation of the Reformed Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government: At this Time there was no Reformed Church in
Scotland but the Episcopal, unless the Scots Covenanters erected another: So
here the Scots do not distinguish, which Church they swear to endeavor to
preserve; nor say what the Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government of the
Church of Scotland was. So that herein; in the first part of the Oath, they
swear equivocally; and in the second, they swear by Implicit Faith, without
declaring wherein their Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government does
consist.

That they shall also endeavor the Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. All Oaths are to be taken in
Truth, viz. of what a Man knows, or truly intends: Can any Man believe; that
every Scot which swears the Covenant, knows what Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Schism and Profaneness are, especially when they have an etc. joined to them?
I do not believe that ever the Church of Rome, or any other Nation, ever
imposed such an Equivocal and Canting Oath, as this Covenant, by a Rout of Men,
and contrary to the established Government in being, and against the King's
express Will.

And to make all sure, they swear, to defend all those that shall enter into
this Covenant, and shall zealously and constantly all the Days of their Lives
continue therein. But God shall soon blast this abominable Swearing, to the
Destruction of these Covenanters.

The Oath of the Covenant was purely promissory, wherein they swear what
wondrous Acts they would do in Preservation of their Kirk, etc. and for the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, etc, and for the mutual Defense of one another.
But the first Part of the Convocation-Oath is assertory, wherein they swear,
that they approve the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, as
containing all things necessary to Salvation; so as there is no further need of
searching the Scriptures, and no Man needs further to seek his Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, if he be conversant in the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England. The next part of it is negatively Promissory, that they will
not bring in any Popish Doctrine contrary to it. The third part of it is partly
Promissory, and partly Assertory; Promissory, not to give Consent to alter the
Government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc.
Assertory, as it now stands, and ought to stand. The fourth part is Promissory,
not to subject it to the Usurpations and Supersitions of Rome (without
declaring what these were.) The last part of this Oath is Assertory, That this
they do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, and do it heartily,
willingly and truly.

Now let us see the Success of this jumbled Oath, and Grant of these Subsidies;
first, the King never got one Groat of them. Secondly, The very next Year
after, viz. March 10th, the Commons voted that no Bishop should have any Vote
in Parliament; nor any judicial Power in the Star Chamber, nor Authority in
Temporal Matters; and that no Clergyman shall be in Commission of the Peace:
and upon the 22d of June the High Commission Court, and Star Chamber (wherein
Laud and the Prerogative Clergy played their Pranks) were abolished by Act of
Parliament: and soon after, viz. January 12th, Twelve of the Bishops were
committed to the Tower for High Treason, for protesting against all Votes and
Orders of the Lords during their Absence; and soon after the King passed a Bill
for taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament; so little Success had the
Clergy in their Convocation-Oath.

As the Clergy, without Consent in Parliament, imposed the Convocation-Oath
upon the rest of the Clergy: So the Parliament, (I mean the Lords and Commons)
without the Consent of the King, imposed upon the Subjects a Vow and
Protestation to maintain and defend, so far as lawfully may be, the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and according to the Duty of the Allegiance to his Majesty's Royal
Person, Honor and Estate, to defend the Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the Subject; and by all just and honorable Ways, endeavor to
preserve the Union and Peace of the Three Kingdoms; and neither for fear, nor
other respect, relinquish the Promise, Vow and Protestation. See Baker's
History, fol. 508. b.

But the Lords and Commons were not constant to their Vow; for within less than
two Years after, they impose their Solemn League and Covenant (being basely
imposed upon them by the Scots) upon the rest of their Fellow Subjects, with
all the Scottish Cant, and etc. too; and this is observable, that the
Presbyterians, who so bitterly inveighed against the etc. in the
Convocation-Oath, without any scruple swallowed the etc. in their Solemn League
and Covenant. It Is scarce credible, by what Severity this Covenant was, after
the Scots Temper, imposed upon all other sorts of Men, as well Dissenters from
the Church of England, as those of the Church.

This Temper was too hot to last long; for about three Years after the
Independents outed the Presbyterians, and set up the Engagement to be true to
the Rump, without King or House of Lords; nor did this Engagement last five
Years, but was outed when Cromwell set up himself, and imposed the Recognition
for establishing himself. Now let any show, how in any Nation since the
Creation, in less than 13 Years time, Men so often swear and forswear
Governments, which were so often changed, and he shall be my great Apo^^^.

The Secluded Members, and the Rump, if you will take their Words, were the
Representatives of the People, (but without a Head) and could not be dissolved
by the King without their Consent; yet O. Cromwell and his Myrmidons, without
their Consent, dissolved them both. And as these were Bodies without a Head, so
Cromwell and his Army, (like that of the Egyptian Mamalukes) were a Monstrous
Head without any Body of the Nation, yet with this Difference, the Mamalukes
chose their Sultan, but Cromwell exalted himself without the Army's Choice.

The first Manifesto that Cromwell made known to the Nation, was this, I Oliver
Cromwell, Captain General, and Commander in Chief of all the Armies and Forces,
raised and to be raised within this Commonwealth, etc. So here Cromwell, by his
own Authority, makes the Army perpetual, having deposed the Parliament, which
were made perpetual by Act of Parliament.

I have often admired upon what Bottom Cromwell stood when he presumed to do
these things; for the Sectaries and Fifth Monarchy-Men, who were the Creatures
whom he at first most relied upon, when they perceived his Ambition, then
became his utter Enemies; the Presbyterians and Independents hated him for the
Violences he put upon them; and the Royalists both dreaded and hated him.

All Kings of England in their Coronation Oath before, swear to govern by the
received Laws and Constitutions of the Nation; but Cromwell having subverted
these, neither says nor swears by what Laws or Rules he will govern: and tho both
in the Saxon and N^rman Dynasties, the Hereditary Succession of the Kings was
often changed; yet none succeeded which was not of the Royal Blood (which
cannot be said of the Caroline and Capusian Lines of France, nor in the
Succession of the Race of the Kings of Spain) yet Cromwell, without Law, or
being of the Royal Blood, made himself more absolute than any of our Kings
before him.

Now Terras (I am sure Britannias) Astraea reliquit; Justice, Truth and
Plain-dealing is fled the Land, and Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, Intriguing and
Designs rove all England over, and Cromwell to support his ill-establish'd
Greatness, sets all his Agents and Sycophants on work to congratulate and
approve his Actions, and to stand by and assist him. One of the first of these
was from the Officers of the English Army in Scotland, (no doubt but excited by
Monk in the State he stood then with Cromwell.) So that as from Scotland our
Civil Wars first began, and from thence their solemn League and Covenant was so
rigidly imposed in England; so from thence now come Congratulatory Addresses to
Cromwell for overturning all they had done; and a time shall come when a Storm
shall come from Scotland, which shall disperse and unravel all that the
Covenanters, Rump and Cromwell had done; thus you will see how lame-footed
Vengeance shall overtake them all. Having seen how Cromwell established himself,
we'll proceed to see the Success.

The Dutch above all things dreading the Rump, animated Cromwell to dissolve
them, promising greater things to him than they had done to the Rump in case he
would do it, which being done, the Dutch (not unreasonably) hoped by the
Disorders which would arise in England by it, they should be better able to
deal with Cromwell than the Rump; and, notwithstanding their calling God to
witness of their sincere Love and Affection to the English Nation, and desire
of propagating the true Reformed Protestant Religion, with all imaginable
Diligence, set out a greater Fleet to Sea than they had done before, and Trump
gave out he would fire the English Ships in their Harbors and the Downs before
the English Fleet should get out.

But the Rump, who well understood what Faith or Credit was to be given to the
Dutch Protestations, were not behind-hand with the Dutch in their Naval
Preparations, which Cromwell found ready to fight with the Dutch; and sooner
than the Dutch looked for, the English Fleet commanded by Monk and Dean, Penn
Vice Admiral, and Lawson Rear-Admiral, upon the second of June engaged the
Dutch, and at the beginning Dean was killed by a Cannon-Ball, but the Dutch
sore pressed upon by the English bore away, and made a running Fight, having a
Ship of 42 Guns sunk by Lawson, and 140 Men in her; but the Winds blowing
cross, the English could not that day do much more Execution.

Next day Monk engaged the Dutch Fleet again, and sunk six of their best Ships,
two were blown up, and eleven taken, one Vice Admiral and two Rear-Admirals,
with two of their Hoys, and thirteen hundred and fifty Prisoners; and of the
English not one Ship was lost or disabled, and besides Admiral Dean, but one
Captain killed.

The Dutch thus balk'd of their Expectation of firing the English Ships in
their Harbors, and in the Downs, send Beverning, Newport, Vande Parro and
Jonstal, to Cromwell and the new Council of State (for Cromwell had discharged
the old one.) And Beverning repeats the former Cant of calling God the Searcher
of all Hearts to witness, the sincere Affections of the States toward the
Commonwealth of England; and prayed that God with his Holy Spirit might preside
at all their Consultations, and bless their Government and the Nation, with all
Prosperity and Happiness, and desired that the Memory of the past Actions might
be obliterated, and a perfect Amity and indissoluble Union, and more entire
Correspondence than ever might be established between the two Nations; and
concluded, That the Great, most Good, and most Merciful God would preside in
their Councils with his Spirit of Peace.

To this Cant the Council returned a peremptory Answer, That without
Satisfaction for what had been acted against England, and befitting Security
that no such thing should be attempted again, they could not proceed to any
League or Alliance.

But rather than submit to this Introduction of a Treaty, the Dutch resolve to
try once again their Fortune by War, and fit out the greatest Fleet they could,
to be again commanded by Van Trump. These were encountered by Monk, who fought
them on the 29th and 30th of July, and took and sunk 30 of their Men of War,
whereof eight were Flag-Ships, and retook the Garland, formerly taken by the
Dutch from the English, killed Van Trump, and took above 1000 Prisoners,
whereof Vice Admiral Evertson was one; and 'twas conjectured 6000 of the Dutch
were killed and drowned, no Quarter being given during the Fight.

In this Engagement the English had but two Ships fired, whereof the Oak was
one, but most of her Men were saved, but had 250 Men slain, and 700 wounded; of
the slain were Capt. Cox, Graves, Chapman and Peacock; of the wounded were
Capt. Stokes, Seaman, Rous, Holland and Cubi.

Between these Fights, viz. July 8. Cromwell, by the Title of, I Oliver Cromwell,
Captain General, and Commander in Chief of all the Forces raised and to be
raised within this Commonwealth, summons 144 (which was twelvefold the Number
of the Tribes of Israel) of his own Nomination, to take upon them the supreme
Government of the Nation. These were Anabaptists and Fifth-Monarchy-Men,
Cromwell believing them to be the properest Instruments to do his Journey-work,
but was mistaken.

Upon the 4th of July, 120 of these appeared at White Hall, and being set round
a Table in the Council Chamger, Cromwell and the Officers of the Army standing
about the middle of the Table (this was such a Ra^y-Show as never before was
seen in fair Albion's Isle) Cromwell made a Speech to them, showing the Cause of
their Summons, and that they had a clear Call to take upon them the supreme
Authority of the Commonwealth, and urged diverse Places of Scripture to admonish
them to do their Duties.

Then Cromwell, to manifest the Clearness of their Call, produced an Instrument
under his own Hand and Seal, whereby he did, with the Advice of his Officers,
devolve and entrust the supreme Authority and Government of this Commonwealth
into the Hands of the Persons then met. It seems then the other 24 which were
not yet come up had no part of the Supreme Authority and Government of the
Commonwealth, but a less Number may do the Work.

For Cromwell then tells them, that any forty of them are to be held and
acknowledged the Supreme Authority of the Nation, and all Persons within the
same are to yield Obedience and Subjection. Yet this clear Call binds them to
sit no longer than the third of November, and that three Months before their
Dissolution they make Choice of other Persons to succeed them, who are not to
sit longer than a Year, and to be left to them to take care for the Succession
of the Government, and so Cromwell and his Officers left them: But he had as
good said nothing, for his Supreme Authority sat longer than the third of
November, yet never made choice of other Persons to succeed them, nor took any
care for the Succession of the Government.

However this Thing, or Creature of Cromwell's, calls it self a Parliament; and
because one Praise God Barebone a Leatherseller, was a famous Member in it,
'twas called Barebone's Parliament, and they chose one Rouse their Speaker. But
how Godly soever Cromwell seemed to appear by his diverse Texts of Scripture, in
devolving the Supreme Authority of the Nation upon these Men, yet he retained
the Wisdom of the Serpent, and by his own Authority imposed six Months
Assessments upon the Nation, which you may see in Baker's History, fol. 618. b.
which Whitlock takes no notice of; and if he had not, it is a Question whether
his chosen Creatures, The Supreme Authority of the Nation, would have done it.

Barebone's Parliament was so highly pleased with Monk's Victory over the
Dutch, that they ordered a Day of Thanksgiving for it, with a Narrative to be
publicly read, and also several Chains of Gold to be given to Blake (tho he
was in neither of these Fights) Monk, Penn and Lawson for their good Service,
and a Gratuity to all the other Officers and Seamen according to their Quality
over and above their Pay. This is observable, that Cromwell himself put the
Chain of Gold, and the Medal with the Representation of a Sea Fight, which
Barebone's Parliament had given Monk, about his Neck, and having invited Monk
to Dinner, made him wear it all the while. See the History of Monk' s Life, p.
77.

Whilst Cromwell and his Supreme Authority were thus jolly in England, all was
in Confusion and Distraction in Holland (I mean the Dutch Provinces) the common
People obeyed no longer their Government: The Placarts of the States General
were despised, and they in danger to be ruined and plundered by the ignorant
and impetuous Rabble. The Dutch Ambassadors here could obtain no other Terms of
Peace than by a Coalition, Satisfaction for Damages received by the English,
and Security for the future, that the Dutch should not do the like again, and
that the Dutch take a Lease for 21 Years for Fishing, and to pay an Annual Rent.

The Council thus resolute, and Plenipotentiaries tried what Terms of Peace
might be had from Barebone' s Parliament: But these took the Dutch to be the
Outworks of Babylon, which must be taken down before there could be any coming
at the main Fort: They looked upon the Dutch as Carnal and Worldly Politicians,
Enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and such as would upon all occasions retard
the Progress of the Saints and People of God, in overturning the Powers of this
World: That Antichrist, the Man of Sin, could never be destroyed in Italy,
whilst the Dutch retained any considerable Strength in the United Neterlands.

They did not insist upon the Flag, nor Dominion of the Seas, but held it
necessary in order to the Coming of Christ, and his Personal Reign, that the
Seas should be scoured and preserved as peaceably as the Land, that both ought
jointly to submit to the Power of King Jesus, whose Ways they, and not the
Hollanders, were to prepare: They allowed the Procedure of the Dutch by
Petition, since the Power of the Council of State was all one with that of the
Saints, and theirs derived from him to whom all Power is given: And upon that
account the Dutch ought to continue their Addresses of Meseignours, and
Tresillust^es Seignours, to the Council of State, not in the sense they are
forbidden in the Gospel, but that whereby our Lord Christ assumes such Titles,
and confers them on the Saints: That the Saints therefore might tolerate them,
and the Dutch ought not to refuse them, lest it should be a Rejection of the
Kingdom of Christ, which was now approaching: That the Dutch ought to kiss the
Son lest he be angry, and should have a care how they contemn his Holy Ones,
lest they were chastised with the Rod of Iron. See Stubbe, p. 91, 92.

The Dutch were now more confounded and perplexed than ever, it was difficult
to treat with, and impossible to prevail upon these Men: They were now in
danger to be ruined as Enemies to Christ, rather than England; and a Coalition
with England would not satisfy, except they likewise annexed their Provinces
unto the Fifth Monarchy.

In Holland the Provinces met to consult what to do; the Opinion of Holland was
never to enter into a Coalition with England, but that a strict League
defensive should be proffered; that they ought to contract Foreign Amities,
especially with France, and to equip out a Fleet with all possible Expedition:
Yet they had little reason to expect much Help from France, being then
imbroiled in Civil Wars; besides, they had so juggled with France, and
falsified their Faith since the Treaty at Munster, that they had little reason
to expect Help from France. The other Provinces were for entering into a League
with the Elector of Brandenburgh, and other German Princes, and giving
Assistance to the Scots, for at this time Major General Middleton was raising
some Tumults there; but their Necessities were present, and these Treaties
remote and dangerous, they could not get any great Benefit by a Treaty with the
German Princes, they having (except Brandenburg, who had but little) no Power
at Sea. Besides, these Alliances would cost dear, and the Dutch pretended they
were poor, and also such an Alliance would prove dangerous; for the Elector of
Cologne might demand the Restitution of Rhineburg, Orsoy, Rees, and other
Places which the Dutch had filch'd from that Electorate; so might the Elector
of Bradenburgh, of Wesel, and other Places wherein the Dutch kept Garrisons
above 40 Years; besides, they feared the Emperor might claim in right of the
Empire; and little good could be expected from assisting the Scots, without
being superior at Sea, and sending a Land Army, which the Dutch could not
spare.

They therefore gave Orders to their Plenipotentiaries, to protract time
according as they saw Disorders to increase between Cromwell and his Supreme
Authority; to be ample in the Generals concerning the Defense of the Reformed
Religion, and of the Household of Faith, to reject the Coalition, to offer to
enter into a strict and intimate League, but deal as tenderly as they could in
point of Reparation, Satisfaction or Security.

All these things were known to Cromwell's Council of State, and they resolved
to handle them accordingly; and when these were communicated to Barebone's
Parliament, they said, it was no more than was prophesied in Scripture, and in
course to be expected, that the Gentiles should rage, and the Kings of the
Earth set themselves against the Kingdom of Christ; but they should fall before
him, and be broken in pieces. That they were fierce to encounter Gog and Magog,
and by a series of Victories inflamed to encounter this Antichristian Host.
It Is tedious to set forth the manifold Tautologies recited by Stubbe and Leo ab
Aitzma, who could not err herein, and all the Dutch Cant in securing the true
Reformed Religion, and of their love and desire of the Prosperity of the
English Commonwealth.

The Council of State since the Dutch refused a Coalition, and thereby became
our Equals, resolve to make them humble without it, and therefore impose 27
Articles upon the Dutch, which may be seen in Leo ab Aitzma, p. 837, etc. But
Mr. Stubbe mentions but five, viz. the third, twelfth, fourteenth, fifteenth,
and seventeenth, besides Satisfaction and Reparation made for several Wrongs,
Injuries, and Depredations, done and committed upon the English, as well in the
East Indies as elsewhere, by the People of the United Provinces, with Power
nevertheless of the Council, to add, alter, and enlarge the said Articles, or
any of them, before the Conclusion of the Treaty, as they shall find occasion
for the same in the future Management thereof.

The 3d Article was, That the Ships, Guns, and Furniture, and the Goods and
Merchandises, and other things, which had been taken in Harbor or at Land from
the Dutch by the English, during the War, should be accounted as part of
Satisfaction and Reparation for the Charges and Damages which the English had
been put to during the War: And the States General should pay to the English
such further Sum for Reparation as aforesaid, and in such manner as shall be
agreed upon by this Treaty: And thereupon all Offenses, etc. to be forgotten.

The 12th Article obliges them, Not to permit the Prince of Orange, or the
Princess Mary, to relieve with Counsel, or Victuals, any Rebels or Enemies of
the Commonwealth of England, etc. and to seclude the Prince's Lineage from
being State-holders, Admiral, General, or Governor of any of their Towns. I Am
persuaded Cromwell was the Contriver of this Article; the Reason you will see
hereafter.

The 14th Article, That they (the Dutch) were not to enter or pass the British
Seas, but with a certain Number of Men of War, to be agreed upon in this
Treaty: But in case the States General should have occasion to pass the said
Seas with a greater Number of Ships of War, that they should give Notice of
their Intentions to the English, and obtain their Consent before they put to
Sea.

The 15th Article, wherein Stubbe follows the English Manuscript, and not Leo
ab Aitzma, which much differs from it. As the Commonwealth of England have
declared their Resolutions, that they will from time to time take care to put
forth upon their Seas a convenient Number of armed Ships for the Defense and
Safeguard thereof, and to maintain and preserve all lawful Navigation, Trade,
and Commerce therein, against Pirates and Sea-Rovers, and all others that shall
act or do any thing to the Disturbance thereof; so for the greater freedom of
Commerce and Navigation, that neither Commonwealth shall give Reception to any
Pirates, etc.

The 17th Article obliges the Dutch to take a Lease for 21 Years for the
Fishing, and to pay an Annual Rent. Here note, That tho the Dutch pleaded the
Grants of the Kings of England to the Dukes of Burgundy, and Kings of Spain,
for License to fish upon the Coasts of England, which they could no ways
pretend to after they had rent themselves from their Subjection to the Kings of
Spain, and their immemorial Prescription to fish in these Seas, tho Thousands
were then alive who were born before they became States; yet they were not so
impudent to plead Grotius's Mare Liberum, that they had as much Right to fish
in these Seas, as the English.

Thus far Cromwell's Council and the Rump went in equal Paces, and the Dutch now
were in no better state than when Cromwell deposed the Rump: But two Accidents,
which were not in the Dutch Power, contributed to their Deliverance from the
desperate state they were reduced to; one was Oliver's Ambition; the other, the
Frenzy of Barebone's Parliament: for Cromwell, however he accused the Rump of
Selfishness, was himself much more selfish; for without any regard to the
Honor or Interest of the English Nation, now makes it his Business to join in
a Defensive League with the Dutch, against the King and Royal Family, to set up
himself and his Posterity. Barebone's Parliament was contrary to Cromwell's
Designs, and he knew 'twas impossible to alter them; and therefore resolved one
way or other to be rid of them: and the Dutch dreaded them; and therefore the
Dutch Plenipotentiaries told Cromwell, that in case he would depose them, and
assume the Government to himself, they would be ready to accord with him upon
more moderate Terms, and enter into such a Defensive Alliance, as should secure
him against his foreign and domestic Enemies: This was the 7th of December.
See Stubbe, p. 110.

The Frenzy of Barebone's Parliament was as intolerable to the Nation as to
Cromwell; so that no Man could judge of their Designs, or where they would end.
Their Prate was, to make way for Christ's Monarchy upon Earth, which they were
sure was at hand, now they were got together: therefore they pronounced
Priesthood to be Popery; paying of Tithes, Judaism; the Laws of England, The
Remains of the Roman Yoke; Schools and Colleges, Heathenish Seminaries of
curious and vain Learning; and Nobility and Honor, contrary to the Law of
Nature and Christianity.

Tho these had sat above five Months, yet they made but four Laws; one, for
punishing seditious Seamen, caused by their tumultuous demanding their Tun and
Gun-Money taken from the Dutch, and granted them by the Rump: another, For
Marrying by Justices of Peace: the third, For Registring Births, and not
Christnings: and the fourth, was an Act brought in by Praise-God Barebone,
Against Building, unless upon old Foundations, within ten Miles of London; tho
his Son designs to build London all the Country over upon new Foundations.

But tho Cromwell was resolved to be rid of Barebone's Parliament, yet he would
not proceed in that rude and Ruffian manner as he did against the Rump, but
wheedled with Rouse the Speaker, and some of his Creatures, that it should be
moved in the House, That their sitting longer would not be for the Good of the
Commonwealth, and that it would be fit for them to resign up their Powers to
the Lord-General again: Whereupon the Speaker, with such Members as would
follow him, went to White Hall, and under their Hands resigned up their Power
to Cromwell. See Whitlock fol. 551. Dr. Bates, in his Elenchus, page 165. says
Cromwell made a show of Wonder at it, denying utterly and rejecting it; but at
length, with much ado, was prevailed upon. This was December. 12.

The Copy of Cromwell's Countenance was quite contrary to his Actions; for tho
he seemingly refused to accept of the Resignation made by Rouse and his
Followers, yet he sent a Party of Soldiers to purge the House of those who
stayed behind; whereof Major General Harrison was one, who would have taken
Lenthal out of the Chair when Cromwell outed the Rump. See Baker's Hist. fol.
620. a. There was a Mistake in the former Impression in point of Time, That
Cromwell accepted of the Protectorate by Praise-God Barebone's Parliament, which
he assumed not till four days after, viz. December 16.

Before we proceed to see how Cromwell behaved himself after his resuming the
Government again, it is fit to see how the Case stood between the English and
French at this time, as also the Dutch and French, in reference to this War.
Tho there was no declared War between the English and French, yet there often
happened Acts of Hostility between them, the French making Prize of the English
Ships at Sea, and the English much more of the French: and upon the 7th of
September 1652, the English in the Downs set upon a French Fleet laden with
Provisions and Ammunition, under the Convoy of so many Men of War as the French
could well set out, and dispersed the Fleet, and took seven of their Men of
War, whereby the Spaniards were enabled to retake Dunkirk and Graveling, taken
from them by the French in the Year 1646. The next Year, viz. in October 1653,
Captain Hayton in the Sapphire, came up to eight French Men of War, and shot
twice at their Admiral, who returned him a Broadside, and Hayton endeavored
to have boarded her, but she got away: Hayton with his single Ship engaged the
rest, and took the French Vice Admiral and Rear-Admiral, and another of their
Men of War, and many rich Prizes, with the Loss but of four Men, and some
wounded. See Whitlock's Memoirs, fol. 547. b. So inconsiderable were the French
at Sea in those Days.

However, the Dutch held constant Intelligence with the French in all their
Negotiations with the English during this War, as you may see in Whitlock's
Memoirs, fol. 568. as appears by Monsieur Chanute's Speech to the States;
wherein, in this low state of the Dutch, he gives them the Title of High
Puissances: and when the Dutch were in their distressed state, in the time both
of the Rump and Barebone's Parliament, the French fearing the Dutch's Ruin, or
such a Peace as the English should impose upon them, proffered to be at half
Charges with the Dutch in case they would continue their War with England;
otherwise the French were not able to contribute but little to help them at
Sea. Now let us see if Oliver's Government was as arrogant, impolitick, selfish,
and dangerous to the Safety of the Nation, as his first assuming it was rude
and barbarous.

After the Supreme Power of the Nation had been thus tumbled from Post to
Pillar, from Cromwell to Barebone' s Parliament, and from them to Cromwell again;
upon the 16th of December, Cromwell and his Officers, after several Days seeking
of God, tho it was resolved on before, resolved, That a Council of Godly, Able
and Discreet Persons should be named, consisting of 21, and that the
Lord-General should be chosen Lord Protector (for King, good Man, he would not
be:) but le^t he should go too far astray, tied himself up to an Instrument of
Government, which he swore to in these Words; I have accepted thereof, and do
declare my Acceptance thereof accordingly; and do promise, in the Presence of
God, That I will not violate or infringe the Matters and Things therein
contained, but to my Power observe the same, and cause them to be observed; and
shall in all other things, to the best of my Understanding, govern these
Nations according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs, seeking their Peace, and
causing Justice and Law to be equally administered.

In the former Impression I followed Cromwell's Instrument of Government, as it
is set forth by Dr. Bates; but finding this differ from Mr. Whitlock, not only
in the Number of the Articles, but in the Substance of several of them, I shall
now follow Mr. Whitlock, as being of better Authority, tho not particularly
recite them all, being long; but make Remarks upon several of them, to show how
inconsistent this Instrument was with Cromwell's Oath, and how he observed it in
his future Actions.

Cromwel' s Council was Philip Lord Viscount Lisle (now Earl of Leicester)
Charles Fleetwood his Son-in-law, John Lambert, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Sir
Charles Woolsley, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (after Earl of Shaftsbury) Edward
Mountague (after Earl of Sandwich) John Desborow (his Brother-in-law) Walter
Strickland, Henry Lawrence, William Sydenham, Philip Jones, Richard Major,
Francis Rouse, and Philip Skipton Esquires.

The 5th Article is, That the Protector, with the Consent of the major part of
the Council, have Power of War and Peace. How well he observed this in his
Peace with the Dutch and French, and War with Spain, will appear afterward.

The 6th Article is, That the Laws shall not be altered, suspended or repealed,
nor any new Law made, nor any Tax, Charge, or Imposition laid upon the People,
but by common Assent in Parliaments, save only as is expressed in the 30th
Article. How does this Article agree with the 27th, That a constant Revenue
shall be raised for the maintaining 10000 Horse and 20000 Foot in England,
Scotland, and Ireland; and 200000 l. per Annum to himself, beside the
Crown Lands: or with the 38th Article, To repeal all Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, contrary to the Liberty Cromwell grants to all tender Consciences
(as he calls them) in the next preceding Articles, where he excludes Popery and
Prelacy? Or how did Cromwell observe this Article when he imprisoned the
Royalists which would not give Security for their Good Behavior to him? and
whether they did or not, took from them the tenth part of their Estates, and
put them to Death by his High Court of Justice, as he called it.

The 8th Article is, That Parliament, after the first Day of their Meeting,
shall sit five Months, and not in that time be Adjourned, Prorogued, or
Dissolved, without their Consent. Yet he dissolved the next Parliament (as he
called them) within five Months after their first sitting, with their Consent;
and if they refused, had his Janissaries in Westminster Hall, and in the Court
of Requests, to have forced them, as he did by the Rump, (this is true of my
own Knowledge) and declared what should be Treason. See Whitlock's Memoirs, fol.
563. b.

The 34th Article is, That the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of the
Great Seal, the Treasurer, Admiral, Chief Governors of Scotland and Ireland,
and the Chief Justices of both the Benches, shall be chosen by the Approbation
of Parliament; and in the Intervals of Parliament, by the Approbation of the
major part of the Council, to be afterward approved by Parliament. I deny any
of these Officers were ever chosen or approved by Parliament: if any were, it
lies upon another to prove them to be so chosen or approved by Parliament.

Thus by manifold Perjuries, deepest Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, and foul
Ingratitude, Cromwell waded through a Sea of Blood in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and then deposed them who had raised him, for which he had murdered
thousands for but attempting to do what he had done. He aspired to the Dominion
of Britain and Ireland, which the Rump had conquered to his hand; and by Monk's
Victories over the Dutch, Holland lies at his Mercy: so that as Cromwell was the
most absolute Tyrant that ever raged in England, so was he not less terrible to
his neighboring Nations. And now he had it in his Power to do what he will,
let us see how like a Beast he did what he did.

Of all our neighboring Nations, the Dutch and French were the most formidable
to the English; the Dutch being not only Competitors with the English in Trade,
but Contenders with them in the Dominion of the Seas; and the French the most
formidable and faithless by Land; and of all Nations, the English Trade to
France was the worst, being as much to the enriching France, as the
impoverishing England: Spain neither a neighboring Nation to England, except
some part of Flanders, nor any ways formidable to England by Sea or Land; yet
of all others, the English Trade with Spain was the most beneficial and
enriching to the English. Now let us see how diametrically contrary to the
English Interest Cromwell acted in every one of these.

After Cromwell had assumed the Protectorate, Mr. Whitlock says, he observed new
and great State, and all Ceremonies and Respects were paid to him by all sorts
of Men, as to their Prince; and Stubbe says, upon the 20th Notice was given to
the Dutch Plenipotentiaries, by Cromwell's Master of the Ceremonies, of his
being Protector, and how ready he was to treat with them, and how kind he would
be to them; but they must pay him the same Honor and Respect which was
heretofore exhibited to the English Kings, and in their Writings and Discourses
give him the Title of Highness, which was in Use before that of Majesty; that
they not being in the Quality of Ambassadors, but Lords Deputies
Plenipotentiaries, must be uncovered in his Presence.

In this state Cromwell takes the Treaty of Peace out of the Council's Hands
(tho it ill agreed with his Oath to the Instrument of his Government) and upon
the 26th of December (but ten Days after his assuming the Protectorate) by his
Secretary Thurlo^, brought the Dutch Plenipotentiaries a Writing, wherein the
Satisfaction of the 3d Article, demanded by the Council, was wholly omitted;
but the Claims of the East India Merchants and others were to be compounded.
The 15th Article was changed so, as that neither the Dominion of the Seas was
mentioned, nor their Ships to be searched; but they were to strike the Flag,
and lower their Top-sail to any English Man of War within the British Seas:
with several other Concessions.

Now the Dutch Artifice, after having made so many Protestations of agreeing
with Cromwell upon better Terms than they would, if he would dissolve the Rump
and Barebone's Parliament, appeared: for notwithstanding Cromwell had omitted
the Satisfaction demanded by the third Article, and qualified the fifteenth;
yet looking upon Cromwell's state uncertain, and that he stood in as much need
of them as they of him; without giving any Answer, upon the 28th of December
desired a Passport to depart. Now Cromwell perceived how the Plenipotentiaries
had deluded him, and therefore declared, That if they departed without
concluding and signing the Treaty, and mutually engaging to ratify it in a
certain time, he would not be obliged to it, or any part thereof. Hereupon the
Plenipotentiaries staid; and Cromwell in plain Terms told them, Without the
Seclusion of the Prince of Orange from being Stadtholder and General, no Peace
was to be expected. But if Cromwell thus juggled with his Council, the States of
Holland and West-Friezland did not less with the States of the rest of the
Provinces.

For by the 9th Article of the Union at Vtrecht, 1579, No Truce, Peace, or War,
should be made without common Consent of all the Provinces, and not by the
States General. Yet this Treaty was broken by the States of Holland, when they
made a Truce with the King of Spain 1609, for twelve Years, without the Consent
of the other Provinces, or States General: So did they at Munster, 1648, make a
separate Peace with Spain, notwithstanding several Treaties with France to the
contrary; which Stubbe, page 72, 73, 74. cites out of Leo ab Aitzma; the rest
of the Provinces detesting and declaiming against it, as perfidious,
treacherous, etc.

Cromwell knew this, and the Potency of Holland above the rest of all the other
Provinces, as also their Aversion to the House of Orange, and Instructions of
the Provinces not to exclude the Prince of Orange: Hereupon Cromwell entered into
a secret Conference with Beverning (the same, I think, that in 1679, at
Nimeguen, made the separate Peace with the French, without the Confederates, or
the Consent of the rest of the States) That if the Province of Holland would
sign a secret Article for to exclude the House of Orange, he would be content
to proceed in the Treaty of Peace. But Beverning pretending he had no
Instruction therein from the States, they had a Passport to return to Holland,
January 6.

These stayed longer before their Return than Cromwell expected, which put him
in a great Wrath and Confusion, and seemed to make great Preparations for
carrying on the War. The Dutch, to amuse him, send over the same Men in a
splendid and formal Embassy, with Consent to all the other Articles, except the
Seclusion of the Prince of Orange; which Cromwell signed upon the 5th of April
1654, and Peace was thereupon proclaimed at London: but Cromwell would not
exchange the Ratifications, unless the States of Holland and West-Friezland
would make a Decree for excluding the House of Orange from being Stadtholders
and General; which the said States did upon the 4th of May 1654, in these
Words, That the Noble and Potent States of Holland and West-Friezland, would
never elect his present Highness, or any of his Lineage, to be Stadtholder, or
Admiral of their Province; neither should their Province ever give their
Suffrage or Consent, that he, or any of his Family, should be Captain General
of the Forces of the United Provinces; the rest of the Provinces protesting and
declaiming against this, as much as they did against the States of Holland and
West-Friezland for making a separate Peace at Munster, without the Consent of
the French King.

By this it is evident, That Sir William Temple, in his Observations upon the
United Provinces, page 115. is mistaken; where he says, That the Union of
Vtrecht was never broken before the Year 1668, when the States General (and not
of Holland alone) concluded the Peace of Aix la Chapelle.

Here you see how selfish Cromwell was, and how little he regarded the Honor
and Interest of England in this Peace; for he not only remitted the 300000 l.
which the Dutch proffered the Rump for the Damages the English sustained by the
War (See Stubbe, p. 112. in the Margin) but left out the Coalition; the Revenue
to be Annually paid to the English for Liberty to fish in the British Seas; the
Sovereignty of the Seas, except the Flag; Security from the Dutch not to molest
the English in time to come; and to have their Ships searched in passing through
the British Seas; and not to set out any greater than such a Number of Ships of
War, without giving an Account to the English State of the Reason; and also,
that the English should have a Free Trade up the Scheld: and because both the
Rump, Council and Oliver himself had demanded Justice against those that were
alive, who had any Hand in the Massacre of the English in Amboyna; Cromwell
suffered himself to be deluded by the Dutch in referring it to 8 Commissioners;
and if they agreed not in 6 Months time, Umpires were to be chosen. See
Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 568. b. But no Agreement was made, and Cromwell never
further minded it. And this is observable, that notwithstanding both the Dutch
and Cromwell's Protestations of calling God the Searcher of all Hearts to
witness, how much by this Peace they designed the Glory of God, and the
Promotion of the true Reformed Religion abroad; yet there is not one Article
concerning the same, nor any Protestant Prince named in it, except the King of
Denmark, who was to pay the English Merchants their Damages for the Embargo he
had laid upon their Ships in the Sound. And Dr. Gumble says, p. 74. That Monk
did often highly resent this Peace as a base Treachery in Cromwell.

Mazarine endeavored to have had the French included in this Treaty, but the
States of Holland regarded him not more than in that of Munster. The Dutch by
this Peace had an Opportunity to build more and greater Men of War, than they
could if the War had continued, of which you will hear more about 10 Years hence.

Mazarine finding himself thus neglected by the Dutch in their Treaty of Peace
with the English, sends Monsieur Bordeaux Extraordinary Ambassador to Cromwell
to obtain a Peace with him; and was not so squeamy in excluding the King and
Royal Family out of France, as the Dutch were in excluding the Prince of
Orange; but as preparatory to it, proffered to exclude the King out of Paris (I
think France) as you may see in Whitelock's Memoirs, f. 565. But this did not
procure a Peace till the Year 1655.

After Monk's Triumphant Victories over the Dutch, Cromwell having no further
Use of him at Sea, sent him back to govern Scotland; but when he shall come
there, Cromwell shall never get him out again; nor shall he come out of
Scotland, but utterly to exclude Cromwell's Posterity from ever mounting to his
ill gotten Greatness; and to unravel all that the Presbyterian Parliament, the
Rump and Cromwell, had been near twenty Years in Weaving. But in regard General
Monk has born so great a Figure in this Treatise, and shall much more
hereafter, it will not be amiss to see how the Case stood with him, before he
entered into the Parliament Service.

He was the second of Three Sons to Sir Thomas Monk of Potridge in Devonshire,
and born in the Year 1608. And being a younger Brother, and having a Mind above
his Fortunes, he endeavored to advance them by a Military Profession. His
Birth sorted with his Desires, his Family being of great Antiquity, and he no
stranger to the Royal Blood, one of his Maternal Ancestors being a Daughter
(but not Legitimate) of Edward the Fourth.

At the Age of Seventeen Years he served King Charles the First in the
unfortunate Expedition to Cadiz: And at the Age of Eighteen, he served in the
more unfortunate Expedition to the Isle of Rhee; yet was not his Courage
daunted by these Misfortunes, but he followed the Earl of Oxford (General of
the English) in the Low Country Wars against the Spaniard, until the Civil Wars
began to break out in England, between the King and Parliament: And the Irish
Rebellion first breaking out, he took a Commission from the Earl of Leicester
(agreed to be Lieutenant in Ireland by the King and Parliament) against the
Irish: But the King and Parliament after falling out, the King sent the Earl of
Ormond, Lieutenant of Ireland, and Monk took a Commission from him to serve
against the Irish.

When the Scots came with an Army into England to assist the Parliament, the
King made a Cessation of Arms with the Irish, and recalled the English sent to
subdue the Irish, to assist him against the English and Scots; these, in which
Monk's Regiment was included, were utterly defeated by Sir Thomas Fairfax,
joined with Sir William Brereton, Gell, Middleton and Mitton, and Monk taken
Prisoner, and sent to the Tower; where he continued near 4 Years.

In this time he fell into great Poverty and Want, but was relieved by a near
Kinsman of mine, Sir R. C. then a Prisoner in the Tower with him, and whilst he
was a Prisoner, did conform to the Prayers and Liturgy of the Church.

When the Parliament made the self-denying Ordinance, thereby to depose the
Earls of Essex and Manchester from their Commands, as being more inclined to a
Pacification with the King, than the Parliament were willing they should be;
Cromwell (knowing the Worth of Monk) sent to him to take a Command in the Army,
to be new modelled under Fairfax and him, which Monk accepted.

The Bishop of Ely (who was Prisoner in the Tower with Monk) told me, that
after he had accepted a Commission, and was released from his Imprisonment,
Monk, before he went out of the Tower, went to visit the Bishop, and beg his
Blessing, which after the Bishop had given him, he said, Now Colonel you have
changed Sides, we expect neither to see, nor hear from you more; the Colonel
then protested, He would never wear a Sword against the King. It seems he did
not think Fighting against the Irish and Scots, was wearing a Sword against the
King; for he did not only wear, but draw his Sword against them: And tho he
changed Sides, he did not his good Nature to Sir R. C. For on the first
opportunity after he came out of the Tower, he took a Journey into the Country
to visit Sir R. C. (who was released out of the Tower a little before) and to
thank him for his Favors when they were Prisoners.

But lest Cromwel' s assuming the Supreme Authority of the Nation should too
much savor of Selfishness, he having no Authority but from himself, therefore
he summons a Company of Men, so many to be chosen by each County, but not of
like Number; and others to be chosen by such Towns as he named, to meet the 3d
of September 1654 at Westminster. He upon their Meeting, and before he
permitted them to enter the House, told them, That some Years ago, none would
have thought of such a Door of Hope: That he knew there were yet many Humors
and Interests, and that Humors were above Interests: That the Condition of the
English was like Israel in the Wilderness: That this was an Healing-Day: There
was neither Nobleman, Gentleman nor Yeoman before* known by any Distinctions:
We had not any that bore Rule or Authority, but a great Contempt of Magistracy
and Christ's Ordinance: That the Fifth Monarchy was highly cried up by Persons
who would assume the Government; but that desired thing wanted greater
Manifestation than appeared, for such Men to change the Authority by* He
desired this Assembly to remedy all these Disorders; showed, That the Wars with
Portugal and France (for yet he had not made Peace with it) do, and did eat up
all the Assessments: That Swarms of Jesuits are crept in to make Divisions,
which were grown so wide, that nothing but Government could remedy them: And
let Men speak what they would, he could speak it with Comfort before a greater
than any of them. Then he showed what he had done during his Government: First,
his Endeavors to reform the Laws; next, his filling the Benches with the
ablest Lawyers; then his Regulation of the Chancery, and his Darling Ordinance
for the Approbation of Ministers (which hindered all that list from invading the
Ministry) by Men of both Persuasions, Presbyterians and Independents, etc. And
lastly, his being instrumental in calling a Free Parliament; which he valued,
and would keep it so above his Life.

But this Cant did little edify the greater part of the Members, who again
choose Lenthal Speaker, and fall upon a strict Enquiry into Cromwell's Instrument
of Government, which the Officer-Members oppose, alleging, That the Instrument
was the Foundation of the Government by which they met; and therefore could not
be brought into Debate: And Lambert said, If the Parliament would not confirm
them, they would call another, a Third and Fourth, till 'twas done.

Yet this frighted not the Republican Party, who boldly said, That the
Government was usurped by Fraud and Force, not procured by Right, nor confirmed
by the free Votes of the People: that it laid Snares for the Liberty of the
Commonwealth, and made way for a most grievous Tyranny. Nay, one said, Since
we were so near approaching to Monarchy, it were better to call one of the
Royal Family to the Government, than that Cromwell should usurp both Scepter and
Crown.

These Debates nettled Cromwell to the quick, so that in an unusual Heat he
tells them these Debates would turn all things into Confusion, and make them to
return to their former Chaos: And that they were to build upon the Foundation
of the Instrument, not to overturn it; with a great deal more of such Stuff.

But if Admonition would not prevail, he will try what may be done by Force; so
next Day he set a Guard upon the House, who would let no Member enter, but he
who subscribed a Recognition, To be faithful to the Protector, and not to
endeavor to change the Government of a single Person: When many of the
Republican Party refusing, the Cromwellian Faction within Doors, became near
equal to the Republican.

The secluded Republicans, rather exasperated than subdued by Cromwell's
Repulse, join with a Republican Party of the Army, who consult how they might
apprehend Cromwell, and bring him to a Trial before the Parliament for his
Treasons against the Commonwealth: But Cromwell being quick-scented, smelt out
this Conspiracy, and so prevented it; and upon the 22d of January 1654,
dissolved the Parliament, tho they sat not 5 Months, which he swear by his
Instrument of Government.

As the Republicans were impatient under Cromwell's Government, so were the
Royalists: For in March, after Cromwell had dissolved his Parliament, the
Cavaliers designed to rise, but could not get together; yet Sir Joseph Wagstaff
with a Body of Wiltshire Men, when the Assizes were holden at Salisbury, seize
upon the Judges in the Circuit, and proclaim the King, but were soon dispersed
by Captain Crook, who granted Colonel Penruddock, and those with him, Articles
of War upon his surrendering himself, to be indemnified in their Lives and
Estates. But Cromwell sent other Judges, who condemned Colonel Penruddock and
Captain Groves for High Treason, for which they lost their Heads; and several
others were hanged and quartered.

Cromwell being thus at Odds with his Parliament, and his standing Army in such
intestine Feuds, and Supernumeraries of the cashiered Armies commanded by
Essex, Manchester, Waller, Massey, etc. discontented, now contrives how to get
freed from the Dangers he apprehended from them; and therefore, with as much
Selfishness, and Dishonor and Loss to the Nation, as by his Peace with the
Dutch, he, without Cause shown, makes War upon Spain.

By Cromwell's War with Spain, the Dutch, who since the Peace of Munster 1648,
became Competitors with the English in the Spanish Trade, are now sole
Proprietors of it, as much to their Enriching as our Impoverishing; whereby
they not only redeemed the Losses they sustained in the War with us, but were
enabled to build more and much greater Men of War than they had before. And of
this you will hear more about 10 Years hence.

But these were not all the Losses which the English sustained by this War, for
Cromwell did not begin it as just Princes do, by complaining of Injuries done,
and demanding Redress, and in case of denial to proclaim War; but sneakingly,
and like a Pirate, fits up a Fleet under William Penn, (own Father to the now
William Penn) and puts on board a Land-Army, commanded by Colonel Venables:
Thus shipped, away they sail for Hispaniola; the Design was to take Sancto
Domingo, and after Carthagena, where they were sure was Gold enough; but care
was taken the Soldiers and Seamen should have little enough.

When the English arrived at Hispaniola, some Soldiers were landed in sight of
Sancto Domingo, whilst they were to fetch a Compass, and land to attack the
Town on the other side; but these mistaking their Place of landing, landed ten
Miles beyond: The Sun was scorching, the Country uncouth, sandy and woody; and
the English ignorant of the Way, were so overcome with Heat and Thirst, that
many of them died outright; others so spent, as they could not march, so were
killed by the Spaniards without fighting: Yet some few feebly arrived* to join
their Companions, when, to the breaking of all their Hearts, they opened their
Commission, and found, that upon Pain of Death, All the Gold, Silver and Rich
Goods, should be brought into a Common Treasury.

This was cold Comfort to these wretched Men in this scorching Climate, where
they could no longer stay; so away they sail to Jamaica, where a Plague
overtook them, so that in less than six Months time, not two Hundred of this
whole Army outlived it. Thus you see how Divine Vengeance overtook this part of
the Army Abroad, after their Perfidiousness, Treachery and Hypocrisy at home:
And this Calamity was brought upon them by him whom they had set up to enable
him to do it. And Cromwell, who expected Mountains of Gold, (like Sir Walter
Raleigh, in King James the First's Reign, by his Expedition to Guiana)
contracted such a Debt by this Expedition, that by all his Tricks he could
never after overcome: And as Sir Walter lost his Head by his Expedition, so did
Cromwell his Reputation.

But if Cromwell lost by this War, the Nation and Spanish Merchants lost much
more; for the Spaniards seize and confiscate all the English Effects in Spain;
which were so much more, by how much the Merchants were surprised in it, they
having no Notice of it, by which they might have withdrawn their Effects in the
Spanish Power: and the Privateers from Dunkirk, Ostend, and the Ports of Biscay
and Galicia, did the English Merchants in all their Trades more Damage than
they sustained in the Dutch War; with this Difference, that the English took
above seventeen Hundred Prizes from the Dutch, which eased the English Charge
in the War against the Dutch; whereas in this the English took none, or but
very few from the Spaniard.

Nor had the English Nation any Benefit of the Two Ships taken by Blake in
September 1656 off the Coast of Spain; where one was sunk, another burnt, and
two broke to pieces on the Shore; so that of eight Plate Ships, but two got
into Cadiz: On the contrary both England and Europe suffered by Blake's burning
the Spanish Plate-Fleet in Sancta Cruz, in April 1657; whereby, tho it were the
immediate Loss of the Spaniard, yet in Consequence this was a Loss to Europe in
all their Trades to Spain, which became so much lessened by this Loss, as the
Spaniard had thereby less means to hold Trade and Commerce with the Nations who
traded to Spain, or any of its Dominions.

Thus we have seen Cromwell make Peace with the Dutch, to the endangering the
Safety of the Nation, and War with Spain, to the enriching the Dutch, and to
the impoverishing the English; next you will see him make Peace with France, not
only to the impoverishing the English, but to the endangering the Safety, not
of England only, but of all Christendom.

But that we may take a better View of what followed, it is fit to look back,
and see how things stood before.

About the latter end of 1642, Cardinal Richlieu died; and in May following,
Lewis the Thirteenth died, his Son, the now French King, being in the fifth
Year of his Age: But Cardinal Mazarine succeeding Richlieu in being Prime
Minister of State, not yet being warm in his Office, the Prince of Conde, and
generally the Nobility of France rose in Arms against him; and to them the
Parliament of Paris joined, and proscribed Mazarine, and set a Reward upon any
who should bring his Head.

However the Queen Mother continued firm to Mazarine; and it was the Felicity
of Mazarine to force the Pass (I think) at Charenton, which Conde had ordered
Marshal Tureen to keep. Conde chafed at this Loss, which was the loss of Paris,
receives Tureen with Indignation and Reproach: Mazarine takes the Advantage of
this, and wins Tureen to his side, which made Conde betake himself to
Bourdeaux, from whence he sent to the Rump for Assistance; but the Rump being
resolved upon a War with the Dutch, gave the Prince no Assistance.

After the Reduction of Paris, all France in a short time was reduced to the
King's Obedience; yet the Prince of Conde's haughty Spirit could not bend to
submit to the Cardinal, but served the King of Spain in Flanders, when in the
Year (I think) 1653, he destroyed and took half the French Army which besieged
Valenciennes.

In these Commotions, tho the French in the Year 1646, took Dunkirk and
Graveling from the Spaniard, yet in the Year 1652, the Spaniard retook them
both from the French, and the Spaniard was enabled to do this by the English;
for tho the Rump could not or would not assist the Prince of Conde in
Bourdeaux, yet having a Squadron of Men of War in the Downs, when a great
French Fleet under a Convoy of Men of War were going to relieve Dunkirk
(besieged by the Spaniards) these were set upon by the English, and the whole
French Fleet destroyed or scattered, and so Dunkirk soon after surrendered, as
did Mardike and Graveling.

Nor were the Spaniards less successful in Catalonia, for having expelled the
French out of it, in the Year 1652, they reduced Barcelona (the Metropolis of
that Province, and one of the best Ports in all Spain:) but these Successes
will not long continue; and if the Spaniards were beholden to the Rump for
reducing Dunkirk and Graveling, they may ascribe the loss of them, and of many
more Towns and Dominions, to Cromwell.

In our Trades to Spain, we were as much Gainers by them, as Losers by the
French, so as we could better sustain the Losses wherein we debauched our
selves by drinking Spanish Wines: whereas in this War with Spain, and Peace
with France, we doubly debauched our selves in drinking French Wines, which
became so much more, as Spanish could not be had.

King James and Charles the First, except in the business of Rochel, were only
Lookers on, whilst this French King's Father rooted out the Power of the
Reformed in France, expelled the Duke of Lorain out of his Country, supported
Portugal and Catalonia in their Rebellion against Spain, tamed the Duke of
Savoy, and took Pignerol, (the Key of his Country) and other Places from him,
as also Brisac from the Empire, and Landreshy and other Places from the
Spaniard. Whereas Cromwell actually joined with the French in an offensive War
against the Spaniard, whereby he first made the French so formidable, that it is
a Question, whether it be in the Power of Christendom to restrain his boundless
Ambition by Land; for besides the routing of the Spanish Army near Dunkirk by
the English and French, or rather by the English without the French, they took
from the Spaniard, Winixburgh, Furnes, Bourbock, Dunkirk, Mardike, Graveling,
Montmeily, Ipre, and other Places.

But the Land could put no Bounds to the French Ambition, and therefore
Mazarine made use of this Conjuncture to enlarge the French Dominion by Sea,
without which all the French Grandeur by Land could not protect France from the
Insults and Invasions which the English and Dutch might make upon it by Sea:
And herein Mazarine wisely considered, that the Dominion of the Sea could not
be attained but by Navigation, nor could Navigation be had but by Trade to
support it.

Of all Trades the Fishing-Trade most increases Navigation both my Mariners and
Ships. For in other Trades by Navigation, as to Turkey, Miscovy, the East and
West Indies, it may be we employ a thousand Men in making Cloths, etc. to ten
Mariners in the Foreign Vent of them; whereas in the Fishing Trade every Man
becomes a Mariner: Add hereunto, in the Fishing Trade the Mariners are always
at hand for the Public Service of their Country, and lusty, active and strong;
whereas in the long Sea Voyages, especially to the East Indies, the Mariners
are long absent, and in the Diversities of Climates, and by salt Meats and sour
Drinks become subject to infinite Distempers: so that it may be a Question,
Whether in these Voyages, we do not lose more Men than make Mariners? And of
those which survive, one Fisherman shall by his Health and Strength beat three
of them.

Besides, in our Foreign Trades by Navigation, we employ only Men in them,
whereas in the Fishing Trade, we employ all sorts of People, Men, Women and
Children, in curing and drying Fish, and in making Cordage, Nets and Sails for
the Fishing-Trade. The Fishing-Trade upon the Coast of England and Scotland,
the French could not hope to drive the Dutch out of; but the New Foundland
Fishery was too remote from the Dutch, and the French should only have the
English to contest with in it.

Here let us see how the Case stood between the English and French in this
Contest. The New Foundland Fishery was carried on by the Inhabitants of the
Port-Towns of Cornwall, Devon and Dorsetshire: these Ports were all
Corporations, which excluded all other Men from carrying on this Trade; and
these Corporation-Men being few and Beggars, could not enlarge their
Fishing-Trade beyound their Men and Stock.

Whereas Havre de Grace, St. Malo's, Morlaix, Breast, Blavet, Rochford, Bayon,
and other Western Ports of France, are not only manifoldly bigger and better
peopled than the Ports of the Western and Southern Parts of England, but the
French King contributed three hundred thousand Pistols for carrying on the
New Foundland Fishery; and for further Encouragement, gave half Pay to lusty
young Men above their Wages for two or three Voyages, for the increase of
Mariners; and in all the Ports of France erected Schools for instructing Youth
in Mathematical Learning gratis.

The Fish caught in the New Foundland Fishery cost nothing but the catching
and curing, so that they who can catch and cure them cheapest, are sure of a
Foreign Market in their vending: And this creates another Navigation and
Employment of Mariners. And here let us see if the Act of Navigation be not as
much a Cause of enabling the French in carrying on this Fishery, as it is
eternally of fixing the Fishing-Trade upon the Coast of England and Scotland,
and the Green-land Trade, upon the Dutch and Hamburghers.

The French have upon the Coast of France (I dare say) near twenty-fold more
Timber to build Vessels for the New Foundland Fishery, than can be had at like
distance from the Ports of Cornwall, Devon and Dorset; and, I believe, as cheap
as the English pay for the Carriage of theirs to the Ports: and when it comes
there, the French Timber is wrought much easier than the English; and Vessels
made of French Timber draw less Water, and are sailed with fewer Hands:
Besides, the French encourage all Foreigners to build their Vessels more
conveniently for this Trade, than the English understand.

And as the French have much more manifoldly the Advantage above the English in
building Ships, so have they more in Plenty of Hemp and Flax for fitting up
Ships for this Trade (wherein, I suppose, they do not restrain the French from
curing Flax and Hemp in standing Waters) and in Proportion as much cheaper than
the English can fetch Foreign Hemp and Flax in English-built Ships, and sailed
by three fourths English: So that to the Poverty of these beggarly
Corporations, this wise Law of Navigation obliges the English to encounter the
French in the New Foundland Fishery, in Ships doubly as dear built, and sailed
by near double the Charge, and so as the English are like to come to a sorry
Market abroad, if they can find none at home, for their Fish caught in this
Trade.

Add hereunto, that the English, who cannot cure a White Herring, Pilchard, or
Cod-fish, are too wise to be instructed in this Trade, but keep the Fish on
Board till it becomes stale, and so cannot be so well cured as when new caught;
whereas the French cure them on board; so, as they take them cheaper, so they
cure them better: The Success hereof you will hear more hereafter. So that from
the Act of Navigation made by the Rump, and this War by Cromwell, we may date
the Fall or Decay of the beneficial Trades of England, and also of the Value of
the Lands of England, being a necessary Consequence.

Having seen Cromwell lay a Foundation for the Ruin not of England only, but of
the Western Dominions of Europe abroad, by exalting the French Grandeur by Sea
and Land; we'll see how he behaved himself at home, and how he established his
ill acquired Dominion in himself and Posterity.

He set up fourteen Major-Generals over England and Wales, with an absolute
Power to enquire after all those who had bore Arms, or been sequestered for
being Malignants, and to make them pay the tenth part of their Estates, and to
be imprisoned till they gave Security for their Good Behavior to Cromwell.
These Major-Generals acted their Parts to the Life; and being an obscure
company of mean Fellows (except Fleetwood) lorded it over the Nobility as well
as Gentry and Clergy, with an unheard of Insolence. Here I take liberty to
tell, it may be, a not unpleasing Story.

My Father was a Member of the Long Parliament, and one of the first Rate which
was expelled the House, sequestered and imprisoned for Malignancy, first at
Yarmouth, after at London: And whilst he was a Prisoner there, the Committee at
Haberdashers-Hall sent a Messenger to him, to pay 300 l. for the five and
twentieth part of his Estate, for being resident in London.

My Father was not forward to return an Answer, till the Messenger told him he
must have an Answer: Then my Father told him, that such Residence as he had in
London, he wished to those who sent him. Afterward Sir Anthony Weldon*
(Chairman to the Committee in Kent) sent to him, that if he would send the
Committee his Court-Rolls, they would keep his Courts for him; to which my
Father answered, the Parliament had kept him Prisoner near three Years to prove
him a Knave, but Sir Anthony should not beg him for a Fool.

My Father would never own the Parliament's Power, by petitioning them, or
paying any Taxes assessed by them; yet by the Solicitation of my Mother, he was
discharged of his Sequestration and Imprisonment.

Of all the Provinces of these Major-Generals, Fleetwood's was the greatest,
being the Associated Counties, which were Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
Cambridgshire, Huntingdonshire, and (I think) Hertfordshire.

I do not remember Fleetwood ever acted of himself, but one Haynes was his
Deputy: But because these Major-Generals were Men of Action, and so could not
always attend this Business, they appointed Committees of their own Gang, mean
and profligate Fellows, who should not vary one Tittle from their Instructions:
One Day an Attorney was Chairman to tha^ in Suffolk.

In the Year 1656, one Major Rolston (who served under Sir Richard Willis, when
he was Governor of Newark for the King, and who betrayed the Cavaliers Designs
to Cromwell) came to me and told me, the King was making great Preparations to
land in England, and that the Cavaliers were intending to rise all over England
to assist him: This he assured me he had from Sir Richard Willis, and told me I
could not do the King greater Service, than to provide some Horse-Arms, Back,
Breast, Pot and Pistols.

Hereupon I went to London, and bought a Dozen of either, and had them put up
in two Hampers, and see them put on Shipboard, and then returned into the
Country, and took care upon the first Arrival of the Ship to have notice of it:
And when the Ship arrived, I ordered the Business so, that in the Night I got
them to my Father's House; this was upon a Friday; and that Night my youngest
Brother and I so disposed of them, that I believe none but we two knew where.

Upon Sunday, about Midnight, my Father's House was broke into by a Party of
Horsemen sent from Yarmouth, and the Cellars, and all suspected places of the
House were searched for Arms, but none found, but the Swords of me and my
Brother, which hung up in the Hall, which they carried away as well as my
Father and Brother: My Father was old, very fat and unweildy, my Brother young,
(about nineteen Years old) raw, and of little Experience in Martial or any
other Affairs; but whither they were carried we could not tell.

The News of this Exploit was soon blazed all the Country over, and this
brought me a Ticket to meet Rolston, and a Cousin German of mine at a certain
Place, for we had our Meeting-places.

We met with heavy Countenances, not one of us but expected to be hanged, tho I
had more reason to fear it than either of them: The danger was, my Brother
would discover all, they both wished I had been taken, so my Brother had not: I
thanked them for their good Wishes, but this availed nothing; what was to be
done now my Brother was a Prisoner, was to be advised of, they both could not
tell what to do, but hanging was the best we could expect.

At last I told them that these Fellows were Sancho Pancho's Stamp, Proud to
the Humble, and Humble to the Proud, and therefore nothing was to be done with
them but by Hectoring: they both agreed, but neither of them would undertake
it, but left it to me.

The next day News came from my Father from Yarmouth, for Drink and Diet; for
he said this Devil could be cast out no other way than by Fasting; and
therefore would neither pay for any Meat or Drink which was sold there, nor
give the Soldiers one Penny who guarded him: And by this time I got some
inkling, that my Brother had discovered our Design of rising to a mean Fellow,
whose Mother Hopkins the Witch-finder had been hanged for a Witch, who had
informed one of the Bresters, of which there were three Brothers, Robert,
Francis, and Humphry, (all stiff Cromwelians) of it.

The next Day I went to Yarmouth, where I found my Father and Brother at
Variance, for they were not at good Terms one with the other, and Soldiers
guarding them. At first I expostulated with the Soldiers for taking away my
Sword, which they had nothing to do with; which they denied, or shifted from
one to another; which was all I cared for. Then I complained that my Brother
should be hurried into Prison upon the Story of a Rogue, whose Mother was
hanged for a Witch: This, my Father said, was too late now, for my Brother had
confessed all to the Governor; it seems they had put burning Matches between his
Fingers to do it.

So I went to the Governor, and told him how unhappy my poor Brother was, to
be so hardly used upon the sole Testimony of so vile a Fellow. To which he
answered, That it was past now; and by that time his Examination was before the
Protector. But, said I, if you have any thing against my Brother, it does not
appear you have any thing against my Father; and his Case was not usual
heretofore, an aged unweildy Man to have his House invaded at Midnight, and his
Person hurried into Prison at that season.

To which the Governor answered, That what the Protector demanded, that my
Father should give Security to the Protector for his Good Behavior (which I
was sure he would never do) could do my Father no hurt.

To which I replied* That no Man who is bound to his Good Behavior is taken
for a Man of Good Behavior; and that now, as the Protector will have the tenth
part of his Estate for having been sequestered, so he might take half or all his
Estate for having been bound to his Good Behavior. To which the Governor not
answering, told me, He would not have taken the Language my Father gave the
Protector from any body else. I told him, My Father always led a free Life, and
the Governor could not expect he should be metamorphos'd upon his Appearance
before him. So I left him, and went to my Father, and asked him what he had
said which gave the Governor such Offense? He said he knew nothing, unless it
were that the Governor asked him if he knew the Protector? he said, yes, and
his Father too, when he kept his Brew House at Huntington.

Next Day the Soldiers carried my Brother for London: I went part of the way
with him, and, when I could get an Opportunity, instructed him what to do: and
about three Days after, my Fa^^er returned to his House in Sir Nicholas Bacon's
Coach; for after my Brother was gone, the Governor ordered my Father to be
released; who to get out of Town, not staying to send for his own Coach or
Horses, took one of the Carts (peculiar to the Town of Yarmouth, which have two
Wheels behind, and over them a place to carry Goods from Shipboard to the
Merchants Warehouses) and in it went to Sir Nicholas Bacon's. It Is strange how
such an odd thing should be so long remembered; for, above twenty Years after, I
being at the South End of Yarmouth, and my Horse standing at the North (about
three quarters of a Mile) and seeing one of these Carts, I asked the Owner if
he would carry me to my Inn, and I would give him Sixpence; we agreed, and the
Fellow told me how before he had carried my L -- to Sir Nicholas Bacon's in it.

My Father had not been long returned, but he received a Summons from Haynes to
appear at Bury, to give the Protector Security for his Good Behavior, and show
Cause why he should not be decimated. My Mother was now dead, and Security I
was sure my Father would not give, nor any that I knew would appear for him: So
I took up his Case, and appeared for him; I excused his not coming for his Age
and Unweildiness, which was allowed: But I told the Committee, my Father was
not in their Instructions, for tho he had been sequestered, yet no Charge was
alleged against him; and so, upon hearing his Case, the Parliament discharged
his Sequestration: But 'twas to no purpose to talk Reason to these Fellows, for
they said, he was in their Instructions, and so ordered him to be decimated. I
told them I would not submit to it, but protested against it, and appealed from
them to the Protector.

I was content to take this Occasion to go to London, more to take Care of my
Brother than in hopes to get off my Father's Decimation: And when I came to
London, I knew not how to get a Petition to be delivered to Cromwell.
Major General Skippon's Father was Servant to my Grandfather, and eldest
Uncle, to whom I went; but when I named my Father, and his Case, he went out of
the Room. I then applied my self to Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, who was one of
Cromwell's Masters of Requests; who promised to deliver my Father's Case to
Cromwell, and that I should have an Answer.

So I appeared before Cromwell, (which was the only time I ever saw him) in
Henry the Eighth's Chamber in White Hall; but Mr. Bacon stood at the further
Door, and Cromwell and I at the Door next the Closet: Cromwell seemed to read the
Petition, tho to my Apprehension he read not one Line of it, but sometimes
looked upon me, then upon the Paper; and after some Pause told me, Mr. Bacon
should give me a satisfactory Answer: Then Cromwell ^old me, He knew my Father
very well, and that I had a very fair Sister; and I believe would have gone on
at this rate, when I humbly thanked his Highness for his Favor to my Father,
and so went off.

I had heard enough of Cromwell, not to believe any thing he said; and therefore
I told Mr. Bacon, that unless I saw the Order of the Protector to the
Major General upon my Father's Appeal, I would not take it out. Mr. Bacon told
me, it was not usual, yet I should have it; which was as much as I could
desire. Yet upon some private Queries between Cromwell and his Parasites, it
signified nothing as to my Father's Decimation; but whether the contesting his
not being in the Major-General's Instruction, or the Humor of giving Security
being abated, my Father was not further prosecuted for giving Security, which
was all I cared for; and I believe my Father was the only Man who was
sequestered in England, who escaped it without Imprisonment.

My Brother proved stanch (as we say) and would not make any further Discovery,
tho Cromwell proffered to prefer him in the Army; and the Major-General's Power
declining, and Cromwell's third Parliament coming on, at last, by my own proper
Charges, I got him released.

About this time Cromwell sent Colonel Overton (it may be suspecting Monk) with
a Commission to command in the North of Scotland, as Major General. Overton
being a Fifth-Monarchy-Man, highly stomach'd Cromwell's Protectorship, anew sets
up Agitators in their several Regiments, and had several Meetings with them at
Abe^deen: They drew up a Declaration against Cromwell's Usurpation; of this Monk
had Knowledge, but took little Care to disturb them: but when they agreed upon
their Declaration against Cromwell, they consult how to assassinate or secure
Monk; who thereupon changes and increases his Guards, seizes upon the
Conspirators, tries several of them, cashiers others, and sends Overton
Prisoner to Cromwell.

In these Times a Rapsody of Socinianism, Pelagianism, and Arianism, as sprung
from the Seeds of Arminianism, was vented all over the Nation, especially in
the Army: the Ringleaders of these were Bidle, Cops, Fry, Erbury, Saltmarsh,
etc. But more blasphemous than these was one James Naylor, (I saw him when he
stood in the Pillory before Westminster Hall) who personated our Savior (and
was like his Picture) in his Words and Gestures; and so mad was he, and many of
his Crew, that getting upon a Horse-Colt (an Ass would have becom'd him better)
he came riding to Bristol, his Sect strewing his way with Leaves and Boughs of
Trees, crying Hosanna, Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord. Nor
did he stay here, but imitated our Savior in affecting his Divinity; as, that
he could Raise the Dead, Heal the Sick, and Fast 40 Days.

In these Distractions without (to prevent which Cromwell took little Care)
Cromwell had little Peace within: He was obeyed by none for Love; had no Title
to his Greatness but by Barebone's Parliament, of his own making, his own Will,
and the Flattery of some of the Officers of his Army: yet the Body of the Army,
and a greater part of the Officers, looked upon him as a Tyrant and Usurper;
and with these the Generality of the Commonwealth Party agreed: The
Presbyterian Party hated him, and he knew the Royalists would never obey him,
if ever they could find an Opportunity to get rid of him.

The Crown Lands, and the established Revenues, he reserved by his Instrument
of Government, would not near maintain the Charges of his Intelligence and
Army, which in a manner lived upon Free Quarter; and the Decimation of the
Royalists bore no Proportion to support them. His Expendition to Hispaniola,
from which he expected Mountains of Gold, proved not only dishonorable, but
thereby he contracted so great a Debt, as he could never live to overgrow.

In these Disquietudes of Mind, his Looks were intent upon new and unusual
Spectacles: He took particular notice of the Carriage, Manners, Habit, and
Language of all Strangers, especially if they seemed joyful: He never stirred
abroad without strong Guards, wearing Armor under his Clothes, and offensive
Arms too; never came back the common Road, or the same Way he went, and always
passing with great speed; had many Locks and Keys for the Door of his Houses;
seldom slept above three Nights in one Chamber, nor in any which had not two or
three Back-doors, and Guards at all of them.

To these, Dr. Bates, in the second Part of his Elenchus, adds this, That
Cromwell being much troubled with the Stone, used sometimes to swill down
several sorts of Liquors, and then stir his Body by some violent kind of
Motion, as, riding hard on Horseback, jolting in a Coach, etc. that by such
Agitation he might disburden his Bladder. Wherefore one Day he took with him
his Secretary Thurlow, that they two might privately use this Exercise in a
Coach in Hide-Park.

When they came thither, Cromwell got into the Coach-box, drawn by six brave
Horses, lately presented to him by Count Ollenburg; and so soon as Cromwell
began to snap his Whip, the Horses ran away, and the Postilion was thrown off
the Fore-horse; the Horses fretting and growing unruly, tossed Cromwell from his
Seat upon the Pole, and falling from thence upon the Ground, was entangled in
his Coat, and dragged up and down till he received many Bruises, a
Pocket-Pistol in the mean time going off, ^^d his Coat rent: but a Guard of
Horse, which waited at the ^ate, seeing the Disaster, hasting toward his
Assistance, dis^^tan^ed him out of the Danger.

However Cromwell, to establish his ill-acquired Greatness in his Family, makes
his Son Henry Lieutenant of Ireland, and fain would have made his Son Richard
Governor of Scotland; but Monk would not budg there, which it may be was as
great an Affliction to Cromwell, as all those he labored under before.

Now was Cromwell driven to a Forc'd-put; if a Parliament could not help him, he
had lost his Game: So he in September 1656 sets up a new Bawble, called a
Parliament. Cromwell set his Wits upon Tenterhooks to have those chosen for
England to be for his Turn; he cared not so much for those sent from Scotland
and Ireland, being sure of them.

To this purpose, his Major-Generals used all their Endeavors equally to
hinder the Elections of Royalists and Republicans, for neither would suit with
Cromwell's Designs: However, Cromwell would not suffer any to enter the House
before he subscribed to the Authority of the Protector.

These Men chose Sir Thomas Widdrington Speaker, who June 1657 begirt Cromwell
in Protectorean Robes, for King he would not be; and told him, That the Robe of
Purple is the Emblem of Magistracy, which imports Righteousness and Justice;
the Robe of Mixed Color, Justice and Mercy; and a great deal more of such
Stuff, which Cromwell regarded no more than he did Barebone's Parliament and his
Instrument of Government.

To ease Cromwell of the Trouble, this Parliament put down the Major-Generals,
who were become troublesome to Cromwell himself as well as the Nation in
general; and made it Treason to conspire Cromwell's Death; and that the Royal
Family should be renounced. These gave Cromwell the Customs, and a Triennial Tax
upon all Houses built upon New Foundations in London, and within ten Miles
round, that every one of them should pay Cromwell a Year's Rent: And to endear
him the more, this Parliament gave Cromwell Leave to name his succeeding
Protector; which he kindly accepted.

By this you may see the Nature of the Beast; for when Cromwell's former
Parliament disputed the Authority of his Instrument of Government, he told
them, It was the Foundation of Government upon which they must build, and not
destroy; and therefore it was unalterable by Act of Parliament: and by the
Instrument his Council was to choose a Successor. But now it is for his Turn, the
Parliament may alter his Instrument, and give him Power to name his Successor.

This Alteration of naming a Successor, had another Effect too; for Lambert,
who expected to succeed Cromwell, and therefore told Cromwell's former
Parliament, That unless they would confirm it, they (the Officers of the Army)
would call another, and a third and fourth, till the Instrument of Government
was confirmed. Now his Hopes of Succession were balk'd, he tacked about, and
seemed to join with the Republican Party. Hereupon Cromwell took away Lambert's
Commission, and made his Son-in-law Fleet-wood Lieutenant General in his place.
So that tho Cromwell got a Power after his Death, he distracted his Power whilst
he was alive.

And as Pedlars, which have not Gold, yet will show something which may glister
like it; so Cromwell, that his Parliament may seem like a Parliament, will have
a House of Lords too: but these are not Lords with Titles, but Lords of the
Lord knows what. If you will take the Measures of the rest, I Will give you a List
of some of them: There was Pride the Brewer, Huson the Shoemaker, Barkstead
the Thimble-seller, Cooper an Haberdasher of small Wares, Whaley a Broken
Clothier, etc. Yet these Lords must not be called the Upper, but The Other
House of Parliament.

Nothing could have madded the Republicans more than this Other House of
Parliament. What, said they, have we fought to Depose the
Prerogative-Creatures, the Lords, those Limbs of Tyranny, who so lorded it over
the Freeborn People of England; and shall we submit to these Creatures of
Cromwell, to usurp the same Tyranny over us and the Freeborn People of England!

Nor did this end in Words only, but the Republicans conspire to make an
Insurrection against Cromwell, but were discovered and dispersed by Cromwell; for
which, Cromwell committed Lawson (afterward Sir John) Harrison, Rich, (Sir
Robert's own Father) Danvers, and several other Officers: And one Sundercome
more boldly attempted to have killed Cromwell, as he should pass from White Hall
to Hampton Court; and to that purpose, had prepared a Blunderbuss loaded with
twelve Bullets, to shoot him out of an Arbor as he should pass in a narrow Way
in Hammersmith: but one Toop, who seemed to conspire in it, discovered this to
Cromwell, and so Sundercome was taken, and condemned for High Treason by
Cromwell's Law made this Parliament: but Sundercome escaped the Execution, being
found dead in his Bed before.

Nor did this and the Other House agree better than Cromwell and the
Commonwealth-Men; this scorned the Other House, as having no Authority from the
People, and were as vain as useless: so that to prevent further Heats, Cromwell
adjourns them for six Months.

I Will vie this Cromwell against Tarquin, Agathocles, either of the Dionysius's,
or any of the Roman, Athenian or Sicilian Tyrants, that he was a more arrogant
and boundless Tyrant than any or all of them.

For if Tyranny be either Sine Titulo, viz. To arrogate a Power over another,
which he has nothing to do with, or ab Exercitio, to be bound by no Laws; then
both ways Cromwell was a greater Tyrant; for Tarquin had a Title, and his Vices
were rather personal and particular, than tending to subvert the Roman Laws and
Constitutions: So were the Vices of Agathocles and both the Dionysius's, etc.
Whereas Cromwell's Title was only from some corrupted Officers of an Army raised
by his twice deposed Masters, and what Widdrington begirt him with.

So tho Caesar and his Successors, did assume to themselves an Imperial Power*
which did not well suit with the Consular and Tribunitial Dignities; yet they
never made a Pack of Senators to do whatsoever they would have them; nor forced
or corrupted the Free Voices of the Romans, in choosing such Tribunes as the
Emperors pleased; and permitted the Roman Laws to have their free Course.

Whereas Cromwell made a Parliament (as 'twas called) of his own Nomination; and
tho he called two more, yet they met by Elections utterly unknown to our Laws
and Constitutions; and when they met, he would suffer none to sit, but such as
would own his Authority.

By our Laws the King cannot tax the Subject, but by Consent in Parliament;
whereas Cromwell, by his Instrument of Government, of his own Will alone, taxed
the Nation to maintain him an Army of Twenty Thousand Foot and Ten Thousand
Horse, and after taxed the Cavaliers a tenth Part of their Estates.

It Is the Birthright of every Englishman, not to be punished in his Person,
Liberty or Fortune, but by Judgment of his Peers, or the Law of the Land; and
these to be done by Legal Officers; whereas this Cromwell, without any Law,
imprisoned, and took away Men's Lives and Estates, by a new thing called A High
Court of Justice, never heard of in this Nation, before the Rump and himself;
the Judges whereof were of his own naming* and his Janisaries, the Soldiers,
his Military Executioners.

But it may be objected, Cromwell had reason for erecting his High Court of
Justice, having been so ill used by Jurors: for he had by them tried John
Lilburn twice for High Treason, and Sir John Stawel thrice, who were acquitted
by these Juries; yet neither of them could be discharged from their
Imprisonment, which by Law they ought to have been.

But that which madded Cromwell most, and made him utterly out of love with
Juries, was, that three Men, Davison, Holder and Thorold, being apprehended,
upon Suspicion of endeavoring to bring in the King, were committed Prisoners
to a Provost Marshal; and these having obtained leave of the Provost to walk
abroad under the Guard of a Soldier, they would have wheedled the Soldier to
have made their Escape, which the Soldier refusing, they killed him.

Cromwell, who before designed to have sacrificed these Men by a High Court of
Justice, having, as he thought, a more plain Proof of Murder against them, than
he had for their endeavoring to bring in the King, would now try them at
Common Law by a Jury.

When they came upon their Trial, they pleaded Not Guilty; and upon their Trial
the Question was, Whether they were legally committed; which if the Jury found,
they were to find them guilty of Murder; if not, they could find it but se
defendendo, or at highest but Manslaughter; and the Jury found them not legally
committed, and so acquitted them of Murder. This put Cromwell so out of conceit
with Juries, that he never after made use of them in Capital Cases: However by
this he might see, he was as little regarded by the Body of the Nation, as by
his discarded Officers and the Commonwealth-Men.

Nor was Cromwell a better Governor in Church than State, for he prostituted
all Orders of Christianity; and so little regarded things dedicated to Sacred
Uses, that he made St. Paul's Church a Garrison for his Soldiers, and a Stable
for Horses: and his Want of Money was as Great, as the Love of the Nation was
little.

This being a forc'd-Put, he will try once more what he can get by a Parliament;
and that it may be a Free Parliament, it should be made up of the other House,
and Republicans were permitted to sit in this. Thus qualified, they met upon
the twentieth of January, 1657. Never was such Brawling heard, the Republicans
brawling against Cromwell's Creatures in this House; and both against Cromwell's
Lords in the other House: so that it may be truly said of this Parliament, That
this did out-babble that of Barebone's as far,
As these above those Men in Number are,
viz. Above Threefold more.


Cromwell therefore, not able to endure their Jangling longer, and having got
not a Groat by them, suddenly dissolved them, and shall never call another.

To make this Tragedy a little comical, Cardinal Mazarine was as little a Slave
to his Word as Cromwell, and endeavored to enlarge the French Dominions by as
unworthy means as Cromwell did to establish his. About this time a Party of the
Garrison of Ostend, with the Privity of the Governor, held Intelligence with
Mazarine, and after with Cromwell, to betray the Town to the French, wherein
Cromwell was to have his Share: Mazarine was to send a Land-Army, commanded by
Marshal d'^ Aumont, and Cromwell was to provide a Fleet to transport them; and
the Articles of Agreement were agreed upon between the supposed Conspirators
and the Cardinal in April 1658: but here Cromwell was at greater Charge for his
Fleet, than Mazarine for his Army, and Cromwell had outbid Mazarine for the
Bargain, but little Money was to be paid before the Town was surrendered.

The Agreement being made, upon the 14th of May 1658, the Fleet appeared before
Ostend, and the Garrison in the Fort permitted the French to pass and land; but
the Governor fearing if the English Fleet should enter, they might endanger
the Town, with his own Hands pulled down the white Flag, and set up the bloody
Flag: but before the English Fleet could tack about, it was sore galled by the
Artillery planted upon the Fort, before it could get out of their reach; and
the French which landed were killed or taken every Mother's Son, to the number
of 1500; the Marshal was of the number of the Prisoners. This Story is
pleasantly and particularly printed in Spanish by one of the Agents; translated
into English under the Title of Harm watch, Harm catch.

Mazarine with much ado got his Men again which were not killed; but how shall
Cromwell get his Money again, of which he had more need than Mazarine had of his
Men? nor would Mazarine part with one Groat, he had been out of Pocket too much
to redeem the French.

By this time Cromwell was in ill Plight, hated of all Factions as much as of
the Royalists; he had nothing to trust to but a Mercenary Army, which he could
not pay, and above half of these would have been content to have his Throat
cut: His Means would not pay for the Intelligence he was forced to buy at home
and abroad, to discover the Practices which were every day hatching against
him: So as he had no Security, but in the general Fear, which all the Factions,
as well as he, had, that their Discords might give an Occasion of restoring the
King, to the ruin of them all.

Nor were their Fears without Ground, for at this time there was an Inclination
of the Royalists in all parts of England to rise; and the Marquess of Ormond
was sent by the King to encourage it, having gotten a Company of Men together
beyond Sea, under the Command of General Marsin to assist them.

But Cromwell had his Spies every where, who betrayed all; the principal of
these Spies was Sir Richard Willis, (who was always upon his Discovery of these
Plots, one of the first committed to the Tower) and one Corker (who had served
King Charles the First, and was one who assisted in killing Rainsborough at
Doncaster) so as Cromwell nipp'd all in the Bud before they moved: Yet
notwithstanding all his Diligence, Ormond made his Escape, only to give the
King an Account of the Discovery and Ruin of his Design.

Though the Royalists could draw no Blood from Cromwell, yet he resolved to take
some from them; yet would not do it by Juries, (having had such ill Luck with
them) but by a Court of Justice of his own Creatures and Nomination, headed by
Lisle.

Before these were haled my Lord Mordant, Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, the
two Staleys, Woodcock, Mallery, Rivers, Dike, and many others.

Dr. Hewet denied their Jurisdiction, and was condemned for Contumacy; Sir
Henry Slingsby pleaded, yet was condemned; my Lord Mordant was acquitted by the
Majority of one Vote, when ^ride came in, who if he had been there, had turned
the Scales; and Woodcock behaved himself so well as he was acquitted: The rest
were condemned, yet some for Money got their Pardons; and others, who had not
so much Money, for somewhat less, and swearing themselves out of the Plot,
saved their Lives. Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewet were beheaded, others
hanged and quartered.

Yet this good Success gave little Comfort to Cromwell, for to all his former
Disturbances were added the Disorders of his own Family; his Son-in-law
Fleetwood, and Brother-in-law Desborough, caballing with the Republicans and
Dissenting Officers, so as they rarely visited him; tho Cromwell, to sweeten
Fleetwood, promised to name him his Successor; and to these, Lambert, since his
Discarding, joined.

Cromwell having so little Dependence on his Army, sets up another of
Volunteers, to have Eight ^ounds a Year apiece to be ready to serve him: These
were a Company of Fellows, who as their Pay was little, so were their Horses
Jades and lean, and a Troop of any Army-Horse would beat ten of them; yet they
served Cromwell so far, as to seize Malignants whenever he sent them; and were
Spies over all suspected Persons, and to inform him of their Demeanor.

All the Joy Cromwell had in these Anxieties and Inquietudes, was in his beloved
Daughter Cleypole, who even to his Heartbreaking, died the 6th of August 1658,
and upon the third of September following, he himself followed her, in a
terrible Storm of Wind; a day upon which at D^nbar in Scotland, and Worcester
in England, he had sent so many thousands before, for which he then was to give
an Account.

However Cromwell lived, yet when he died, all the Flattering Poets strained
their Wits to that Pitch, to celebrate his Encomiums, so as that they could
never after arrive to it.

The Good Deeds of Oliver Cromwell.
THUS in some measure, and in Epitome, you have seen, if not the Life, yet the
Rage of Cromwell in his Usurpation; in which, as I have said nothing of him for
Spite, having never done me any Wrong, but what was common to all the Nation;
so I think in Justice I ought to do him Right, wherein (as I conceive) he
deserved well of the Nation.

1. By Blake he more humbled and subdued the Algerine, Tripoli and Tunis
Pirates, than ever any before or since did.

2. Westminster Hall was never replenished with more learned and upright Judges
than by him; nor was Justice either in Law or Equity in Civil Cases more
equally distributed, where he was not a Party.

3. When the Norway Traders represented to him the Mischief and Inconveniences
the Act of Navigation brought upon the Nation, (which may be at large said
elsewhere) Cromwell, during his time, dispensed with it, and permitted the
English to trade to Norway for Timber, Masts, Pitch, Tar and Iron, as before
the Act: And by a Law made in Cromwell's Third Parliament in June 1657, which
was but five Years after the Rump's Act of Navigation, License is given to
transport Fish in Foreign Bottoms. See Whitlock's Memoirs, f. 661. a. So little
then was the Act of Navigation regarded.

4. Tho Cromwell played the Fool in making War upon Spain, and Peace with
France, yet he made a more advantageous Treaty of Commerce for the English to
France, than before they had: I have not seen it, but had this from our English
Merchants who traded to France.

5. Tho Cromwell joined Forces with the French against the Spaniard, yet he
reserved the Sea-Towns conquered from the Spaniard to himself; so had Dunkirk
and Mardike delivered up to him; and would have had Ostend, if the Garrison had
not cheated both Mazarine and him; thereby to be Arbitrator over the French, as
well as Spaniard, when he pleased.

6. Cromwell out-vied the best of our Kings, in rendering our Laws to the Subject
in the English Tongue; for tho Edward the Third (the most Excellent of our
Kings) permitted Pleading in the English Tongue, yet he went no further;
whereas Cromwell rendered, not only the Pleadings, but Practice, and Laws
themselves into the English Tongue; and herein he* imitated our Savior, common
Justice, and the Practice of the most Learned and Civilized Nations.

I say, he imitated our Savior, who after his Ascension wrought his first
Miracle, by inspiring his Apostles to speak all Languages, to teach the Gospel
to all Nations in their Native Tongue; and by the same reason, all Nations
ought to be instructed in their Laws in their own Tongue.

I say, this is conformable to common Justice; for all Laws ought to be a
Priori: for where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; and if Laws be
rendered in a Tongue not understood, it is all one to those who understand not
the Language, as if there had not been Laws.

The Romans and Grecians, who were the most Learned and Civilized of all
Nations, would never endure a Foreign Word in any of their Laws, lest the
Subject through Ignorance of it might be unjustly punished, when 'twas not his
fault. When Caesar was murdered in the Senate, and the Senators were ready to
cut one another's Throats, Cicero cried out, Let there be an Amnestia, and for
the future the Power to reside in the Senate: And you may read in his second
Philippicks, the long Apology he makes for suddenly using this Foreign Word in
the Senate. And Tiberius asked leave of the Senate to use Monopolion, because
'twas foreign to the Latin. And the Romans, as well as Grecians, not only
instructed Youth in their Laws, but in all Arts and Sciences in their
Mother Tongue, and thereby became the most Learned of all Nations. But these
good Deeds of Cromwell you will soon see will not long outlive him.

CHAP. III.
A Continuation of this Treatise, from the Death of Cromwell, to the Restoration
of King Charles the Second.
AFter the Death of Cromwell, there was some Grumble between the Republican
Officers of the Army and Protectorian, who should succeed: Those said, that
Cromwell when he was well, promised his Son-in-law Fleetwood, that he should
succeed; but these said, That tho Cromwell was sick, yet he declared his Son
Richard his Successor, and that this was his last Will: And besides, Cromwell's
Council (which by the Instrument of Government had the Power) had elected
Richard; and so Richard was proclaimed Protector in all the public Places of
England, Scotland and Ireland.

Richard thus seated, not only the Protectorian, but the Officers of the
Republican Faction congratulate him, and under their Handwriting, promise to be
true to him: and what Cromwell so industriously obtained from the Mercenary
Officers of the Army in England and Scotland, to congratulate him in his
assuming the Protectorian Dignity, and to assist him in it with their Lives and
Fortunes, is now voluntarily done by numerous Companies of Sycophants from all
Parts of the Nation, to the number of ninety Congratulatory Addresses, which
Richard had as little good of, as King James II. had from those above thirty
Years after, When they flattered that Prince in those things which tended to
the Subversion of the English Constitution, both in Church and State.

But Richard's wandering Joys faded in the Bud: For after his Father's Funeral,
the Pomp whereof undid him, the Republican Officers cabal and conspire to
depose Richard, and exalt Fleetwood; and in two respects they say Fleetwood
ought to be Protector; one, that he was truly Godly, and an expert Leader, and
had been tried to be so in many Difficulties: The other, Cromwell had by his
last Will, when he was Compos Mentis, designed him his Successor; whereas
Richard was substituted in a surreptitious manner, by the Craft of some of the
Council, when Cromwell had lost his Senses.

Lambert, after he had been discarded by Cromwell, betook himself to
Wimbleton-House, where he turned Florist, and had the fairest Tulips and
Gelli^^owers that could be got for Love or Money; yet in these outward
Pleasures he nourished the Ambition he entertained before he was cashiered by
Cromwell: And in these Dissensions, as Tortoises do upon the approach of the
Spring, he comes abroad, and becomes a prime Ringleader in the Cabal, and in
due time shall be the Ruin of them all.

The first thing they agree upon, was to restore the common Soldiers to their
former Pay, which Cromwell had retrenched two Pence a day: And herein they show
their good Will, as Dego did; but how to pay the Soldiers they could no more
tell, than how Dego's Executors should pay his Legacies.

In this Kindness to the common Soldiers, the Officers did not forget
themselves, and charge the Memory of Cromwell, that he ruled over them with a
Tyrannical and Despotical Power, turning out and putting in Officers by his own
Will; therefore they petition Richard, That for the future, no Soldier be
turned out of his place without a Council of War, nor any Action brought but by
Martial Law: That no Soldier be tried in any Criminal Case, but in a
Court Martial; and that the Soldiers have Power to choose their own General.

Richard was Head of no Faction as his Brother Fleetwood was, nor was his
gentle and easy Nature a ^it Match to encounter the intriguing Designs of
Lambert, or resist the rude Attacks of his Clownish Uncle Desborough, and so
foresees no Help to be had for his Security, but from a Parliament.

Therefore Richard summons a Parliament to meet at Westminster upon the 27th of
January 1658, of the Composition made by his Father, of this and the other House;
this to consist of 400 English, 30 Scots, and as many Irish.

This and the other House met accordingly, when this House fell at Variance with
the other House, by what Right they sat there: Nor did this House agree better
with the Scots and Irish sitting there, having no Right to sit and vote with
the freeborn English, they being conquered Slaves, and Creatures of the
Protector: Nor did the Republican and Protectorian Factions agree better.
However, all agreed to recognize Richard Protector of England, Scotland and
Ireland; yet would not agree to Cromwell's Instrument of Government, but
inveighed bitterly against it, as being extorted from a lame Parliament that
was neither ^ull nor free: But they recalled Overton, who was imprisoned in
Jersey by the Arbitrary Will of Cromwell, and made an Ordinance against the
meeting of the Officers of the Army to hold Consultations; till the Parliament
should determine Affairs.

This Ordinance stung the Caballing Officers to the quick, so that they
resolved to be rid of Richard and his Parliament too; but how to do this, or
where to begin, admitted of great Debate: For to begin at Richard now the
Parliament was sitting might be dangerous, since the Parliament had so lately
recognized him, and so many thousands of the People had congratulated his
Assumption into the Protectorate. And to begin at the Parliament might be as
dangerous, for this they thought would disgust the Nation in general; neither
did they know whether the Parliament would be disbanded by them: they therefore
resolve they will make Richard dissolve them, and take the Odium upon himself;
and when that is done, they will do well enough with Richard.

To this end the Officers urge Richard to make good their Proposals: but the
Protectorian Officers advised him to seize the Heads of the Republican, which
tho Richard durst not come to, yet he spoke high, and threatened the Officers to
cashier them.

This had a double Effect, for the Protectorian Officers, the Lord Falconbridg,
Captain Philip Howard, Colonel Ingoldsby, Whaley, Goff, and others, seeing the
meanness of Richard's Spirit in neglecting their Advice, leave him, and the
Republicans were not to be quelled with Words, but exasperated by them; so that
upon the 22d of April they beset White Hall, and sent Desborough and Fleetwood,
to beseech him to dissolve the Parliament; and if 'twere not speedily done,
they would set fire to the House, and kill all who should resist; which so
frightened Richard, that he forthwith signs a Proclamation for dissolving the
Parliament. The Parliament thus dissolved, Richard's Turn was next to be
deposed, not one of the manifold thousands of the ninety Congratulatory
Addresses, who promised to stand by Richard with their Lives and Fortunes,
speaking one word in his behalf; and so shall such another Turn about thirty
Years after be served on King James the Second.

Tho Richard and his Parliament were out, yet something else must be in; yet
before they would put in any thing else, the Republican Officers send
Ingoldsby, Goff, Whaley, my Lord Falconbridg and Howard (after Earl of
Carlisle) after Richard and his Parliament, and take in Lambert, Harrison,
Rich, Parker, Okey, and others, whom Cromwell turned out: But before they would
set up any thing instead of Protector, they make Fleetwood General by Sea and
Land, and Lambert Lieut. General.

To prepare the way for what was to be set up, the Officers prepare a
Remonstrance, inveighing bitterly against the Malignants, (for so they call'^
the Royalists) that they had printed Lists, and marked for Destruction the
Godly (especially the King's Judges*); and therefore they would revive the Good
Old Cause, and restore the Rump Parliament: but William Pryn, according to his
rude way of writing, answered them, That their Cause was neither Good nor Old,
and bitterly charges them with Treachery and Ingratitude.

But all to no purpose; for since no better was to be had, these Officers awake
the Rump out of their Lethargy, wherein they had been above five Years asleep,
and now were become so miserably lean, that none but the Officers could abide
the sight of them; they could get but forty two together, and these looked so
wretchedly, that they had much ado to get Lenthal to be Head again to it. But
how nasty soever the Rump was, the first secluded Members would have sat with
them, but the Rump would none of that, but set Guards at the Door of the House
to keep them out.

Thus got together, they again depose Richard, and send Ludlow to do the same
by Henry in Ireland: and thus you see what Security can be had by relying upon
a Mercenary Army, one part of it exalted the Father, and another part of the
same Army deposed both the Sons.

But in Scotland they let Monk alone, who promised to be true to them. Yet
these were not the Hal^yon Days the Republican Officers expected by restoring
the Rump; for the Rump, tho it had been long asleep, yet remembered they were
before tuned out by the Officers of the Army; and that they shall do so no
more, they make Lenthal General of all the Forces in England, Scotland and
Ireland, by Sea and Land.

The Rump being contemptible to all the Nation, and the Officers of the Army
being thus divided and subdued, and like Virginal-Jacks, when one was up the
other was down, raised the Expectation of the Royalists, That a sudden Change
would be, which could end in nothing but restoring the King: And the
Presbyterians, exasperated by the Rump's Repulse, again resolve not to sit
quiet under it, and therefore a Correspondence is held between them and the
Royalists, to depose the Rump whatever came of it.

To this end Sir George Booth rises in Cheshire, with whom Sir Thomas Middleton
joined, but was ill seconded by the Royalists.

This alarmed the Rump, for they expected no better from the Presbyterians than
the Royalists: And now the Rump not well knowing the Man, had so little Wit as
to send Lambert against Sir George; and you will soon see Lambert shall do that
by the Rump, which the Presbyterians and Royalists both together could not do.

For Lambert having overthrown Booth, and taken him Prisoner, tho the Rump were
mightily joy'd at it, and voted Lambert a Gratuity of a Thousand Pounds, yet
this no ways altered the Designs of Lambert, which ever since the Death of
Cromwell he had been hatching.

For Lambert, after the Defeat of the Cheshire-men (in his return for London)
at Derby, the 16th of September, procured a Petition from the Officers to the
Rump, that Fleetwood might be General of the Army, and himself
Lieutenant General: He was content to give Fleetwood the first Place, as
Cromwell had given Fairfax; for he knew himself to be too hard for Fleetwood,
and a much better Soldier, and so would do what he list: And the greater part
of the Officers in London join with Lambert in his Petition.

The Rump was more alarmed at this Petition, than at Sir George Booth's
Insurrection; so as all Prosecution against him and the Cheshire-Men was at a
stand; nor were the Rump of one piece among themselves: for Sir Arthur Haslerig
(a hotheaded Man) was violently against the Army, and said, they made the
Parliament a precarious thing; and that Lambert trod Cromwell's Steps, and his
seeming Modesty in preferring Fleetwood was but a Decoy: But young Sir Henry,
now become old Sir Henry Vane, with much more cunning, endeavored to carry on
the Designs of Lambert and his Faction.

However, the Majority of the Members, rather than be deposed, depose Lambert,
Desborough, Berry, Kelsey, Ashfield, Cobbet, Creed, Parker and Barrow, and make
a Council of War, without naming a General, of Fleetwood, Monk, Haslerig,
Ludlow, Morley and Overton. And to starve Lambert and his Officers, the Rump
vote, That no Money shall be raised without Consent in Parliament, and he that
shall do it, shall be guilty of High Treason against the Commonwealth. And the
Nation, to whom the Rump and Army were alike hateful, took this for a very good
Law.

However, before this Infant Council of War should be warm in their Seats,
Lambert resolves to beat up their Quarters, and marches directly to London: but
the Rump, who had Intelligence of Lambert's Motion, would not tamely be turned
out, but appoint Moss and Morley's Regiments to guard the House; yet Lambert,
upon the 13th of October, with a stronger Guard, hastens to the
Old-Palace-Yard, and before the Members came, set Guards upon all the Avenues
to the House, not permitting any Member to enter, and sends the Speaker back
into the City.

Now is the Rump's Lethargy (from which they were recovered but five Months and
some few Days) turned into a Convulsion; and the next Fit you will see will carry
it quite off.

Instead of the Rump, the Officers set up a new thing, which they call The
Committee of Safety, which consisted of 22; whereof Vane, Fleetwood, and
Ludlow, were prime Directors.

Lambert having thus turned out the Rump, his Turn shall be next: But before we
proceed, it is fit to see how things stood in Scotland; where, at this time, all
things (contrary to the Scottish Temper) were in perfect Peace and Quiet: and to
keep the Scots so, the Rump and Cromwell had built four Citadels upon the four
principal Passes in Scotland, viz. at Leith, Air, St. Johnstons, and
Inverness, which bridled the Scots from holding Communication within Land, and
which cost above 30000 l. being three Regular Fortifications on the North Sea,
and one upon the West, for to relieve the English in case of Land-Sieges, or
other Accidents.

After Monk had perfectly subdued Scotland, he took Care for constant Supplies
out of England for the Payment of his Soldiers, whereby he kept them in such
regular and severe Discipline, that Disorders rarely happened among them; and
hereby Scotland did never before abound in so much Wealth and Trade: and to
these, Monk duly observed all Articles made with the Scots, whereby the common
sort of Scots enjoyed more Liberty and Wealth than ever before they had under
their Lords and Lairds: and now no Man durst oppress his poor Tenants and
Neighbors. He likewise suppressed all those Scottish Feuds which before so often
raged in Scotland; and compelled the Clergy to mind their own Function, without
meddling with Temporal Affairs. So as the Scots never lived so free and happy
under their Kings, Nobles, and Lairds, as in that short time they did under
Monk's Regency.

In this State Monk hired the Countess of Bucklough's House, about five Miles
from Edinburgh, which had fine Gardens, Orchards, and a stately Park, walled
about, belonging to it; and here he fell into the Acquaintance of the principal
Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, and by his Familiarity and Affability with
them, he gained their Love and Friendship: And in this State Cromwell would have
found it a hard Task to remove him.

After Cromwell's Death, and that his Son Richard became Protector, he caressed
Monk by frequent Letters, and great Protestations of Kindness, entreating also
his Advice and Assistance, letting him know, that his Father did recommend to
him, as an especial Command, to be chiefly ruled by his Prudence. Monk in
return answered, That he was very remote, and could not well tell what to write
at such a distance; but advised him to call a Parliament, which was the Wisdom
of the Nation, by whom he might be best instructed: which Richard did, and if
he had stood by them, it is thought Monk would have stood by him; but Richard
spoiled all by dissolving the Parliament; and when the English Army had deposed
his Brother Henry, by frequent Messages and Letters he invited Monk to appear,
to give a Check to the mutinous and seditious English Army, which now courted
Monk as well as he; and so did the Rump after they were restored: So that in
all the Troubles and Alterations in England, both England and Ireland too
courted Monk, who sat still, and was quiet in Scotland.

Lambert's fiery Ambition burnt out that Prudence which Cromwell observed, in
making sure of Monk before he attempted to turn out the Rump; which Lambert did
not, nor so much as made his Design known to Monk. The turning out the Rump,
and erecting a Committee of Safety to govern, being Sectaries, Republicans, and
Enemies to Monk, which he called Fanatics, he knew no Good was intended him by
this Change; and therefore resolved not to submit to it: But herein Monk
proceeded with as much Caution and Prudence, as Lambert did in Haste and Folly.
Here you may see how Ambition and Interest change Men's Actions; for herein,
what Monk allowed in Cromwell, he disclaims in Lambert.

For upon the 18th of October, Monk marched with his own Guards from Dalkeith
to Edinburgh, where his own Regiment of Foot quartered, and seized all such
Officers as he suspected would not be true to him in his Design, and secured
them; and drew his Forces into the Field, and gave them an Account of his
Resolution, To adhere to a Civil Authority, and not to follow the English Army
in their mad Counsels and Fanatic Courses; which was entertained by the
Soldiers, and generally by the Scots.

At his Return out of the Field, he received an Express from the Governor of
Berwick, That he feared he should not be able to secure the Town for him,
almost all the Officers in the Town being Anabaptists: Whereupon Monk gave
Order for a Troop of Horse to march to Berwick, to fetch away the ill-affected
Officers, and sent also a blank Commission to the Governor to put in what
Officers he pleased; but it was difficult to get a Troop to march, being about
40 Miles from Edinburgh, the Days short, and Ways deep and bad: yet Captain
Johnson undertook the Journey, and arrived at Berwick but the Night before
Colonel Cobbet entered Berwick, sent from Lambert; whom Johnson seized, and
sent Cobbet and the suspected Officers Prisoners to Edinburgh.

'Twas well Monk succeeded so well at Berwick, for otherwise he had had a hard
Game to play, the English Army in Scotland being far off, in the more remote
Northern and Western Parts of it, and Lambert upon his March from London, with
(it may be) the bravest Body of Horse in Europe, against him, and could augment
his Foot in his March. But if Monk was fortunate in reducing Berwick, he was
not less unfortunate in endeavoring to reduce Carlisle; for having sent
Captain Dean upon that Account, his whole Troop deserted him, and joined with
the Garrison. Besides, Monk having sent Letters to many of the Officers in
Ireland whom he thought he might confide in, and to the Officers in the English
Fleet then riding in the Downs, they all refused to join with him. Hereupon the
Sectaries in the English Army grew insolent, and drew off from Monk in
Discontent: whereupon Monk kept back their Pay, and bid them seek their Arrears
of them to whom they were going; which they could not have done in a worse
time, now the Rump had voted it Treason to raise any Money to pay them: these
Officers were above 140, and their Arrears Monk kept, the better to pay the
Officers he could confide in. However, this could not secure Monk of those
Soldiers which he confided in; for Robinson, a Captain of Dragoons, having
received his Pay, and the Soldiers Back, Breast, and Pot, ran away with his
whole Troop to New Castle; and most of Twisleton's Regiment refused Monk's
Service. However Monk, by Dr. Troutbeck, received secret Assurance from my Lord
Fairfax, to be assisting to him.

Now with insincere Affections both sides agree to a Treaty of Accommodation to
be at London, and Monk named Wilks, Knight, and Cloberry, his Commissioners:
these had public Instructions from the General Council, and private from the
General; to which the Committee of Safety named three (whose Names I do not
find) to treat with them. These agreed that a Committee of 19 should be
appointed; five for England, not Members of the Army, viz. Whitlock, Vane,
Ludlow, Salway, and Berry; five for Scotland, viz. St. John, Warreston,
Harrington, Scot, and Thompson; the rest for England, Scotland, and Ireland, to
be Members of the Army; they to determine the Qualifications of the Members of
Parliament.

That two Field-Officers of every Regiment, and one Commission-Officer of every
Garrison, and 10 Officers of the Fleet, shall meet at a General Council, to
advise touching the Form of Government.

Monk, as astonished at this Agreement, and contrary to his wonted
Reservedness, told the Messenger, That if the Honesty of some, certainly the
Prudence of them all was to be suspected, and committed Wilks to Prison for
transgressing his Commission; and 'twas observed, he never was so much out of
Humor as upon his Commissioners assenting to this Agreement: for by this
Agreement, the Committee would consist of threefold more for England and
Ireland than for Scotland; and the General Council fourfold more: so that Monk
and all the Scots Officers would be at their disposing.

Dr. Gumble, page 152, 153. says, While Monk was in this melancholy Mood, not
speaking, or permitting any to speak to him; one of Monk' s Acquaintance, who
was of a pleasant and free Conversation, came where Monk was, who asked this
Gentleman, What he had to say to this Agreement? Truly Sir, says he, I am come
to make a little Request to you. What Is that, I wonder, says Monk? Even that,
says he, you will sign me a Pass to go for Holland; yonder is a Ship at Leith
that is ready to sail. What, says Monk, will you leave me? He answers, I know
not how you may shift for your self by your Greatness; but be confident, they
will never be at rest till they have torn you from your Command; and what they
will do with you then, it concerns you to consider; but for my self, tho I am a
poor Man I will never put my self into their Power, for I know it will not be
for my Safety. What, replies Monk hastily, will you lay the Blame upon me? If
the Army will stick to me, I will stick by them. The Officers gave him
Assurance they would, for the Danger was common to them all: And such a Joy
among them hereupon succeeded, that some expressed it with Tears.

' It Was said, That Fleetwood was as fearful of Lambert upon this Agreement, as
Lambert was of Monk, in case he would not agree to it. Monk therefore wrote to
Fleetwood, That the News of a Pacification was very agreeable to him, but that
he found some things doubtful in the Conditions, and other Matters not rightly
transacted by his Commissioners; that therefore, that the Agreement might be
more solid, he desires the Number of the Commissioners might be increased, and
Newcastle as a more proper place for the Meeting. Fleetwood (tho dissuaded from
it by Whitlock and others) agrees to this, and so does Lambert, whereby he did
not show himself a great Statesman.

Monk now resolved not to submit to this present Committee of Safety in
England, sent Circular Letters to every Shire in Scotland to send to Edinburgh
two Commissioners, and to every Borough to send one; who met at Edinburgh,
where they granted Monk 30000 l. Sterling above the Assessments, and proffered
to assist him with 20000 Men if he pleased: Monk accepts of the first, and
demurs upon the second; but only desired of them to take Care in his Absence
that no Disturbances should be; and that they abjure King Charles and his
Interest. I know Dr. Gumble denies this latter; yet I cannot believe the
Scottish Writers about this time, viz. two or three Years after, should so
positively affirm this, which all Scotland must know to be a Lie, if it were
not so.

Monk having obtained this Aid in Scotland, which was Treason to impose in
England, by this time Lambert being come to Newcastle, sent three Regiments of
Horse, and one of Dragoons, into Northumberland, to seize on my Lord Gray of
Werk's Rents; but Monk prevented the Design, having before done the Work, and
carried the Money into Scotland; which Dr. Gumble says, was after restored.
Hereupon Monk seizes Colonel Zanchy (who was sent from Newcastle with Letters
to proceed in an additional Treaty) for Breach of certain preliminary Articles,
one whereof was, That no Forces on either side should advance forward during
the Time of the Treaty: And now Monk advances to Coldstream, a poor Place upon
the Tweed, and there pitches his Tents; where he received Intelligence, that
the Forces in Ireland had declared for Monk, and such as opposed his Designs
were all secured. This was managed by the Earls of Orrory and Montrath, Sir
Theophilus Jones, the Warrens, and Captain Fitz-Patrick (who after did the King
excellent Service in securing Dublin for him) and others. And sure it is
observable, that as our Civil Wars began first from Scotland, then from
Ireland; so first from Scotland, then from Ireland, should arise that Peace
which after succeeded in England.

Rubicon thus passed, all Terms of Accommodation ceased; Monk's Army consisted
of four Regiments of Horse (and those pitiful ones) commanded by Morgan,
Johnston, Knight, and Cloberry; and six of Foot, commanded by Major General
Morgan, (whom Lambert had sent to treat with Monk) Fairfax, Read, Lidcot, and
Hubblethorn. Monk had this Advantage of Lambert, That his Horses were well fed,
and his Soldiers lay in Tents; whereas Lambert's Horse had nothing but what
they plundered, and his Foot were dispersed into Quarters where they could get
them: And at this rate Lambert came to Newcastle.

Whilst these things were doing, all was in a Hurlyburly in London: The
Apprentices rise, and are suppressed by Hewson; however, the Citizens take the
Rump's Vote for not paying Taxes without Consent of Parliament, for good Law;
and therefore will pay none: and the Country follow their Example. The
Soldiers too, tho they would be glad of their Pay when they could get it, yet
agreed among themselves, That their Officers might fight with one another if
they pleased, but the Soldiers would fight for none of them. My Lord Fairfax
and the Yorkshire Gentry rise against Lambert behind, and Monk marches on
before. Portsmouth, headed by Haslerig, Walton, and Morley, declares for the
Rump; and Lawson, Admiral of the Fleet, stopped the Mouth of the Thames,
threatening the Committee of Safety, That unless they restored the Rump, not one
of them should escape.

In this violent Motion, or Commotion, the Lord Willoughby, Alderman Robinson
(after Sir John) Major General Brown (after Sir Richard) and some others, came
to Mr. Whitlock (then one of the Commissioners of the Broad Seal) and
propounded to him to go to Fleetwood, to advise him to send to the King at
Breda (it should have been to Brussels, for the King came not to Breda before
he was advised to it by Monk) and to offer to bring him in upon good Terms, and
thereby prevent Monk's Designs; which Whitlock did, as at the Desire of them
and Sir William Fleetwood his elder Brother; and showed Fleetwood, unless he
did it, he and all the Parliament-Party would be left at the Mercy of the King,
whom Monk would bring in without any Terms, as he after did.

Whitlock therefore propounded to Fleetwood one of these two things; Either to
give Order to all his Forces to draw together, and himself and Friends to
appear at the Head of them, and so get what Strength they could that would
stand by them; and accordingly to take further Resolutions, if they found their
Strength but small (which he doubted;) then with those few which he had; to go
to the Tower, and take Possession of it; and to send to the Mayor and
Common Council that he would join with them to declare for a Free Parliament;
which he thought the City would willingly do, and furnish him with Money for
his Soldiers, which would increase their Numbers.

Fleetwood asked him, If he would go with him into the Field, and to the Tower?
Whitlock said, He would. Then Fleetwood asked him, What was the other Way he
had to propound to him in this Exigency? he said it was, That Fleetwood should
immediately send away some Person of Trust to the King at Breda (Brussels) to
offer to him his and his Friends Service to the restoring the King to his
Right, and that upon such Terms as the King should agree upon; and for this
purpose, to give Instructions to the Party whom he should send upon this
Affair. Fleetwood asked him, If he would be willing to go himself upon this
Employment? who answered, He would, if Fleetwood thought good to send him. With
this, and some other Discourse, Fleetwood seemed fully satisfied to send
Whitlock to the King, and desired him to go and prepare himself forthwith for
the Journey; and that he and his Friends would prepare Instructions for him, so
that he might begin his Journey this Evening, or early next Morning.

Whitlock going away, met Vane, Desborow, and Berry, coming to speak with
Fleetwood; and about a quarter of an Hour after, Fleetwood returned, and, in
much Passion, told Whitlock, I cannot do it, I cannot do it: who desired his
Reasons; Fleetwood answered, I am engaged not to do any such thing without my
Lord Lambert's Consent: then Whitlock told him, You will ruin your self and
Friends. See his Memoirs, fol. 692.

Thus you see how Man proposes, but God disposes: Monk that made the Scottish
Nobility abjure the King and his Interest, brought him in; and Fleetwood, who
would have done it, could not do it.

Fleetwood and his Committee of Safety, seeing all things now desperate, sent a
humble Message to Lenthal to beseech him and the Rump, to take upon them the
Supreme Government again, which they graciously accepted, but came staggering
into the House, being miserably shaken by their Convulsion, tho it lasted not 2
Months, a shrewd Sign they were not long lived.

The first thing the Rump did now they were out of their Fit, was to recall
Lambert's and Fleetwood's Commissions, tho they needed not have done it, for
their Soldiers which before would not fight for them, now would not keep them
Company, but deserted them; so that their Conditions were right lamentable:
Lambert had no body to fight for him, nor Fleetwood scarce any to condole with
him in his present Solitudes: However, the Rump committed Lambert to the Tower.

Monk now having broken off the Treaty of Accommodation with the Committee of
Safety, marches on, and is every day addressed to, That the Nation might have a
full and free Parliament; yet every one understood what was intended by it: and
at Morpeth he met with a Letter from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, by
their Sword Bearer, promising the Concurrence and Assistance of the City in it:
And that the End for which a Free Parliament was to be called, was interpreted
by hanging out the King's Picture, which was no less gazed at by them, than by
the Welch-men at King Taffy's Effigies at the Welch-Gate at Shrewsbury.

When Monk came into Yorkshire at North-Allerton, he was met by the Sheriff of
the County, and at York he was magnificently treated by the City, and caressed
by my Lord Fairfax, and a numerous Gentry; and here he received into his
Service some of Lambert's Regiments, and sent back Major General Morgan into
Scotland, to keep all quiet there.

The Rump were scarce recovered out of their Convulsion, when they fell into a
terrible Quotidian Ague, which shaked them grievously; and yet could get no
Physician which could administer any Comfort: They were sure they were no way
concerned in the Nation's and City's Addresses to Monk for a Full and Free
Parliament; they could not trust the English Army, nor would the Army trust
them; all their Hopes were in Monk and his Army, yet were afraid of them; and
tho they were so, yet could not tell to whom they should complain.

However not to be utterly wanting to themselves, they sent Luke Robison and
Scot, to congratulate Monk's coming, and thank him for the Rump's Recovery; but
not to speak one Word of the Ague the Rump were fallen into.

These met Monk at Leicester, and did their Errand, but Monk understood their
Meaning, as well as they; and was as close in concealing his Intentions, as
they were of their Errand; which was to observe, and to be a Spy upon him in
all his Motions: And Monk so far complied, as at Northampton he made the
Officers of the Irish Brigade abjure the King and his Interest.

When Monk came to St. Albans, he sent to the Rump to turn all those
treacherous Soldiers who had been so unfaithful to them, out of the City and
Lines of Communication; which the Rump consented to: and the Day after, the 3d
of February, in a Military Pomp, led his Army through London, and lodged in
White Hall.

But the Rump's Frights were without end, for now they dreaded the Return of
Charles Stuart (so they called the King) more than Sir G. Booth's Insurrection,
or the Officers Rebellion; and since they could not fight him unless Monk help
them, they will try to swear him out, and see if Monk will join with them in it.
And therefore the Council of State, next Day after Monk came to White Hall,
tendered him the Oath of Abjuring the King and Royal Family; which Monk thought
not fit then to do, but said, He would consider some time of it.

The next Day after, Monk, attended by Robison and Scot, went to the House,
where the Speaker caressed him in a florid Speech, congratulating his coming to
Town; and in the Name of the House, thanked him for the great Service he had
done them. To which Monk, in a plain Soldier-like Answer, said,

That amongst the many Mercies of God to these poor Nations, their Restitution
was not the least; that it was his Work alone, and to him belongs the Glory of
it; that he esteemed it an Effect of God's Goodness, that he was some ways
instrumental in it; wherein he did no more than his Duty, which did not deserve
the high Mark of Favor they put upon it: That he would trouble them with no
large Narratives, yet desired leave to acquaint them, That in his March from
Scotland he observed the People in most Countries earnestly desired a
Settlement for a full and free Parliament; and that they would determine their
Sitting, a Gospel Ministry, Encouragement for Learning in the Universities; and
that the Secluded Members before 1648, might be admitted without previous Oaths.

That he had answered, They (the Rump) were a free Parliament, and if there
were any Force upon them, he would remove it; that you would fill up your
House, and then would be a full Parliament; and that you had already determined
your Sitting. And for the Ministry and their Maintenance, the Laws and
Universities, you had declared largely concerning them in your last
Declaration. That for the Gentlemen secluded before 1648, you had already given
your Judgment, and that they ought to acquiesce therein: but to admit Members
to sit without a previous Oath, was never done in England: yet begged leave to
say, That the less Oaths and Engagements were imposed, your Settlement would be
sooner attained; yet that neither the Cavalier nor Fanatic Party have any
share in the Civil or Military Power. Then he recommended to them the State of
Scotland and Ireland, which you may read at large in the third Part of Dr.
Bates' s Elenchus.

The Rump were as little pleased with Monk's Speech, as the Council of State
with his Refusal to take the Oath of Abjuring the King and Royal Family;
therefore, seeing he would not Swear as the Rump would have him, they will try if
he will Do as they will have him.

The Common Council in London had passed an Order, That unless they had a full
and free Parliament, they would pay no more Taxes. This so startled the Rump,
that the next day after Monk had been at the House, they sent to him to send 12
of the forwardest Citizens to the Tower, and to pull up the City-Posts, Chains,
and Portcullices.

In Obedience to the Rump's Order, Monk marches into the Old Exchange, and
secured as many of the Citizens the Rump ordered, as he found there; but when
he issued out his Orders to pull down the Posts, Chains, Gates, and
Portcullices, the Officers withdrew, and consulted what to do; and resolved,
They could not obey these Orders, and offered to lay down their Commissions.
Monk endeavored to pacify them; and told them, The Orders of the Council were
to be obeyed; but they persisted, so as he was forced to set his lesser
Officers to do the Work, but did not pull down the Gates and Portcullices,
thinking he had done enough to satisfy the Rump, but was mistaken, for the Rump
sent more peremptory Orders, to pull down the Gates and Portcullices; which
piece of Drudgery Monk performed.

Col. Herb. Morley, a Non-Abjurer of the King, at this time was Lieutenant of
the Tower, and took this Occasion to come to Monk, and assured him for the
Tower, himself, and Sir J. Fagg his Brother-in-law, whose two Regiments were in
London, and were resolved to agree with him in any Matters that should be for
the public Peace and Settlement. This was a Preparative to what followed; and
that Night Monk returned to White Hall.

And the next Day, or a Day after, Praise-God Barebone, with a multitude of
Watermen and others (who it may be could neither write nor read) presented a
Petition to the Rump, for the excluding the King and Royal Family, and that
those who refused should not be capable of any Employment: for which the Rump
thanked them; but the Success shall be no better than Richard's 90
Congratulatory Addresses.

This struck directly at the Authority of Monk: whereupon he called a private
Council of his Confidents, to advise what to do: where it was resolved to take
a General Muster of his Army in Finsbury-fields the 11th of Febr. From whence
Monk wrote to the Rump, That the Services he had done them were slighted,
whilst the late Traitors, no less Enemies to them than the Commonwealth, had
more Esteem than he: From whence else was their Kindness to Lambert and Vane,
and new Offenses against him, and their Respect to that leering Heretic
Barebone and all his Rabble? And therefore demanded that the filling up their
Members be within a Week, and their Sitting determined, and to give place to a
new Parliament.

From Finsbury, Monk sent to the Mayor, That he would dine with him at the
Bull-head in Cheapside; where he desired the Mayor, in the Evening to call a
Court of Aldermen at Guild Hall. This was blown about the City, and thousands
came to Guild Hall (and I amongst the rest) to see what the Meaning of it
should be.

About six Monk came, and all the way as he came, and quite through the Hall,
the Cry was, A Free Parliament. I saw him when he lighted out of his Coach, and
went leaning on Col. Cloberry's Shoulder, into the Mayor's Court, but not one
word he said; and when he came into the Mayor's Court, he read a Letter he sent
that Morning to the Rump, and then returned: the Cry was the same, A Free
Parliament. Monk said nothing; Cloberry said, You shall have a Free Parliament.
And it is not to be imagined, how far this spread in so little time; for, I
believe, in less than 2 Hours all the Bells of London were ringing; and in all
the Streets (to the number, 'twas said, of above 6000) Bonfires were made, and
Rumps of all sorts roasting. But that Night Monk did not return to White Hall,
but lay at the Glass-house in Broadstreet.

If the Rump were nettled at Monk's Speech, they were now ready to die for
fear; but since they could not show their Teeth* they would show their
Back-sides, and voted a Committee of Five; to order the Affairs of the Army,
whereof Monk to be one.

But Monk, who but 4 Days before was so terrible to the City, is now become
their Darling; they let him have 30000 l. to pay his Army in the City; whereas
that without, was like a Herd of Goats upon the Mountains, having no body to
look after them, nor a Penny to help themselves. And Monk now having his Army
entirely at his Devotion, scorned, for all the Rump's Vote, to suffer any other
of their Committee to partake with him in any part of his Authority over it.

And now Monk, with a better Authority, and more Applause than Cromwell had,
might have set up himself for Protector, or what he pleased; but he saw the
Genius of the Nation lay another way, and that 'twas more secure to follow it,
than to set up himself against it.

He held therefore private Intelligence with the Heads of the Secluded Members
about their Restoration on certain Conditions: The Secluded Members were
zealously disposed to out the Rump upon any Terms, whatever came of it; they
had more to say against the Rump, than the Rump had against the Officers of the
Army, who had twice deposed them; and the Rump began the Game with the Secluded
Members before the Officers began with them. So upon Feb. 21. Monk gave the
Command of the Guard to Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper (after Earl of Shaftsbury) to
permit the Secluded Members to enter the House; the first whereof was W. Prynn,
tied to a great Basket-hilted Sword: yet the Rumpers were not excluded, nor did
the Secluded Members care for it, being four to one. And so the Rumpers left
the House, and fell into a Relapse of their Convulsion, out of which they never
recovered: nor did Barebone's Rabble afford them any Relief.

Thus you see the Rump and Secluded Members were like Virginal-Jacks too, when
one was up, the other was down; for the Secluded Members, who before would not
have the Nation or themselves safe, unless they were an Undissolvable
Parliament, now, to be revenged on the Rump, are content to meet only to do
Monk some Journey-work, and then dissolve themselves.

The Secluded Members, after they were in, repeal their own Exclusion; then
vote Monk General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland;
Mountague, Admiral of the Fleet; set Sir George Booth, and those in Prison upon
that account, at liberty; and soon after sent Lambert in his room; and grant a
Tax for Payment of the Army, which now no Man disputed.

But Monk' s Cares did not end here; the Army without were more than fivefold
to his within the City: he therefore sent Letters to all the other Regiments of
the Armies in England and Ireland, To certify the Reason of the readmission of
the Secluded Members, that without it there was no way to satisfy the Nation,
or raise Money to pay the Army; and with large Assurances of their Constancy in
their old Profession and Principles.

The Soldiers in general were glad to be out of their starving and wandering
state, and therefore in shoals submitted to Monk, who yet would not receive
them, unless they would swear to be true to this Parliament (as 'twas called)
which he could but little trust to, they having so often forswore themselves
before; yet these at present served his turn, and those who refused he
cashiered.

Now had horrible Dread overwhelmed the Rumpers, especially the Regicides; they
saw themselves hated by almost all the Nation, yet at irreconcilable Variance
one with another; the Body of the Army which had raised them, turned now
against them: they knew the Secluded Members had but a limited time to sit, and
then to dissolve themselves to make room for another, which would certainly
bring in the King, to their utter Destruction.

In this Consternation, Lambert escaped out of the Tower, and Col. Rich refused
to submit: Lambert posts to Warwick, where he met Axtel, Okey, Cobbet, Creed,
and some other disbanded Officers, to whom many disbanded Soldiers joined,
which made up a little Army.

Colonel Streater (a Confident of Monk's) from Northampton, gives Monk an
Account of this; whereupon the Council of State, settled by the Secluded
Members, proclaim Lambert and all his Adherents Traitors; and Monk sent Col.
Rich. Ingoldsby (a Gentleman of more true Courage than 20 of these sniveling
Fellows, who was before cashiered for adhering to Ric. Cromwell, when the
Officers deposed him) with a strong Squadron of Horse, to join Streater's Foot,
against them.

When these were joined, upon Easter Day, near Daventry, both Armies came
within sight of one another; when Lambert made an Overture to Ingoldsby to
restore Ric. Cromwell: but Ingoldsby knew this Game was lost, and that Lambert
did not mean sincerely; and so they fought. Ingoldsby charged home, and
Lambert's Men could not sustain the Shock, but fled; and Ingoldsby (it is said)
took Lambert Prisoner with his own hands, Lambert crying, Quarter, good my Lord
(for Ingoldsby was one of Oliver's Lords of the other House) spare my Life.
With Lambert, Cobbet and Creed were taken Prisoners; Okey and Axtel escaped
now, but could not escape a greater Punishment than befell Lambert, Cobbet, or
Creed, for they were hanged and quartered for having been K. Charles's Judges.
Nor was Rich's Fate much better than Lambert's, for Col. Ingoldsby at Bury in
Suffolk cashiered him, it is said, at the Head of his Regiment, and disbanded it.

This was the End of that Invincible Army, subdued by not one 6th part of it
self; for Monk, when he came from Scotland, had but 4 Regiments of Horse, and 6
of Foot, and (I believe) not 10 Men killed in their Defense; and not one in the
Reduction of the invincible Armado. And now it is time to see what followed; the
Secluded Members, with much ado, having dissolved themselves, upon Mar. 17.
issued out Writs for another to meet, yet in the Name of the Keepers of the
Liberties of the Commonwealth of England, upon Apr. 25. the Elections to be as
they were before the Year 1640. The gazing World eagerly expected the Success
of this wondrous Revolution.

If we look abroad, we shall see Mazarine, after Cromwell's Death, not
foreseeing wherein the Confusions and Disorders in England would end, unless in
the Restoring the King (which, by Monsieur Bourdeaux, the French Ambassador in
England, he diligently used his utmost Endeavors to prevent) now sets up a
Treaty of Peace with Spain, and to forward it, propounds a Marriage between the
French King and the eldest Infanta of Spain; the younger was after married to
the now Emperor Leopold, and the now King of Spain not born. This Treaty was
called The Pyrenaean Treaty.

But as this Treaty was made in deepest Dissimulation and Treachery, so were
the Preparations to it; for at the same time (the War continuing between Spain
and Portugal) the French King made an offensive League with Portugal for 10
Years, not to treat with Spain, unless the Portuguese were entirely satisfied
in all their exorbitant Demands of Spain; in which 'twas agreed, That all the
Harbors the Portuguese should take in Spain, either upon the one or other side
of the Sea, shall be put into the Power of France: which you may read in the
most excellent Treatise of the truly honorable and learned Statesman the Baron
d' Isola, Of the Buckler of State and Justice, Chap. 1. And in regard there is
so great a Connection of the Pyrenaean Treaty with that of the Life of King
Charles II. we'll be more particular in it before we enter on the other.

The Baron, in the 2d Article or Chapt. says, the moving Cause of the Peace
was, The Desire of the Good, Quiet, and Ease of the Subjects of both Kings. The
Object was, To put a period to so many Mischiefs; the Effect, To forget and
extinguish all the Causes and Motives of the Wars past, and to establish a
sincere, entire, and durable Peace between the Kings and their Successors. For
attaining these Ends, the Spaniard insisted that these Points were necessary,
viz. The Infanta's disclaiming all her Right and Title to the Kingdom of Spain,
or any of its Dominions; that the French should not directly or indirectly
assist the Portuguese in their War against Spain; and by the by, That the
Prince of Conde should be restored to all the Estate and Governments he enjoyed
before he joined with the Spaniard against Mazarine and his Faction; and that
the Duke of Lorain should be restored to his Duchy, with all the places which
he had possessed in the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun.

The Articles of the Infanta's Renunciation were soon agreed to reciprocally,
but that of abandoning the Portuguese stuck at present, the French having so
lately made an Offensive League with the Prince Regent: And that the Treaty
might be agreed without the French abandoning of Portugal, the French proffered
the Restitution of all the Places conquered from Spain during the War (but
promised more than they could perform, for Dunkirk and Mardike were not in
their power) and also other Countries, and entirely to restore the Prince of
Conde.

But without abandoning Portugal nothing was to be done, and so the French King
did promise and oblige himself, upon his Honor, and in the Faith and Word of a
King, for himself and his Successors, not to meddle any more in the Affair of
Portugal; nor to give to it, either in general, or to any Person or Persons of
it in particular, of what Estate, Dignity or Condition, at present or
hereafter, any Aid or Assistance, public or secret, directly or indirectly, of
Men, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Ships, or Money, under any Pretext, nor of any
thing that is or can be by Land or Sea* or any other fashion; nor permit any
Levy to be made in any part of his Dominions; nor grant free Passage to those
who shall come out of other Countries; which shall come to help the Realm of
Portugal. And was signed by the King, Mazarine, Clergy and Nobility of France.

Toward the End of this Treaty, K. Charles II. about the End of November (the
Differences between Monk and the Officers of the English Army being in the
highest Ferment) came to it, that his Concerns might be concerted in it; he was
received by Don Lewis de Haro (that Spanish Minister) with as much Honor and
Veneration, as if possessed of all his Kingdoms, but negligently and slightly by
Mazarine and the French Ministers: And sure the Indignity here offered to his
Person, and the Industry of Bourdeaux at London, in endeavoring to keep him
from being restored, would have made another not to forget these about 5 or 6
Months after. But if the King's Restoration came not from some other place, he
might have waited long enough for it here; for France would not, and Spain
could not assist him.

A DETECTION OF THE Court and State of England, DURING THE REIGN OF K. CHARLES
II, etc.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
This Reign detected to the beginning of the first Dutch War.
AS the Nation thought they could not be redeemed from the Arbitrary Government
of King Charles the first, but by the Long Parliament it 1640, so they thought
they could not be redeemed from the Confusions, Rage and Distractions they
labored now under, but by restoring King Charles the Second.

To gratify this Expectation, the Convention who met on the 25th of April 1660,
Hand over Head, without any Preliminaries of asserting the Rights and Liberties
of the English, so manifestly violated by his Father and Grandfather, restored
the King without any Contradiction.

Upon his Restoration there were but five of the Bishops living, viz. Dr.
Juxton, Bishop of London; Dr. Fruin, Bishop of Chester; Dr. Wren, Bishop of
Ely; Dr. Warner, Bishop of Rochester; and Dr. King, Bishop of Chichester: These
three latter lived to die in their Bishoprics, and in the Interval between the
beginning of the Long Parliament, and the Restoration of the King (near twenty
Years) upon the matter, all these Leases of the Church were expired, whereby
incredible Sums of Money were raised by the new-promoted Bishops to their
vacant Sees, without any regard to the rest of the poor sequestered Clergy,
their Wives or Children: But the Jollity of the Convention for having got their
King, put such mean Thoughts out of their Consideration.

The Hopes of the happy Days to come under this King's Reign, quite blotted out
their Remembrance of the Days of his Father's and Grand-father's Reign: On the
contrary, to flatter him, they styled his Father, The Martyr for the English
Church and State. Now they had got him they would hold him, he might do what he
list for all them, and so he did; which the Nation submitted to, rather than
return to the Confusions and Disorders of the Times after his Father's Death:
Nay, the Memory of these Times was so odious, that if even the Parliament took
notice of his Actions, his Flatterers charged them with returning to the
Parliament in 1640.

The Convention took terrible Vengeance on his Father's Judges; for tho they
did not all suffer in their Persons, scarce any of them but forfeited their
Estates: So as these Men who would have his Father's Life, and Crown Lands for
their Estates, lost their own Lives, and had their Estates added to the
Revenues of the Crown: tho this was but as Water poured into a Sive, yet it is
observable, that the Instruments who acted in the King's Death should be thus
punished, and Lenthal the Speaker, who granted the Commission to act, should
escape free.

The Presbyterians were scarce wet with the Tail of this Storm, none of them
(except those in sequestered Livings) being punished either in their Persons or
Fortunes; and many of them were preferred in high Places both in Church and
State.

The poor Cavalier, or Loyal suffering Party, who hoped for a Heaven upon Earth
in this King's Reign, fell into a worse State that that they were in before:
For as Messeray said of the Reign of Henry III. of France, It was the Reign of
Favorites, wherein the Subjects* (it is said) paid so much, yet never was any
King so poor: So it may be said of this. And the Cavalier Party having before
mortgaged their Estates to redeem their Sequestration, the Remainder paid the
Taxes to the King, and the other Part the Interest to the Mortgage; nor were
they any ways countenanced by the King.

For his Favourite^* were a Generation of People who knew not his Father, but
who humoured him in his Sensual Pleasures and Prodigality; and were of the
Female as well as Male Sex; who were a sort of Favorites his Father was not
acquainted with, nor do I find he ever regarded the Memory of his Father; but
that he industriously endeavored to have it believed, the Portraiture of his
Father's Sufferings, a Book of late so much controverted, was none of his.

However, his Mother had a great Ascendant over him, so that she being a
Daughter of France, inclined him to embrace the French Interest against his
own: And she living near ten Years after his Restoration, so fixed this into a
Habit in him, that in all his Life after he could never get rid of it,
notwithstanding all the Provocations of the French King to the contrary. But
it is time now to take a View of this King's Actions.

The Desires of the King to be restored were no less than those of the Nation,
that he should, tho upon any Terms; for upon the Dissolution of the secluded
Members, the King left Brussels (as you will soon see he left Spain, who had
harbored and relieved him in the time of his Exile, to join with France, who
had expelled him to join with Oliver, and by its Ambassador Bourdeaux at this
time was using all its Endeavors to keep him out) and came to Breda, from
whence he sent Letters by Sir John Greenvile (after Earl of Bath) to Monk,
Mountague, (after Earl of Sandwich) and the Mayor of London.

The Presbyterians, who thought to have had the same Power they had when the
secluded Members dissolved themselves, were shrewdly mistaken, for the Body of
the Commons were Royalists, who chose Sir Harbottle Grimston their Speaker, and
upon the opening of the Convention, the Royalist Lords, double more than the
Presbyterians, entered into the Lords House, which the Presbyterians complained
of to Monk, who answered, Now they were in, he had no Power to turn them out;
so the Royalists were double to the Factions in both Houses of this Convention,
so as the King need not fear his Restoration.

Now half England, of all sorts (except the Rumpers) cross the Seas to Breda,
to make their Bargains with the King before he should come into England: the
King promises fair to all, which it may be was impossible to perform, which
caused Murmur afterward: And the Convention after they had proclaimed him King
by inherent Birthright, sent him 50000 l. 10000 l. to the Duke of York, and
5000 l. to the Duke of Gloucester; and the City of London sent the King and his
Brothers 12000 l.

Upon the 11th of May, both Houses sent Commissioners to Breda, to invite the
King to return, and Admiral Mountague with a Royal Fleet to convoy him over,
who upon the 25th landed him at Dover, where Monk met him upon his Knees, the
King embracing him and kissing him, and next day at Canterbury created him
Knight of the Garter, the Dukes of York and Gloucester putting the George about
his Neck.

'Twas rather a Madness than Jollity, all sorts of People expressed in the
King's Passage from Dover to White Hall. The Nation was never so fine in
Cloths, even the poor Cavaliers will be as fine as the best, tho they never
live to pay their Tailors; nor shall the King take any care of them, his
Favorites being of another Stamp than those who served his Father: Never were
such Pageants, Triumphal Arches, and sumptuous Feasts seen in the City before;
for which the poor Orphans Money in the Chamber of London must pay the greatest
part.

When the King was restored, the Nation was in a Martial Posture, and the
Manners of the People generally more severe and sober, than in his Father's and
Grand-father's Reigns.

The first that made Court to the King were the Dutch, when he was at Breda, to
enter into a League with them; but the King, by the Advice of Sir Edward Hide,
(it is said) wisely answered, That this would look as if 'twere done by
Restraint, the King being in their Power; besides, he was not yet possessed of
his Kingdoms, nor had established his Privy Council: Yet the Dutch were the
first who caressed him with a most rich and splendid Gilded Yatch, to prepare
him for a Treaty after his Accession to his Crowns.

Nor were the rest of the Princes of Europe long after the Dutch, in
congratulating the King's Restoration, the French King being one of the first:
The Spaniard made not so much haste, yet hoped for a better Reception than the
French; and that the King of Spain might have a better Reception, he sent the
Prince de Ligny his Ambassador, who in the Splendour of his Train much outvied
the French. It Is true, the Prince got a Peace with the King for his Master the
King of Spain, but he got as little good by it, as the King of Spain did by
that he made with the King's Grandfather, King James the First.

With better Success came the French Ambassador, tho I do not find he made any
League with the French against the Spaniard, as Oliver did; nor was there any
need of it, the French having made a deceitful Peace with the Spaniard at the
Pyrenaean Treaty, yet you shall soon see both Kings dealt as ill with the King
of Spain, as if he had been an open Enemy: And the more to endear himself with
his Brother of France, the King rejected the advantageous Treaty of Commerce
which Oliver made with France, as done by an Usurper, and never after (at least
that I ever heard of) made any other instead of it, but left his Subjects to be
used even as the French King pleased in their Trades to France.

Henry the Seventh was the first of our English Kings who used Guards, and he
set up the Yeomen of the Guard, which was followed by all the Kings of England
since: but tho the Convention had paid off and disbanded the English Armies,
yet the King besides his Band of Pensioners, in imitation of the French, must
have Guards of Horse and Foot, and the Parliament gave him Revenue enough to
increase these to what Number he pleased: But it had been better for him if he
had imitated the French too, in preferring Men who were qualified, but few of
these were to be found there: And tho he gave near double the Pay to these, yet
was he much worse served than if Men of Merit had been there for half the Pay;
for scarce one of the Officers but bought their Places; and this was so common,
that the Prices were certain; so not he who deserved, but he which gave most
was preferred; and when he was in, he owed the King no Service, having paid for
what he had; and so his Business was how to improve his Bargain, not serve the
King. And herein too the poor Cavaliers had the worst, they not having so much
Money to buy as others had.

I take it for granted, that the first League which the now French King made
after he came to Majority (I mean after twenty one Years of Age) was that of
the Pyrenaean Treaty, the Breach of all the rest before we will lay to the
Charge of Cardinal Mazarine: We will therefore see if the French King was not
as little a Slave to his Word in this League, as Mazarine was in any before;
and you will see that in all the Leagues this King after made, he was as little a
Slave to his Word as in this Treaty.

We have in the former Book set down particularly the Article whereby the
French King, upon his Honor, and the Faith and Word of a King, did promise
neither directly nor indirectly to assist Portugal against Spain; yet at the
beginning of the Treaty they secretly conveyed Troops into Portugal in several
Bodies: And when upon Complaint of the Marquess de la Fuente, they sent public
Orders to the Governors of their Ports, not to suffer any Soldiers to embark
for Portugal, they did not abstain by Connivance underhand to let them pass.
Nay, when Marshal Turene made public Levies to assist Portugal, it being
complained of by the Marquess de la Fuente, they answered, it was a particular
Act of the Marshal, and the Court of France had no Hand in it. And also
continually supplied Portugal with Corn, and all sorts of Ammunition: And
France also fomented the Obstinacy of Portugal to continue the War, when Spain
offered them advantageous Terms of Peace. This, and much more you may read in
the second Article of The Buckler of State and Justice.

Nor did the French King stay here, but (being become the dearest Confident
with his Brother of England) almost as soon as the King was settled, the French
sent Monsieur Courtin to move the King not to abandon Portugal; nor did he yet
stay here, but Mazarine dying much about the latter end of Summer, having a
Stone in his Heart, (so the French Pasquils said) in September or beginning of
October the Queen Mother came over, seemingly to treat with her Son for a
Marriage between Monsieur of France, and her fair Daughter Henrietta Maria, the
King's beloved Sister: Yet it seems to me the Marriage of the King with the
Infanta of Portugal was not less designed than that with Monsieur: And besides
these, you will soon hear of something else which brought the Queen Mother into
England.

As the Designs of the Queen's coming over were dark, so I acknowledge I have
not seen any of the Treaties or Transactions concerning them, but must take
Measures by what followed, and so far as I had Light from what went before; yet
in all of them it seems evident to me, that the Queen showed her self to be
more affectionate to her Daughter than Son, and to be more a Daughter of
France, than Queen of England.

But before I proceed, it will be convenient to take notice of the deplorable
State of Spain, which their Ambition in seeking so many Foreign Dominions, and
a Tyrannical Government had brought it to: For before the Accession of their
American Dominions which they acquired by unjust War, and unheard of Cruelties
in all the ten Years War between Ferdinand and Isabella with the Moors (who had
seven hundred Years been possessed of the Kingdoms of Granada, Murcia, and a
great part of Andaluzia) every Year the Moors and Christians brought near a
hundred thousand Men into the Field to fight one with another; yet the Kingdoms
of Arragon, Navar and Portugal were Neutral in all the War: Whereas now all the
Kingdoms of Spain (except that of Portugal) were united under this King Philip
the Fourth, yet out of them all he could not raise an Army to fight the
Portuguese, but trusting to the French Faith in the Pyrenaean Treaty, sent the
Army in Flanders under the Command of the Marquess Caracene to do it.

The King embraced the Overtures of both Marriages; and now the French King
doubly, if not trebly, assured of his Brother of England, as well by the
Treaties of these Marriages as by his Message by Courtin, no longer acts
covertly in assisting the Prince Regent of Portugal against Spain, but
barefaced sent Marshal Schomberg with an Army and Fleet to their Assistance,
yet this Army was not sufficient to make an Offensive War against Spain; but
Portugal stood only upon the Defensive.

The Want of Money a little retarded the Marriage of the Princess with
Monsieur; but this might be easily helped, if the King would give up Dunkirk to
the French, whereby he might pay 200000 l. for his Sister's Portion (which was
more than his Father had with his Mother) and also receive 200000 l. more for
himself. Nor was this all, he might save the Charges of maintaining a Garrison
there; yet the Parliament in the Hereditary Excise, allowed him 60000 l. per
Annum for the Support of it. I do not find this mentioned in the Body of the
Act, yet several Members assured me, it was so intended in the passing the Act.

All this the King agreed to, and so Dunkirk and Mardike Fort were given up to
the French, against all the Laws of Humanity, Justice and Prudence.

I say it was against all the Laws of Humanity; for the Spaniard entertained
and relieved the King, when the French had expelled him, and joined with Oliver
the Usurper of all his Dominions. It was against Justice; for the Sovereignty
of Dunkirk was of Right and Justice the Spaniards. And against the Rules of
Policy and Prudence; the French Nation being the Natural Enemies of the
English, and the next Neighbor to it, and of all Nations the most formidable.

It had been happier for the poor Spaniard, and the English Nation, if the
Unkindness of the King to the Spaniard had ended in his giving up Dunkirk to
the French: but it ended not here; for the King employed the Army which should
have kept Dunkirk against the Spaniard in Portugal; and with these and another
Band of the disbanded English Army joined to them; the French, Portuguese and
English, or rather the English without them, routed the whole united Army of
the Spaniard at the Fight of Elvas: So as now the French had a new Inlet into
Flanders, and the Spaniard no Army to defend it. This was a foul Blot in the
Spanish Politics, by their King's trusting to the Faith of his Brethren of
England and France. But this will not stay here, as hereafter you will see.

Here I take leave so well as I can, to vindicate the Memory of my Lord
Chancellor Hide, from two Aspersions (as I conceive) cast upon him; one, That
he was the Adviser of the giving up Dunkirk to the French: The other, That he
was the Procurer of the King's Marriage with the Infanta of Portugal.

For the first, I was assured by a credible Person (tho a Confident of my Lord
Chancellor's) that he was so far from advising the King to give up Dunkirk to
the French, that only he and my Lord Treasurer Southampton (upon whose Honor
my Lord Chancellor relied more than any other) of all the Council, entered their
Protestations against it. The Truth of this may be resolved, by inspecting the
Privy-Council's Books.

It Is true, I cannot prove negatively, that my Lord Chancellor did not first
propound the King's Marriage with the Infanta of Portugal; yet it seems to me
reasonable he did not, for these Reasons.

I never heard of any Discourse of this Match, before the Arrival of the
Queen Mother in England; or if any were, it is probable that Monsieur Courtin
had this in his Instructions, as well as that of moving the King not to abandon
Portugal, for both these tend to the same end; and the French King, all his
Reign after, sought to attain his Ends by Women, as well as other Ways: Nor can
it be believed that the Prince of Portugal, now engaged in War against Spain,
should pay the Queen's Portion 400000 l. I believe he did what he could, give
up Tangier and Bombay to the King, which last Place he leased to the East India
Company for 10 l. per Annum, but the Money was paid by the French King.

Though the Factions had such ill Success with previous Swearing, which every
one imposed upon the Nation when it was uppermost, and which no Man regarded
when another succeeded; yet upon the Restoration of the King, the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy (which latter was only imposed upon certain Sorts of
Men; and, as my Lord Verulam says, sinks deep into the Conscience, and was
therefore interpreted by Queen Elizabeth in her Injunctions, which were after
confirmed by Act of Parliament) were imposed upon all sorts of People, and the
Refusers looked upon as Enemies to the King, and Favorers of the late Times.

And tho the Convention sat but from the 25th of April, 1660, to the 29th of
December following, yet by this time the outward Face of almost all the Nation
was quite changed; the Cavalier Party, under the Persecution of the late times,
lived quietly upon that part of their Estates which was permitted them after
their Compositions, and the Governing Factions put on a Countenance of
Godliness and Sobriety; whereas in the Jollity of the King's Restoration, all
sorts of Men (even the Factions) endeavored to imitate the profuse Prodigality
and Luxury of the Court; which scarce entertained any but upon those Terms. To
humor the King, the Public Theaters were stuffed with most Obscene Actions
and Interludes, and the more Obscene pleased the King the better, who graced
the opening of them with his Presence, at the first Notice of a new Play.

In this State the Convention was dissolved, and a Parliament met the eighth of
May, 1661. where that they might outvy the Convention in Loyalty, in the first
Chapter they make Words to compass or imagine any Bodily Harm, Imprisonment, or
Restraint upon the Body of the King, or to Depose him, or levy War against him,
to be High Treason: And if any shall any ways affirm the King to be a Heretic
or Papist, shall be incapacitated to hold any Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military
Employment: And that it shall be a Praemunire in any to say, The Long Parliament
begun in November 1640 is not dissolved; or that there lies any Obligation upon
any one from any Oath to endeavor a Change of Government either in Church or
State; or that one or both Houses of Parliament have a Legislative Power: and
declare the Oath, commonly called The Solemn League and Covenant, to be an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subject against the Fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of the Nation: And Chap. 5. declare against Tumultuary
petitioning the King or Parliament: And Chap. 6. declare the sole Right of the
Militia to be in the King. This Parliament, upon the thirtieth of July, was
adjourned to the twentieth of November.

This being but an Adjournment, and so the Act of the Houses, (for as yet the
King did not exercise his Prerogative of Proroguing them, which hereafter you
will see him very prodigal of) I do not find that this Adjournment was made,
that the King might better proceed in his Bargain and Sale of Dunkirk to the
French. Yet I do say that before the Parliament met, it was (as I remember in
September) that the Bargain and Sale was perfected, and Dunkirk put into the
Power of the French.

But neither the Sale of Dunkirk without, nor the keeping up a standing Army
within (called the King's Guards) after it was disbanded and paid off by the
Covention, nor the King's Manner of Life, could any ways abate the Loyalty of
this Parliament to the King; and keep him they would whatever came of it: And
to all the Provisions for Security of his Person and Power, they will add that
to keep him in, which the Rump in its last Breath did to keep him out, viz. To
swear to keep him out. And therefore the Parliament, Chap. 2. made the
Corporation-Oath to be taken by all the Members of Corporations, viz. I A. B.
do declare and believe, that it is not Lawful, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King: And that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those who are
commissioned by him: So help me God. This I think is one of the first Laws that
ever was made, to swear to Opinions and Belief: And sure if Swearing would
determine Controversies and Beliefs, all Learning, Reasoning and Instruction
would be at an end; and he that swears most is the best Logician, and the
Godliest Man. We will therefore consider the Nature of an Oath, and those who
are to take this Oath.

If we consider Man, and other Sensitive Creatures in their Creation and
Generation, they were all passive, and they were created and generated without
any Act of their own Will, or the Counsel or Concurrence of any Creature, but
of a Divine and Omnipotent Power; and by a Providence and Prescience not less
wise and good, than the Power was Omnipotent, they had Food, and other Means
for their Continuance in this World provided before they were created or
generated.

But though God, without the Act of the Will of any Creature, did make Man and
other Sensitive Creatures, by an inimitable Power, which he communicated to no
Creature; and by an unscrutable Wisdom and Goodness did provide for them before
they were made or generated; yet did he not in vain make them Organical Bodies,
endued with Life, Sense and Motion; so that after they were made, they might
seek food which God had before provided for them, and preserve themselves from
other Creatures which might be hurtful to them.

As Sensation is naturally common to Man, and other Sensitive Creatures, so are
the Passions of Love, Fear, Hatred and Desire; viz. Love of those things which
conduce to their Welfare and Preservation; Fear of those things which are
hurtful to them, accompanied with an Hatred of them; and a Desire of generating
their Like in other Bodies.

Besides these Attributes common to other Creatures, God endued Man with an
Intellectual and Reasonable Soul, which is proper to Man, exclusive to other
Creatures; and made all things in this our Habitable World for the Use of Man,
and therefore created Man for a Nobler End than can be found in this World,
viz. capable of Eternal Happiness in a better.

But though God made all things in this World for the Use of Man, yet few
things are useful to Man, but as they are made so by Humane Labor, Industry
and Art; yet no Art or Science in Man is innate or connatural, or comes to pass
by Inspiration, Fate, or Chance, but by Education, Learning and Experience: We
do not read that God ever made a House, Cloth, a Ship, etc. without Man;
whereas Nature of her own Accord has provided Food and all things necessary for
other Creatures, without any Act or Care of theirs: Thus Nature clothed Sheep
and Beasts with Wool and Hair; Fowls with Feathers, and Fish with Scales: And
tho Fowls make their Nests, and Conies and Badgers Berries, yet they do these
by an insite connatural Power, not learned or taught by any Creature.

Other Creatures live free and independent upon one another, except the young
ones of some Creatures, while they can seek their Food and Preservation; and
are either Solivagous and Hurtful, as Foxes, Wolves and Tigers, etc. or live
promiscuously in Herds and Flocks, and are innocent Creatures, as Sheep, Goats,
etc. whereas Men live in Dependency one upon another, so as no Man can subsist
of himself; but depends upon another for things which conduce to their Welfare
and Preservation; and are neither Solivagous, nor live promiscuously in Flocks
and Herds, but in Society and Conversation; and keep Company by Election or
Choice, as they stand in need of other Men, either for their Necessity,
Convenience or Pleasure: and Men are distinguished from other Men by their
Manners and Conversation, so as it becomes Scandalous to keep Company with
Debauched and Vicious Men.

As other Creatures live free and independent upon one another, so have they
all things which Nature had provided for them in common; whereas Man lives upon
those things wherein he has Property exclusive to other Men: So that it is
wicked and unjust for any Man who has no Property in a thing, without the
Consent of him who has Property in it, to take it from him.

In this State of Society, out of which no Man lives, God did not endue Man
with Understanding and Reason in vain: for whereas other Creatures pursue their
Actions, being excited by the Passions of Love, Fear, Hatred and Desire; yet
Man depresses these, and governs his Actions by Understanding and Reason, so
that Humane Society may be preserved.

Speech and Letters are necessary in Humane Society and Conversation; which
wise Nature (which never acts in vain) has denied other Sensitive Creatures,
which govern their Actions by Sense, and their Passions, these having no need
of them. Speech is the Mean or Instrument by which Men converse to the Hearing
of one another; and Letters to the Sight: Other Creatures hear the Sound of
Speech, and can see Letters, but do not understand the Power of the Words, or
Construction of them.

Man is born the most impotent of all other Creatures; being naked and unarmed,
yet can neither clothe nor defend himself without the Help of another; he has
nothing to feed himself with but what he has from another; yet if he takes any
thing from another, without the Consent of that other, it will be Wickedness
and Theft: He is obliged to live uprightly and justly with other Men; yet
understands not how to live uprightly and justly, but as he is instructed by
Education, Learning and Experience; he is obliged to speak and write in Truth,
but neither Speech nor Letters are Insite or Connatural, but acquired by
Instruction and Learning from others.

All Humane Learning, Reasoning and Instruction in Religion, Morality, and in
every Art and Science, is begotten from the Powers which God had before
implanted in the Learner, and from the Principles which were before understood
by him: so that if a Man be born blind, it will be in vain to instruct him how
to be a Painter; or if Dumb, to be a Musician or Orator; or if he be not Compos
Mentis, so as to understand the Principles from which he is to be instructed,
Instruction will be as vain to him, as to teach a Dumb Man to be an Orator, or
a blind Man a Painter: So that it is from those Powers which God has implanted
in Man, without the Will of Man, that Man becomes capable of being instructed
by Man; and therefore Man is obliged to give God all Honor and Praise before
any other, that he endued him, without the Help of any other, with an
Intellectual and Reasonable Soul, capable of Instruction.

The End of all Learning, Reasoning and Instruction, is how from Premises or
Principles, which a Man before understood as an Intellectual Creature, to
govern his Intentions, Speech and Actions from them in time to come rationally:
So that as the Understanding is of the Causes of things and Actions which were
before; so Reason is of the Consequences of Speech and Actions in time to come.
The Understanding is from the Act and Power of God, but Reason is from the Act
or Power in Man. So that though a Man may instruct another, who has a
competent Understanding, how to act Rationally in Consequence, yet no Man can
instruct another who is a Fool or Madman, how to understand Principles from
which he is to be instructed, so as to judge and act rationally.

As every Learner is presumed to understand the Principles from which he is to
be instructed, so the Principles are assumed, not proved, and are to be without
Question or Dispute: For if the Question of any rational Proposition be but
probable or uncertain, the Conclusion or Consequence, will be less probable and
more uncertain.

For the better understanding an Oath, it will be very requisite to distinguish
between Understanding and Knowledge; for Man understands Intelligible Beings, as
God, the Soul, a Law, Religion, Justice, etc. which can never be the Objects of
Sense, but may be said to know what he understands, sensibly, viz. of things
and Actions which are perceived by Sense; as a Man, a Horse, a Tree, may be
perceived by other Sensitive Creatures: But that these do exist, is
intelligible. So it is that Man is an Intellectual and Reasonable Creature; and
that God has made all sensible things in the World for the Use of Man, etc. and
these can never be the Objects of Sense.

As Man excels all other Creatures as he is an intellectual and reasonable
Creature, ^hereby he honors God, is helpful to other Men, and preserves Peace
in Society; so on the contrary, Man above all other Creatures abounds in Pride,
Ambition, Arrogance, Malice, Revenge, Covetousness, and unlawful Lust, whereby
God becomes dishonored, and the Peace of Humane Society disturbed; so as it is
necessary in all Kingdoms and Countries, that these be restrained and punished
by Civil and Coercive Laws.

Laws are twofold, Divine and Humane; Divine Laws are twofold, viz. Natural,
and Supernatural revealed in the sacred Scriptures: Natural, which are presumed
to be alike engraven on the Mind of Man: Supernatural are those which Man obeys
by God's special Favor and Grace. Natural Laws are Affirmative and Negative;
Affirmative, That Man honor God above all Creatures, and that he converse
truly and uprightly with Man: Negative, That he do not blaspheme or dishonor
God, nor wrong, or deal falsely or deceitfully with another, neither in his
Intentions, Speech nor Actions: so that Civil Laws do not forbid Blasphemy, or
Immoral Speech and Actions, but indifferently in diverse Countries and Places
punish them.

I say the Law of Nature is alike inplanted in all Intelligible Creatures; for
where there is no Law, there is no Transgression nor Omission: And therefore if
all Men did not understand that Blasphemy, and Immoral Speech and Actions were
wicked, it would be Tyranny to punish them: So as Humane Judgment and Justice
are necessary for Preservation of Humane Society; and the End of Humane
Judgment and Justice, is, as well to restore them to Right who suffer
Wrongfully, as to punish Wrong-doers.

It Is fit here to distinguish between Knowledge and Belief; Knowledge is
immediate of those things and Actions which fall under the Sense of Man, and
therefore not learned or taught, but alike understood by all Men: And Verity
and true Speech is what a Man knows; whereas Belief is a Reliance upon what
another says to be true.

In all Legal Judgment upon which Justice is executed, Judges in Civil Affairs
assume two Premises, which are to be without Question or Dispute, viz. some
foreknown Law, and some Speech or Act done; so that if the Law and Fact be but
probable or uncertain, the Judgment will be less probable and more uncertain:
But in giving Judgment, Judges do not swear to their Opinions, but make some
Laws to be their Reasons of them.

A Promise is twofold, Affirmative and Negative, and is of time to come, and is
a Respecter of Persons. An Affirmative Promise, is a Speech or Writing, wherein
one or more assure another or more, upon their Truth or Faith to do such an
Act, in his or their Power, in some certain Time and Place; or to be
serviceable to another or more, for some time, or during Life, as they shall be
able: a Negative Promise is when one or more, upon their Truth or Faith, assure
another, not to do such an Act; and if the Parties mutually promise, this is a
Contract.

A Promissory Oath, is when one or more affix God's Name (which implies an
Imprecation of God's Judgment upon them) that they will do or not do, what they
promise: But sure Men who give Promissory Oaths, ought to be well assured they
can do what they promise; and ought (considering the Frailty of Humane Nature,
and the infinite intervening Accidents which they annot foresee, or if they
could, could not prevent) to implore God's Assistance to enable them to perform
their Promise. And I do say, and verily believe, that of all Men, those who
soonest make Promissory Oaths, do most break them; and that Men who are so
forward to make these Promissory Oaths by them, cover their Designs of
deceiving the other, more than of performing their Promise.

An Oath is so sacred, that as God will not have Divine Adoration, or Worship,
to be given to any other but himself, so neither will he have an Oath to be
taken by any other Name; not by the Sun, Moon, Earth, or all the Host of
Heaven. And if he will not hold him Guiltless who takes his Name in vain, how
will he hold him Guiltless who swears in vain? Thereby not only lessening the
Veneration due to his Name, but designing by it to deceive another.

In all my Observations, I never knew any Man, who made no Conscience of
Swearing, or taking God's Name in vain, but made less in taking care to perform
his Promises: And when I hear a Man begin with Swearing, (not duly called unto
it) I suspect he has either some Design in it, or that thereby he would create
a Belief to that which is not true.

But how Legally or Illegally soever these Promissory Oaths are imposed, I
never heard of any who was prosecuted for Perjury upon them, except Mr. Long,
Sheriff of Wilts, prosecuted in the Star Chamber, for that he had sworn (as all
Sheriffs do) not to go out of the County without leave from the King; yet being
chosen a Parliament Man, 3 Car. 1. came to serve in Parliament, for which he
pleaded the King's Writ, which was Leave from the King; and the Earl of Argyle,
about the Interpretation of the unintelligible Scottish Test. And I dare say,
That if the Oath of Allegiance to the King were but once taken, it would be
held in greater Veneration than by often taking it upon these Premises. Let Us
see whether the Corporation-Oath be an Assertory, or Promissory Oath, or
neither: And in regard it is in two Parts, consider both. The first is,

I A. B. do declare and believe, That it is not lawful upon any Pretense
whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King.

This Part of the Oath is not Promissory, and so an Assertory Negative Oath:
Here I will not dispute whether there can be a Negative Assertory Oath; yet I
do say such an Oath can never extend farther than to him who swears he does not
know what he is required to swear: But he can never swear that another does not
know it. So tho a Man may believe it is not Lawful for a Man to take Arms
against the King upon any Pretense whatsoever, yet he can never extend it
further than himself.

But I say this sort of Swearing destroys the Religion and End of an Assertory
Oath, which is only to what a Man knows certainly to be true; but no Man
certainly knows that an Opinion or Belief is certainly true: But tho by some
apparent Reason, or the Authority of another, I may be of an Opinion, or
Belief, yet upon clearer Reason and better Authority, I may alter my Opinion
and Belief, which a previous Assertory Oath can never oblige me to. In Justice
therefore an Assertory Oath, That I Believe, or am of Opinion, is not admitted,
unless he that testifies swears the Ground or Cause of his Belief or Opinion to
be certain and true of his own Knowledge.

I desire to know what were the Grounds or Reasons of this Corporation-Oath,
which every one ought to swear to be true of his own certain Knowledge, before
he believe it not to be lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms
against the King. Or, admit there might be Reason for this Belief, yet if the
Causes of this Belief were not before known to the Taker of this Oath, so as
the Taker knows them to be true of his certain Knowledge, this Oath, if any, is
Perjury.

The other Part of this Oath is, And I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his (the King's) Authority against his Person, or against those
who are commissionated by him. So help me God.

So that from swearing Negatively to Belief in the first part of this Oath, we
come to swear Affirmatively in this part of it: But this part not being
Promissory of Time to come, is an Assertory Oath too, if any, besides the
taking God's Name in vain, or worse.

An Assertory Oath is of what a Man knows to be certainly true, and what was
immediately the Object of Sense. Here a Man swears not that he knows, but
abhors: and what does he abhor? That Traitorous Position of taking Arms by the
King's Authority against his Person, or those commissionated by him. Is
Traitorous Position the Object of Sense, and immediate, so as the Swearer knows
what the meaning of Traitorous Position is? Which I believe not one of twenty
does: Or is not some Inference deduced from some Law or Usage, which cannot be
the Object of Sense, and so not to be sworn to?

The End of an Assertory Oath, is to inform the Judge and Jury, so that Justice
may be determined by it: but here is neither Judge nor Jury to inform: What can
be the end of this Swearing? Why, it is because otherwise the Swearer cannot be
a Member of the Corporation; but if I cannot take his Word, I Will not take his
Oath: And he that swears most to get Places, is least worthy of them. And I
dare say he so much less understands his Duty in any Place, by how much the
more he is ready to swear to get into it: And you will see that those Men who
are so ready to swear by this Oath which they did not understand, to get to be
Members of Corporations, shall be more ready to forswear themselves in giving
up their Charters, which they had sworn to maintain and keep, and which they
understood they ought to do.

Religion, Piety, Judgment, Justice and Righteousness, are the ways by which
God is honored, and Peace and Happiness established in Nations and Kingdoms:
And will God instead of these, suffer his Sacred Name to be prostituted by vain
Swearing, so as to pass unpunished? Did not the Prophet Hosea, Chapter 4. v. 3. of
old complain, That the Land mourned because of Oaths? And has not our Land
mourned ever since the Convocation, after the Dissolution of the Short
Parliament 1640, did enjoin the Oath, I A. B. swear that I approve the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to
Salvation, and will not consent to alter the Government in the Church, by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons, etc. to be taken by all the
Clergy? Was God well pleased that his Sacred Name should be affixed to such
Stuff? Or did this establish this Hierarchy? Did not the Parliament about a
Year after expel the Bishops out of the Lords House, and imprisoned their
Persons, and made them and all Deans and Archdeacons incapable of Temporal
Jurisdiction? And did not England and Scotland about two Years after join in a
Covenant, and swear to extirpate Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and
Archdeacons? Did not the Engagement expel the Covenant, and the Recognition to
Oliver out the Engagement, till Men neither regarded what they had sworn, nor
cared what they swore to? Monk before he came out of Scotland, caused the Scots
to abjure the King and his Interest: So in his coming to London, he did by the
Officers of the Irish Brigade, and the Rump died abjuring the King and Royal
Family; yet in less than four Months after the King was restored.

Before the Scots would admit the King to land in Scotland, the 23d of June
1650, they made him, with his Hands lifted up, swear in the Presence of
Almighty God, the Searcher of all Hearts, his Allowance and Approbation of the
National Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant, and Directories of Worship;
and not only to give his Royal Assent to Acts of Parliament enjoining the same
in all his Dominions, but to observe them in his private Family: And upon his
Coronation on the 11th of January 1651, repeated the same Oath. Yet how little
did this avail him, or the Covenanters? for in less than eight Months Cromwell
drove him and his Covenanters quite out of Scotland. And I dare say, the King
never after made use of them in his private Family, nor ever after give his
Assent to any Act of Parliament enjoining the Covenants, tho he were restored
to all his Dominions.

From swearing the Corporation-Oath, the Parliament proceeds, That all Members
of Corporations declare against the Solemn League and Covenant, in these words,
I A. B. do declare, That I hold there lies no Obligation upon me, or any other
Person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, and that
the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this
Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

This Declaration is as vain, and more wild than the Corporation-Oath; for it is
but matter of Belief or Opinion, and so no Issue can be taken upon it: but if
there could in him who declares, yet none can be taken upon that part which
declares there lies no Obligation upon another; and I Will put it upon this
Issue, that such a Declaration was never before enjoined by any Law.

And if the Covenant be an unlawful Oath in it self, because imposed by no
lawful Authority, yet I say that no Authority under Heaven can make the taking
God's Name in vain lawful, much less to take a vain or superfluous Oath.

From new invented swearing, and declaring to keep the King in the Kingdom, the
Church makes many new invented Prayers for him, especially that for the
Parliament, wherein they tell God that the King is their most Religious and
Gracious King; as if he were so, and God did not know it; and if he were not
so, to persuade God he was so.

De Jove quid sentis? Will God be mocked? Is not he Omniscient, and knows the
Secrets of every Man's Heart? Has he any need to be informed what Man is? Or
did this King's manner of Life induce the Church to inform God that he was most
Gracious, or full of Grace? Or his devout Behavior at his seldom Presence in
Divine Service, declare him to be most Religious? This King's Father and
Grand-father's Flatterers went no higher than to flatter them, that they were
bound by no Laws, and accountable to none but God for all their Actions, and
that their Subjects were bound to obey them in all, under Penalty of Damnation:
They never went about to persuade God they were most Religious and Gracious in
so doing.

The Parliament chimed in with the Church, and by the Act of Uniformity,
enjoin, That every one who holds an Ecclesiastical Promotion, shall publicly
declare before his Congregation his unfeigned Assent and Consent to every thing
contained and prescribed in the Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer,
etc. Put these together: I. A. B. do declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent,
That the King (Charles II.) is my most Religious and Gracious King: If he be
so, how came you to know it? And if you do not know it, how came you so
unfeignedly to assent and consent that he is so? But tho to get your Living you
tell the Congregation so, when you do not know it; I think it is dreadful for
you to tell God Almighty he is so, if you be not very well assured he is so.
But you will soon see what Care this King took of the Church of England, which
took such Care for him.

Was God well pleased with these things? You shall soon see unjust Wars and
dishonorable Peace: Such Judgments of Plague, Fire and Invasion into our
Ports, as never before were heard of: And tho God's Judgments were in the Land,
the People did not learn Righteousness, but continued a divided and factious
Nation, and a People laden with Iniquity: The Honor of the Nation not only
lost abroad, but a joining with a neighboring Faithless, Boundless and
Ambitious Prince, to the endangering the Subversion of the Religion,
Constitutions and Liberties of the English Nation. Now let us see what is doing
in Scotland.

If a Man reads Buchanan's and Drummond's History of Scotland, they will better
judge of General Monk's prudent Government and Conduct in it for eight Years
together: For from the Contest between Bruce and Baliol, for the Succession to
the Crown of Scotland, about the Year 1280, till James VI. came to the Crown of
England, I scarce find five Years Peace together in any of the Reigns between:
And if for some time the Scots were freed from open War, yet scarce at any time
were they freed from Feuds among the Nobility, or the Nobility at Discord and
Variance with their Kings.

After the Reformation of Religion in Scotland, which began in the first Year
of Queen Elizabeth, by her assisting the Nobility with an Army by Land, and a
Fleet by Sea, whereby the French sent by Henry the Second of France, (Father of
Francis the Dauphin, who had married Mary the Scottish Queen) to subdue Scotland
to a Conformity to the Romish Church, were outed; the Kirk of Scotland set up a
Jurisdiction as independent from the Civil as the Romish was, and held it up
during the Reign of Mary; and after they had expelled her, and chosen her Son
James King (about fourteen Months old) in the Regency of Murrey, they got their
Church Discipline established by Act of Parliament: This was in the Year 1567.

The Kirk being possessed of this Power during the Minority of King James, and
several of the Nobility having got a great share of the Crown Lands of
Scotland, the King upon his Majority was so poor, that he was not in a
Condition to keep up the State of a King, much less to curb the Insolence of
the Kirk, the Nobility who had got the Crown Lands joining with them.

Tho Queen Elizabeth did not love the Kirk-Party, yet was she content to have
Scotland in this State; for thereby she preserved the English Borders free from
the Depredations which the Scots usually made upon them, and therefore secretly
countenanced both the King and Nobility, who had got the Crown Lands; However
ever she allowed the King a Pension yearly, whereby she kept the King, as well
as Kirk and Nobility, depending upon her.

In this State England and Scotland stood till the Death of Queen Elizabeth;
but it was ill timed of King Charles I. to grant Commissions to enquire into
the Crown Lands usurped in his Father's Minority, and soon after to endeavor
to set up Laud's Injunctions, and High Commission in Scotland, which made the
Nobility as well as Kirk so fierce in opposing them.

King Charles, offended at the Proceedings of the Parliament of England in
1641, goes into Scotland, and establishes the Kirk in all their Pretensions,
and disclaims all Title to the Crown Lands usurped in his Father's Minority,
which no ways mollified either: But next Year the Scots sent an Army under
Lesley (made an Earl by the King) against him in Aid of the English Parliament:
But tho the Kirk and Nobility were thus insolent against their Kings, they
patiently submitted to Monk during his Government in Scotland, except some few
Disturbances made by General Middleton.

For neither Cromwell nor the Rump before him, trusted to the Scottish Oaths, or
Solemn League and Covenant, but after they had subdued them, bridled them with
Forts built upon the principal Passages of Scotland, and disarmed all the
Nobility and Gentry, and thereby kept them in Peace, which King Charles by all
the Condescensions he submitted to, could not procure. And hereto, that the
common sort of Scots lived in more Freedom under Monk, than under their Lords
and Lairds; so that neither the Kirk or Nobility could form the Body of an Army
against the English.

Before the King was restored, the Army which would have kept him out was
dissipated the Year before by Monk, and after his Restoration was disbanded,
and so the English Nation was restored to its former Government: But it was not
so in Scotland, for not only the Forts which bridled them, but the Army which
conquered them, was still kept up. Nor had the Scots any hopes of being freed
from these Fetters, but by an entire Submission to the King.

Upon the King's Restoration, many Debates were in the Council in England,
about the calling a Parliament in Scotland, and the demolishing the Forts for
keeping the Scots in Subjection; but neither were so easily determined, for in
all Scotland after Montross was butchered, I do not find there was one of the
Nobility, except his Son, which were not Popish or Presbyterian; and the
Presbyterian Party had been so rigid against the King when he was in Scotland,
and intolerable to his Father, that above a Year past before any Resolution was
taken in either.

Lauderdale, as before said, was taken Prisoner after the Fight at Worcester,
and from that time kept Prisoner in Windsor-Castle, from whence he was set free
upon the King's Restoration, but became so poor, that it is said he could not
meet the King, for want (...) Money to pay for a Pair of Boots.

This Imprisonment was doubly happy to him: for during the Restraint of his
Body, he enlarged the Faculties of his Mind; and being a Man of Parts, improved
them by Contemplation and Study, wherein he met with more Helps than it may be
he could have found in Scotland; whereby he became of greater Abilitie^ to
serve the King, than could be found in any other of his Countrymen; and being
in England, found better Opportunities to have them known to the King, than any
of his absent Countrymen could.

In the late Wars between the King and Parliament, he, with Sir John Cheesley,
were ordered Commissioners by the Kirk-Faction to the Parliament in England,
for propagating the Presbyterian Government: But this being most detestable at
Court, Lauderdale to raise himself, set himself with all his Skill to oppose
it; and by it, at first, got to be made Principal Secretary of State of
Scotland: and as Runnagadoes from Christianity, become the greatest Persecutors
of Christians, so was Lauderdale of the Kirk and Presbyterian Government.
However, Lauderdale seemed zealous for calling a Parliament in Scotland, and
demolishing the Forts tha^ bridled the Scots, which Monk opposed: and hereby
Lauderdale became popular in Scotland; so that all Applications to the King
from thence was by Lauderdale.

In this state it was not easily determined who should be Commissioner in
Scotland, in case a Parliament should be called; for Affairs were not yet ripe
enough to make a Popish one, nor would the Court trust a Presbyterian one: and
Lauderdale would not forsake his Post at Court, where he governed all, but
continue it that all the Motions in Parliament might receive their Life from
him. At last it was agreed, That Middleton (who first served the Kirk against
King Charles I. and after changing Sides, made some Bustle in Scotland, after
the King left it) should be created an Earl, and made Commissioner, and a
Parliament should be called in Scotland.

The Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, clearly saw there was no other way to
redeem Scotland from being a conquered Nation, and a Province to England, but
by an entire Submission to the King. Lauderdale knew this as well as they, and
therefore resolved to make them pay dear for their Deliverance; and now you
shall see the Nobility and Gentry, which with the Kirk united against King
Charles I. divide under his Son, and sacrifice the Kirk and all their
Discipline, to make an Atonement for themselves. The first Act which was showed
herein, was upon this Occasion.

The fiery Zeal of the Kirk-men burnt up all Rules of Prudence, or the
Consideration of the present State of Scotland; so that even in this state,
Crowns and Scepters must submit to the Kirk. And that the King might know his
Duty, a Company of them met together, and drew up a Supplication (as they said)
but in nature of a Remonstrance to the King, setting forth the Calamities they
groaned under in the Time of the Usurpers, by their impious Encroachments upon
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Liberties thereof; which of themselves
they were not able to suppress and overcome: and the Danger of the Popish and
Prelatical Party now beginning again to lift up their Head, they press him to
mind his ^aths and Covenant with God, etc.

The Committee of Estates well knowing how ungrateful this would be to the
King, upon the 23d of August 1660. sent a Party and apprehended these Men,
whereof one Mr. James Guthry was the chief, (of whom you will hear more
hereafter) and committed them Prisoners to Edinburgh-Castle, and from thence
Guthry was sent Prisoner to Dundee, for treasonable and seditious reflecting on
his Majesty, and on the Government of England, and the Constitution of the
Committee of State, and tending to raise new Tumults, and kindling a new Civil
War among his Majesty's good Subjects.

This was the first Spark, which soon burnt into such a Flame, as totally
consumed the whole Kirk-Party in Scotland, and left them in a much worse plight
than before, when they suffered under the Usurpation (as they called it) of the
English.

For during the late Usurpations, the Kirk enjoyed a Liberty of Conscience: but
it is the Nature of some Men, that unless they may persecute other Men, they will
exclaim they are persecuted themselves; and therefore (since they were not able
to do it themselves) they minded the King of his Covenant with God, to
extirpate Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, and to remove the stumbling which
the King had given them, in admitting Prelacy, Ceremonies, and Service Book in
the King's Chapel, and other Places of his Dominions.

But these Men were mistaken in their Measures; for after the King was expelled
from Scotland by Cromwell, he little (I may say never) observed the Directory of
Worship, Confession of Faith, and Catechisms in his Family, according to the
National and Solemn League and Covenant, as he repeated in his Coronation Oath,
and less the establishing Presbyterian Government in England and Ireland, and
least of all in Scotland.

For one of the first Acts of the first Sessions, was an Anniversary
Thanksgiving, to be observed on every May 29, with this Proem.

The States of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, taking into their
Consideration, the sad Condition, Slavery and Bondage, this ancient Kingdom has
groaned under these twenty three Years (the time when the Troubles arose in K.
Charles the First's Reign) in which, under very specious Pretenses of
Reformation, a public Rebellion has been, by the Treachery of some, and
Misperswasion of others, violently carried on against sacred Authority, to the
Ruin and Destruction, so far as was possible, of Religion, this King's Majesty,
and his Royal Government, the Laws, Liberties, and Property of the People, and
all the public and private Interests of the Kingdom; so that Religion it self
has been prostituted for the Warrant of all these treasonable Invasions made
upon the Royal Authority, and disloyal Limitations upon the Allegiance of the
Subjects: Therefore upon the 29th of May be set apart for an Holy Day, etc. Yet
soon after the King's Restoration, he wrote to the Presbytery of Edinburgh,
promising to countenance the Church as by Law established: But Lauderdale knew
his Mind better.

Here it is observable, That in 1638, when the Kirk were so zealous, with
lifted-up Hands in the Presence of the Eternal God, to swear to establish their
National Covenant, there was not one of the Nobility (but the Popish) except
the Marquess of Hamilton, and the Earl of Traquair, but joined with the Kirk,
expressly against the King's Command: Traquair, the Kirk-Party proceeded against
as an Incendiary; and after, Hamilton secretly joined with the Covenanters, for
which King Charles I. made him Prisoner in Pendennis-Castle; from whence he was
discharged when Fairfax had it surrendered: And not one of the Nobility (except
Argile and Cassels) but declare this, and all the Kirk-Proceedings since,
Treasonable Rebellion against the Laws, Liberties, and Property of the People,
and Prostitution of Religion; and this Declaration was celebrated with a double
Sacrifice, the Marquess of Argile being executed as a Traitor, for holding
Correspondence with Cromwell, and his Head set where Montross's stood on the
Monday before; and Mr. Guthry, on Saturday after, for refusing to own the
Jurisdiction of the Judges in Ecclesiastical Affairs, had his Head set upon one
of the Ports of Edinburgh.

This was a sad Presage to the Kirk of what followed: For as they, without the
King, would impose their Solemn League and Covenant upon England; now, by the
King and Parliament, an Oath of Allegiance (in the very Nature, if not the
Words, of the Oath of Supremacy in England) is imposed upon them; wherein they
are to swear, That the King is the supreme Governor over all Persons, and in
all Causes, etc. and, That they will maintain, defend, and assist his Majesty's
Jurisdiction aforesaid, against all deadly Enemies; and shall never decline his
Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as they shall answer it to God. And all
Persons who refuse to take this Oath, to be incapable of any public Trust, and
to be looked upon as Persons disaffected to his Majesty's Authority and
Government.

And the 11th Act of the first Session says, That it is the inherent Privilege
of the Crown, and undoubted Prerogative of the Kings of Scotland, to have the
sole Power of choosing Officers of State, etc. and of holding and dissolving
Parliaments, etc. and, That it is High Treason in any of the Subjects, to make
Leagues with Foreigners, or among themselves, without his Majesty's Authority
first had, etc. And therefore the League and Covenant, and all Treaties
thereon, are not obligatory; and that none presume to require, or renew the
swearing the said League and Covenant.

The next Act (I cannot say of Parliament, for it was purely arbitrary) was the
total rooting out the Presbyterian Government in Scotland, and upon this
Occasion.

Mr. James Sharp, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Farwell, Mr. Leighton, (but whether sent for
by the King, or sent by the Kirk-Party, I do not find) came in 1661 to London,
and were ordained Deacons and Presbyters, and after consecrated Bishops by the
Bishop of Winchester, and two other Bishops: The Acceptance of which was a
Renunciation of their Presbyterian Ordination; nay, it was a Declaration of the
Invalidity of their former Ordination: and thereupon, the King, on the 6th of
September 1661, issued out a Proclamation, declaring his Royal Pleasure to be
for the restoring the Government of the Church of Scotland to be by
Archbishops and Bishops, as it was exercised in the Year 1637; and that he had
nominated and presented Archbishops and Bishops to their several Bishoprics,
and to have the same Authority they had in the Reign of his Grandfather. Thus
you see the Presbyterian Government, which was set up by such odd swearing,
without the King, is by his sole Authority utterly subverted.

In Obedience to this Proclamation, the Privy Council, the 9th of January
following, did discharge all Ecclesiastical Meetings in Synods, Presbyteries,
and Sessions, until they be authorized by the Archbishops and Bishops, upon
their Entry into the Government of their respective Sees; which was to be done
speedily.

Tho this Proclamation, and Intimation of the Privy Council, had prevented the
Parliament, yet, to make sure Work of both, the Parliament, in their second
Sessions, Redintegrated the Bishops to the Exercise of their Episcopal
Function, and to all their Privileges, Dignities, Jurisdictions, and
Possessions, due, and formerly belonging thereunto.

And another Act did ordain all Ministers to repair unto their Diocesan
Assembly, and concur in all Acts of Church Discipline, as they should be
thereunto required by the Archbishops, or Bishops of the Diocese, under pain
of being suspended from their Office and Benefice till the next Diocesan
Meeting for their first Fault: and if they amended not, to be deprived, and the
Church to be declared vacant.

In the Year 1649, (when there was no King in Israel) the Parliament, at the
Instance of the Kirk, by the 39th Act, Discharge all Patrons, and the King not
excepted, from Presentations to Church-Benefices, for that the Estates of
Parliament were sensible of the great Obligations that lie upon them by the
National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, and by many Deliverances
and Mercies from God, and by the late solemn Engagement unto Duties, to
preserve the Doctrine, and vindicate the Liberties of the Kirk of Scotland, and
advance the Work of Reformation therein to the utmost of their Power: And
considering that Patronage and Presentation of Kirks is an Evil and Bondage,
under which the Lord's People, and Ministers of the Land, have long groaned;
and that it has no Warrant in God's Word, but founded on the Common Law, and
is a Custom Popish, and brought into the Kirk in time of Ignorance and
Superstition; and that the same is contrary to the 2d Book of Discipline, in
which, upon solid and good Grounds, it is reckoned among the Abuses that are to
be reformed, and unto several Acts of the General Assembly; and that it is
prejudicial to the Liberties of the People, and planting of Kirks, and unto the
free calling and entering of Ministers unto their Charge.

This Act did not hold long, for next Year Cromwell entered Scotland, and
overturned all the Tables of Presbytery: nor was this much mended after the
King's Restoration; for in the second Session of the first Parliament, 1662,
the Parliament did ordain All Ministers who had entered to the Cure of any
Parish, within Burgh or Land, in, or since the Year of God 1649, to have no
Right unto, or up-lift the Rents of their respective Benefices, modified
Stipends, Marsh or Glebe, for this instant Year 1662, nor for the Year
following, unless they should obtain a Presentation from the lawful Patron, and
have Collation from the Bishop of the Diocese where he lives, before the 20th
of September next.

Tho the High Commission which Laud so zealously endeavored to erect in
Scotland, was put down by Act of Parliament 1641. in England, yet the King, by
the inherent Right of his Crown, and by the Virtue of his Prerogative Royal,
and supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, erected one in Scotland: The
Commissioners were partly Ecclesiastics, and partly Laymen; who, or five of
them, whereof one to be a Bishop, had a more arbitrary Power over the Clergy,
than was practiced in England under Laud, and more than Laud could have
expected for a High Commission for Scotland in the King's Father's Reign.

Thus you see the Kirk, which would be a distinct Table, and independent upon
the Crown of Scotland, are by the Prerogative of it committed to the arbitrary
Mercy of the Prelates, whom, for above 24 Years, they had been railing against,
and by many Oaths swear to extirpate.

But the Tribulations of the Kirk, for the time to come, do not end here; for
the Parliament resolve to stigmatize them for their Actions past, and therefore
upon the 5th of September 1662, they form a Declaration to be subscribed by all
who shall have any public Charge, Office, and Trust within the Kingdom, in
these Words.

I -- do sincerely affirm and declare, That I judge it unlawful for Subjects,
upon Pretense of Reformation, or any other Pretense whatsoever, to enter into
Leagues and Covenants, or to take up Arms against the King, or those
Commissionated by him; and that all these Gatherings, Convocations, Petitions,
Protestations, and erecting and keeping Counsel-Tables, that were used in the
beginning, and for carrying on the late Troubles, were unlawful and seditious:
and particularly, That those Oaths, whereof the one is called the National
Covenant, (as it was sworn and explained in the Year 1638, and thereafter) and
the other entitled, A Solemn League and Covenant, were, and are in themselves,
unlawful Oaths; and were taken by, and imposed upon the Subjects of this
Kingdom, against the Laws and Liberties of the same; and that there lies no
Obligation upon me, or any of the Subjects, from the said Oaths, or either of
them, to endeavor any Change or Alteration of the Government, either in Church
or State, as it is now established by the Laws of the Kingdom.

Thus you see the Parliament throw this upon the Son, which his Father so
zealously contended for, even to the Loss of his Life: and when they had done
all they could, the Son little cared for what they had done.

For the Year after, viz. 1663, the King granted a Toleration, and Indulgence
to Dissenters from the Church. Thinking Men thought this strange, that the King
should the Year before pass the Act of Uniformity, as the best Means to secure
the Church against Popery and Fanaticism, and in this grant a Toleration. It
could not be in Favor of them termed Fanatics, who kept him from his Crown;
and last Year Venner with his Party, would have expelled him again: And this
Year, Swarms of Pamphlets were spread abroad, to defame his Person and
Government: For printing some of which, Twyn the Printer was hanged.

Thinking Men considered too the time when this Indulgence was granted: for as
the King in the Sale of Dunkirk, chose to do it in the Interval of the Sitting
of the Parliament, so he did grant this Indulgence (I think) in November, when
the Parliament was prorogued to February.

But tho the Parliament would take no notice of the Sale of Dunkirk, they did
of this; and therefore the Commons upon their Meeting, entered into a serious
Debate about it, and made an Address to the King, humbly representing, How it
would reflect upon the Wisdom of the Parliament, to have such an Alteration
made so soon, and that for ought they could foresee, would end in Popery: And
sure the Commons were true Prophets herein.

However, whether the King fearing the Continuance of the Indulgence might
retard the Commons in giving him Money, or that time was not yet ripe enough to
insist upon it at present, he recalled his Declaration: So that tho the King
did establish a High Commission in Scotland, by his Prerogative Inherent in his
Crown, which the Parliament agreed to in Scotland; yet this Indulgence had not
the like Effect in England.

This Indulgence may seem more strange, if we look into Ireland, where the
Irish this very Year were contriving a Massacre of the Protestants, and holding
Intelligence with the French King, which you may read at large in Plunket's
Trial, and this proved by Popish Witnesses. I do not find the Irish had any
Countenance herein by the King; nor do I believe the French King acquainted his
Brother of England with it: Yet the Insincerity of the King's Intentions of any
Benefit the Protestant Dissenters should have by this Indulgence, will appear
by this, that when the Parliament, seeing the Danger which the Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters might bring upon the Nation, had prepared Bills for the
Ease of Protestant Dissenters, the King would not pass them.

However the Memory of the Rage and Tyranny of the late Times took deeper
Impression in the Parliament, than the Fear of Popery, intended by the King's
Toleration and Indulgence, and therefore the Parliament from new invented
Swearing, and new invented Declaring, proceed to new invented Laws against
Dissenters and Conventicles; and the Act of the 16 Car. 2. c. 4. does declare
the 35 of Eliz. c. 1. to stand in full Force, and ought to be put in Execution:
and did also enact, That if any Number above Five more than the Family shall
meet in any Assembly or Conventicle, upon Color or Pretense of Religion, in
any other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England, he shall be committed Prisoner for the first Offense, there to remain
for a Term not exceeding three Months, unless such Offender shall pay a Sum of
Money, not exceeding Five Pounds; for the second Offense, to be committed to
Prison for a Term, not exceeding Six Months, or pay a Sum not exceeding Ten
Pounds; and for the third Offense to be transported beyond the Seas for the
Space of seven Years, unless he pay one hundred Pounds.

I will not dispute the Justice of these Laws; but I say, no Human Laws can
divest Men of Human Nature, but that Man as well as all other Creatures, will
endeavor by such Means as they are endued with, to preserve their Being and
Subsistence in this World. And herein I again observe the unhappy State of this
Nation in the Education of Youth in the Grammar-Schools, and our Academical
Learning, (as it is called:) For tho a great Part of the Youth of England have
Means to maintain them, after they have lost their time of Youth, under this
unprofitable Breeding, whereby they are no way instructed how to live and
converse in this World; yet double, if not treble Numbers of Youth, are thus
bred, who have little or no Means to maintain them after they become Men, and
more than can be maintained by the Revenues of the Church, as they are
established.

I say therefore, this kind of Breeding Youth, shall eternally create Feuds,
and a kind of Civil War, between those who are in Church-Preferments, and those
excluded from them; and these for their necessary Subsistence, shall become
Patrons of Factions opposite to the Church, within the Kingdom, and to the
promoting the Popish Interest without. In the late Times, when the
Presbyterians bare the Sway* were there not enough of that Party to supply the
Vacancies of the Sequestered Clergy; besides such Swarms of the Patrons of
Independency, as were more numerous than they, and who turned them out: Yet was
there a large Relick for to promote the Popish Faction. Upon the Restoration of
the King, when the Sequestered Clergy were restored, were there not Multitudes
of such Clergy as would have conformed, yet could not get any Preferment in the
Church? Thus excluded, what other means had they to subsist, but to become
Nurseries of Factions, which were opposite to the Church? and tho these Laws
were intended against Protestant Dissenters, who had no other means of living
but dissenting, yet you shall soon hear of another Sort of Dissenters; and
these secretly countenanced by this most Religious and Gracious King, which
shall be much more dangerous to this Church and State, than those against whom
these Laws were made. And I say, the Unreasonableness of Separation from the
Communion of the Church of England will no more prevent this, than Origines
Sacrae, by not only confounding, but inverting all Rules and Methods of
Reasoning, prove a Deity, or the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, thereby
making them the Creatures of a Creature, and the Production of a Fantastic
Brain.

CHAP. II.
A further Account of this Reign, to the End of the Second Dutch War.
THe King being thus established in England and Scotland, tho he was not so in
Ireland, this Year shows the Effects of his Power by making a War upon the
Dutch; and even this War 'twas believed, was carried on by French Counsels: For
so long as the English and Dutch stood united, it would be very difficult, if
not impossible, for the French King to increase his Grandeur, either by Sea or
Land, if the English and Dutch should oppose it. However, the outward
Appearance seemed otherwise on the French Part: for in the Favor of the Dutch,
he made War upon the English, tho to no Benefit of the Dutch, other than by the
influence of his Party upon the English Counsels. But to return his Courtesy,
the Dutch during this War built him six great Men of War; and the Dane joining
with the Dutch and French against the English, built the French as many more;
so that whilst the English and Dutch were fighting with one another to destroy
their Men of War, the French King looked on, and without fighting increased his.

The English and Dutch had been above Eighty Years Competitors in the
East India, African and American Trades; so that if either had a mind to
quarrel, it would not be hard to find an Occasion for it. Queen Elizabeth kept
so severe a Hand over the Dutch, that they durst not presume to give the
English any Cause of Offense during her Reign; nor do I find the English gave
them any in King James's Reign: Yet the Dutch gave the English a most
abominable one, in the Business of Amboyna.

The World taking notice of the Vast Power at Sea, and Wealth which the Dutch
acquired by the Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scotland; King Charles
I. required a Tribute or Acknowledgment from them about the Year 1630, as a
Right belonging to his Crowns of England and Scotland. The Dutch were resolved
not to part with their Fishery, and unwilling to pay the King any
Acknowledgment for it; and instead of Payment, set Hugo Grotius to work, with
his Pen to discharge it: Which he did in a little Treatise, called Mare Liberum.

The King to vindicate his Sovereignty, set Mr. Seldom, (then at ill Terms with
him, for I think he was a Prisoner in the Tower, for not submitting the Debates
in Parliament to the Cognizance of the Council Table and Court of King's Bench)
to write Mare Clausum, in Answer to Grotius's Mare Liberum: Yet this is
observable, how much the Dutch Interest governed their Reason; for soon after,
(I will not say the certain time) in all their Manifesto's in the East Indies,
the Dutch styled themselves Sovereigns of the Southern Seas: And, as such,
you will hear how they exercised their Sovereignty over the English.

But King Charles (though he raised Ship Money upon Pretense of suppressing
Pirates, and for Safety of the Nation) in May 1636, issued out a Proclamation,
forbidding the Dutch and all Foreign Nations Fishing upon the Coasts of England
and Scotland; which the Dutch little regarding, set out for this Fishery
notwithstanding: Whereupon the King commanded the Earl of Northumberland, with
a Fleet of sixty Men of War, to take an Account of their Disobedience. The Earl
with this Fleet, fell in upon the Dutch, and dispersed them, and cut their
Nets, so as the Dutch were forced to seek for Shelter in the King's Harbors;
where they were detained till they made a Composition to pay the King Thirty
Thousand Pounds sterling yearly, for License to fish: And this was all the
Action done, by raising Ship Money for the Safety of the Nation, (whereof the
King was sole Judge) and for Suppressing Pirates.

The Dutch in return, next Year, or the Year after, upon Pretense of taking in
fresh Water, seize upon New York in Long Island in America, and change the Name
into New-Amsterdam. But at this time things were in highest Ferment, both in
England and Scotland, about establishing Laud's Injunctions in England, and
erecting a High Commission in Scotland, by the King's Supreme Ecclesiastical
Power, which the King was so intent upon, that he neglected to call the Dutch
to an Account for the Surprisal of New York.

In the Year 1643, the Dutch, by Virtue of their Sovereignty in the Southern
Seas, by one Geland, in a Hostile Manner, between Goa and Maccao, in the
Straits of Malacca, made Prey of the Bona Esperanza, and spoiled her of all her
Tackle, Apparel, Furniture, and all the Goods and Lading in her, in her Return
of a very hopeful Voyage from China, and carried them to Batavia, where without
due Process of Law, they were confiscated: and the same Year, the Ship called
the Henry Bonadventura, being come on Ground near the Island Mauritius, was
seized with all her Goods and Lading, by the Dutch East India Company, and kept
from the Owners: And these Actions, both in the East and West Indies, were done
in time of Peace between England and Holland.

These Ships were set out by the Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir William Courten, Sir
Paul Pindar and others, by Virtue of a New Charter granted by King Charles the
First, in the Year 1635, and had laid the Foundation of a much more
advantageous Trade for the English, than that of the English East India
Company: For the Northern and middle Parts of China, are cold or temperate, and
so our Woollen Manufactures would have been very acceptable to them; whereas
they are of little Use in the Southern Parts of India, and all the Islands in
the Indian Ocean, which lie in the Torrid Zone.

The Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir Paul Pindar, and Sir William Courten, being
Royalists, took no Care for Satisfaction in the late times: Nor do I find the
Rump made any of these the Causes of the War between the Dutch and them; nor
did Oliver in the Peace he made with the Dutch, take any Notice of these
Violences used by the Dutch against the English, or the Honor of the Nation;
yet he would not by his Peace, discharge the Dutch from the Business of
Amboyna, but this was referred, 'twas said, to the Cantons of Switzerland, to
be determined by them; but was never after regarded.

But King Charles II. being at better Terms with his Parliament and Subjects
than his Father, the next Year after his Restoration, viz. 1661, sent Sir
Robert Holmes with a Squadron of Men of War, and some Soldiers to America, with
which he reduced New York, and all that which the Dutch had taken from the
English in Long Island: And from thence Sir Robert Holmes sailed to Africa, and
took Cape Verd, and some other Places, where the English had Factories.

And about the same time, the Earl of Shrewsbury, with William Courten,
(Grandson of Sir William) and the Executors and Creditors of Sir Paul Pindar,
represented their Case to the King; who by Letters under the King's Signet
Manual, demanded Reparations of the States for these Depredations, by Sir
George Downing the King's Envoy, without any Satisfaction.

Thus things stood, when the Algerines being at War with the English and Dutch,
the Dutch by their Ambassador, desired the King in 1663, to join a Squadron of
Ships with the Dutch, to reduce the Algerines to better Terms, which the King
did, and sent a Squadron under Sir John Lawson to that end: And the Dutch sent
another commanded by De Ruiter seemingly, but not designedly, for to join Sir
John against the Algerines.

For De Ruiter after he had entered the Straits, abandoned Sir John Lawson, and
sailed to Cape Verd, and dispossessed the English of their Factories, nor did
he stay there; but sailing thence, he attempted Barbados, but was beaten off
with loss: But with better Success he sailed to Long Island, where he made
great Depradations.

This Double-dealing of the Dutch alarmed the Parliament, so as they petitioned
the King to make War upon the Dutch, and the King was well disposed to it;
(having before designed it, as many thought, and so took this Occasion for it:)
nor were the City of London less forward than the Parliament for promoting this
War; and upon that Account furnished the King with several Sums of Money, for
which both Houses gave the City Thanks, upon the Twenty Fifth of November, 1665.

The King the Day before, made this Speech to the Commons. Mr. Speaker, and you
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I know not whether it be worth my Pains to
endeavor to remove a vile Jealousy which some ill Men scatter abroad, and
which I am sure will never sink into the Breast of any Man who is worthy to sit
upon your Benches; that when you have given me a Noble and Proportionable
Supply for the Support of a War, I may be induced by some evil Counselors,
(for they will be thought to think very respectfully of my Person) to make a
sudden Peace, and get all the Money for my own Private Occasions.

But let me tell you, and you may be confident of it, That when I am compelled
to enter into a War for the Protection, Honor and Benefit of my Subjects, I
will (God willing) not make a Peace, but upon the obtaining and securing those
Ends for which the War is entered into; and when that can be done, no good Man
will be sorry for the Determination of it. But the War was not declared till
the 22d of February following: But here I observe, that neither my Lord
Chancellor Hide, nor my Lord Treasurer Southampton were present in Council at
it.

It may seem strange to any Man conversant in our Government, that the King in
less than four Years and a half after his Restoration, should be in such a
Necessity of borrowing such Sums of Money of the City; for the disbanding of
the Army was paid by the Convention and Parliament, and the Parliament had
settled the Excise on him, which was cessed at 500000 l. per Annum, and the
Customs at 600000 l. and Chimney-Money worth 150000 l. per Annum, and 12 Car.
2. c. 26. granted the King the Arrears of twelve Months Assessment, commencing
the 25th of December 1659, and (C. 29.) gave the King 70000 l. and (C. 34.)
also the Post Office, worth 50000 l. per Annum; and in the 13 Car. 2. cap. 3.
vested in the King the Arrears of the Excise and new Imposts; and in the second
Session (Cap. 3.) the Parliament gave the King 1270000 l. and (Cap. 5.) a
voluntary Contribution, and (C. 8.) gave the poor Cavaliers 60000 l. that the
King might never hear more of them; and (C. 9.) granted a further Relief for
the poor and maimed Officers which had served the King's Father; and also (Cap.
15.) four entire Subsidies by the Laity and four by the Clergy, besides all the
forfeited Estates both in England and Ireland.

So that the Excise, Customs, Chimney-Money, Post Office and forfeited Estates,
at a moderate Computation, may be computed at 1600000 l. per Annum, a new
Addition to the Crown which Queen Elizabeth had not; only the Court of Wards
was exchanged for part of the Hereditary Excise. And, if you compute but six
Months Arrear of the twelve Months Assessment at 70000 l. per Mensem, beginning
at Christmas 1659, this will amount to 420000 l. and the Arrears of the Excise
and new Impost at 300000 l. and 70000 l. granted the King, 12 Car. I. 29. and
the 1270000 l. 13 Car. II. 3. and the voluntary Contribution at 300000 l. and
the four Subsidies granted by the Clergy and Laity at 400000 l. besides the new
added Revenue of 1600000 l. per Annum to the Crown, the King in less than four
Years and a half received 2860000 l. or two Millions eight hundred and sixty
thousand Pounds.

Yet the King paid no Debts of his Father's, nor do I find he built any new Men
of War, nor made any War except that last Year against the Algerines: It Is
true, he married his Sister, but had twice her Portion of the French King for
the Sale of Dunkirk, and also 400000 l. Portion with the Queen. Now let us see
how things stood in Scotland.

During the Earl of Middleton's Commission, the Parliament of Scotland granted
the King so great a Revenue, that the King signified his Pleasure not to raise
any more; but tho Middleton in the general Opinion had done more in Scotland
than could have been expected, yet Lauderdale thought he had not done enough,
and therefore got the Parliament to be dissolved, and a new one to be called in
1663, and the Earl of Rothes (the Ringleader of the Presbyterians in the Reign
of Charles the First, and was the first that subscribed the Letter to Lewis the
XIII th for his Aid, by the Appellation of Au Roy) to be made Commissioner.

The King's Supremacy in all Ecclesiastial and Civil Matters, and so great a
Revenue as the King could ask being settled by Middleton, one would have
thought no more could be done; yet another Law must be passed, entitled the
Humble Tender: Whereby the Kingdom of Scotland is obliged to raise the King
twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse sufficiently armed, and furnished
with forty days Provision, to be in a readiness at his Majesty's Call: And also
that all Scots-Men from sixteen to sixty, if the King should have further use
of them, should hazard their Lives and Fortunes, as they shall he called by his
Majesty, for the Safety and Preservation of his Sacred Person, Authority and
Government, to march into any part of Scotland, England or Ireland, for the
suppressing any Foreign Invasion, or Intestine Troubles, or any other Service
wherein his Majesty's Honor, etc. was concerned: And this Law it may be was
the Equivalent for which the Forts were demolished. Tho Rothes was Commissioner
when the Act passed, yet Lauderdale assumed to himself the Glory of it; and
it is observable, this Act passed the same Year, and about the same time the
King issued out his Declaration of Indulgence to the Dissenters in England.

Thus you see, as the Parliament of Scotland outrun the Parliament of England
in Loyalty to the King, so at least they went hand in hand with them in
grauting the King more Aids than he would ask of the Subjects of his ancient
Kingdom.

Never had Kings of England or Scotland their Debts so easily paid, or was one
tenth part so highly caressed by their Subjects in a time of Peace. Was it not
strange then that the King should be in such Necessities for Money, as to
borrow such great Sums of the City for carrying on this hasty War before the
Parliament should meet to supply him?

Whereas when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, her Revenue, besides the Court
of Wards, and the Duchy of Lancaster, was but 188179 l. per Annum, and the
Crown left in Debt by her Father, Brother and Sister (which she afterward
paid;) and for the four first Years of her Reign, the Parliament gave her but
one Subsidy and two Fifteens about 120000 l. Yet in these Years she fitted up
her Navy Royal, so as it was not only superior to those of all the
Neighboring Nations, but of any Prince in the World; and also sent a Fleet and
Land-Army into Scotland, with which she expelled the French out of it. And the
Parliament in the fifth Year of her Reign gave her but another Subsidy, and two
Fifteens, wherewith she assisted the Princes of the Reformed Religion in
France: Whereas the Parliament in the fifth Year of this King's actual Reign,
gave him 2467500 l. for carrying on the War against the Dutch.

I will not dispute the Justice of this War, yet sure never was any made with
such Precipitancy and Inconsideration both abroad and at home: for as the King
entered into no Alliances or Confederations abroad in it; so on the contrary,
France and Denmark (our next Neighboring Nations) joined with the Dutch
against the King; and that tho the Spaniard stood Neuter in it, yet the King
had little reason to expect any Benefit from him, having been so used in the
King's Sale of Dunkirk to the French, and joining with the Portuguese and
French against the Spaniard.

And as the King had made no Foreign Alliances abroad, so had he not laid up
any Naval Stores at home; and, which is worse, he had the Act of Navigation
(tho made by the Rump, yet the Parliament 13 Car. II. confirmed it, or set the
Royal Stamp upon it) to struggle with to supply himself with Naval Stores for
carrying on the War.

For the Rump were as hasty in making the Act of Navigation, as the King was in
entering into this War, and made it general, without any Consideration of Time,
either in War or Peace: and herein their Zeal to make this Law outrun their Wit
or Memory; for these very Men about ten Years ago, viz. 16 Car. I. 21. (which
yet stands unrepealed) taking notice of the manifold Mischiefs, tho in time of
Peace, which happened by reason the Importation of Gunpowder was prohibited,
contrary to Law, viz. That the Price of Gunpowder was excessively raised, many
Powder-Mills decayed, the Kingdom much weakened and endangered, the Merchants
much damnified, many Mariners and others taken Prisoners and brought into
miserable Captivity and Slavery, many Ships taken by Turkish Pirates, and many
other Inconveniences thereby ensued, and like to ensue: Therefore this Act made
the Importation of Gunpowder, Saltpeter, and Brimstone free to Strangers as
well as Natives, and a Praemunire to hinder it. Whereas in this War, if the
East India Company shall set double or treble the Price upon Saltpeter, or if
their Ships should miscarry, yet by this Act it is Confiscation of Ship, Goods,
Tackle, Apparel and Ammunition, for the Subjects of any other Nation to import
Saltpeter, or Gunpowder.

The King, tho this were a Naval War, having laid up no Stores for it; yet if
the Swede from any Port of Norway but Gottenburg, or if the Bradenburgher,
Lubeker, Hamburgher, or Emdenber, should import any from any Port of Norway, or
any rough Hemp or Flax from Leifland or Prussia for making Cordage or Sails,
this had been Confiscation of Ships, Goods, Guns, Tackle, Ammunition and
Apparel by this Act.

This Act restraining the English in the Newcastle Trade, and to the
Plantations, to navigate their Ships by three fourths English, the King was
forced to man his Fleet with pressed Men, the greater part whereof were Land
and Watermen: Whereas, if it had been free for the English during the War to
have employed Foreigners in these Navigations, the King might have above twenty
thousand of his best Seamen more than he had to man his Fleet, and the City of
London, and other Parts of England thoroughly supplied with Coals at half the
Prices, and with more Security.

The King by reason of this Act, in the first Year of this War, was forced in
the dead of Winter to send Sir John Harman to Gottenburg with a Squadron of Men
of War for Masts, Pitch and Tar, where by the Coldness of the Season some of
the Ships were frozen up, and many of the English lost their Noses, and were
benumbed in other Parts with the Cold: Yet all agreed, if the King had not been
supplied with Naval Stores by this Fleet, he could not have fitted out a Fleet
next Year.

These things, tho evident to any Stander-by, yet the Parliament took no notice
of them: However, the King wisely dispensed with the Act of Navigation, so far
as it related to the Importation of Naval Stores, and Hemp, and Flax, with this
different Success, that tho the Parliament the Year before boggled at the
King's dispensing with the Penal Laws against Dissenters, yet they took no
notice of the King's dispensing with the Act of Navigation.

Tho this War was thus hastily begun, yet was it managed more carelessly and
prodigally than ever any was before: The Officers of the Fleet, like those of
the Guards, bought their Places to sell their Lives; the poor common Seamen
not paid, and wanting Money to pay their Quarters, were forced to take Tickets
for less than half their Wages: whilst Favorites swelled into incredible
Riches by the Ruin and Spoil of the Nation. The innumerable Prizes taken from
the Dutch, were so far from contributing to the Charges of this War, that many
of them were given to Women and Favorites, and became a Charge to the King: no
Inspection must be into the defraying the Moneys given for the War, for this
was to distrust the King: The Officers who had bought their Places in the
Fleet, instead of minding their Business, made it their Business how to be
Gainers for the Purchase of their Places, and caballed how they might improve
their Interest at Court.

However, the King receiving no Satisfaction from the Dutch for the Injuries
done to Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pindar, upon the 17th of May 1665
granted Letters of Reprisal to Sir Edward Turner and George Carew, their
Executors, etc. against the Dutch, till they should be satisfied 151612 l. This
Grant to stand in force notwithstanding any Peace to be made, till Sir Edward
Turner, etc. were fully satisfied of the said Sum, with all their Costs and
Damages.

Sir Thomas Allen opened the first Sea Campagn, by falling upon the Dutch
Smirna-Fleet, and took four of them richly laden; and the third of June
following, the English Fleet commanded by the Duke of York, Prince Rupert
Admiral of the White, and the Earl of Sandwich of the Blue, fought the Dutch
off the Coast of Harwich, where the Dutch were put to flight; Opdam their
Admiral was blown up, and Cartinere, Stillingwolf and Stamp Flag-Officers,
killed, and eighteen of the Dutch Fleet sunk and taken; and if it had not been
for fear of disturbing the Duke in his next Night's Sleep, it is believed the
whole Dutch Fleet might have been destroyed. But in this Fight, the English
lost the renowned Earl of Marlborough; who, tho Admiral in King Charles the
First's Reign, died a private Captain in this Fight; Rear-Admiral Sanson was
killed in it, and Vice Admiral Lawson soon after died of his Wounds.

The Duke of York was of too estimable a Value to be ventured any more in this
War, for in his Person the Hopes of this War and Declaration of Indulgence
resolved: So the Earl of Sandwich was made Admiral, Sir Thomas Allen of the
White, and Sir Thomas Tiddiman of the Blue Squadrons.

The Dutch were so damaged in the first Fight, that they were not in a
Condition to set out another Fleet this Year. But the Dutch having lodged their
East India and other Fleets in Bergen in Norway, the English Fleet sailed
thither to attack them in it.

But Sir Thomas Tiddiman, who was ordered to do it, did not sail into the
Harbor as he might have done upon his first Approach, but sent to the
Governor of the Castle to treat without; the Dutch within, alarmed at the
Danger, set all hands on work that Night, so that by the Morning they had so
fortified the Castle, that it was impossible for the English to force a
Passage: and the Weather growing boisterous, it being toward the latter end of
September, the English Fleet was forced to return; nor could the Dutch Fleet
stay in Bergen; and in their Return home, two of their richest East India
Ships, and about 80 Sail of their other Ships fell to the English share: but
tho they were deep laden when the English took them, they became much lighter
before they came into the English Harbor.

It seems God was not pleased with these things; for this Year he sent a
horrible Plague, which raged over almost all the Parts of England. The greatest
Plague which happened since Edward the Third's time in England, was in the
first Year of this King's Grandfather; yet a greater in the first Year of his
Father's Reign; and now a greater than either, in the sixth Year of his actual
Reign. And as the Plague drove the Parliament to Oxford in his Father's Reign,
so did it now in his.

But neither the Mourning of the Land because of Oaths, the Plague, this Dutch
War, nor the King's Declaration of Indulgence for dispensing with the Penal
Laws against Dissenters, could abate the Parliament's Zeal in prosecuting
Protestant Nonconformist Ministers, but they made a Law, called the
Five-Mile-Act, whereby they were banished five Miles from any Corporation, or
Market Town, and had this Oath imposed upon them.

I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous Position, of
taking up Arms by his Authority against his Person, or any that are
commissionated by him, in pursuance of such Commission. And I do swear, that I
will not, at any time to come, endeavor the Alteration of the Government
either in Church or State. So help me God.

The poor Nonconforming Ministers did quietly submit to this in England, but
the Presbyterians did not so to the High Commission erected in Scotland; for
about this time they rose in Arms at Pentland, against the Persecution of the
Prelates who disturbed them in the Execution of their Ministry; but were soon
broken, and a terrible Execution followed upon them, as Traitors and Rebels.

In England, the Parliament at Oxford granted the King 1250000 l. for carrying
on the War against the Dutch; and in the Spring 1666 the Plague ceasing, the
King set forth a Fleet under the Command of Prince Rupert and the Duke of
Albemarle, Sir Thomas Allen Admiral of the White, and Sir William Berkley of
the Blue. But the Dutch and French now try to do that by Craft which they could
not do by Force and Plain-dealing: And to this purpose it was given out, that
the French had fitted up a strong Fleet to join the Dutch; and this so
prevailed upon the King and Council, that upon the 29th of May (a remarkable
Day) when the English Fleet was riding in the Downs, Prince Rupert, in all
haste, was ordered with the White Squadron to sail to the West, to fight the
French Fleet coming to join with the Dutch. I desire to be particular in some
part of what followed, because I had it from Sir John Harman himself, who was
Vice Admiral of the Blue.

At the same time Prince Rupert sailed from the Fleet, the Dutch put out to
Sea, the Wind at North-east, a fresh Gale; this brought the Dutch Fleet on the
Coast of Dunkirk, and carried the Prince to St. Helens, on the Isle of Wight:
but the Wind suddenly turning into the South-west, blew a strong Gale, which
brought the Dutch and Duke to an Anchor; when Captain Bacon of the Bristol, by
firing of his Guns, gave notice to the Duke of the Approach of the Dutch.

Hereupon the Duke summoned all the Captains on board him, not to consult
whether to fight the Dutch, but to order them to weigh Anchor, and fight the
Dutch. This was the 1st of June, the Wind at South-west blowing a stiff Gale,
so that the Dutch were forced to cut their Cables, not having time to weigh
Anchor; and tho the English had the Weathergage of the Dutch, yet the Wind so
bowed the English Ships, that they could not use their lowest Tire when they
came up to fight the Dutch.

Sir William Berkley's Squadron led the Van: but the Duke, when he came on the
Coast of Dunkirk, to avoid running on a Sand, made a sudden Tack, which brought
his Topmast to the Board; whereupon he was forced to lie by 4 or 5 Hours, till
another was set up: but the Blue Squadron knowing nothing of this, sailed on,
fighting through the Dutch Fleet, which were 5 to 1 of the Blue. Here Sir
William was killed, and his Ship (the Swiftsure, a second Rate, and all her
Guns Brass) taken, so was the Essex, a Frigate of the third Rate, and Sir John
Harman in the Henry got among 9 Ships of the Zeal and Squadron, commanded by
Vice Admiral Everts; and these so disabled the Henry, that Everts offered Sir
John Quarter if he would yield; but Sir John told him 'twas not come to that
yet, and gave him a Broadside, and killed Everts.

Hereupon this Zealand Squadron sailed to assist their Fellows behind, and only
left Sir John to the Mercy of 3 Fireships; one of which grappled the Henry on
her Starboard Quarter: The Dutch Fireships do not take Fire at first, as the
English do, but first raise a Smoke incredibly stinking, and so thick as
nothing can be seen at the least distance, so as it could not be seen where the
Fireship's Grappling-Irons were fixed; but upon the Fireship's taking Fire, Sir
John's Boatswain swung himself into the Fireship, and by the Light of the Fire
found where the Grappling-Irons were fixed in the Fireship, and let them loose,
and got on board again.

But another Fireship grappled the Henry on her Larboard Quarter Deck, and took
Fire, and Sir John's Chaplain, and about 50 more, skipped into the Sea;
whereupon Sir John ran among the Mariners, and threatened to kill any other who
did not assist in quenching the Fire: whereupon Sir John's Cabbin-Boy seeing
the Sails on fire, with wet Cloths encountered and put it out; but the Cordage
being burnt, the Cross-beam fell upon Sir John's Leg, and broke it.

By this the third Fireship made toward the Henry, but 4 Pieces of Cannon
laden with Cross-shot disabled her; so that Sir John set up Jury-Masts, and
brought the Ship into Harwich, and the next Day after fitted her up, and tho
his Leg was broke, went out to Sea again to have fought, but the Fight was over
before he could come up to the Fleet.

In this Day's mad Fight, wherein the English could make no use of their lower
Tire of Guns (and therefore Sir Thomas Tiddiman, Rear-Admiral of the Red,
refused to engage) the English were much damnified in their Rigging, yet next
Day the Duke engaged the Dutch again, tho above double his Number of Ships, and
the Dutch hourly receiving fresh Supplies; so he did the Day after, the 3d of
June, when the Duke caused several of his most disabled Ships, after he had
taken out their Men, to be burnt, and had but 16 Ships left able to fight, with
which he retreated, putting them between the Dutch and his unburnt disabled
Ships.

Toward the Evening, the English espied the White Squadron making up toward
them; but the English engaged with the Dutch, striving to make their nearest
Way to meet the White Squadron. The Prince Royal (it may be the best Man of War
in the World, and best gunn'd) commanded by Sir George Askew, run on a Sand,
and was lost, and Sir George made Prisoner; yet next Day the Fleets fought
again, and by the help of the White Squadron, the English Fleet, with much ado,
got into Harbor again; leaving it a Problem, whether it were a greater
Treachery to divide the Fleet, or Madness to fight the Dutch with the rest,
when they could not use their lower Tire of Guns.

The English and Dutch thus engaged at Wars at home, the French King, instead
of sending his invisible Fleet into the Channel to assist the Dutch, sends a
visible Fleet to the subduing the English in their Plantations in the Leeward
Islands, and almost totally expelled the English out of St. Christophers, and
interrupted them in their Trade to their other Islands, and assumed a
Sovereignty in those Seas: where, at present, we leave him, and return to
England.

The Loss and Damage which the English sustained in the last Fight, gave the
Dutch an Opportunity to put out to Sea, and ride braving upon our Coasts 3
Weeks, or a Month, before we could repair, and fit out another Fleet: but upon
the 17th of July, the English put to Sea again; whereupon the Dutch retreat to
their own Coasts, where the English again engage them upon the 25th, and where
they beat the Dutch, and forced them into their Harbors: In the Fight, Everts
(Brother to Everts, killed by Sir John Harman) Admiral of the Zealand Squadron,
Tirich Hides of the Friezland Squadron, Vice Admiral Conder, and 6 Captains,
and Vice Admiral Banker's Ship, and the best Ship of Harlem, were taken and
burnt. The English lost but one Ship, commanded by Captain Haiman.

The Dutch thus driven in, gave the English an Opportunity to burn the Village
of Brandaris in Schelling, and fire above 150 Sail of the Dutch within the Fly.

Upon the 16th of August the Dutch put to Sea again; and now the English had 10
or 12 Men of War more than the Dutch, (which was the only time, in this and the
other Dutch War, the English had so many Men of War as the Dutch) and to the
Amazement of Standers-by, the Dutch forsook their own Coast, and sailed toward
the French; for which no other Reason could be given, but that the French King
(who equally loved the Dutch and English) had decoyed the Dutch to join that
invisible Fleet, which we divided ours to fight with.

The English pursued the Dutch through the Straits between Dover and Calice,
and were ready to engage them, when by a terrible Storm the Wind drove the
English to an Anchor at St. Helen's Point, where in the Passage the St. Andrew
(a second Rate Ship) broke her Back upon a Sand, and the Dutch came to an
Anchor in the Bay of Bulloigne: and the Wind about the 8th of September
turning, brought the Dutch home before the English could engage them.

And in that instant, September the 2d, as near as could be conjectured, that
this Storm arose which saved the Dutch Fleet, the City of London flew on Fire:
nor did the Desolation made by the Fire end in it; but when it was over, by
Order of Council, all the Houses upon the Tower Ditch, to the number of about
200, were pulled down, to preserve the Tower from the Danger of another
Conflagration now the City was burnt.

The Firing of the City of London so soon succeeding the Division of the Fleet,
caused a strange Consternation, not only in Men's Minds in London, but all the
Nation over, That there were Designs to ruin the Nation as well on Shore as at
Sea; whereupon infinite varieties of idle Tales and Stories were printed, as
well as said; so as tho a general Fear of Plots against the Nation was evident,
yet in this Confusion, the Cause from whence the City of London became fired
was not only smothered, but the Means of searching into it prevented. Herein I
will take notice of only two Particulars, both which are mentioned in Sir H.
C's Speech in the third Westminster Parliament, which met the 21st of October
1680.

In April 1666, next before the Fire of London, several Persons confessed they
had been treated with, and had treated with others to burn the City of London
in September following, tho the Parliament were then sitting, and this a Matter
of State proper to be enquired into by Parliament; yet these Men were hanged,
so as no further Enquiry could be made into it; and all those who were taken in
carrying on the Work, discharged, except one Hubert a Papist, who confessed
that he and others set the City on Fire.

Upon this Hubert was condemned; but I do not find he was examined who those
other were who joined with him in it, or who set him on work: but this I find,
that Mr. Hawles, in his Remarks upon Fitzharris's Trial, fol. 5. says, That the
Commons resolving to examine Hubert upon the Matter, next Day Hubert was hanged
before the House sat, and so could tell no further Tales.

Those who excused the firing of London to have been by Design, or that Hubert
had any hand in it, said Hubert was mad, and knew not what he did or said: And
why then would they let him be tried upon it? For it is not only contrary to
our Laws, but to the Law of Nature and Humanity, to try and convict a Madman
of any supposed Crime, when he is incapacitated to make any Defense, as a
Madman is. And tho the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. in High Treason ordains, That if
a Man fall mad after he had committed High Treason, yet he should be tried for
it and executed; yet this extends only to High Treason, upon which Hubert was
not tried; but even this Law being deemed inhumane and cruel, was soon after
repealed. But this Case of Hubert's only led the Van; you will hear of others of
like nature, which followed.

I remember very well, that when it was blazed about that Hubert was mad, and
the City in Ruin, Hubert was carried to show where he fired the City; and tho
it was in its Ruin, Hubert showed those who brought him, where it began. I
confess I was not present then; but such was the Fame of it, which I never
heard to be contradicted.

This Year the Parliament, that they might not less contribute to the French
Grandeur by Sea, than the Rump had done by the Act of Navigation, made a Law
(18 Car. 2. cap. 2.) against Importation of Irish Cattle; which, in regard it
is the only Law since the Creation which was ever made by any Prince or State,
to make things necessary for Preservation and Convenience of Humane Subsistence
scarce and dear, we will more particularly make these Observations upon it.

The Reason given for this Law was, That the Importation of Irish Cattle had
fallen the Rents and Value of the Lands of England, and were like to fall more.

Observation I.
It Is true, the Rents, and Value of the Lands of England, were fallen at this
time considerably, but not from the Importation of Irish Cattle; for Lands are
valuable as Trade is more or less, and Money more plentiful: And we have
showed, That the Severity used by the Bishops in 1636 had sent many of our
Woollen Manufacturers into Holland, as much to their Enriching, as to our
Impoverishment: That by the Treaty of Munster in 1648, the Dutch became
Partakers with us in the Spanish Trade, whereby, above all others, we were
enriched: That by reason of the Act of Navigation, we have, upon the matter,
lost the most beneficial Trades to Hamburgh, and into the Sound, with our
Woollen Manufactures. And besides the eternal fixing the Fishing-Trade upon the
Coasts of England and Scotland, to the Dutch by this War, we have totally lost
the Greenland Fishery, and the Dutch partake with us in the Iseland and
Westmony Fishing Trades, and the French to the Newfound-Land: That by Oliver's
breaking with the Spaniard, and joining with the French, the Dutch got all the
Riches of the Spanish Trade, whilst we were bound to be Losers by the French.

I will add two more Reasons of the Fall of the Lands of England. One, The
advantageous Treaty of Commerce made by Oliver with the French, was not
established by the King; but a much worse, if any, submitted to: And after, the
French set such high Imposts upon our Commodities, that Sir John Trevor, in his
Appeal, takes notice that we did not vend one fourth of the Commodities we
before exported into France, whilst we consumed French Wines, Brandies, and
other French Wares, more than before: So that about this time, or soon after,
the Lords Commissioners for a Treaty of Commerce with France, appointed a
Committee to inspect the Difference of the Balance; which, besides those of
Gloves, Lace, Ribbon, and other Toys, did amount yearly to 965128 l. 17 s. 4 d.
imported from France, more than exported out of England.

The other is, That the most gainful Trade the English have, is that to Spain,
which has no other Means to maintain it, but by the Returns of their Fleet;
which since we took Jamaica, the Buccaneers so interrupted the Spaniard in the
West Indies, that as the Spanish Loss and Returns were more difficult, so much
was our Trade to Spain damnified.

Observation II.
The Importation of Irish Cattle might fall the Rents of Lands, yet not make
them the less valuable; for if Landlords would content themselves with the
Product of their Tenants Labors, so that if they could buy their Commodities
half, or one third, etc. cheaper, their Lands would be as valuable as if they
had half, or one third, etc. more Rent, and they pay so much more for their
Commodities: besides, many thousands of People might subsist by their Labors
where Provisions are cheaper, which could not, if dearer; and the Charge of
maintaining the Poor are so much more, as Provisions are dearer; and so much
less must the foreign Vent of our Manufactures be, as Provisions are dearer
whereon Workmen subsist. But admit the Importation of Irish Cattle had caused
such Plenty of Provision as the Nation could not have expended, yet if
Commodities be Riches, the Nation would have been so much more enriched by the
Importation of the Irish Cattle; and by this means might have established a
foreign Trade upon that Account: and only by foreign Trade the Nation is
enriched.

Observation III.
The Returns which the English made for Irish Cattle were Clothes, Hats, Caps,
Stockings, Hops, and other Manufactures, which upon the Act ceasing, the People
who subsisted by working these, necessarily fell into Decay and Poverty; so as
the Value of the Lands of England were lessened both ways: for as these People
who by their Labors were enabled to buy Provisions, to the Improvement of the
Value of the Lands of England; so by their Poverty they became a Charge and
Burden to them.

Observation IV.
If it be Injustice and Wickedness to take away another's Lands or Goods
without a just Cause, it is equally, or more wicked and unjust, to take away the
means of living from industrious Men in their just Employments, and make no
Retribution; both which this Law did to the People employed in the Manufactures
returned for Irish Cattle. Nor did this Law make any Provision for the Mariners
employed in bringing over Irish Cattle, nor pay the Owners of the Vessels
employed in it for their Vessels, now they had lost their Employment. Nor did
the Parliament give the King any Satisfaction for 30000 l. per An. Duties, paid
the King for importing Irish Cattle.

Observation V.
By this Law the English lost the Manufactures of the Hides, Tallow, and Horns
of the Cattle, which might have been wrought in England, and gave them to other
Nations, if the Irish should not work them; to the Loss of the Employment of
the English, and thereby lessening the Value of the Lands of England.

Observation VI.
Suppose that we had no Act of Navigation, but our Western Men might have built
and fitted out Ships for the Newfound-Land Fishery as cheap as the French; yet
by this Act against Importation of Irish Cattle, the French being enabled to
victual Ships cheaper from the Ports of Ireland, than we from the English; the
French, from this only Cause, may have the foreign Vent of the Newfound-Land
Fishery, whilst the English are necessitated to vend theirs only in England;
which is as much a Grievance, as the Importation of Irish Cattle; for the
Expense of them will as much fall the Price of Flesh, as the Importation of the
Cattle.

Observation VII.
By this Law, the English have lost the Benefit of Victualling foreign, as well
as English Ships, from our own Ports, and established them in Ireland, to the
lessening the Value of the Lands of England, and this in time of Peace: And in
time of War, by how much cheaper foreign Nations can victual Ships from Ireland
than we can from England, so much cheaper they may manage War, and continue it
longer.

Observation VIII.
The Wools of Ireland are generally better than those of England, (I have it by
very good Authority;) and by the 14 Car. II. 18. it is Felony to export any out
of England or Ireland: The Reason given is, it would decay the Woollen
Manufactures, ruin many Families, and be the Destruction of the Navigation and
Commerce of England and Ireland.

And why would it decay the Woollen Manufactures, and ruin many Families, to
export Wool? The common Reason given is, That the Natives of other Countries
would work them cheaper than the English, whereby we should lose the Employment
of our People. If this be a Reason, this Irish Act was made in an ill time to
make Provisions dearer, which will necessarily resolve into a further Dearness,
because those who work our Woollen Manufactures must live by Food; and so much
the dearer Food is, so much dearer must Men's Labors be.

But I say this is not the Reason; for no People in the World, in like
Circumstances, take so much Pains, for so little Profit, as the Combers,
Spinners, and Weavers do in our Woollen Manufactures; and I Am sure the Wools
and Fullers-Earth in England are cheaper here than can be had elsewhere; and an
English Man or Woman has a better Habit of Body, and as good a Wit, as a
French or Dutch Man or Woman; and that in Holland they pay as much for Excise
for Meat and Drink, as in England is paid for them.

I Will give the true Reason, why, if the Dutch or French get our Wools and
Fullers-Earth, they may vend the Manufactures cheaper in foreign Trade than the
English. The Wools of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestarshire,
Warwickshire, Lincolnshire, Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, Huntingtonshire,
Hertfordshire, etc. are in the dead of the Winter, brought by Land-Carriage to
Norwich and Colchester; and even the Wools of the Sheep killed in London, are
carried to Colchester to be wrought there; and then by another Land-Carriage
they are brought to London, as our Western Cloths are: And then none but the
Freemen of London must buy them, at, it may be, 20 per Cent. cheaper than they
might be sold if the Trade were free; then they must be vended abroad in
English-built Ships, double as dear by the Act of Navigation, and these sailed
by near double the Hands of foreign Ships of like Dimensions; and if any
Returns be made, they shall pay twofold more Duties than if they were imported
into Holland and Hamburgh: And upon other Terms ou^ Poor must not be employed,
working Woollen Manufactures.

It Is agreed, the vast Riches of France arise by the Trades which the English,
Dutch, Dane, Hamburgher, Embdener, Lubecker, and Bremeners drive, trading into
France for Wines, Brandies, Salt, Paper, and the English besides these, for
Linen, Cordage, and Sails. Suppose then, the French King should by Edict
ordain, that these should be first brought by Land-Carriage to Paris, and then
none but the Freemen should buy them at what Rates they please, and then these
should vend them in foreign Trade only in French-built Ships, and these sailed
by three fourth parts French, whether they have Ships or Men or not; and the
Returns made of them, to pay him twofold more than if they were imported into
Holland or Hamburgh, etc. Would not any Man think he were mad? Yet what would
that differ from our Practice?

At this rate we have in England more Wools than we can work; and by this Act
the Irish are forced to breed Sheep upon the Grounds they bred their Cattle
before the Act; and by the Act of 14 Car. II. 18. it is Felony to export the
Wools, so as the Irish are necessitated to work them, where Provisions are
cheaper than in England, and where they shall not be at the unnecessary
Land-Charges of Carriage of their Wools, and Re-carriage of their Cloths; where
they shall not be restrained to the vending of them to Freemen of Corporations
at 20 per Cent. Loss; and where their Ports are better and more convenient for
foreign Trade than those of England; and then the English must condescend to
the Terms of the Irish, or these will undo more Families, and more decay the
Trade of our Woollen Manufactures, than if Foreigners wrought the Irish or
English Wools.

Observation IX.
Ireland is a Kingdom depending upon England, and Trade and Commerce create a
mutual Correspondence and Interest between Countries, so as this Law makes the
Correspondency and Interest of Ireland to depend upon other Countries; whereas
it is the Interest of England, that England should have been the Mart or
Storehouse of all the Wools, Hides, Tallow, etc. renewed in Ireland; as
England is the Storehouse of the Product of our Plantations, or as Holland is
of the Spice-Trade.

These ruinous and mischievous Consequences this Law has brought upon England
and Ireland, only that the Northern and Western Men might have a Monopoly of
imposing what Rates they pleased upon the Eastern and Southern Parts of
England, I may safely say to the lessening the Rates and Value of those Lands
at 30 per Cent. and I dare say from many less Causes; or if this Partial Law
had been imposed by any King out of Parliament, it might have caused a
Rebellion in England and Ireland too: Yet it had been the Interest of the
Northern and Western Men to have continued the Importation of Irish Cattle; for
in breeding Cattle they can make but one Return in five Years, whereas they
might make four Returns in one Year by the Irish Cattle imported: Yet in many
Land-Taxes, the Parliament taxed the Southern and Eastern Parts of England near
double more than the Northern and Western.

But neither the King's Management of Business, this Infant-Law, the Fire of
London, the pulling down the Houses upon the Tower-Ditch, the Plague, nor the
Act of Navigation, now sixteen Years old, could allay the Parliament's Heat
from carrying on this War against the Dutch; and therefore they gave the King
1256000 l. toward it: but the King had other Occasions for the Money, and
thought he better otherwise could dispose of it, upon the Assurance he had from
his Mother out of France, that the Dutch would not set out another Fleet this
Year, tho the French King used all means that the Dutch should do it: And this
Year the Zealanders set out a Squadron of Ships, and took Surinam from the
English in America.

Relying upon his Mother's Intelligence, the King, by the Mediation of the
Swedish Ambassador, entertains a Treaty of Peace with the Dutch, whilst they
make all possible Preparations for War, which all the World saw but the King,
who would not see it; and so took no Care to set out a Fleet to fight them, nor
to protect his Fleet in their Ports.

However, the King at this time was not pleased with the Insults of his Brother
of France upon the English in their Plantations in the Leeward Islands; and
therefore sent Sir John Harman with a Squadron of Frigates, to repress the
French Insolence there: Sir John had the Gout so as he could not go; but upon
the Discovery of the French Fleet, got upon his Feet, and gave Orders to fight
the French, which he did, and beat them; and during the Fight, walked and gave
Orders as when well. But the Fight was no sooner over, when Sir John returned
to his gouty Lameness again, and after reduced Surinam to the English: but this
was after the Peace of Breda between the English and Dutch.

The Dutch having completed their Fleet, upon the 9th of June entered the
River: I was on the 10th, in the Morning, walking in St. James's Park, when a
Gentleman whispered to me, That the Dutch were entered the River. Then the King
had fed his Ducks, and was walking on the West Side of the Park; and as we
walked, Prince Rupert overtook us, and met the King at the further End of the
Pall Mall; and the King told the Prince how he had shot a Duck, and such a Dog
fetched it: and so they walked on till the King came to St. James's House, and
there the King said to the Prince, Let Us go see Cambridg and Kendall, (the
Duke's two Sons, who then lay a dying) but upon his Return to White Hall, he
found all in an Uproar, the Countess of Castlemain (as 'twas said) bewailing
above all others, that she should be the first torn in pieces.

Hereupon the Duke of Albemarle was posted down to Chatham, where, in a Council
of War, it was resolved to sink all the Ships; but as they lay, there was not
Water enough. The Dutch found an easy Passage, after they broke the Boom which
lay cross the River; for no Fort was then finished at Sheerness, and that at
Vpnor ruined for want of Repair: however, the Duke put some Guns into it, which
shooting high, little damaged the Dutch in the Passage: So the Dutch fired the
Royal James, London, and Royal Oak; and the Henry being afloat, run so
violently upon Rochester-bridg, the Tide forcing her, as endangered the
breaking of it; and the Royal Charles was carried off by the Dutch.

I was then at London, and also in the Plague and Fire Years, yet in neither
did I observe such Consternation and Confusion in the Looks of all Men as at
this time, and with great Cause: for if the Dutch had then come up to London,
they had found all open to them; not one Gun mounted at Tilbury Fort, nor one
Frigate ready in the River; so as they might have forced all the Ships in the
River up to the Bridge, and there have burnt them; which would certainly have
fired the Tower, and all the Suburbs West to Black-wall, as well as Southwark,
below Bridge.

Nor were the Ships at Portsmouth in more Safety; and the Dutch had Ships enough
to have made both Attempts at the same time; but whilst the Dutch lay loitering
below Sheerness, the English had time to plant some Guns in Tilbury Fort, and
sink Ships cross the River at Woolwich: And the King sent the Earl of
Macclesfield and Captain Elliot to Portsmouth, who used such Diligence in
fortifying it, that when the Dutch came before it, they thought not fit to
attempt to do what they had done at Chatham.

However the Dishonor which the Nation sustained by this Action may be
forgotten, yet the sudden and more dishonorable Peace concluded at Breda the
9th of July following, will never be: Where the 3d Article is,

That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, and Losses sustained on either side by
the King and States, or their Subjects during this War, or at any time before,
upon any Cause or Pretense whatsoever, be totally expunged, and buried in
Oblivion.

So that by this Article the Business of Amboyna is buried, and never to be
called in Question; which Oliver, tho he made Peace with the Dutch, would not
do, but was referred to the Cantons of Switzerland, who never did any thing in
it.

By this Article the Dutch had Polloroon (out of which they had expelled our
East India Company during this War) confirmed to them, whereby they became sole
Proprietors of the Spice-Trade, as well in Europe, as other Parts of the
Indies, Arabia, and Persia: And by this Article they were to have the
Plantation of Surinam restored to them, because taken by Sir John Harman after
the Treaty.

The 4th Article is, That all Ships, Goods, and Movables, which at any time
had come into the Power of either Party, or their Subjects, should remain in
the present Possessors thereof, without any Compensation or Restitution for the
same, without any Exception of Place, Time, or Things.

The 5th Article was, That all Actions, Ships, and Pretensions whatsoever for
the same, should remain void, obliterated, disannulled, and nothing moved
thereupon hereafter.

The 8th Article is, That under the foresaid Renunciation, and Stipulation, all
Letters of Mart, Reprisals, or Counter-Mart, general or particular, ought to be
comprehended and revoked, by virtue of that Article accordingly,
notwithstanding any Grant to the contrary.

This was the Success of the King's Speech to the Parliament, upon his
declaring War against the Dutch, that as he entered into the War for the
Protection, Honor, and Safety of his Subjects, so without these he would not
make a Peace: and this Benefit Sir Edmund Turner and Mr. Carew had of their
Letters of Reprisal, wherein the King granted, That they should stand good,
notwithstanding any Peace to be made with the Dutch, until they had fully
reprized their Debt of 151612 l. and Charges of Reprizal: nay their Agents were
tried by a Commission out of the Admiralty for Piracy, for acting under the
said Grant, the Silver Oar being carried before Sir Lionel Jenkins, who was
very zealous to have hanged them; but the Common Law Judges were of another
Opinion, and so they did not lose their Lives, as Sir Edmund and Mr. Carew did
their Debts: yet the French sped not so well as the Dutch in this Peace, being
to restore all they had taken in the Leeward Islands to the English.

And now the Steed is stolen, the Stable-door is shut: for after the Peace,
thousands of People were pressed in London to finish the Fort at Sheerness; and
it being a terrible aguish Time, in an aguish Place, almost all fell sick, and
it was deemed by many, that more died there than in all the Dutch War.

In this Consternation, 'twas necessary to do something to appease the
Parliament and People, and so the King sends for the Seal from my Lord
Chancellor Hide; which was no sooner done, but the Parliament were as fierce
upon him as for the Dutch War* One of his intimate Friends told me, he took
Counsel with his Friends, whether he should stay or leave the Kingdom; they all
advised him not to stay; and so he left the Kingdom, yet fell into more Danger
than if he had not: for at Diep, a Company of rude Seamen endeavored to have
assassinated him. Thus fell this great Chancellor and Statesman, I do not say a
Sacrifice for either King or People, having followed the King's Father in all
his Wars, and himself in his Exile: yet he lived to see two Lord Chancellors in
England, and two Lord Keepers alive at the same time (no Argument of the
Steadiness of Counsels after him:) Two were deposed as well as he; and the
third, with much ado, lived to die in the Place. A little before his Deposure
(as if he had lived long enough) that great Standard of Loyalty and true
Nobility, my Lord Treasurer Southampton, died; but sure so upright a
Chancellor, or two such honorable Counselors and Statesmen, for their
Integrity to the English Interest, and great Understanding in State Affairs,
have not since succeeded: but they were but two to too many others, and the
King's Inclinations were toward the other side; so as neither he, nor my Lord
Treasurer Southampton were present at the Council when the War was declared
against the Dutch: But this Power was in the Wain, and the Torrent run the other
way.

It was time for the Dutch to make Peace with England; for this Summer the
French King, with a mighty Army, was fallen into Flanders, and like a Torrent,
had ravaged Artois, Hainault, and other parts of the Spanish Netherlands, and
taken Charleroy, Oudenard, Aeth, Courtray and Lisle. But that we may take a
better View of this War we must look back.

In the Year 1612 there was a cross Marriage between Lewis XIII. of France and
Philip IV. of Spain: Lewis married Ann, Philip's Sister, and Philip married
Elizabeth, Lewis his Sister: By Elizabeth Philip had Don Belthazar, and the
Infanta married to the French King by the Treaty of the Pyrenees.

In the Year 1649 (Elizabeth of France being dead) Philip married Ann the
Daughter of Ferdinand the Third, Emperor, Philip's own Niece, by whom he had
Charles the now King of Spain. I do not find whether Don Belthazar was dead
before the French King married his Sister, but Charles the now King was born
about Nine Months after the Pyrenean Treaty.

By the Pyrenean Treaty, the French King, by all that they call sacred in the
Church of Rome, and by all the Clauses the Wit of Man could express to avoid
Evasion, disclaimed all Right or Title to Spain, or any part of it, in the
Right of the Infanta; and Philip dying in the Year 1665, the French King did
engage his Faith and Royal Word to the Queen by the Marquess De la Fuente, that
he would Religiously keep the Peace, and continue a faithful Friendship with
her and her Son during his Minority; nay, after the Eruption by the French into
Flanders, the Archbishop of Ambrun did, in Verbo Sacerdotis, protest and vow
to the Queen, that his Master (the French King) would never break with the King
of Spain, or invade his Dominions during his Minority.

By this time the Dauphin (I think) was about Six Years old, and his Father, to
cover his Hypocrisy and Perfidy, pretended that the Women of Brabant, by the
first Venture, inherit before the Males of the second: but you shall see Brabant
flow over all the Spanish Netherlands; and therefore no Act of his could
preclude the Dauphin, who was born of Elizabeth, Philip's first Wife; which
vain Pretension was thoroughly confuted by the renowned Statesman, the Baron de
Isola, in his excellent Treatise termed The Buckler of State and Justice.

However, about four Days after the Archbishop of Ambrun's Protestation, the
Queen of Spain had notice of a Manifesto published by the French King, that he
had so fully proved his Son's Title, that he did not think himself obliged to
spend any time in unprofitable Contests about it; yet not to make War, but to
take Friendly Possession of what was so justly due to the Dauphin.

Never was Spain at so low an Ebb, and unable to make Opposition to the French,
as at this time: for besides our King's giving up Dunkirk to the French, and
the breaking of the Spanish Army at the Fight at Elvas in Portugal, which
should have defended Flanders, the War still continued there, where the French
by a Treaty with Portugal, (contrary to the Pyrenean Treaty) were to have all
the Port Towns taken from the Spaniard: The Buchaneers at Jamaica plagued the
Spaniard in the Returns of their Plate-Fleet, and plundered and fired many of
the Spanish Towns upon the firm Land: And Don John (the King's Bastard Brother)
and the Queen, were at highest Discord about her Confessor Nitard, so as Don
John refused to accept of the Government of Flanders again to oppose the French.

Here it is observable how much the French King's Ambition prevailed beyond his
Zeal to Religion; for in 1665 and 1666, the Irish had been treating with him,
to send an Army into Ireland to assist the Irish in a designed Rebellion
against the King, which this Year was brought to Maturity; and the French King
promised to send them Forty Thousand Men to land on St. Lewis's Day, in August:
But he kept his Promise no better with them to assist them, than he did his
Oath at the Pyrenean Treaty, not to assist the Portuguese, and to the Queen
Regent in Spain, not to invade any of the Spanish Dominions during the Minority
of the King.

The King either stung with the Success of his Mother's Assurance, that the
Dutch would put out no Fleet this Year, or at this time angry with his Brother
of France, for the Ravages he had made upon the English in the West Indies,
whereby the King's Customs were much lessened; or it may be, having some Seeds
of the wholesome Counsels which the Chancellor Hide and Treasurer Southampton
had infused into him, how dangerous it would be to England as well as Holland
for the French to make a Conquest in Flanders; sent to Sir William Temple, his
then Resident at Brussels, to take joint Measures with the States for
restraining the Progress of the French Conquests in Flanders: This was in
January 1667/8.

The French Progress in Flanders more nearly concerned the Dutch than the
English; the Spanish Netherlands being the Barrier to secure the United
Netherlands from sinking under the Power of France, and therefore the Dutch
States readily complied with Sir William's Proposals, and Sir William waited
upon the King to give him an Account of his Negotiation; and within 5 Days
after was sent back with Powers to conclude a stricter Defensive League than
that at Breda between England and Holland; either by Mediation or Force, to
stop the further Progress of the French Army in the Spanish Provinces: And
because the Swedes soon after entered into it, it was called the Triple
Alliance. This preserved what the French had left untaken, and the Spaniard was
forced to sit down by the Loss.

But whatever the Spaniard lost by the French Ravages, the English gained this
Benefit by it: That one Brewer (whose Parents were said to be English) with
about fifty Walloons, who wrought and died Fine Woollen Cloths, came into
England; and the King, after the Example of two of his wisest and most renowned
Predecessors, Edward III. and Queen Elizabeth, entertained them against our
Barbarous Law, or rather Usage, against Foreigners partaking the Benefit of
Natural-born English; and by them the English, in a few Years time were
instructed to make and dye fine woollen Cloths cheaper by 40 l. per Cent. than
they could do before; not only to the Benefit of the English at home, but in
foreign Vent abroad; which before the Dutch had.

I think it was this Year the French sell into the Franche County of Burgundy,
and took Dole and Besanzon: but this being a Barrier to the Swiss against the
French Power, as the Spanish Netherlands are to the Dutch, the Swiss recalled
their Subjects out of the French Service, and ordered the levying Sixty
Thousand Men to expel the French out of the County of Burgundy: and now it was
not time for the French King to contend against the Triple League, and the
Swiss too, so he gave up Dole and Besanzon again to the Spaniards, and withdrew
his Forces out of the County. Thus was Spain saved by others when they could
not help themselves.

The banishing the Chancellor Clarendon did palliate, but the Triple League
reconciled all Difference between the King and Parliament, as if no Dutch War,
or Miscarriages had been; and for the Triple League, they granted the King a
Treble Supply, viz. 20 Car. II. c. 1. 301000 l. upon Wines and Liquors:
Secondly, an additional Duty of 8 l. per Tun on French Wines, etc. and 12 l.
per Tun on Spanish Wines for eight Years, which amounted to 560000 l. this was
the 22 Car. II. And also, cap. 3. an Act for sale of the Fee Farm Rents to the
Value of 1300000 l.

An. Dom. 1668.
But you will see these dear bought Joys soon will fade, for the great Clarendon
and noble Southampton now are gone, and another Generation is springing up, and
that with such forward Growth (as all Weeds do) that upon the Joy of the Triple
League, the House of Commons having given the King the 301000 l. Mr. Clifford
(after Lord Treasurer) in April following told a Friend of Sir William
Temple's, that for all this great Joy, it must not be long before we have
another War with Holland; and this very Year a French Man gave my Lord
Arlington the Design of laying another Holland's War, and the Advance of it by
the Practice of Monsieur Colbert, upon the Ministers of our Court.

An. Reg. 21. Dom. 1669.
However the Devil will play at small Games rather than stand out: for now the
French King's Hands are tied up by the Triple League and Treaty at Aix la
Chapelle, from taking more Towns in the Spanish Netherlands: Yet he exacted
great Contributions from the Dutchies of Limburgh and Luxemburgh, and
confiscated the Estates of those in his Conquests, who would not forswear their
Allegiance to the King of Spain, and endeavored to surprise the Town of
Hainault. And tho by the Pyrenean Treaty the Duke of Lorain was to be restored
to his Duchy; yet the Duke, tho a Friend to the King, was rejected from
entering into the Triple League, which he endeavored, and therefore incurred
the French King's Displeasure, who in the Year 1669, seized upon the poor
Remainders of his Country, and ordered one of his Generals to seize his Person,
and bring him either dead or alive. And tho by the Treaty of Breda the French
King was to restore the English to their Plantations in St. Christophers, which
the French had taken from them, yet hitherto he refused to do it.

In this trifling, which the Hector of France did only to keep his Hand in ure,
he did not sleep otherways; the Triple League stuck sore in his Conscience,
which, unless broken, would set Bounds to his boundless Ambition: In its infant
State Monsieur Colbert, in the first Year, had made some Steps toward it; but
the next Year made such Advances, that he had almost brought the Destruction of
it to Perfection: To facilitate this hopeful Project, Madam, the King's beloved
Sister, came in June 1670, to Dover, with full Powers to conclude this desired
Business.

The King was not long behind, but with equal Desire, and extraordinary
Affection, meets his Sister, where all things are concluded, which, tho as dark
as Hell, yet were as secret as Witchcraft, which would have no Light, but by
their Consequences: and that this well-laid Design might not be forgotten, the
Princess left her Woman, Madam Carwel, after Duchess of Portsmouth, with the
King to put him in mind of it: but the Princess was unhappy in this; for
Monsieur her Husband entertained a furious Jealousy in his frantic Brain, that
something else besides this hopeful Project was designed by the Princess; so
that though she were in perfect Health, and never more pleased than when here,
yet, upon her Return, she in the Glory of her Age, but Twenty six Years old,
died suddenly, so that the Cause of her Death was as dark as the Design she
came for.

But there is neither Sister, Father or Mother with Kings and Kingdoms: The
sudden Death of Madam put no stop to the ratisying the Business she came for,
but the Marquess of Bellefonds is sent hither, and an honorable Person is sent
into France, for both Kings Ratification of it.

Hereupon the French King descended from his Stiffness, and delivered the
English their Grounds in St. Christophers to Sir Charles Wheeler, yet destroyed
all the Plantations, plundered and carried away all that was portable, laid the
whole Country waste, and left it in a much worse Condition than if it had never
been planted.

The French King by his English Pensioners, did not only keep the Emperor and
Duke of Lorain out of being desirous to enter into the Triple League, but he
enters into a stricter League with the Archbishop of Collen, and the Bishop of
Munster (two Princes of the Empire) against the Dutch, and now began to sit out
a greater Fleet of Men of War than ever any French King did before: Nor were
the Dutch behind-hand, but made proportionable Advances, not doubting but the
King would make good his Proportion, according to the League so lately made
between the King and them, in case the French King made any Attempt upon them.

Upon the 24th of October 1670, the Parliament met again, and notwithstanding
all the Aids granted the King in April before, my Lord Keeper Bridgman told the
Parliament the great Care his Majesty had of them and the Kingdom since their
last Recess, and that besides the triple Alliance, he had made many
advantageous Alliances, both for Security and Profit of Trade with the Swede,
Dane, Spaniard, and Duke of Savoy: But since the Dutch and French made such
vast Naval Preparations, it was necessary for the Safety and Honor of the
Nation, that the King should at least keep equal Pace with them, which could
not be done without great Supplies, which must be speedily granted; for the
King intended to put an End of this Session before Christmas: but the Success
of this Speech so ill agreeing with the Premises, it was not permitted to be
printed, yet you may read it at large in Mr. Marvel's Growth of Popery: But
whatever Treaties of Commerce were made with other Princes, the Keeper finds
none with France, where neither the advantageous Treaty made by Oliver was
observed, nor any new one made, but the French King did use the English with
all imaginable Oppressions, without any Redress from the King.

However, this Speech wrought so pathetically with the Parliament, that they
gave the King one Shilling in the Pound of the real Value of all the Lands of
England for one Year, and an Additional Excise upon Beer and Ale for six Years,
and the Law-Bill for nine Years; which three Bills were computed at two
Millions and a half.

And now this dark Design, founded in such deep Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, and
Perfidiousness, as Oliver Cromwell would have been ashamed of and blushed at,
begins to receive Light: For, the Parliament having granted the King the Aids,
were in Consequence prorogued, and did not meet to act till the fourth of
February 167 1/2. But in regard that not only the extirpating the Protestant
Religion, but the Subversion of the Western Parts of Europe was now designed,
which extended as far as the Baltic Sea, and the Bounds of the Turkish and
Tartar Empires, we will be a little particular in it. But what is most amazing
is, that the King, in appearance a Protestant, and a free independent King, so
used by the French King in his Exile, and since his Restoration, should be so
forward in joining with a Faithless and Boundless Ambitious Neighboring
Prince, which if his Design had succeeded, had involved the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland in the same Condition with the rest of
Christendom.

The Vizard-Mask under which the Popish Party covered their Hypocrisy, in
propagating their Catholic Cause [for plain-dealing must never be expected in
it] in King Charles the First's time, was Arminianism, which then had the
Ascendant in Laud's Regency: but since the King's Restoration the Protestant
Dissenters being so fiercely prosecuted by the Parliament, it was judged that
the dispensing with Penal Laws against Dissenters from the Church of England
would conjoin the Protestant Dissenters Interest with the Popish; and this not
only appeared by Practice, but by Design in Coleman's Letters to Father Ferier
and La Chaise, the French King's Confessors.

As before the first Dutch War, the King issued out his Declaration of
Indulgence for dispensing with the Penal Laws in Ecclesiastical Affairs in the
Interval of the sitting of the Parliament, so did he before the second War. It
seems to me that the Designers of this War got some secret Oath or Promise from
the King that he should not do the like again; for the King told the House of
Commons he would stand by his Declaration of Indulgence, and sure nothing but
Queen Money would have got him off.

However, these Conspirators were more zealous than politic; for before the
King issued out his Declaration of Indulgence in England, upon the 26th of
February 1671, he issued out his Proclamation in Ireland, wherein he granted
general License to all Papists to live in Corporations, exercise Trades there,
and enjoy the same Privileges as other Subjects ought to do; which was a
greater Privilege than his Protestant Subjects had, for by their Charter, all
who were not free of the Corporations could not have the Benefit of their
Privileges.

But that the Catholic Design might take deeper Root and Continuance, the Duke
of York's Sons being dead, and the Princesses his Daughters being bred up in
the Protestant Religion, Care must be taken to establish the Popish for the
time to come; for which it was expedient the Duke should marry some Popish
Princess, and to this end the Arch-Dutchess of Inspruck was propounded, and a
Treaty entered into upon it.

But tho the Princess's Religion pleased the French King, yet the Interest this
Marriage would bring with it did not: So that tho the Treaty were far advanced,
yet the French King (who ruled all the Roast) propounded the Princess of Modena
(the Daughter of a little Italian Prince, and a Dependant of the French King's,
yet had a great Interest in the Court of Rome) and this, against all Endeavors
of the Parliament, and to the Dishonor of the Treaty with the Arch-Dutchess,
prevailed, the French King having adopted her a Daughter of France, and given
her a Portion.

But while these Designs are laid in the dark here in England, the French King,
barefaced by his Ambassador at Vienna, in a solemn Speech declared, that his
Master had undertaken the War against Holland for propagating the Catholic
Cause, and that all good Christians were bound to join with him to extirpate
Heresy, and that he would restore all his Conquests to re-establish the true
Worship banished out of the Holland's (meaning the United Netherlands)
Territories, which you may read more at large in Mr. Secretary Trevor's Appeal,
etc.

Now let us see how agreeable these Men's Morals were to their Religious
Pretenses in laying the Scene for this designed Dutch War. The Treasury, since
the Death of my Lord Treasurer Southampton, was managed by Commissioners; and
if the Aids granted by the Parliament were not sufficient for carrying on the
King's Designs, the French King is to supply him further: but things were not
ripe enough yet for these Moneys to be returned into the Exchequer, lest they
might give cause of Suspicion; and therefore between six and seven hundred
thousand Pounds were received by Mr. Chiffins, he to have two Pence in the
Pound, to be disposed of as the King shall order. If you doubt this, you may
examine Mr. Chiffins's Accounts when he was advised to pass them, and take his
Quietus out of the Exchequer.

Tho by the Defensive League between the King and States when the Triple League
was entered into, the King and States were mutually engaged to supply each other
with a certain Number of Men and Ships in case of any Foreign Invasion upon
either; yet now the King has Subsides given him by the French King to join
with him against Holland, which by the Defensive Alliance the King was obliged
to assist.

The King who was so great in the Love of his Subjects and Parliament for the
Triple League, and had received such vast Sums for it, now at the Instance of
the French King sends Mr. Henry Coventry to the Court of Sweden to dissolve it,
which he did so effectually, that that King not only stood Neuter at the
beginning of the War with the Dutch, but in it joined with the French King
against the Confederates; and this Success Mr. Coventry had, that for this
Business which put all Christendom into a Flame, he was by the King made
principal Secretary of State, and it may be presented with his fine Ranger's
Place in Enfield-Chase too, and that perhaps with thrice more by the French
King: Whereas Sir William Temple, who was the principal Instrument in the Peace
at Nimeguen, lost 2200 l. by it, and his only Recompense was to be Secretary of
State in Mr. Conventry's Place, if Sir William would give him 10000 l. for it.

The Triple League thus dissolved, all Obstacles which might retard the
Progress of this pious Work must be removed: And now my Lord Keeper Bridgman
having done by his Speech the Conspirators Work for Money, has done his own
too, and is turned out of his Place; and my Lord Ashley Cooper, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, is made Lord Chancellor of England; and Earl of Shaftsbury; Mr.
Clifford, (after Lord Clifford) Lord High-Treasurer of England; and my Lord
Arlington Chamberlain to the King's Household, and Prince Rupert, the Duke of
Ormond, and Secretary Trevor discarded from the Committee of Foreign Affairs;
so as the CABAL, viz. Clifford, Ashley, Buckingham, Arlington and Lauderdale
govern all.

The first Result of this sacred Conclave, was the shutting up of the
Exchequer, wherein the Bankers (who formerly had furnished the King with mighty
Sums of Money at extorsive Interest) had lodged between 13 and 1400000 l. of
the Subjects Money; this was in January 167 1/2. One would think these Moneys
added to the Aids granted in the last Session of Parliament, with those
received from France, might have carried on the War against the Dutch on the
King's Part; but to make sure, the Fleet for which the Parliament gave such
vast Sums, to be equal with the French or Dutch, is set out under Sir Robert
Holmes to surprise the Dutch Smirna-Fleet, which he vainly attempted the
thirteenth and fourteenth of March 167 1/2; and to sanctify so Herotick an Act;
at this very time the Declaration of Indulgence was printed and published the
fifteenth.

The French King having gotten the King into his Net* let us see how he used
him: The French King openly declared, that 'twas none of his Quarrel, and that
he only engaged in it out of respect to his Person, and therefore before any
War was declared, the King must first break the Peace, by the Attempt upon the
Dutch Smirna-Fleet.

The Dutch, alarmed at the Attempt upon their Smirna-Fleet* and being in no
Condition to resist both Kings, sent Deputies to both to know upon what Terms
they would agree to Peace: Those sent to our King were denied Audience, and
kept at Hampton Court till it were known what the French King's Pleasure was;
but those sent to the French King had Answer, That what the King had was his
own, and what he should conquer should be his without an Equivalent, and
declared the States might deal with England as they pleased, and come off as
cheap as they could, because by their Treaty they were not bound to procure
them any Advantages. Yet, all this the King as patiently submitted to now, as
before he suffered one Marsilly to be broken on the Wheel at Paris, without one
word from him in his behalf, for being his Agent to the Swiss, to invite them
to join in the Guaranty of Aix; who upon the Scaffold had twenty Questions
asked him in relation to his Majesty's Person, and a strict Enquiry of the
Particulars that passed between the King and him; all which you may read at
large in Mr. Secretary Trevor's Appeal: And this pitiful Story you may find in
a little Treatise termed Colbert's Ghost, printed at Cologn, 1684.

I find little difference in the Causes of this War by these two Kings. The
French King's was, that the Dutch had acted in Diminution to his Glory, but
says not wherein. The King of England's was, the Dutch had not yielded him the
Honor due to his Flag.

The Cabal sought for a fourfold Cause of this War, the Insults upon the
English in the East India Trade, the detaining the Engglish Planters in Surinam
against the Treaty at Breda, and horrid Pictures in Defamation of his Majesty,
and his Flag.

To this purpose the Committee for the East India Company was summoned to show
Cause: who answered and gave it under their Hands, That since the Treaty at
Breda they knew no Cause, nor as yet the Dutch could pretend to no more than
was granted by it, they having not as yet assisted the young King of Bantam
against his Father, and made use of the young King's Name to expel the English
Factories from the Pepper Trade, as before they had the Spice Trade.

For detaining the English Planters in Surinam; it was answered, the Planters
were not willing to forsake their Subsistence, and be turned into the wild
World to seek it; and that the Dutch performed their Part with Mr. Secretary
Trevor, and therefore it was no fault of theirs if it were not observed; nor
did they hinder them when they were transplanted to repair the Ruin of the
English Plantation in St. Christophers made by the French.

For the Pictures the Dutch answered, they knew of none, except one Medal,
which might be liable to any such Construction; but so soon as they knew of it,
they caused the Stamp to be broken.

For that of the Flag, the Case stood thus: the Dutch having fitted up a Fleet
of Men of War in jealousy of the French, were riding near their own Coast, when
one of the King's Yachts discharged a Gun at the Admiral to strike Sail; which
the Admiral not doing, was the cause of the Breach for the War, tho the States
disowned the Refusal, and offered to make any Satisfaction the King should
require. But it is the End which crowns the Work in every Act, and therefore
the Declaration concludes, That notwithstanding this War, the King will support
the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle according to the Scope and Intent of it, and
preserve the Ends of it inviolable: As if the getting the Swede out of it, and
joining with the French against the Dutch, diametrically contrary to it, were
the Support of that Treaty; or that the subduing Holland, so that the French
should be Lord on both sides of the Spanish Netherlands, could be to protect
them against the Power of the French. Good God! Did these Men believe Heaven or
a God! But all Moral Virtues, and whatsoever may be called sacred, must give
way to the Advancement of the Catholic Cause.

By this time the French King by the Benefit of the Act of Navigation, Oliver's
Peace with France, and War with Spain, our King's supine Negligence, and the
Addition of twelve great Men of War built by the Dane and Dutch in the former
Dutch War, had got a Navy equal to the Dutch or English; yet how to damage or
destroy these, and to instruct his Men to fight, is the French Game now to be
played: And therefore for this time the French permitted the English to have
the Red Flag, and the French were content with the White: Yet here it is
observable, That in all the former Fights with the Dutch, when the French and
Dane joined against the English, except that when the Fleet was divided, the
English put the Dutch to flight; whereas in all the Fights (which were four)
wherein the French joined the English, the English came off with more Loss than
the Dutch.

Things thus ordered, the Duke of York was Admiral of the Red, or the whole
Fleet, Monsieur D'Estree of the White, and my Lord of Sandwich of the Blue: And
thus they rode at Anchor in Sould-Bay the 28th of June 1672, the Wind blowing
at North-East, a stiff Gale: And upon that day there was a mighty Sacrifice to
Ceres and Bacchus on board the Fleet by the Flag-Officers; and at the same
time, the other Captains in imitation of their Admiral, went on Shore to
perform the same at Alborough, Dunwich, and Sold.

In their Jollity on Board, my Lord Sandwich (not at good Terms either with the
Duke or with the French) said, that as the Wind stood, the Fleet rode in danger
of being surprised by the Dutch, and therefore thought it advisable to weigh
Anchor, and get out to Sea: The Duke retorted upon him, as if this had been
said out of Fear, which the next day 'twas thought was the loss of the Earl,
and the brave Ship the Prince Royal.

The Sacrifice ended, and when all were Vino somnoque sepulti, the Thunder of
the Cannon of the Scout-Ships about two in the Morning, gave Notice that the
Dutch Fleet was approaching to call the English to an account for their
Yesterday's Jollity.

Now all things were in Confusion, our drowsy Officers were in no case to go to
Counsel, nor had time for weighing Anchor, the Cables therefore were cut to
avoid being burnt by the Dutch Fireships, and the Long-boats were sent near
the Shore to wait upon their sleepy Officers. Here was no time to draw into a
Line of Battle* but it happened that about four in the Morning a Calm fell,
which continued till after six, whereby the Captains had time to get on Board,
tho not to consider how to fight: And I have heard experienced Seamen say, if
this Calm had not happened, the whole English Fleet had been in danger to be
stranded or burnt.

The Coast of Sould-Bay lies near North and South, the North-most part
inclining into the East, called Eastonness; being the most Eastern Part of
England, but toward the South it inclines into the West.

The French lay South, the Duke's Squadron in the midst, and my Lord Sandwich
on the North; so as the French had most Sea-room, and the Blue least.

When the Dutch engaged the Fleets, the Wind was South-East; and the Dutch did
not fight close with the French, yet the French shot furiously, but their Shot
fell short: But with great Courage the Dutch fell upon the Duke's Squadron, and
more fiercely upon the Blue, the Dutch having near one third more than the
English; and thus the Fight held till about 11, when the French by this time
might have weathered the Dutch, and disingaged the English; but did not: Now
the Wind had got North-East, and Van Gent, the Dutch Vice Admiral, with three
Men of War, whereof one lay across his Haulser, sorely distressed my Lord
Sandwich, when Sir Joseph Jordan (Vice Admiral of the Blue) who might have
disengaged the Earl, sailed to the Red to assist the Duke, and it is believed
the Earl might have done so too, if his great Spirit could have digested his
yesterday's Taunt: So this noble Earl and his brave Ship perished; with many
young Gentlemen besides Mariners. Toward two the English got the Weather-gage
of the Dutch, and then the Fight ended; nor did the French serve the English
better in any of the other Sea Fights, which let others tell, I have had enough
of this.

Tho the Dutch could thus cope with the English and French at Sea, yet they
found another kind of Task of it by Land: And let us look back a little, and see
how this Calamity came upon them, and some things we are necessitated to resume
here, tho mentioned before upon another occasion, to make Matters more plain
and obvious.

There is no Man conversant in the Stories of those Times, but understands that
the Foundation of the Dutch States was laid by William Prince of Orange (Father
of Maurice, and Henry Frederick, Grandfather of King William) who and his
Brothers all lost their Lives in establishing it, with the Assistance of Queen
Elizabeth.

Queen Elizabeth, however she made use of the Dutch to curb the aspiring
Dominion of the Spaniard, knew their Nature so well as never to trust them, and
therefore bridled them by keeping the Brill, Ramakins and Flushing (the Keys of
the Maeze and Scheld) in her Dominion.

The Queen in assisting the Dutch made one Article, That two such English Men
as she should name, should sit and vote in their States. But the Dutch growing
mighty by her Assistance, and withal ungrateful, formed a private Cabal at
Amsterdam, where they managed all the secret Affairs of their State; and in
this Barnvelt was the Head.

The Queen incensed herewith, in the Year 1598 called the States to an account
for all the Moneys she had expended in their Support, which was 8000000 Crowns,
or two Millions Sterling; the Dutch pleaded Poverty, and their Inability of
Payment, and beseeched her, that as she excelled all others in Glory and Power,
so she would continue her Mercy and Pity to these distressed States.

The Queen answered them, She had been often deluded by their deceitful
Supplications, and ungrateful Actions, and pretenses of Poverty, and that they
bare no Reverence to Superiors, nor took any Care but for themselves.

The States were confounded with this Answer, and to appease her, promised to
pay her the whole Debt after the War, and during the continuance of it to pay
her 100000 l. per Annum, and that the English Garrisons in the Brill, Ramakins
and Flushing, should be paid by the States.

The Queen, tho not much trusting the States, yet wisely considering, that if
she refused these Offers, the States might alter, and put themselves under the
Protection of France, now at Peace with the Spaniard, by the Peace at Vervins
the Year before, or that they might make a Peace with Spain, whereby she might
lose the whole Debt, and Dependence the States had upon her, accepted their
Terms: But I do not find they ever performed any of them, except the Payment of
the English in Garrison in the Cautionary Towns, which how well they observed
this, when they found it their Interest not to do it, has been said before.

For in the Year 1609, the Dutch made a Truce with the Spaniard for eleven
Years, when Barnvelt, Hugo Grotius, etc. (Heads of the Lovestein and Arminian
Faction) conspired how to get rid of the English and Prince of Orange (by whom
the Dutch became States.) It Is said before how easily in King James the First's
Reign they got rid of the English; but their Attempt upon the Prince not
succeeding, Barnvelt lost his Head, and Grotius had lost his too if he had not
fled the Country.

But tho Barnvelt's Head was cut off, the Faction did not die with it; for
after the Dutch had made Peace with the Spaniard, at the Treaty of Munster
1648, tho in the Life of the then Prince of Orange (the King's Grandfather, and
the most Renowned General of the Time) the Lovestein Faction stirred not, yet
he dying within the Year after the Treaty, (I think) they began to play their
Game against his Son, a Prince of Lively and Active Courage, about twenty two
Years of Age; and after the Example of Barnvelt, laid their Foundation by
disbanding the English, by whose Blood and Valor, under the Conduct of three
Princes of Orange, they became States.

The Prince, if he suffered this, foresaw his Authority was next struck at,
therefore resolved to prevent it, and to be beforehand with the Conspirators
at Amsterdam, where the Scene was laid; and in great Silence marched within
three Hours march of Amsterdam: but the Weather being dark and foggy, the
Hamburgh Post past by the Prince undiscovered, and gave the Burghers account of
the near Approach of the Prince, whereupon they opened their Sluices, and by
drowning the Country, stopped the Prince's March, whereby he not only lost his
Design, but his Life; for upon the 24th of October 1650, he died, they say of
the Small Pox, leaving the Princess big with Child of the now King William.

Now had the Lovestein Faction a fair Field to play their Game in, and so the
English were disbanded; and having the Rump in England, who would be accounted
States as well as they, they thought all cock-sure; for they were sure the Rump
would take as much Care to keep out the King, as they to suppress and depose
the Prince of Orange, born after his Father's Death.

But tho the Lovestein Faction thought they had a sure Game against the Infant
Prince, they found they had a hard Task to play their Game against the Rump,
who next Year made War upon them; and tho the King offered to assist them
against the Rump with the Fleet Sir William Batton had brought over to him, yet
such was their Aversion to any thing which they thought might tend to the
Benefit of the Prince, that they refused the King's Assistance, and so had been
rooted out from being a State, if Oliver's Design of keeping out the King, as
well as the Prince of Orange, had not prevented it.

After the Dutch made Peace with Oliver, being before at Peace with France,
Spain and the Empire, they now set all their Wits to work to establish their
Commonwealth without the Prince of Orange; and to make sure work, God's sacred
Name must be prostituted to establish their Ambition, Perfidiousness and
Ingratitude, by swearing never to admit of a Stadtholder; nor did they stay
here, but imposed the same upon the Prince: The Success you will soon hear.

In this seeming Prosperity, they made John De Wit (a Fellow as arrogant and
insolent as ungrateful, factious, and imitating French Modes) Pensionary, or
rather Dictator of Holland; whose chief Business was to depress the Prince,
thereby arrogating so much more to himself as he debased the Prince and his
Authority; and so intent he was hereon, that he neglected to take care of the
Military Discipline which was exercised in the United Provinces, whilst they
continued in War with Spain; and in all their Garrisons (especially those upon
the Rhine) instead of the old experienced Governors, De Wit and his Faction
put in Burgomasters Sons, and Favorites of their Faction opposite to the
Prince.

Now you shall see De Wit and his Faction outwitted by the French, and by the
same Artifice, by which they had outwitted our King and his French Counselors.

For De Wit having lulled the King into the Security of a deceitful Peace,
whereby the Dutch got the Opportunity of Firing our Ships at Chatham, and then
the Peace at Breda; and after having gotten the King into the Triple Alliance,
De Wit ascribed the Glory of all these to himself, and became so insolent
hereon, that he became intolerable to all but his own Faction.

The French King cooped up by the Triple Alliance, used this Finess to break
it; his Pensioners in England represented to the King the Insolence of De Wit
and the Dutch, upon the Treaty at Breda, and it may be more than was true* and
how that the French King had by the Treaty restored what he took from the
English in St. Christophers during the War, whereas the Dutch still detained
Polloroon, and Surinam, though taken in the War; and how dishonorable it would
be to the King not to vindicate his Honor herein, and how ready his Brother of
France would be to assist him in it. These Counsels had the Effects before
showed.

In all this Time the French King entertained a Treaty with the Dutch, to be a
Mediator between the English, and them, about their settling Trade and
Commerce, but especially in the East Indies; and the Dutch embraced the
overture, wherein the French were no more sincere, than the Dutch were with the
English in the Year 1667, before they fired our Ships in their Harbors.

The Dutch lulled into Security by this Treaty, made no Preparations by Land
against the French, either by raising an Army, or fortifying their Garrisons.

Whilst the French King was thus wheedling De Wit and his Faction, he
corrupted one Mombas, (a Frenchman, and an Officer of War in the Dutch
Service) who betrayed all he could learn or observe to the French King; and one
Desroches* a Captain in the Prince of Conde's Guards, and a Kinsman of Mombas,
prevailed with him the Winter before the War broke out, to take a Journey into
France, fully to inform the King of the State of Affairs in Holland, and to
take further Instructions from the King.

Thus the French King having made a strict Alliance with the Archbishop of
Cologn, and Bishop of Munster, (two implacable Enemies of the Dutch, for having
filcht some Towns from them) utterly surprised the Dutch, and marched with a
mighty Army to Wise, a small City upon the Maez, in the Bishopric of Liege,
where he staid a Fortnight for further Instructions from Mombas.

The Dutch now roused out of their stupid Security, to take Counsel what to do,
the Prince of Orange's (though they had forsworn him St^dtholder, yet allowed
him a Place among the States) Counsel was, to put ten Thousand Men into
Mastricht, and to encamp with the rest at Bodegrave, whose Situation was most
advantageous to cover Holland, and to abandon the rest of the Places above the
Rhine: Monsieur Opdam, and Celidreck, who spoke for the Nobility, were of the
same Opinion.

But De Wit and his Faction, (little versed in Military Affairs, yet ruled all
the roast) would keep all or lose all, (and so they did;) and tho the Garrisons
upon the Rhine were weak, and ill provided, they made them much weaker, by
detaching great Numbers out of them to put into Mastricht.

Mombas gave the French King an Account of all this, and how easily all the
Towns upon the Rhine might fall into his Power.

The French King nicks the Opportunity, and passed the Maez, and easily put to
flight some Troops which the Dutch had advantagiously posted to oppose him, and
came before Orsoy, which next day was surrendered to him.

From thence he marched to Rhinburgh and Dossery, both which surrendered, and
Dossery without shooting one Cannon, for which the Governor lost his Head.
Wesel was delivered to the Prince of Conde, after the Trenches had been opened
for a day or two; and the Governor had a Sword passed over his Head by the
Hangman, for making so feeble a Defense. Barick at the same time was taken by
Marshal Turenne; and the Prince of Conde advancing, took Deudekom, Rees, and
Emerick, with the same Facility as he had done Wesel. Thus you see these De
Wits, (or without Wits) after their supine Negligence of preserving their
Country for twenty Years, by their Ignorance, or stubborn Opposition to the
Prince, made the French King's Passage more easy to destroy their Country.

Here the French Arms seem to stop, for the Issel, by reason of its Depth, not
only forbad the French a farther Progress, but the strong Retrenchments on the
other Side, where the River is more fordable; when two Gentlemen of the
Neighborhood of Tolhuys came to the Prince of Conde at Emerick, and promised
to show him a Passage over the Rhine, where there were but one Hundred Paces
swimming. The Prince of Conde hereupon, sent the Count De Guiche, to try the
Truth hereof, with the two Men, who brought the Count opposite to the Tol-huys,
where plunging into the Water, the Count followed them, and found what they had
said to be true.

The Prince hereupon acquainted the French King, who came that Night and supped
with the Prince, and ordered his Army to march toward the Rhine; whither they
came about half an Hour before day.

You have seen how easy a Conquest the French King made of all the Towns on the
Rhine, by the Advice of these witless De Wits: now you shall see how by their
Advice, they gave him as easy a Passage over the Rhine, to the Ruin and Loss of
all their Up-land Towns, and Country on this side of it.

The Prince of Orange (who in this Exigence De Witt's Faction permitted to be
General) not knowing the Man, sent Mombas with a Body of Horse and Foot to
guard the Passage over the Rhine, those of the Issel being already secured from
the Passage of the French; but Mombas seeing this might prevent the French
King's Passage, wrote to some of the Deputies of the States, that there was no
Likelihood of the French passing the Rhine, but if they pleased, he would put
himself into Nimeguen, where he believed they bent their March, which these
Deputies ordered him to do.

At this time the Prince was gone out from the Camp with a Detachment, and upon
his Return was surprised with what Mombas and the Deputies had done; and
forthwith sent Wartz with some Troops to the Tol-huys, to entrench himself
there; b^^ though Wartz made all the Haste he could, the French appeared on the
other side of the Rhine, which caused him to entrench his Infantry, and caused
the Cavalry to advance along the Rhine.

The French King caused his Cannon to play upon Wartz's Cavalry, who sheltered
themselves from the Shot, among the Trees upon the River, whilst the French
passed it, though some were drowned in it; which Wartz's Cavalry did not
hinder: but when they perceived some of the French Troops had come over, and
began to form a Squadron, they came from the Shelter of the Trees; but instead
of pressing upon the French, they made a Halt, and made their Discharge at so
great a Distance, as did no Execution; and thereby gave the French an
Opportunity of joining those who were before come over.

The Foot divided from the Horse, and discouraged by their base Cowardice, and
not having time to entrench themselves, demanded Quarter, which the Prince of
Conde granted, in case they laid down their Arms. But the Duke of Longueville,
advancing to the Brink of the Dutch Retrenchment, fired his Pistol, whereupon
the Dutch discharged a whole Volley upon the French, and killed a considerable
Number of them, whereof Longueville was one, and the Prince of Conde wounded.

Hereupon the French stormed the Trenches, wherein they found some Resistance,
and put all to the Sword, but those who escaped by Flight; and took and
plundered the Castle of Tol-huys, and put all the Isle of Betue under
Contribution.

The Disaster of the Dutch ended not here, for the Dutch which guarded the
Issel, fearing the French would fall upon them behind, fled from their Posts,
and left the Passage free to the French; so as the King in Person took Doesburg
and Turesune, Nimeguen, Swoll, Daventer, Grave, Arnheim, Skinenschon, and
Creveceer; and the Bishop of Munster, Coventer.

Whilst the King besieged Doesburg, the Burgomasters of Vtrecht surrendered the
Keys to the King, who sent the Marquess of Rochfort to take Possession of it;
who made such Haste, that he neglected to take Muiden, then abandoned, whereby
he might have bridled Amsterdam.

Thus you see what a deplorable State the Ingratitude and Perfidiousness of
these Men had brought their Country to; and you will soon see that these Men who
had sworn to exclude the Prince from being Stadtholder, shall themselves be
deposed from being States, and no other visible Hopes left to free their
Country from the Calamities which they had brought upon it, but by exalting
this Prince, which they had formerly sworn never to do. And it is more
observable, that both the De Wits were massacred by the Rage of the People, in
whom the De Wits, and Barnvelt before them, placed all Sovereignty, and might
do as they pleased.

To complete the miserable Condition of the Dutch Provinces, the King had
raised an Army commanded by Marshal Schomberg, (who had done what he could for
the French in Portugal, the Queen Regent of Spain, upon the French Irruption
into the Spanish Netherlands in 1667, having made Peace with Portugal) and Col.
Fitzgerald, an Irish Papist, Major General: The Business of this Army was, as
the Vogue went, That since the French King could not get that part of Holland
which was drencht by Fresh Water, to souse it with Salt Water, by cutting down
their Sea-Banks; but Point Homo.

For the Dutch Mob, astonished and confounded with the Loss of their Country by
Land, and opposed by Two the most Powerful Kings in the whole World by Sea, in
a Rage assassinated the Two De Wits, Cornelius and John, as the Betrayers of
their Country, and the Causers of this War, and depose the States, who they
thought were of the Lovestein, or De Wits Faction, and restore the Prince of
Orange (now in the first Year of his coming to age) to the Command of his
Ancestors, and make Monsieur Fagell Pensioner of Holland.

The Prince being the King's Nephew, and having never offended him, raised an
Expectation in the People, and Fear in the French King, that the King would not
suffer the Prince to fall into a worse State than the De Wits intended, by
suffering the French to conquer Holland, whereby the Prince's Authority must
needs be swallowed up. This the French King foresaw, and therefore to obviate
it, the French King was the first who made Application to the Prince, and
proposed to him the making him Sovereign of the United Provinces, under the
Protection of England and France: (such a Protection was never heard of before)
But the French King knew how to deal with his Brother of England.

It Is admirable to consider, that notwithstanding the Conquest by the French of
the other Provinces, and the Desolation of Holland, and the long Prejudices,
even from his Cradle, against him by the Lovestein Faction, this Generous
Prince in his most florid and ambitious Age, should out of his virtuous, innate
Love to his Country, stand so firm to it, that his Answers were, That he would
never betray a Trust reposed in him, nor sell the Liberties of his Country,
which his Ancestors had so long defended, and God so blessed him herein. But out
of these Ruins shall this limited Prince arise, and put a check to the
boundless and arbitrary Ambition of this designing French Universal Monarch, as
his Ancestors before had to the Spanish.

The King it seems could not but see, that whilst he got nothing but blows by
Sea, the French got all by Land; and therefore sent the Duke of Buckingham, my
Lords Arlington and Hallifax, to the French King, keeping his Court at Vtrecht,
but with Instructions as secret and dark, as those of making the War: These
when they came into Holland, were informed of the French Designs; and the
King's Answer to their Deputies was, viz. That the King might treat as he
pleased, but that what the French King had got, was his own; and that what he
should get he would not restore without an Equivalent. Which raised such an
Indignation in them that nothing would serve their turn but destroying, at
least mastering the French Fleet: And in this Humor they went to the Prince of
Orange, and promised the same; and engaged to their utmost, to bring the French
King to be satisfied with Mastricht, and of keeping Garrisons in the Towns upon
the Rhine, belonging to the Electors of Brandenburgh and Cologn.

From Holland Two of these proceed to the French Court at Vtrecht, where the
French Air changed their Minds they left in Holland, and about Four Days after
sent word to the Prince of Orange, that the States must give Satisfaction to
both Kings jointly, and that neither would treat separately; upon which the
Prince desired to know what the Kings joint and respective Demands were, and of
the new Agreement made by them, so contrary to their Promise to the Prince and
States: Whereupon Mr. Secretary Trevor makes these Queries.

1. Whether they were sent to promote the French Conquest? If not, why, by
making the Peace impossible, as far as in them lay, would they force the Dutch
to submit to the French Dominion? 2. Whether they did not know that the French
Demands alone had been rejected by the States, and that the granting of them
would make it impossible for the Dutch to give the King any Satisfaction? 3.
Whether having received from the Prince and States all imaginable Assurances of
their Designs to return to the King's Amity, and to purchase it at any Rate
they could, they could faithfully neglect these, and enter into a new
Engagement, so prejudicial to England? 4. How far those who were joined in
Commission, did concur in their Judgment; and whether these Considerations with
many others, were not represented to them, and urged by some who desired to
serve the King faithfully? 5. Whether or no it was for that Reason they opposed
to fiercely my Lord Viscount Hallifax's (whom came a Day or two after them)
Appearing and Acting jointly with them, tho in the same Commission with them,
in as ample a Manner as themselves? 6. Who were those who (after my Lord
Hallifax could be kept out no longer) went privately to the French Camp under
Pretenses, and had Negotiations of their own on foot? 7. Whether they had order
to call the French King King of France, and to name him before their Master, as
well in the French Demands, as of his Majesty's, in all their Agreements which
they sent to the Prince of Orange? 8. Whether they had Instructions to stand in
the Behalf of the French upon the Public Exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion in the United Provinces, the Churches to be divided to the Roman
Priests to be maintained out of the Public Revenue? And to bind the King's
Hands, so that the French King may be sure of his Bargain, these
Plenipotentiaries (Two of them) agreed with the French, that the King should
not treat nor conclude a Peace with the Dutch without them: But the French King
shall find no more Security herein, than the Dutch and Spaniard did in the
King's joining in the Triple League.
For the Support of this holy Catholic Design, stood my Lord Treasurer
Clifford, and a new Band of Parliament-Pensioners, never before heard of in
England, at Board and Wages: but these being a kind of Land-Privateers, are to
tax the Country to pay themselves, and to do whatsoever shall be commanded, or
no Purchase no Pay.

In this state of Affairs the Parliament met again the 4th of February 1671/^,
when the Commons, like Men coming out of a drowzy Lethargy, began to consider
the dangerous state of the Nation, and the dangerous Consequences of the severe
Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters, by provoking them to join with the
Popish; and therefore, tho they questioned the King's Declaration of
Indulgence, and no Money was like to be had unless he recalled it, yet upon the
14th of February, the Commons resolved, Nemi^^ contradicente, That a Bill be
brought in for the Ease of his Majesty's Subjects, who are Dissenters in
Matters of Religion from the Church of England. And a Bill passed the House
accordingly, but was stopped in the House of Lords, (Causa patet) the dead Weight
joining with the Caballing Party.

But whatever the Commons thought of the King's Dispensing Power in England,
Lauderdale (the fifth in the Cabal in England) was of another Opinion in
Scotland; for in the second Parliament c. 1. held by him, he gets an Act
declaring, That by Virtue of the King's Supremacy, the ordering the Government
of the Church does properly belong to his Majesty and Successors, as an
inherent Right of the Crown; and that he may enact and emit such Constitutions,
Acts, and Orders concerning Church-Administrations, Persons, Meetings, and
Matters, as he in his Royal Wisdom shall think fit, etc. any Law, Act, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that he might not be less active in Scotland than his Brother Clifford was
in England, and Buckingham and Arlington were in Holland, being armed with
these other Powers, he made all sorts of People depose upon Oath, their
Knowledge of the Persons of Dissenters, not Popish Meetings, in the Exercise of
their Worship, upon Penalty of Fining, Imprisonment, Banishment, and
Transportation, to be sold for Slaves; imprisoning all outed Ministers who
shall preach out of their Families, till they give Security of 5000 Marks Scot,
not to do the same again; every Hearer, being a Tenant, to pay 25l. Scot, and
Cotter 12, toties quoties they shall offend; and that it shall be Death for any
to preach in Fields or Houses where any are without doors; and 500 Marks Reward
for any to secure such dead or alive: and gave Orders, That every Man, for
himself and all under him, should give Bond, not to go to Field-Meetings, and
to inform against, pursue, and deliver up all outed Ministers to Judgment.

The Execution of these Orders was not by legal Officers, but by an Army of
Highland Robbers, who quartered upon the Country: so that it may be a Question,
whether the French King did not take his Measures in his Dragoon-Reformation,
by the groundwork laid by Lauderdale.

But his Grace (which it seems did work irresistibly) did not stay here; for
his Highland Army, which consisted of eight or nine thousand Men, not only
lived upon Free Quarter, upon all sorts of the King's peaceable Subjects, but
in most places levied great Sums of Money, under the Notion of Dry Quarters:
they had only regard to the Duke's private Animosities; for the most part of
the Places where they quartered and destroyed, had not been guilty of
Field-Conventicles. The King's Subjects were denounced Rebels, and Captions
issued out for seizing their Persons, for not entering into Bond, That neither
they, nor any under them, shall go to Field-Conventicles; and the Nobility and
Gentry were disarmed, who had ever been faithful to the King, and assisted in
suppressing Field-Conventicles. Indictments were delivered in by the King's
Advocate in the Evening, to be answered next Morning upon Oath, otherwise they
were to be reputed guilty. These and many more of this kind, in the Matters
relating to Lauderdale's Administration of Affairs in Scotland, were
represented to the King, and that by his Command; and are in Lauderdale's and
his Lady's Impeachment, which are all in Print. Notwithstanding all this, it
was this Lauderdale who had procured an Act of Parliament to raise 20000 Foot,
and 2000 Horse, to march into England to serve the King upon all Occasions. And
tho the Duke, to prevent the Fame of his Actions arriving in England, had by a
Proclamation forbid all Subjects to depart the Kingdom without License, yet the
Noise of his Actions flew every where in England, not less than the Censures of
the Star Chamber and High Commission, in Laud's Regency, did in Scotland; and
in due time the Duke shall hear of them. Can any Man now believe, That the
King, by his Declaration of Indulgence, intended any Benefit to the Dissenters
in England, whilst Lauderdale, without doubt by his Order, was acting these
things in Scotland?

The House of Commons could not at first step forget all the Loyalty they
before professed to the King, nor yet would they own the Dutch War; and therefore
they voted the King 1238750 l. to supply the King's extraordinary Occasions;
but before they would let this Bill slip through their Fingers, they tacked a
Bill to it, by which no Papist should have any public Employment. This Bill
caught my Lord Treasurer Clifford, the first in the Cabal, who was forced to
resign his Treasurer's Place, or renounce Popery, which he would not do; his
Pensioners not being against it, hoping thereby to get the Places which the
Popish Party held; and even my Lord Chancellor Ashley, from Delenda Carthago,
now sets up for the Country Party, against the Designs of the Cabal: so moultry
are all Designs, which are not cemented in Justice and Honor.

The King having got the Bill for the Money, the further Sitting of the
Parliament became uneasy to him; whereupon the Parliament was adjourned till
the 20th, and after to the 27th of October, viz. 1673.

During this Recess, there were three Sea Fights between the English, French,
and Dutch, Prince Rupert Admiral, in all which the French stood aloof, looking
on whilst the English and Dutch battered one another; only Monsieur de Martell,
for engaging, was recalled, checked, and dismissed.

As the English thrived no better by Sea, so neither did the French by Land;
for first the Elector of Brandenburg, then the Emperor, and at last the King,
or Queen Regent of Spain, apprehensive of the Danger common to them all, of the
French subduing the Dutch Provinces, entered into a mutual League for their
Defense: and by their Conjunction, the Prince of Orange recovered many of the
Vpland Towns, in almost as little Time as the French had taken them.

In this state the Swede now broke loose from the Triple League, whereby he
opened the Gap to let in this Confusion, and became a Pensioner to France, and
proposes a Treaty of Peace to be held at Cologn; and thither the King, the
Emperor, the French King, and the King of Spain, send their Plenipotentiaries
to treat of it.

The French King's Propositions were so insolent, that if granted, our King
could have nothing; yet the King (pudet haec) insisted, That tho he was
contented with such Propositions as he required, so as accepted in ten Days,
yet if granted by the States, they should be of no force: nor will he enter
into any Treaty of Peace, unless his most Christian Majesty shall receive
Satisfaction from the States in his Particular.

After the French King should have all, the King's Demands were a Regulation of
the Trade to the East Indies, a Settlement of the Freedom of Navigation in
Europe, the Arrears for the Fishing-Trade upon the English Coast, to assert a
settled Revenue to the Crown for every Buss or Dogger-boat for the future; and
to make Satisfaction for the Damages sustained by the Depredations upon the
Ships and Lading taken from Sir Paul Pindar, and Sir William Courten, etc.

In this Interval of the Parliament's Recess, the King took the Seals from my
Lord Chancellor Ashley; now made Earl of Shaftsbury, and gave them to Sir
Heneage Finch, a Person of singular Integrity, Eloquence, and Veracity; who to
those insite Excellencies which were natural to him, improved them, by the
great Example of his Uncle John Finch, likewise Keeper of the Great Seal in the
King's Father's Reign; yet with a different Fate, for the Temper of the Times
would not bear his Uncle's Integrity, Eloquence, and Veracity; whenas the
Nephew, with prosperous Gales, continued his Course till he arrived at Lord
Chancellor, Lord Daventry, and Earl of Nottingham, and kept the Seals to his
dying Day; which not one of his three Predecessors could do: And Sir Thomas
Osburn succeeded Lord Treasurer. So C. and A. are out; we shall soon see what
became of B. A. and L.

At last the 20th of October came, and the Parliament met again, when at the
opening of the Session, the new Lord Keeper, with admired Eloquence and
Veracity (which he retained to his dying Day) made a large Deduction of the
Dutch Averseness to Peace; their uncivil Demeanor to the King's
Plenipotentiaries at Cologn, and how indirectly they dealt with the King in all
the Overtures of Peace; and therefore a necessary Supply, proportionable to the
Greatness of the King's Affairs, was not only demanded, but Care to be taken
for Payment of the Bankers Debt, otherways Multitudes of the King's Loyal
Subjects would be undone.

But neither the Keeper's Eloquence nor his Veracity would down with the
Commons; for during this Recess, the Terror of the French Progress had alarmed
the Nation as well as the rest of Christendom: The French Legerdemain at Sea
was so much more taken notice of as our Loss was more, by their looking on
whilst the English and Dutch destroyed one another. The Commons were frighted
at the standing Army in England, commanded by a Foreigner, and an Irish Papist,
taking all Military Liberty as in Time of War. It was more than whispered, the
Conditions proposed by the King's Plenipotentiaries at Cologn were impossible;
which tho granted, yet no Peace was to be had, unless the French King was
answered in his Demands: nor were the Commons content with their Prorogation,
till the Marriage with the Princess of Modena was past Cure.

Hereupon the Commons, on the 31st of October, bound themselves by a Vote, That
considering the present Condition of the Nation, they will not take into
further Consideration any Aids or Charges upon the Subject, except it shall
appear that the Obstinacy of the Dutch shall render it necessary; nor before
this Kingdom be effectually secured from Popery and Popish Counsels, and other
Grievances redressed.

This early Vote of the Commons was so much more surprising to the Band of
Pensioners, who as yet had not earned their Bread, by how much they expected
Mountains of Gold should fall from my Lord Keeper's Eloquence and Veracity. And
now is the King* like his Father when he went to York to fight the Scots,
reduced to a fine state, all the Moneys received from the French King, like
Water spilt upon the Ground, never to be collected: Besides the Band of
Pensioners, he had a Land Army to maintain, and a Fleet at Sea, which the
French Subsidies would not one fourth maintain: He could not avoid the Clamours
of his Subjects whose Moneys were shut up in the Exchequer, nor the Merchants
who had supplied his Navy in this and the former Dutch War; yet their Graces
the Dutchesses of Cleveland and Portsmouth, must be maintained suitable to their
Qualities; so must the Dukes of M -- G -- S -- N -- R -- St. A -- and Earl of P
-- besides Portions to be provided for many of his Offspring of the other Sex.
He had already provided Titles for the Cabal, except Buckingham, who could not
be greater. However, you will see this Vote of the Commons will work powerfully,
notwithstanding the Agreement at Vtrecht that the King shall not make a
separate Peace without the French King, nor any Peace with the Dutch, unless
the French King shall be satisfied in his Particulars at Cologn.

Nor did the Commons stay here, but C. and A. being gone, one dead, the other
turned to the other side, they fell upon B. A. and L. and addressed themselves to
the King that they might be removed from his Councils, Presence, and all
public Employment: and upon the 4th of November moved, 1. That the Alliance
with France was a Grievance. 2. That the evil Counsel about the King was a
Grievance to the Nation. 3. That the Lord Lauderdale was a Person grievous to
the Nation, and not fit to be trusted in any Office or Trust, but to be removed.


The Rump of the Cabal thus used, frighted the whole Band of Pensioners into a
Fear, their Turn would be next, at least their Pensions not paid; and therefore
to undo all that was done, in a Hurry the Parliament was prorogued to the 7th
of January following, not having sat eight Days.

But the Commons needed not to have been so fierce upon B. A. and L. for B. was
now going off, and A. being the King's Brother-in-law was spited that he was
twice balked in being Lord Treasurer; and if he did not turn to the other side,
yet he would never be reconciled with my Lord Treasurer: Only L. now remained
to be quit with the Commons, to get an Act of Parliament in Scotland to raise
20000 Foot and 2000 Horse, to serve the King upon all Occasions.

The King having so hastily begun this War, by two such Acts as were without
Precedent, viz. The shutting up the Exchequer, and the Attempt upon the Dutch
Smyrna Fleet, was now as forward to make a Peace with the Dutch, even upon any
Terms; tho but last Year his Plenipotentiaries had agreed at Vtrecht with the
French King, not to make Peace with the Dutch without him; and this Year at
Cologn, to grant no Peace unless the French King be satisfied in his
Particulars.

By this time the CABAL was degenerated into a Juncto, and this was compounded
too of five, viz. My Lord Keeper F -- L -- Lauderdale, Arlington, and Secretary
Coventry, in room of Secretary Trevor, now dead.

It was agreed by the whole Juncto, That Sir William Temple was the most proper
Agent for making this Peace, not only for his Abilities and great Reputation he
had acquired in concluding the Triple League, but for the Honor and Esteem the
King of Spain and States of Holland held of his Integrity and Conduct: And in
order hereunto, my Lord Arlington, from the King and Juncto, complimented Sir
William, and told him, He would not pretend the Merit of having named him (Sir
William) upon this Occasion, or whether the King or my Lord Treasurer did it
first, but that the whole Committee joined in it, and concluded, That since a
Peace was to be made, no other Person to be thought so fit for it; and
therefore the King, with many kind Expressions, gave order to Sir William to
prepare for his Journey, and the Secretary to draw up his Instructions.

But how forward soever the Juncto were for Peace, the Dutch outrun them, or
at least kept equal Pace with them: for tho the Prince of Orange were
victorious in Holland, and with admired Prudence and Conduct, like another
Scipio, carried the War out of his Country, and thereby saved it; for in the
dead of the Year he joined Montecuculi the Emperor's General, and besieged and
took Bon (the Residence of the Elector of Cologn) and thereby cut off the
Communication between France and Holland, whereby the French were forced not
only to quit their conquered Towns by heaps, but he opened a Passage for the
Imperial Forces to join the Dutch and Spanish; yet the Dutch, having but newly
recovered their drowned Country, and lost their Trade, the Charges of
maintaining their Land Army became so great, that it was impossible this Year
to set out a Fleet by Sea.

The Dutch States therefore gave the Marquess of Frezno (the Spanish Ambassador
in England) Power to treat and conclude a Peace with the King, which came in
three Days after the Juncto had sent to Sir William: and this, by Sir William's
Advice, stayed his Journey into Holland, it being more honorable for the King
to be sought to, than seek a Peace; and that the King's Interest might be
better pursued at London than at the Hague.

The King and Juncto agreed to it, and withal added, That tho Sir William did
not treat the Peace at the Hague, he should at London: And when Sir William had
received his Instructions, he at three Meetings with the Marquess concluded the
whole Treaty with the Satisfaction of the King.

Sir William says, the Articles being public, need no Place here; but the two
Points of greatest Difficulty were the Flag, and recalling the English Troops
out of the French Service: But that this last was composed by private
Engagements to suffer those to wear out without any Recruits, or not to permit
new ones to go over; yet at the same time to give Leave to the Dutch to raise
such Levies as they should think fit in his Majesty's Dominions.

But this is an odd Equivocation to recall the French Troops, which was to let
them wear out, without Recruits, which was not observed neither, for Men were
not only encouraged, but pressed to this Service: and to these in the French
Service does Sir William and the Germans too ascribe the Glory of all the
French Actions, who not only in Turenne's Life, but at his Death, saved the
whole French Army. But if this be as Sir William says, yet the King hereby,
instead of being the Protector, becomes a Murderer of his Subjects, in
permitting them to kill one another on both sides; for it is impossible the War
should be just on both sides: Nor do I believe the like Precedent can be
showed, unless by the King's Grandfather James I.

I confess, I have not seen the Articles of the Treaty at large; but by so much
as I have seen, I do not find that the Arrears for the Dutch Fishing upon the
Coasts of England and Scotland, agreed upon in King Charles the First's Time
(which was 30000 l. per Annum) and a settled Revenue for that Fishery for the
Time to come, insisted upon at the Treaty of Cologn; nor the Damages to the
Executors of Sir Paul Pindar and Sir William Courten, were so much as mentioned
in it. It may be the 800000 Patacoons to be paid by the Dutch to the King by
this Treaty, were intended in Satisfaction of the Executors Demands, of which
they denied they ever received one Penny.

This hasty Peace thus huddled up, in less than 4 Days, viz. between the 5th or
6th and 9th of February, would not admit of the Establishment of a Marine
Treaty, and Regulation of the East India Trade between the English and Dutch,
and Treaty at Cologn: And therefore it was agreed, That Commissioners on both
sides were to meet at London to treat of these, and determine them in three
Months after such Meeting: and in case any Differences should not be adjusted,
these to be referred to the Queen Regent of Spain, who should name 11
Commissioners, the greater part of whom should determine the Differences in 6
Months after, and these to meet in 3 Months after the Queen Regent shall have
taken the foresaid Arbitriment upon her self.

But the States, as wise in this Treaty as the English were improvident and
hasty, got the 7th Article agreed to, viz. That the Treaty made at Breda 1667,
as also other Treaties renewed by it, be confirmed, and remain in full Force
and Vigor, as far as they shall not be contrary to this present Treaty.

The Marine Treaty was agreed by the Commissioners; but the first and fifth
Articles ill observed by the Dutch, as I have seen made public; but nothing
was agreed for the Regulation of the East India Trade, nor any thing concerning
it referred to the Queen Regent of Spain.

This is that honorable Peace, to his Majesty's Satisfaction, which succeeded
this glorious War, to the Expense of such vast Treasure and Charge to England,
and involving Christendom into a War, wherein we taught the French to fight by
Sea, while they encouraged the Dutch and us to destroy one another, whereby we
got nothing but dry Blows, except the 800000 Patacoons: for the Flag was ever
given by the Dutch to Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles I. and by
the Treaty to Oliver in 1654, and to the King in 1666 and 1667, nor ever
desired by the States: But the Dutch got confirmed the Islands of Amboyna and
Polloroon, which they had ravished from the English, (whereby they not only
supply Europe, but India and Persia, with Spice) and Surinam; and also got
discharged again from the Piracy or Robbery perpetrated upon the Bona Esperanza
and Henry Bonadventura in Time of Peace, and all the Arrears of 30000 l. per
Annum, for fishing upon our Coasts since 1636. So little Regard was had, in
this Treaty, either of the King's Honor, or of the Good or Interest of the
Nation.

However, 'twas the Interest of Spain to promote this separate Peace with the
Dutch; for this Year the French King having bribed the Swiss to a Compliance,
took the Franche County from Spain, the Swiss keeping Garrisons in Dole and
Besanzon: And this Year Messina revolted from Spain, and submitted to the
French King.

CHAP. III.
A further Detection of this Reign till the breaking out of the Popish Plot.
TO mollify his most Christian Majesty, highly exasperated, you must think, by
this Peace, the King, 'twas said, and I believe it, sent his Ship-Carpenters to
instruct the French how to build his Men of War: and I say, Sir Anthony Dean
told me, that by Order of the King, he built the Model of a Man of War (as I
remember he said of a hundred and fifty Tuns) and carried it by Water to Roan,
from whence the French King conveyed it by hand to Versailles, and had it
launched into his great Pool he had made there, where he came on board, and had
much Conference with Sir Anthony upon it.

And if the Service of the English commanded by Turenne in France were not
sufficient for carrying on the War against the Confederates, the King emptied
his own Magazines to fill the French; and that from June 1675 to June 1677,
Grenades were sent without Number, under color of unwrought Iron; Lead-shot
twenty one Tuns, Gunpowder seven thousand one hundred and thirty four Barrels,
Iron-shot eighteen Tuns six hundred Weight, Match eighty eight Tuns and a
thousand Weight; Iron Ordnance four hundred forty one, Quantity two hundred
ninety two Tuns, nine hundred Weight; Carriages, Bandaliers, Pikes, etc.
uncertain.

In return of these Kindnesses, the French King not only exorbitantly enlarged
his Impositions upon the English in their Trade to France, but let loose his
Privateers upon the English, as if there had been no Peace, and plundered,
murdered, made Prize of their Ships and Effects, and confiscated them; blocked
up our Coast, and took our Ships out of their very Ports: and if Complaints
were made at his Sovereign Port, they were baffled, except some which were
redeemed by Sir Ellis Leighton's Interest (a most notorious --) who made a
second Prize of them. Mr. Marvel, at the End of his Growth of Popery, gives an
Account of sixty three of these, with the Masters Names, their Burden, Lading,
and the Ports they belonged to, from 1674 to the latter end of 1676.

Now the King, who by this War had set Christendom in a Flame, being himself
got out of it, sets up to be a Mediator for Peace; and no Man so fit to be
employed in it as Sir William Temple, who having observed how the Ministers had
deceived him or themselves, and advised the King to break Treaties so solemnly
agreed upon, would not take this Employment upon him before he had sounded the
King's true Sentiment, and trust no more to his Ministers.

Sir William therefore, in a Conference with the King in his Closet, and in a
well composed Speech, reflected upon the Cabal, how ill he had been advised to
break Treaties so solemnly agreed to, and how ill they had succeeded, how
different the Constitutions of France were from those of England, and how
different the State of the Crown now was from that when it had the Court of
Wards, and Knights Service, and large Revenues of Lands, and Fee-Farms which
now were alienated: so that Gourville well observed, that a King of England who
will be the Man of his People, is the greatest King in the World; but if he
will be something more, he is nothing at all.

The King heard Sir William attentively, yet impatiently at first, but at last
the King said, Gourville had reason for what was said, and said, And I will be
the Man of my People: but you will see the King shall not long hold in this Mind;
for Monsieur Barillon, the French Ambassador, and the Duchess of Portsmouth,
by the Agency of a French Monk, who had changed his Frock for a Petticoat,
shall unravel all Sir William had been weaving in the Treaty of Nimeguen.

Sir William's Embassy was declared in May 1674, and his Dispatches finished in
July following, when he went into Holland: But it seems to me the French
Interest was chiefly designed, even in this Embassy; for tho Sir William's
Instructions were for a general Peace, yet his Application was first to the
States, and after to the Prince, that they would accept of it, and after their
Acceptance of it, to endeavor it with their Allies; which looks as if the King
rather intended a separate Peace with the Dutch and Spaniard, than a general
one: and this the King endeavored during the whole Treaty at Nimeguen, as you
may see at large in the second Part of Sir William Temple's second Memoirs, and
so ended at last; and so the States understood it, who tho at first desirous of
a separate Peace, yet in Honor they could not leave out the Confederates who
had saved their Country: And if the French King could have a separate Peace
with the States and Spain, he little cared for the Empire, being in a Treaty
with Count Teckely to raise a Rebellion in Hungary, and to engage the Turk in a
War against the Empire.

Tho the King had got out of this War, yet this Summer the French King got the
Swede into it (and as justly as the King began this War by his Attempt upon the
Dutch Smirna-Fleet, for the Elector of Brandenburg had withdrawn a great Army
out of his Country, to assist the Confederates upon the Rhine against Monsieur
Turenne, who commanded the French) without declaring War, the Swede made War
against him in Pomerania, tho it had like to have cost the Swede all he had in
Pomerania; for the Elector returning at the latter end of the Summer, routed
the Swedish Army, and after took Stetin (the Metropolis of Pomerland) and had
kept it, if afterward the Dutch had not made a separate Peace, and left him
and the Empire too, who had saved them, to the Mercy of the French: And this
had been done a Year sooner if the Noble Constancy and Authority of the Prince
of Orange had not opposed it, who this Year fought the great Battle at Seneff
against the Prince of Conde, with uncertain Victory.

You have seen how we got Peace abroad, now let us see how things stood at home.
Tho the Popish Party had been twice balk'd in their Designs, I mean by the
King's recalling the Indulgence, and this Peace, yet were their Hopes and
Designs by the Marriage of the Duke with the Princess of Modena more heightened
than ever; for they knew the King being involved in all sensual Pleasures, and
therefore hating the Cares and Troubles of Business, might easily be prevailed
upon by Importunity; and the Duchess being an adopted Daughter of France, and
having her Advancement and Portion from the French King, was obliged to
propagate the French Designs with the Duke, and he with the King: And the
Advancement of the Catholic Cause was the most pi^us and glorious Work they
could promote, and therefore Coleman (the Duke's Secretary) now holds
Intelligence with Father Ferrier (the French King's Confessor) Ferrier with the
Jesuited Faction in France, and Coleman with those in England how to manage the
King in order to it.

The Bargain was soon made by Coleman and Ferrier, and his Christian Majesty
was fully satisfied of the Duke's good Intentions toward him, so that he
esteemed both their Interests to be one and the same: This Return was by Sir
William Throgmorton, June 2. S. N. 1674, to Coleman.

This Coleman communicates to the Duke, who commanded Coleman to answer, That
the Duke was very sensible of his most Christian Majesty's Friendship, which he
would cultivate with all the good Offices he was capable of, and that the Duke
was fully convinced that their Interests were one, and the Parliament was not
only unuseful, but dangerous both to England and France; and that it was the
Duke's Opinion, That if his most Christian Majesty would write his Thoughts
freely to the King upon this Subject, and make the same Offer of his Purse to
dissolve this Parliament, as he made to the Duke to call another, he did
believe it very possible for him to succeed; and from this time to the breaking
out of the Popish Plot, you shall see the Parliament called, prorogued and
adjourned, by Order from France, or French Ministers and Pensioners.

That this Design may be carried on in Masquerade, the whole Band of Pensioners
make it their Business to possess whom they could persuade, that the Church is
in danger, (truly said, but untruly intended) and that the Nation was running
into Forty One: All Countenance and Hopes of Preferment were promised to those
who would support the Church from the Danger of Forty One. This was blazed
abroad, and encouraged by all sorts of printed Pamphlets, and if they met with
Opposition, the Authors and Printers were persecuted for publishing unlicensed
Pamphlets: Mr. Roger L'Estrange was the Champion and Pensioner of the Cause:
Never did Man fight so to force the Whig into the Church, and when he was there
made a Trimmer of him, and would have him out again: Forty One was his Retreat
against all who durst contend against him and the Government. This was the
Licenser of the Press, but never was there such a Press Rifler.

For propagating this holy Cause, Sir Francis North is made Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, Sir Richard Rainsford Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
William Mountague Chief Baron, Vere Bartue a Baron of the Exchequer, Sir
William Scrogs a Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Thomas Jones of the
King's Bench, Men all durante been placito: You need not fear the Chancery, for
at this time there were four Chancellors and Lord-Keepers alive.

The Parliament was to have met the 10th of November 1674, but the Instructions
from France were not yet sufficiently ripened, so 'twas put off till the 13th
of April 1675.

At the opening of this Session, my Lord Keeper told the Houses, No Influence
of the Stars, no Configurations of the Heavens are to be feared so long as
these two Houses stand in good Disposition to each other, and both in a happy
Conjunction with their Lord and Sovereign, but they ought not quieta movere,
nor res parvas magnis motibus agere.

The House of Commons had been sullen these two last Sessions, and proceeded
contrary to the Humor and Design of the Court, and therefore a Bill was
brought into the House of Lords, e^tituled, An Act to prevent the Danger that
may arise from Persons disaffected to the Government, which was the same
imposed upon the dissenting Clergy by the Oxford five-Mile-Act: this my
Lord Keeper said was a moderate Security to the Church and Crown, which no
honest Man could refuse, and who did, gave great suspicion of dangerous and
Antimonarchical Principles: This Oath or Abhorrence or Test is mentioned
before, and is now set on foot to be taken by all who enjoyed any Beneficial
Offices, Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, to which were added
Privy-Counsellors, Justices of the Peace, and Parliament Men.

It Is strange to me that Princes, or indeed other Men, who have any Piety or
Fear of God, should think to be secure in unjust Actions, by Men's swearing to
observe them: For tho Human Actions be voluntary, yet the End and Design by
them is not in Human Power: Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but only God can
give the Blessing; with what reason then can Man expect a Blessing from God,
because his Name is profaned, and made as a stalking-Horse to attain it? What
Security had the Presbyterians by their Covenant, or the Rump Parliament by
their Engagement, or Oliver or his Son by their Recognition? And more I think
the King could not expect hereby.

Whereas Princes whose Thrones are established by Justice and Righteousness,
have a nobler Security than can be hoped for by Men's previous swearing to get
Offices and Employments; so that Trajan, who was truly called the Just, put his
Sword into the Praetorian Prefect's Hands, and bid him draw it against him,
whenever he should attempt any thing against the Public Good.

This King had a way, never gone by any of his Predecessors, to be present in
the House of Lords at Debates, and would solicit Lords for their Votes: This
was first declaimed against by my Lord Lucas, as an Awe upon the Peers in their
Debates and Votes. This Oath being the Gap to let in the Popish Designs, you
cannot think the King would now be away, but give all Countenance to the
passing of it; the Bishops to a Man were for passing of it, so were all the
Court-Lords, or those who hoped for Preferment, so as these were the much
greater Part: Yet the Country Lords when they debated it in Paragraphs, made it
inconsistent with the present Constitution of the Nation, vain and superfluous,
and inconsistent in it self, which held for seventeen days together: But the
Debates were laid aside by the Commons Votes against the Jurisdiction of the
Lords in Appeals from Chancery. These Debates you may read at large in Print in
a Tract entitled, A Letter from a Person of Quality to his Friend in the
Country.

But because my Lord Keeper will have an ill-meant Distinction between the
King's Natural and Politic Capacity, I Will put one Case which I do not find in
all these Debates: The one Part of the Oath is, I declare, That it is not
lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King; and,
that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority
against his Person, or against those who are commissionated by him, in
pursuance of such Commission. Suppose Duke Lauderdale should have a Commission
from the King to bring his twenty two thousand Scots into England (and you
cannot believe the Scots Law to do it was made to no purpose) and plunder, and
dispossess the English of their Estates; and the Sheriffs of the Counties
should raise the Posse to suppress them, and compel them to keep the Peace, as
the Sheriff by his Commission and Oath is bound to do: On which side does the
Abhorrence of the Traitorous Position of taking up Arms against those
commissionated by the King lie? But you will say this cannot be imagined; and I
say, the Design of imposing this Oath, makes this not only imaginable, but
believed to be intended.

In the Debates the Commons raise a Storm against the Lords Jurisdiction in
Appeals from Chancery, upon which the King prorogued the Parliament to the 13th
of October 1675.

Tho the Duke lost Ground in the House of Commons, and was disappointed in
carrying the abhorring Test in the House of Lords, yet he gained so much upon
the French King, that upon the second of June he offered the Duke his
Friendship, the use of his Purse to the assisting of him against the Designs of
his and the Duke's Enemies; and protested their Interests were so close linked
together, that those who opposed the one, should be looked upon as Enemies to
the other, with much more, as you may read in the Duke's Letter to Le Chaise,
the 29th of June 1675.

Tho the French could not fight against the Dutch in Conjunction with the
English, yet without the English they can fight the Spaniard and Dutch: For the
Spaniard (having blocked up Messina in Sicily by Land, which last Year revolted
to the French) agreed with the Dutch to send a Fleet of Men of War to join the
Spanish, to block up Messina by Sea, which the Dutch this Year did under De
Ruyter; but were so niggardly in it, that the French beat both Dutch and
Spanish Fleets, and killed De Ruyter: This was a just Reward returned to the
Dutch, for building the French six great Men of War six or seven Years before.
Just so Richlieu served the Spaniard in 1637, for joining with the French, in
expelling the English out of the Isle of Rhee.

Tho the King were the first in the Triple League for the Guaranty of the
Treaty of Aix, for the Preservation of Flanders; and tho the King in his
Declaration at the beginning of this War, had engaged to support the Peace made
at Aix; yet the French King this Summer took the City of Limburg, being the
chief of one of the Spanish Provinces: which the King not only takes no notice
of, but tells Sir William Temple, (newly commanded out of Holland by the King)
that some warm Leaders in both Houses had a mind to engage him in a War against
France, which they should not do, because he was sure they would make use of it
to the Ruin of his Ministers. If the King were unhappy in his Declaration, he
was not less in saying this to Sir William, to whom the Year before he promised
to be the Man of his People, but is now of his Ministers: And sure he was the
first Prince that ever professed it.

Upon the 13th of October the Houses met, and the King asked a Supply for
building of Ships, and to take off the Anticipation upon his Revenue.

In the Interval of this Recess, the Debates of the Abhorring Oath became
public, which so nettled the Court and Church-Party, being the more numerous,
that since they could not prevail by Reason, they would by Fire, and therefore
ordered them to be burnt, which made the Debates so much more to be enquired
into, and hereby received a greater Light.

The Commons had before them several Bills for preventing future Mischief, viz.

The Habeas Corpus Bill.
A Bill against sending Men Prisoners beyond Sea.
Against raising Money without Consent in Parliament.
Against Papists sitting in either House.
For more speedy convicting of Papists.
And for recalling his Majesty's Subjects out of the French Service.
These Bills being so diametrically contrary to the French and Popish Designs,
and the Commons now more peremptorily than before, opposing the Lords
Jurisdiction in Appeals from Chancery, so that they voted, Whosoever shall
solicit or prosecute any Appeal against any Commoner of England from any Court
of Equity before the House of Lords, shall be deemed and taken a Betrayer of
the Rights and Liberties of the Commons of England, and shall be proceeded
against accordingly: And the Commons having commanded the Counsel (who pleaded
before the Lords) to the Tower, (How much is the case now altered?) the King
took thereby an occasion to prorogue the Parliament from the 22d of November
1675, to the 16th of February 1676, which is above a Year; in which time, by a
Law in Edward the Third's time, a Parliament was to be called; and as it was
without Precedent, so it caused new Debates and Heats in both Houses when they
met.

In this long Recess, I find but few Motions of the French and Popish Councils
more than what appeared in Sir Thomas Gascoin's and other Trials: For Coleman's
last two Years Letters were suppressed, as was his Book of Entries; and the
Commotions raised in Britany and Guiene, by the Impositions imposed upon the
Inhabitants, hindered the French this Year from their usually more early opening
their Campagn than the Confederates; so that every where the Confederates
prevailed against the French; Tureen's Army was distressed by Montecuculi, and
himself killed, yet the Army got on the French side of the Rhine, by the
Bravery and bold Stands of the English. The Dukes of Lunenburg routed Marshal
Crequy's Army, and after took Triers, and made Crequy Prisoner; and the
Imperialists also took Philipsburg; the Elector of Brandenburg routed the
Swedes in Pomerland, entered into a League with the King of Denmark, who took
Wismar from the Swede: and the Prince of Orange took Binch from the French, and
rased it. But the Progress of all these Victories were stopped, by the
unaccountable Retreat of Montecuculi out of Alsatia with his whole Army back
over the Rhine, it was said by express Orders from Vienna, thereby leaving
Alsatia in the Power of the French, to the breaking of the old Duke of Lorain's
Heart; who at that time had, and never before, so fair a Prospect of the
Recovery of his Country.

If the Commotions in Britany and Guiene retarded the French opening the
Campagn last Year, the King shall make amends in this: For having provided
Stores for Horse and Man in his Frontier Garrisons, in February 167 6/7 he
blocked up Valenciennes and Cambray, and committed such Ravages, by burning and
destroying those Parts of Germany which lay opposite to him on the other side
of the Rhine, as if he made War not to conquer, but to destroy, tho this were
at a time whilst they were in a Treaty of Peace with the Empire and King of
Spain.

Upon the 17th of March, he, notwithstanding the extreme Coldness of the
Season, took Valenciennes, and from thence marched to Cambray, and laid Siege
to it and St. Omers; and after the opening of his Trenches Cambray surrendered,
but not the Citadel, our King looking on, as if he had not been concerned in
the Guaranty of the Treaty of Aix: Nor could the Prince of Orange prevent this,
the Spanish Garrisons being ill provided, and the Confederates being so slow in
getting into Bodies to oppose the French; or if they had been to be got
together, they could not have kept the Field for want of Provisions for Horse
and Man.

However, tho the Prince could not come time enough to relieve Cambray and
Valenciennes, yet with the single Forces of the States, the Spaniard not so
much as supplying him with Guides, marched to the Relief of St. Omers; but the
Duke of Luxemburg joining with the Duke of Oleance, met the Prince at
Mount-Cassel, where at first the Dispute was brave, but the first Regiment of
the Dutch Infantry breaking and falling into Disorder, the Prince rallied them
several times, and renewed the Charge, but could not prevent their plain
Flight; yet made so brave a Retreat, which wanted little of the Honor of a
Victory; so both the Citadel of Cambray and St. Omers, upon the 20th of April,
fell into the French Hands, and thereby the main Strength of the Frontier to
the Dutch Netherlands lost: And by these Conquests the French King not only
delivered his own Subjects from the Contributions they paid to these Cities,
but enlarged his upon the Residue of the Spanish Netherlands.

Upon the 15th of February 167 6/7, the Parliament met again, and from the
Variance between the Houses about Appeals from Chancery to the Lords, they fell
at Variance in both Houses, whether this long Prorogation were not a
Dissolution: The Contest was highest in the House of Lords, and the Duke of
Buckingham, the Earls of Salisbury and Shaftsbury, and Lord Wharton, where
committed close Prisoners to the Tower for their Reason alleged; yet the Lords
who voted their Commitment this Session, were as zealous the last to petition
the King to dissolve the Parliament, when the Commons contested their
Jurisdiction in Appeals from Chancery: But tho the Commons being in love with
their sitting, resolved the Parliament not to be dissolved, yet they committed
none of their Members for debating whether the Parliament were not; and granted
the King an Additional Duty upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors for three Years;
for now was the time to secure Religion and Property, said my Lord Chancellor.

But whether the Parliament were dissolved or not, the Commons were mightily
alarmed at the French Progress in Flanders, and therefore upon the 23d of May
resolved, that an Address be made to the King to enter into a League Offensive
and Defensive with the States General of the United Provinces, and make such
other Alliances as he should think fit against the Growth and Power of the
French King, and for the Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands.

It seems the Ministers were as fearful of a War, as the Commons were of this
Peace, wherein the Spanish Netherlands were in such Danger; and therefore the
King in his Answer upon the Twenty eighth of May, told the Commons, They had so
intrenc^^ upon so undoubted a Right of the Crown, that in no Age it will appear
(when the Sword was not drawn) the Prerogative of making War and Peace had been
so dangerously invaded; with a great deal more of su^^ Stuff, and therefore
assures them, that no Condition shall make him depart from, or lessen so
essential a Part of the Monarchy* A Man I think may swear out of what Quiver
this Arrow was shot.

As if any King were less a King for being well advised, especially by those
who can best assist him. To advise and to act, (...) different. The Commons did
not in this Address, treat either (...) War or Peace, but only advised or
counseled the King; excited to it by their own, as well as the King's Danger,
by the Grow^ of the French: And sure Princes have not such a Prerogative, a not
to take Advice or Counsel, in less Actions than of War and Peace.

If you look upon the King's former Actions, what Glorious Wars, and Honorable
Peaces he had made, you had little reason to think it so dangerous to his
Prerogative, to advise him: For my part, I wonder the Commons should make any
Address to him about them, since they could have no Security in any Answer he
should make to their Address.

For was not the King a Guaranty in the Treaty of Aix, for the Preservation of
the Spanish Netherlands, before the Swede entered into the Triple Alliance? And
did not the King in the Beginning of this War declare he would observe the
Treaty of Aix, which he might do, tho the Swede were out of it? And was not the
King by the last Peace with the Dutch, obliged to withdraw his Subjects out of
the French Service; yet did not only continue them, but permitted, nay pressed
his Subjects to recruit and increase them?

In the first Dutch War, (which was designed for the Overthro^ of the
Protestant Interest) then the Commons Advice was embraced, and thankfully
entertained; but in this, for the restraining the boundless Ambition of the
French King, is an unheard of Usurpation of the King's Prerogative.

However, by this the Commons might perceive what Thanks they had from this
King for their Restoration of him; and for the manifold Millions they had
poured upon him for the maintenance of his Prodigality and Luxury; and how much
he preferred the Enjoyment of his Minions and Flatterers, above his own Honor,
the Safety and Welfare of himself, the Nation or Christendom.

The King to show his further Indignation to the Commons, and to take French
Counsels for Reparation of their dangerous Invasion of his Prerogative,
signified to the Commons that they should adjourn till the sixteenth of July
following; which was so absolutely obeyed by the Speaker, then Mr. but now Sir
E. S. that without the Consent of the House, or so much as putting the
Question, he adjourned them to the sixteenth of July; though Sir John Finch was
impeached for the same thing of High Treason in Parliament in 1640. So that if
the Parliament were not dissolved by the last long Prorogation, another
Question may now arise, whether it was not so by their Separation, without
either Prorogation or Adjournment.

But in this time of War, it seems the French King was not at leisure to give
Counsel; therefore when the Parliament met on the tenth of July, Mr. Secretary
Coventry signified, that it was his Majesty's Pleasure they should be adjourned
to the Third of December, which Mr. Speaker did again by his own Authority: But
before the Third of December, the King issued out his Proclamation, that he
expected not the Members Attendance then, but that those about the Town might
adjourn themselves to the Fourth of April, 1678; yet when the House met the
third of December, Mr. Secretary Coventry delivered the House a Message from
the King, that the House should be adjourned but to the fifteenth of January,
1677, which Mr. Seymor this third time did.

Thus did the Speaker make a threefold Invasion upon the Privilege of the
House, for the House's once presuming to invade his Majesty's Prerogative of
making War and Peace.

In this Jumble of Adjournments, the Prince of Orange about the End of
September came into England, and from Harwich rode Post to New Market, where
the Court then was; his Business was twofold, a Wife, and a Treaty with the
King for the Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands, terribly shaken by this
last French Campagn.

Sir William Temple was sent into Holland, by the King, in July 1674, to
mediate a Peace between the French King and States, and after that to offer the
King's Mediation for a general one, between the Confederates and French King.
The Spaniards were fearful of this, and the Prince jealous of it, so that the
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands refused Sir William a Guard to go to the
Prince, and the Prince declined Sir William's coming to him; so as Sir William
was forced to return to Holland, and wait for the Prince there till the Campagn
was over.

After the Prince returned to the Hague, Sir William acquainted him with the
Powers the King had given him, and that the King desired to act in concert with
the Prince, and therefore desired, so soon as might be, to understand the
Prince's Opinion therein.

The Prince's Opinion was, That the States with any Faith could not make a
separate Peace, and thereby expose the Confederates, who had saved the States,
to the Mercy of the French King; nor could a general Peace be made unless
Flanders was left in a Condition to defend it self: That it was in the King's
Power to induce France to what was just, and that the Prince must perform what
his own Honor, as well as what the States were engaged to for their Allies,
let it cost what it would. This Answer was coldly received by the King, so as
he made no Reply to it.

My Lord Arlington possessed the King, that it was Sir William's ill Management
that the Prince was not pliable to the King's Desires, but if the King would
employ him in the Affair, by the Benefit of his Lady's Relations, the Prince
might be better disposed: So in November following the King sent my Lord
Arlington upon this Affair to the Prince, and my Lord Ossery (who had married
Madam Beverwort, the Countess of Arlington's Sister.)

My Lord Arlington treated the Prince with that Authority, Arrogance and
Insolence, and so artificially, that the Prince, who was of a plain and free
Disposition, could not bear it, but said the King never intended he should
treat him (the Prince) after that manner: Sir William and my Lord too had
Instructions to sift the Prince to a Discovery of Applications made to him by
discontented Persons in England; and to enter into secret Measures with the
Prince, to assist the King against Rebels at home; and to sweeten all, my Lord
Ossery gave the Prince Hopes of a Match, with the Princess Mary, the Duke's
eldest Daughter: but the Prince would not treat of a separate Peace, was
obstinate against the second, said that the third was a Disrespect to the King
to think that he was so ill beloved; and that his Fortunes were not in a
Condition for him to think of a Wife: so that my Lord Arlington every way
failed of his Expectation, lost much of the King's Favor, and utterly
dissolved the Friendship and Confidence he believed he had in the Prince.

On the contrary, though my Lord Ossery had above any other, more bravely
fought against the Prince's Interest by Sea in this last War with the Dutch,
yet the Sympathy of their noble Natures begot a Friendship, which no Power less
than Death could dissolve; and my Lord became Partaker with the Prince in that
glorious Attempt against the Duke of Luxemburg, upon the Relief of Mons, the
Success of which was stopped by the unhappy separate Peace the States made with
France; and the Proposition which my Lord made of the Match between the Prince
and the Princess, made such an irresistible Impression in the Prince's Mind,
that would admit of no other Relief but Enjoyment.

Though the Prince could not suppress, yet he concealed his Desires of matching
with the Princess Mary, till a little before the opening the Campagn 1676, when
he disclosed them to Sir William Temple; but before he made any Paces toward
the attaining his Desires, he desired Sir William's Opinion of the Person and
Disposition of the Princess.

Sir William, who was glad to find the Prince's Resolution to marry, being a
Debt due to his Family, and the rather because he was the only one of the
Masculine Line of it, replied, That he knew nothing of his own Knowledge of the
Disposition of the Princess, but had always heard his Wife and Sister speak
with all the Advantage that could be of what they could discern in a Princess
so young, and more by what had been told them by her Governess.

Hereupon the Prince resolved to write to the King and Duke, and beg their
Favors to him in it, and that my Lady Temple being to go over into England,
upon Sir William's private Affairs, should deliver his Letters to both, and
desired that my Lady, during her Stay in England, would endeavor most
particularly to inform her self of all that concerned the Person, Humor and
Disposition of the young Princess.

About two or three Days after the Prince brought his Letters to my Lady
Temple, he went to the Army; my Lady Temple into England, and about the
beginning of July, Sir William to Nimeguen, to assist with Sir Lionel Jenkins
as Mediators for a General Peace.

The States were desirous of Peace, yet durst not break from their Confederacy,
not trusting England enough, nor France at all, so as to have Dependency upon
either after the Peace made: The French knew the States were bent upon Peace,
but the Prince against any, but what was consisting with his Honor, and the
Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands, so as to be a secure Barrier to the
States against the Power of France. The French Designs, under the Covert of the
general Peace to be treated at Nimeguen, were to break the Confederacy, and
therefore their Ambassadors, the Marshal D'Estrades, and Monsieur Colbert
accosted Sir William, and told him they had express and private Orders from
their King to make particular Compliments to him, upon the Esteem their King
had for his Person. They told him, they knew that the States were bent for
Peace, which could not be had unless the Prince of Orange would interpose his
Authority, which was so great with the Allies that they were sure the Allies
would consent to whatever Terms the Prince should propose for a Peace, and
therefore there was no Way to procure a happy Issue, but for the Prince
privately to agree with France, upon the Conditions, in which the Prince might
make use of the known Temper of the States to bring it to a separate Peace, in
case the unreasonable Pretenses of the Allies should hinder a general one: that
the Duke of Bavaria had so acted his part with France at the Treaty (...)
Munster, whereby he owed the Greatness of his House, that b^ pursuing the same
at Nimeguen, it would be in the Prince (...) Orange to do the same for himself
and his Family: and that (...) what concerned the Prince's personal Interests,
their Master had given them Assurance he should have a Carte Blanch to write
his own Conditions: that tho they had other ways of making these Overtures to
the Prince, yet their Orders were to do it by none but Sir William, if he would
charge himself with (...) that they knew the Confidence the Prince had in him,
and how far his Opinion would prevail with the Prince; and that (...) Sir
William would espouse this Affair, besides the Glory of having alone given
Peace to Christendom, he might reckon upon what he pleased from the Bounty and
Generosity of the King their Master.

Sir William, in a well-composed Answer, acknowledged his Obligations for their
King's good Opinion of him; but that his Instructions were for a general, not
for a private Peace: For the Prince of Orange, he assured them it was his
Opinion, That the Prince had none for his, or any Man's else, further than
their Arguments prevailed upon his Judgment.

The Attacks upon Sir William not succeeding, Monsieur d'Estr^des turned his
Battery upon Pensioner Fagel, to the same purpose the Ambassadors had done to
Sir William, of all the Advantage, to the Interest of the Prince. How these
wrought upon the Pensioner, Sir William does not say; but says, all the Offers
of Advantages made to the Interest of the Prince, met with no other Reception
than what the Prince had foretold, tho at this time the Prince struggled under
great Difficulty, by reason of the French^^ great Treasure, and great Order of
disposing it: The French Magazines were always filled in the Winter, so as it
enabled them to take the Field as they pleased in the Spring, without fearing
the Weather for their Foot, or expecting Grass for their Horse. On the other
side, the Spaniards wanting Money and Order, left their Troops in Flanders,
neither capable to act by themselves, nor in Conjunction with others, upon any
sudden Attempt, nor to supply with Provisions, either Dutch or Germans, that
should come to their Relief: and their Towns were ill fortified, and worse
defended; so that the French King in April took Conde in four Days and in May
the Duke of Orleans took Bouchain, and the Prince of Orange besieged Maestricht
without Success.

But neither the good Success of the French this Campagn, nor the ill Success
the French Ambassadors had upon the Prince of Orange to induce him to a
separate Peace, retarded the French from pursuing of it; for the French, by
their Emissaries in Holland, but especially at Amsterdam, offer such a
Reglement of Trade as the People could desire; the Restitution of Maestricht,
and all Satisfaction to the Prince of Orange he could pretend to upon his Loss,
or their Seizures in the War. This put the Mob into a Ferment of having a
separate Peace; nor could any thing have allayed it, but the noble Constancy of
the Prince of Orange, which stood unshaken, in opposing it in all these
Difficulties.

However, this Campagn the Elector of Brandenburg, in several Encounters beat
the Swede, and was in a hopeful State to have expelled them out of Germany; and
it had been just they had been so: for the King of England and the King of
Sweden were Guarantees in the Triple League at Aix la Chapelle, for the
Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands against the French King: whereas the
King of England stood still, only looking on, whilst the French Arms by
Piecemeals devoured them; and the King of Sweden, in Conjunction with the
French King, assisting him in the War. Put not your Trust therefore in such
Princes.

The Prince of Orange, however his Constancy in opposing a separate Peace was
unshaken, yet in the distracted State of the Confederates, and the violent
Humor of the Peoples running into it, saw it was impossible to keep them out
of it, unless the King of England would interpose his Authority further, than
by being a bare Mediator, and acquainted the King with it: But the King, in a
long Letter under his own hand, instead of an Answer, complained, That the
Confederate Ministers in England caballed with Parliament Men, and raised all
Men's Spirits against Peace as high as they could, so that it was difficult for
him to make any Steps with France toward a general Peace, unless the Dutch
Ambassador Van Beningham would put in a Memorial pressing the King from the
States, to do it; and declared, that without it, all Flanders would be lost.

The Prince, to comply with the King, replied how willing he was that Van
Beningham should put in such a Memorial from the States; and that if the King
pleased to have a sudden Peace, the Prince thought it must be done upon the
Foot of the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, which he would have the more Ground for,
because it was a Peace which he both made and warranted.

Sir William at this time was at the Hague, when his Colleague Sir Lionel
Jenkins wrote to him, That there was a Negotiation of a separate Peace treating
between the French Ambassadors and Beverning (the Dutch Agent) at Nimeguen,
without any Communication of it to the Mediators; upon which Sir Lionel
acquainted the Court of England with it. Whereupon Orders were dispatched, That
in case a separate Peace was concluding, or concluded, the Mediators should
publicly protest against it in his Majesty's Name.

This Sir William Temple wrote to my Lord Treasurer, and Secretary Coventry,
That he could not understand the Reason of such a Protestation: for if a
separate Peace were thought so dangerous at Court, as he knew it was in the
Country, the King might endeavor to prevent it, and had it still in his Power,
as he had had a great while; but if it were once concluded, any other Effect of
such a Protestation, unless it were to irritate both Parties, and bind them the
faster, by our being angry at their Conjunction, could not be expected: Nor did
he know what Ground could be given for such a Protestation; for tho the Parties
had accepted the King's Mediation for a General Peace, yet none of them had
obliged themselves to the King not to treat of a separate one without his
Mediation; or if they had, he did not see why the same Interests that could
make them break through so many Obligations to their Allies, should not make
them as bold with a Mediator: That as to prevent the thing may be a very wise
and necessary Counsel, so the King's Resolution in it ought to be signified as
early as can be, where it is like to be of that moment to France. But if the
thing should be first done, as he could not tell how well to ground any
Offense, so he could as little how to seek Revenge, and it would be to stay
till we were struck, and then trust to crying out: That his Opinion was, it
were better to anger one of the Parties before a separate Peace, than both of
them after; and if we must strain any Points of Controversy with them, to do it
rather by making a fair and general Peace, than by complaining and protesting
against a separate one. But our Counsels at Court, he says, were so in Balance
between the Desires of living at least fair with France, and the Fears of too
much displeasing the Parliament upon their frequent Sessions, that our Paces
upon the whole Affair looked all like cross Purposes, which no Man at home or
abroad could well understand, and were often mistaken by both Parties engaged
in the War, as well as by both Parties in the House of Commons, till the thing
was wrested out of our hands.

Upon the 5th of January 1676-77, Sir William received Answer from the King to
his last Dispatches by the Prince's Direction, which consisted of two Parts;
the first, an Offer of the King's Entrance into the strongest Alliance with the
States, thereby to secure them from all Apprehensions from France, after the
Peace should be made; the second was, the King's Remarks rather than
Conclusions or Judgment upon the Terms propounded by the Prince for a Peace;
that he (the King) believed it might be compassed with France, upon the
Exchange of Cambray, Air, and St. Omer, for Aeth, Charleroy, Oudenard, Conde,
and Bouchain.

This Answer was so different from what the Prince proposed, so illusive, and
of so little Security to the Dutch, that the Prince told Sir William, that he
would rather die than make such a Peace; and complained that the Offer of
Alliance was wrote to him by the King's own Hand, but this about the Terms of
Peace from the Secretary's Hand, which was in a Style as if he thought the
Prince a Child, and to be fed with Whipped Cream: That since all this had been
before the foreign Committee, he knew very well it had been with the French
Ambassador too, and that the Terms were his, and were a great deal worse than
if they had directly come from France.

But the French King's wheedling our King and the Dutch about a separate Peace,
no ways abated the Vigor of his Prosecution of the War whilst Peace was
mediating: for, in the beginning of the Year he takes the Field with a huge
Army, and blocked up Cambray and Valenciennes about the End of February; and
having provided sufficient Magazines for Subsistence of his Forces, which
neither the Spaniard nor Germans had, broke into Flanders, and into the Parts
of Germany on the other side of the Rhine, and with the most cruel Ravages of
burning and spoiling those Parts of Germany that could be exercised, and such
as had not been used on either side since the War began. The Allies made
Complaints of this new manner of making War to his Majesty (as Guarantee to the
Treaty at Aix la Chapelle) who employed his Offices toward France to hinder
such Proceedings; but the Things was done, and the Point gained, which was by
an entire Ruin of those Countries, from hindering the Imperialists from finding
any Subsistence for their Troops if they should march into Alsatia, and thereby
divert those Forces the French resolved to employ in Flanders, before the Dutch
could take the Field and march to the Relief of those Places they intended to
attack.

Before any Dutch, Spanish, or German Army could be brought into the Field, the
French took Valenciennes, and laid Siege to St. Omer and Cambray: But before
they had taken St. Omer, the Prince of Orange, with the Forces of the States,
the Spaniard assisting him with no Forces, not so much as Guides, resolved to
relieve it, tho with the hazard of a Battle. But the Duke of Orleance leaving a
part of his Forces to defend the Trenches, and joining with the Duke of
Luxemburg, with all the Troops the French King could send, met the Prince at
Mount Cassel; where, after a sharp Dispute, the first Regiment of the Dutch
Infantry began to break into Disorder: The Prince went immediately to that
Place where the Shock began, rallied them several times, and renewed the
Charge; but at last was born down by the plain Flight of his Men, whom he was
forced to resist as Enemies, and fall in among them with Sword in hand, and cut
the first over the Face, and cried out aloud, Rascal, I Will set a Mark on thee
at least, that I may hang thee at last. But neither Voice, Action, Threats, nor
Example, would give Courage to Men that had already lost it: so he was forced
to recoil to those Troops which stood firm, and made so brave a Retreat, as was
near equal to a Victory: So as Flanders had only Mons and Namur for a Frontier
by Land, and Newport and Ostend by Sea. However, the Prince made an Attempt
upon Charleroy, which did not succeed.

Hereupon the Prince seeing all Attempts against the French would be in vain,
unless the King came in to assist the Confederacy of the Allies, sent Monsieur
Bentink into England, to desire the King's Leave to make a Journey into England
so soon as the Campagn was over; to which he received this cold Answer, That
the Prince would first think of making the Peace, and rather defer his Journey
till that were concluded. Could any Man now believe any other Prince should be
so supine as not to apprehend the imminent Danger his Nephew stood in, and in
consequence his own Dominions? And tho all the World but he saw and dreaded
this, yet the King, as at the End of the first Dutch War, would not. This was
about the beginning of June; and about the middle of it, Sir William Temple's
Son brought him Letters from my Lord Treasurer, That he should come over and
enter upon the Secretary's Place, which Secretary Coventry had offered to lay
down upon the Payment of 10000 l. and that the King would pay half the Money,
and the Treasurer must lay down the rest at present; but did not doubt but the
King would find a way of easing him of that too.

What could be expected in such a Reign, where Secretaries of State, who are
the Eyes of the King and Kingdom, to take Care of all foreign and domestic
Affairs, which cannot be carried on without Charges, should purchase their
Places, and thereby not only disable them in the Performance of their Office,
but utterly to neglect it, and make it their Business how they may be Gainers
by their Purchase they had so dearly bought? But Sir William excused it, as not
being able to raise 5000 l. now his Father was alive: And tho Secretary
Coventry came cheap enough by the Place, it seems he was either unwilling Sir
William should succeed him in it, or that he would not trust to the 5000 l. to
be paid by the King, unless he might choose his Successor, who, it may be, would
have given him 15000 l. for it.

After Sir William came over, and the Bargain for the Secretary's Place not
succeeding, the King had often Conferences with him about the Peace, and the
Prince's coming into England: he had a great Desire for the first, but not for
the other, till the first were done. He said his Parliament would never be
quiet with him while the War lasted, and then leave him in it, unless they
might have their Terms in removing and filling Places, which he should be very
loath to be so much at their Mercy; and that the longer the War continued, the
worse it would be for the Confederates, and worse for Flanders, and therefore
would have the Prince make a Peace for them if they would not do it themselves;
and that if the Prince and he would fall into Terms about it, he was sure it
might be done; and desired Sir William to make a short Turn to the Prince, and
try if he could persuade the Prince to it: But Sir William excused it, and
desired Mr. Hide (now Earl of Rochester, who was then at Nimeguen) might do it:
but I don't find any thing came of it.

About the latter End of September, as before noted, the Prince took his
Journey for England, and landed at Harwich, and from thence came to New Market,
where the Court then was; where he was kindly received by the King and Duke,
who both invited him often into Discourse of Business, which the Prince avoided
industriously, so as the King bid Sir William ask the Prince the Reason of it:
the Prince told him, he was resolved to see the young Princess before he
entered into that Affair, and get to proceed in that before the other of Peace:
whereupon the King, to humor him, left New Market some Days sooner than he
intended, and came to London.

The Prince, at first sight, was so pleased with her Person, and all those
Signs of such a Humor as had been before described to him, that he immediately
made his Suit to the King and Duke, which was well received and assented to,
but upon Condition the Terms of Peace abroad might be first agreed to between
them. The Prince excused himself, and said, he must end his first Business
before the other. The King and Duke were both positive otherwise, that that of
Peace should precede: but the Prince continued resolute for the former, and
said, His Allies were like to have hard Terms of Peace as things stood, and
would be apt to believe he had made this Match at their Cost; and for his part,
he would never sell his Honor for a Wife: But the King and Duke continued in
their Resolution for three or four Days.

In the Obstinacy of these contrary Resolutions between the King, Duke, and
Prince, Sir William Temple chanced to go to the Prince one Evening after
Supper, and found him in the worst Humor he had ever seen him in; and told Sir
William, he repented he ever came into England, and resolved he would stay but
two Days longer, if the King continued in his Mind of treating upon the Peace
before Marriage; and that before he went, the King must choose how they must
live hereafter; for he was sure it must be like either the greatest Friends or
the greatest Enemies: and pressed Sir William to let the King know so next
Morning, and give him an Account what he should say upon it.

Next Morning Sir William told the King all the Prince had said to him, and the
ill Consequences of a Breach between them, considering the ill Humors of so
many of his Subjects upon our late Measures with France, and the Invitations
made to the Prince by several of them during the late War. The King heard Sir
William with great Attention; and when he had done, said, Well, I was never
deceived in judging of a Man's Honesty by his Looks; and if I am not deceived
in the Prince's Face, he is the honestest Man in the World, and I will trust
him, and he shall have his Wife, and you shall go immediately and tell my
Brother so, and that it is a thing I am resolved on.

Sir William did so, and the Duke at first seemed a little surpised; but when
Sir William had done, the Duke said, the King shall be obeyed, and I would be
glad all his Subjects would learn of me to obey him.

From the Duke, Sir William went to the Prince, and told him all this Story: At
first the Prince seemed diffident, but soon embraced Sir William, and told him
he had made him a very happy Man, and that unexpectedly; and so he left the
Prince, to give the King an Account of what passed, and in the Prince's
Ante-Chamber met my Lord Treasurer, who undertook to adjust all the rest
between the King and the Prince, which he did so well, that the Match was
declared that Evening at the Committee before any other in the Court knew any
thing of it.

When the Match was known, the Nation entertained it with an universal Joy: yet
the French Ambassador and my Lord Arlington were displeased at it; the French
Ambassador, because he had not given his Master an Account of it; and my Lord
Arlington, because nothing of near such moment had passed, and he not
acquainted with it: and within two or three Days after, the Marriage was
consummate.

The Prince having so happily gained the first part of his Design in coming
into England, the Terms of Peace were agitated immediately, and Sir William
Temple was admitted to be present at the Debates. The Prince insisted upon the
Strength and Enlargement of a Frontier on both sides of Flanders; otherwise he
said France would end this War with the View of beginning another, and carrying
Flanders in one Campagn.

The King was content to leave that Business a little looser, upon Confidence
that France was so weary of the War, that if they could get out of it with
Honor, they would never begin another in this Reign: that the King was past
his Youth, and lazy, and would turn to the Pleasures of the Court and
Buildings, and leave his Neighbors at quiet.

But the Prince thought France would not make a Peace now, but to break the
present Confederacy, and to begin another War with more Advantage and Surprise:
that their Ambition would never end till they had all Flanders and Germany to
the Rhine, and thereby Holland in an absolute Dependence upon them, and us in
no good one: and, that Christendom could not be left safe by the Peace, without
a Frontier as he proposed for Flanders, and the Restitution of Lorain, as well
as what the Emperor had lost in Alsatia.

Sir William Temple told the King, that in the Course of his Life, he had never
observed Men's Natures alter by Age or Fortune, but that a good Boy made a good
Man, a young Coxcomb an old Fool, and a young Fripon an old Knave; that quiet
Spirits were so, and unquiet would be so, old as well as young; that he
believed the French King would have always some Bent or other, sometimes War,
sometimes Love, sometimes Building; but was of the Prince's Opinion, that he
would never make Peace but with a Design of a new War, after he had fixed his
Conquests by the last.

The King approved of what Sir William had said, and the Points of Lorain and
Alsatia were easily agreed to by the King and Duke, but they would not hear of
the Restitution of the County of Burgundy (tho it were part of the Spanish
Netherlands, which the King was obliged to protect against France, by the
Treaty of Aix) as what France would never be brought to; yet the Prince
insisted much upon it; which the King imagined was by reason of the Prince's
own Lands in that Country, (which are greater and more Seignurial than those of
the Crown of Spain there) and thereupon the King told the Prince, That for his
Lands there, he would charge himself, that the Prince should enjoy them as safe
under France as under Spain; or if the Prince would part with them, the King
would undertake to get him what Price he would value them at: to which the
Prince generously replied, That he would not trouble himself nor the Peace
about that matter; and that he would be content to lose all his Lands there, to
get one good Town more for the Spaniard upon the Frontier of Flanders. So here
the King and Prince agreed.

But then another Debate arose between the King and Prince, one pretending
France would never be brought to this Scheme, the other that Spain would never
be brought to it; but at last it was agreed, that the Peace should be made upon
these Terms: All to be restored by France to the Emperor and Empire, that had
been taken in the War; and the Duchy of Lorain to the Duke, and all on both
sides between France and Holland: and to Spain, the Towns of Aeth, Charleroy,
Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde, Valenciennes, St. Gillain and Binch, which
were nine Towns: that the King shall endeavor to procure the Consent of
France, and the Prince of Spain: And to this purpose, the King should send some
Person immediately over with the Proposition, who should be instructed to enter
into no Reasoning upon it, but demand a positive Answer in two Days; and after
that term, immediately return. And then the King ordered Sir William within two
Days to make himself ready to go and acquaint the French with it.

At this Agreement between the King and Prince none were present besides the
Duke, my Lord Treasurer, and Sir William Temple, so as the French Ambassador
was as much surprised in it, as before he was at the Marriage of the Prince:
but this could not be longer concealed from him, than when it began to be put
in Practice; yet it seems to me he was acquainted with it before, and that the
King had taken other Resolutions than what was agreed upon but the Day before.

For Sir William having prepared all things in a Readiness to go, the Evening
before, he met the King in the Park (St. James's) who called to him, and told
him he had been thinking upon Sir William's Errand, and how unwelcome he should
be in France, as well as the Message; and that having a Mind to gain Peace, he
was unwilling to anger them more than needs: besides, the thing being not to be
debated or reasoned, any Body else would serve the Turn as well as he, whom he
had other use of. Sir William was very glad of it, knowing how ungrateful a
Messenger he should be upon this Account. Then the King asked Sir William what
he thought of my Lord Duras, (a Frenchman, and a great Favorite of the
Duke's, and since Earl of Feversham.)

It seems the King asked Sir William's Opinion only for Form and Fashion sake,
for the thing was the Morning before agreed upon, at the Desire of the Duke,
upon pretense that France would accept of the Terms, and that he had a Mind to
have the Honor of it by sending a Servant of his own. So my Lord Duras went
immediately after with the Orders; and some few Days after, the Prince and
Princess embarked for Holland, where Affairs pressed his Return, beyond the
Hopes of my Lord Duras from France, the King assuring the Prince he would never
part with the least part of the Scheme sent over, and would enter into a War
with France, if they refused it. But (pudet haec) you will soon see another Face
of Affairs after the Prince was gone; nay before he went, it was a great
Mortification to him, to see the Parliament prorogued till the next Spring;
which the French Ambassador had gained of the King, to make up some good Mien
with France, after the Prince's Marriage, and before the Dispatch of the Terms
of a Peace to that Court. I should not have ventured to say this, if that
honorable Gentleman Sir William Temple, in his second Memoirs, which are
printed, fol. 302. had not said it before.

But how honorable and sincere soever the Prince's Actions were in the
Management of this whole Affair, the outward Face of things had another
Appearance, which caused great Jealousies of him, not only among the
Amsterdamers, and Common People in Holland, but even among the Consederates;
for the Prince sending Monsieur Bentink privately over into England about the
beginning of June, and Sir William Temple so soon after following, and the
Prince's raising the Siege before Charl^r^y the next day after my Lord Ossory
came to his Camp, and the Prince's going in September following into England;
these things thus concurring, passed not without many Reflections, not only in
Holland, but among the Allies, as if there were Intelligences between the King
and him, which were heightened by the Marriage; the main Business of the Treaty
made by the King and Prince about the Peace being yet in Embrio; so as the
Prince and Princess were coldly received in Holland upon the Prince's Return;
and these Jealousies increased more upon the Transactions between the English
Court and France. But sacred Truth, and the Integrity of the Prince, shall
vindicate his Honor, even among those who most suspected him, and were so
jealous of his Actions.

The Noise of a Peace with France so soon after the proroguing the Parliament,
raised a Ferment in the Nation, of some Design of the Court, as dangerous to
the Nation as the Dutch Jealousies that their Liberties were in by the Prince's
Treaty and Marriage with a Daughter of England. And now the Prince was gone,
and out of Sight, he was out of Mind too by the King, in respect to the Terms
of Peace agreed to, and the solemn Promise the King made to the Prince upon his
Departure, that he would never part with the least Point in the Scheme sent
into France, and make War upon it if it were refused.

For upon my Lord Duras's Arrival at Paris, the Court were surprised, at least
seemed so, both at the thing, and more upon the manner of it; yet made good
Mien upon it, took it gently, and said, The King (of England) knew very well he
might be always Master of the Peace: but some few Towns in Flanders seemed very
hard, especially Tournay, upon whose Fortifications such vast Treasure had been
expended; and that they would take some short time to consider of the Offer.
But my Lord Duras told them he was tied to two Days stay, but when that was
out, was prevailed upon to stay some few Days longer, (which he durst not have
done without secret Orders from our Court contrary to his Instructions) and at
last came away without any positive Answer. Hereupon the King, instead of
declaring War against France, as he so solemnly promised the Prince, entered
into a Treaty with the French Ambassador at London, which by French Artifice
was so spun out in length, without any positive Refusal, that the Blow came to
be eluded which could not otherwise be avoided, as Sir William Temple says, tho
I believe it was intended even when the Prince went out of England.

However, about the latter end of December 1677, the King sent to Sir William
Temple to the Foreign Committee, and told him he could get no positive Answer
from France, and therefore resolved to send him into Holland, to make a League
there with the States for forcing France and Spain into a Peace upon the Terms
proposed, if either refused. To which Sir William told the King, what he had
agreed was, to enter into a War with all the Confederates in case of no direct
and immediate Answer from France. That this perhaps would satisfy the Prince
and Confederates abroad, and the People at home: But to make such a League with
Holland only, would satisfy none of them, and disoblige both France and Spain.
Besides, it would not have such an Effect or Force as the Triple Alliance had,
being a great Original, of which this seemed an ill Copy: And therefore excused
himself from going. And so the King sent Mr. Thyn with a Draught of the Treaty
to Mr. Hide, who was then come from Nimeguen to the Hague, upon a Visit to the
Princess, which was done, and the Treaty signed the 16th of January, (tho not
without great Dissatisfaction to the Prince.)

This Tergiversation of the Court set fire to the Jealousies in Holland,
especially at Amsterdam, that the Prince by this Marriage had taken Measures
with the King as dangerous to the Liberties of Holland, and make it there
believed, that by this Match the King and Duke had wholly drawn the Prince into
their Interests and Sentiments. The French hereupon proposed other Terms of
Peace to the Dutch, far short of the King's, and less safe for Flanders,
restoring only six Towns to the Spaniard, and mentioning Lorain but
ambiguously, which would not have gone down in Holland but for the Suspicions
raised by the Prince's Marriage among the People there, who had an incurable
Jealousy of our Court, and thereupon not that Confidence in the Prince that he
deserved.

If we take this Reign as one thing, you will find it made up of almost infinite
Confusions and Disorders, and scarce one regular Act in it; and now we are come
to one which is without any Precedent, which was this: You heard before how the
King to gratify the French Ambassador for not acquainting him with the Marriage
with the Prince, had prorogued the Parliament to the 8th of April next, viz.
1678. And now Mr. Thyn had made this League with the States, the King thought
this a good occasion to get Money from the Parliament upon it, and was loath to
stay till the 8th of April for it; and therefore by his Proclamation, commands
the Parliament to meet upon the 15th of January, before the 8th of April.

Prorogations of Parliaments are new, and I think were never heard of in
England before the Reign of Henry VIII, and are said to be the Acts of the
King, but Adjournments the Acts of the House to a certain Time and Place, and
both Houses must be sitting and in being when they are either so prorogued or
adjourned. I remember upon the discovery of C^leman's Letters the Court were
mightily surprised at it, and the Parliament was to have met some few days
after upon a Prorogation, which the King in that Surprise unwilling they
should, did therefore call a Council to advise whether he might not prorogue
them to a further day without the Houses meeting, and 'twas said my Lord
Chancellor Finch was of Opinion he might; and thereupon Sir Edward Seymour,
Speaker of the House of Commons, having Occasions in the Country, went out of
Town: but some body acquainted the King of the Doubtfulness of the Chancellor's
Opinion, and desired the King to advise with old John Brown, who had been Clerk
of the Parliament for near forty Years; the King did so, and John Brown was
positive, that in case the Houses did not meet at the Time and Place appointed,
the King by his Proclamation could not prorogue them, but it would be a
Dissolution of the Parliament: Whereupon the Speaker was sent for back again,
and so many of both Houses met as would make a Parliament (which it is said is
forty Commoners and seven Lords) and then the King prorogued them. But this
Consideration was not (that I find) taken notice of by either House, tho both
met according to the King's Proclamation.

The Houses thus met, the King acquainted them with the League he had made with
Holland, and demanded Money of them to carry on the War against France, in case
France did not comply with the League; whereupon the Parliament granted him a
Tex by Poll, and otherways, which amounted to 1200000 l. not for Peace, but to
enter into an actual War with France: But this Tax shall only beget another, to
disband an Army raised upon that Pretense, tho no War was entered into against
France.

But so far was the French King from giving up any Towns, notwithstanding the
Agreement the King had made with the Prince, or the League he had made with
Holland, that about the latter end of January he had made an Attempt upon Ipre,
and threatened Ostend, and in March following, by open Force, takes both Ipre
and Gaunt; yet the French Ambassador here continued his Court and Treaty with
all the Fairness that might be.

The French having now taken Ipre and Gaunt, were so far from proceeding in any
Treaty either with England, the Confederates, or Holland, or in the Treaty at
Nimeguen, that about the first of April the French King made public
Declaration of the Terms upon which he resolved to make Peace, which, tho very
different from those agreed upon between the King and Holland, and more from
the Pretensions of the Allies, yet this way of treating the French pursued in
the whole Negotiation afterward, declaring such and such were the Conditions,
which they would admit, and no other, and upon which the Enemies might choose
either War or Peace, and to which France would not be tied longer than the 10th
of May, after which they would be at Liberty to change or restrain as they
should think fit.

But how imperious soever the French were abroad, yet they dreaded a
Conjunction of England either with the Dutch or Confederates, and therefore
thought fit to wheedle our Court till the Affairs of the Confederates should
become so desperate as to submit to what Terms the French King should impose
upon them: And to this purpose Mr. Mountague (now Earl) sent a Packet to my
Lord Treasurer, giving an account of a large Conference Monsieur Louvoy (the
French King's grand Minister of State) had with him by the King his Master's
Order, wherein he represented the Measures they had already taken for a Peace
in Holland upon the French Terms; and that since they were agreed there, they
hoped his Majesty would not be against it: That however, France had ordered him
to make his Majesty the Offer of a great Sum of Money for his Consent, tho the
thing was already accepted by Holland, and wherein his Majesty was consequently
not concerned.

The French Ambassador at London (confident this Bait would take the King)
began to change his Language, That his Majesty should be Arbiter of the Peace:
But now being assured his Master had agreed with Holland, he seemed to wonder
and expostulate why the King should pretend to obtain better Terms for the
Spaniards than the Dutch their Allies were content with.

You have heard the Agreement between the King and Prince before he went into
Holland, as well on the behalf of the Empire and Duke of Lorain, as of the
Spaniards, and how it was not observed by the King, and of the time when the
Prince arrived in Holland, and of the unjust Jealousies had upon the Prince
thereby, as well by the Confederates as by the Dutch, and of the separate
League the King made with the States, for enforcing the French to come up to
the Agreement between the King and Prince of Orange, and how the King had got
twelve hundred thousand Pounds of the Parliament for entering into an actual War
with France, and how the French King, in defiance of the King and States,
instead of giving up any Towns, had taken Ipre and Gaunt, as well contrary to
this Agreement and League as to the Treaty of Aix: Now let us see how the King
proceeded, after the Dutch, contrary to the League with the King, had accepted
the French Terms.

Having got the Money of the Parliament for making the League with the Dutch,
upon the Terms agreed upon by the Prince, he now saw no reason why he should
not get the Money the French offered him if he would agree to the Terms he had
made with the Dutch, and to that purpose ordered Sir William Temple to treat
upon it with the French Ambassador, who had Orders to that purpose: Sir William
would have excused it, but the King told him he could not help seeing him, for
the Ambassador would be at his House next Morning by seven a Clock, and then he
came, but Sir William told him he had been very ill in the Night, and could not
enter into Business; so the Ambassador was disappointed of his Design at that
time: However the Bargain went on, not only for the Money, but something else,
so that Sir William Temple says, p. 321. There was one Article in this private
Treaty the King took such Indignation at, that he would never forget it whilst
he lived.

There was but one Accident favorable to the Confederates in all these
Treaties, viz. the French apprehensive of a Conjunction between the English and
Dutch, who at this time were much more powerful at Sea than France, thought
they might block up Messina by Sea, while the Spaniard besieged it by Land, and
so might lose all the Cannon, Provisions and Stores they had in it; to prevent
which, they abandoned it while it was in their Power to secure their Effects
there, and left the Messinians their Confederates to the Mercy of the Spaniards.

Beverning was the Agent which managed this Treaty upon the French Terms, and
Beverning was sent to the French Camp, where the Terms of Peace were concluded
about the latter end of June, and a Cessation of Arms for six Weeks, that the
Spaniards might come into the Peace upon the Terms proposed: But if they should
not, his most Christian Majesty assured the States, that he would always
provide such a Barrier in Flanders, as they thought necessary for their Safety;
and after the Peace should be made, and the ancient Amity restored, he would be
ready to enter into such Engagements with them as should for ever secure their
Repose and their Liberties, viz. he would be the Fox that should preserve these
Geese.

Indignation will not suffer this to pass over without Reflection, that the
World may see what Trust is to be given to French Faith. Did not he make this
War upon the Dutch, only because of the ill Satisfaction he had of the Dutch
Behavior toward him, being risen to that degree, that he could no longer,
without Diminution of his Glory, dissemble his Indignation against them, etc.
and therefore resolved to make War against them by Sea and Land? Did he not in
the beginning of this War, by all French Artifice, court the Prince of Orange
to take upon him the Sovereignty of the Dutch Provinces? Did not his
Ambassadors court Sir William Temple, Pensioner Fagel, and the Dutch
themselves, and that the Prince should make what Terms he pleased, so as to
make a separate Peace? And now he is making a separate Peace with a pack of
factious Dutch, of the Louvestein Faction, opposite to the Prince, to wheedle
them, that after the Peace was made he would enter into such Engagements with
them as should for ever secure their Repose and their Liberties, meaning to
depose the Prince from having any Power or Authority with them.

In this hopeful Security of this Faction relying upon French Faith, the
Marquess de Balbaces proposed when the six Towns in Flanders should be given up
to the Spaniard upon the French Terms to which the French Ambassador answered,
That his Master being obliged to see an entire Restitution made to the Swede of
all they bu^ lost in the War, could not restore the Towns in Flanders to the
Spaniard, till those to the Swede were likewise restored. So that now the Dutch
by this separate Peace must only stand still and loo^ on, if the King of
Denmark, and the Elector of Brandenburg will not deliver the Towns they had
taken from the Swede, which (...) like they would not, nor could the Dutch
compel them, while (...) French take all Flanders, and impose what Terms they
please upon the rest of the Confederates.

Beverning could not tell what to say to this, and acquaints the States with
it; the States were confounded at it, and could neither tell what to do, nor to
whom to complain: To the Confederates they were ashamed to complain, who had so
generously entered into the War for their Preservation, when otherwise they had
(...) under the French Tyranny without possibility of Relief, and therefore had
great reason to be offended at their endeavoring to make a separate Peace,
thereby to expose them to the Fury and Tyranny of the French Arms; and the
Counsels of the Court of England were so loose that no Reliance could be had
upon them: But it was Hobson's Choice, that or nothing.

That we may take all fair before us, let us now see the Fruits the Dutch had of
their Cessation of Arms for six Weeks, to try if they could bring in the
Spaniard to comply with the Terms which the French had imposed upon Beverning
and his Faction, for restoring six of the nine Towns to the Spaniard, which was
agreed upon between the King and Prince, and also by the League which the King
made with the States: The French King after he had taken Ipre and Gaunt,
Luxemburg proceeded to block up Mons, and Schomberg threatened to besiege
Cologn: and thus the Dutch bound Hand and Foot had no body else to complain to,
or expect any Relief from, but the Court of England.

The Dutch had a little before sent over one Van Lewen, who was the chief of
the Town of Leyden (who Sir William Temple says, was a Man of great Honor and
Worth) to treat with the King to enter into a War against France, which the
King was obliged to by the League with them, and had received 1200000 l. of the
Parliament for carrying it on; and by Van Lewen the States acquaint the King
with the Terms upon which the French King would restore the six Towns in
Flanders to the Spaniards: the King at first seemed not to believe it, but
having sent to the French Ambassador (Barillon) to know the Truth of this;
which the Ambassador owning, he seemed surprised and angry at this proceeding
of France, and next Morning sent for Sir William Temple to the Foreign
Committee, and there declared his Resolution of sending him immediately into
Holland with a Commission to sign a Treaty with the States, by which they
should carry on the War, and the King to enter into it in case France should
not consent to evacuate the Towns within a certain time limited; and the King
took Pains to press Van Lewen to go over with Sir William to persuade the
States of the King's Sincereness and Constancy to pursue these Measures to the
utmost of his Power.

Armed with these Powers, away goes Sir William and Van Lewen, and were
received with all imaginable Joy by the Dutch; and Sir William by the Prince,
hoping by his Errand and Success of it, either to continue the War, or to
recover such Conditions of Peace for his Allies as had been forced out of his
Hands by force of a Faction begun at Amsterdam, and after spread into the rest
of the Provinces: All the Provinces, even those which were so forward for the
Peace upon the French Terms, were so forward in this Negotiation, that in six
days the Treaty was concluded; by which France was obliged to declare within
fourteen days after the Date thereof, that they would evacuate the Spanish
Towns, or in case of Refusal, Holland was engaged to go on with the War, and
England immediately to declare it against France in Conjunction with Holland,
and the rest of the Confederates. Here observe, that tho Sir William was one of
the Mediators of Peace at Nimeguen, yet whilst this Negotiation was perfected,
his Post was to be at the Hague, for a Tale depends upon it.

The Wisdom, as well as the Integrity of the Prince in the whole Negotiation of
this Affair, was now so conspicuous, that the States owned the Prince had made
a truer Judgment than they had done of the Measures which they were to expect
either from England or France; and if it happens that England in this Business
shall prove as fickle and loose as before, yet this shall never be ascribed to
the Prince, who was always the same he was before. So now all Preparations were
made for the Relief of Mons, and ten thousand English being arrived in
Flanders, who were ordered to join the Prince, he resolved to relieve Mons, or
to die in the Attempt.

After the Treaty concluded, and signified to France, all Arts that could be
were on that side employed to elude it by drawing this Matter into a Treaty, or
into greater length, which had succeeded so well in England, that they offered
to treat upon it at St. Quintin's, then at Gaunt; but the States were firm, not
to recede from their late Treaty made with the King, and so continued till
about Five Days before the Term was to expire.

You heard before how the King had solicited Van Lewen to accompany Sir William
Temple, to assure and persuade the States to pursue the Measures Sir William
and he went upon to their utmost: but alas, now when Sir William, as well as
the Prince, were out of Sight, they were out of Mind too; and now Sir William
was gone, he forgot the Indignation which Barillon had put upon him in the
Treaty for the French Money he was to receive for joining in the French Terms
with the Dutch; which he then said he would never forget so long as he lived.
But now you shall see how absolute a Dominion the French King had over him, and
by what Instruments he governed him, viz. a French Man, a French Woman* and a
French Monk, who had changed his Frock for a Petticoat: The French Man was
Barillon, the French Woman was the Duchess of Portsmouth, and the French Monk
was one Du Cross: These three met the King in the Duchess of Portsmouth's
Chamber, and in one hour's time agreed, that Du Cross should carry Sir William
Temple a Packet, wherein the King commanded him to go immediately to Nimeguen,
and there endeavor all he could to persuade the Swedish Ambassadors, as from
the King, to let the French Ambassadors there know, That they would, for the
Good of Christendom, consent, and even desire the French King no longer to
defer the Evacuation of the Towns, and consequently the Peace, upon the sole
Regard and Interest of the Crown of Sweden; and Sir William was likewise
commanded to assure the said Ambassadors, that after the Peace his Majesty
would use all the most effectual Means he could for the Restitution of the
Towns and Countries the Swede had lost in the War. This was to get Sir William
out of the way, who spirited the Dutch in the Action, that Du Cross might play
his Pranks in the rest.

But before Du Cross had brought his Packet to Sir William, he had gone about
most industriously to the Deputies of the several Towns, and acquainted them
with it, and that the Terms of Peace were absolutely agreed upon between the
two Kings: That he had brought Sir William Orders straight to get to Nimeguen,
and that upon his Arrival there he should meet with Letters from my Lord of
Sunderland (the King's Ambassador at Paris) with all the Particulars concluded
between them.

Sir William followed his Instructions, and when he came to Nimeguen there were
but three Days of the Term fixed by the late Treaty between the King and States
at the Hague, either for the French Assent to the Evacuation of the Towns, or
for carrying on the War in Conjunction of Holland with England, and
consequently with the rest of the Confederates, but there found no Letters from
my Lord Sunderland of the Particulars of the Peace concluded between the two
Kings; but on the contrary a Manifesto to the Dutch by the French Ambassadors,
why their Master could not consent to it, without the previous Satisfaction of
Sweden, whose Interest he esteemed the same with his own; but yet declaring he
was willing to receive any Expedients the States should offer in this matter
either by their Ambassadors at Nimeguen, or such as the Dutch should send his
most Christian Majesty at St. Quintin or Gaunt.

The Dutch Ambassadors gave an Answer in writing, declaring it was a Matter no
longer entire, since upon the Difficulty raised about the Evacuation of the
Towns, the States their Masters had been induced to sign a Treaty with England,
from which they could not recede, nor from the Day therein fixed for the
determining the Fate of War or Peace; and as there was no Time, so there could
be no Deputation to St. Quintin or Gaunt, nor any other Expedient besides the
Consent of France to evacuate the Towns.

The Dutch Ambassadors having blown off his Chaff, the French Ambassador then
declared to the Dutch, that they found the King their Master was resolved at
the Desire of the Swedes to retard the Peace no longer upon their
Consideration, and would consent to evacuate the Towns, upon Condition the
States would send their Deputies to treat upon the Ways of securing the future
Satisfaction to Sweden, which was by both intended: But the Dutch Ambassadors
continued peremptory, there could be no Deputation made by their Masters; and
if the Term fixed by the late Treaty with England should elapse, there was no
remedy but that the War must go on: to which the French Ambassadors replied,
That their Hands were bound up from further proceeding without such a
Deputation.

Whilst the French were thus wheedling with the Dutch to elude the Term fixed
for the French evacuating the Towns, at the same time Luxemburg pressed Mons,
and Schomberg seemed to threaten Cologn; when the fatal Day came, whether a
sudden Peace or long War were to be reckoned upon in Christendom, when Boreel
came early that Morning from Amsterdam, to the Dutch Ambassadors at Nimeguen,
which were Beverning and one Haren; and then Boreel went to the French
Ambassadors, and after some Conference with them, the French Ambassadors and
Boreel went immediately to those of Holland, and declared to them that they had
received Orders to consent to the Evacuation of the Towns, and thereupon to
sign the Peace; and that very Day at Night, tho late, Beverning signed a Treaty
of Peace and Commerce, Sir William Temple and Sir Lionel Jenkins refusing to
join in it, and the Confederates exclaiming against it.

The next day after this Peace was thus signed, came an Express to Sir William
Temple from our Court, with the Ratification^ of the late Treaty between the
King and States, with Orders immediately to proceed to the Exchange of them;
whereupon St. William went from Nimeguen to the Hague, and the next Day after
his Arrival made an Exchange of the Ratifications.

Now was Holland in as much Disorder as the Confederates were at Nimeguen; the
Pensioner and several of the Deputies were as much dissatisfied with
Beverning's Peace, as the Confederates were, and said he could not sign the
Peace before he had acquainted the States with it, and received new Orders
there upon it; and talked of calling him into Question for it, and of
disavowing what he had done, and thereupon of having recourse to the Treaty
made with the King, which they now ratified.

But the Deputies of Amsterdam, with whom others joined, declared their
Satisfaction of the Conclusion of the Peace made by Beverning, and argued the
Weakness of their Confederates, especially Spain; and the Unsteadiness, and
Irresolution of England* had made the Peace absolutely necessary to Holland:
But however, this Confusion, and indeed the Fate of Christendom, were the
Consequences of Du Cross's Packet, and his acquainting the Deputies with a
Peace made between the two Kings; yet how dishonorable soever this was to the
King, he was not at all concerned at it that I can find; but pleasantly told
Sir William Temple, Th^^ the Rogue Du Cross had outwitted them all. Could this
be believed, if the great Authority of Sir William Temple had not said it?

During these Brawls, both at Nimeguen, and all Holland over, the Prince of
Orange, upon the Fourteenth of August, stormed Luxemburg's Camp before Mons,
wherein the brave Duke of M^mouth, and the noble Earl of Ossery were Partakers
in the Glory of it: and notwithstanding the French Posts were fortified with
all imaginable Art, and that the Prince's Army had undergone the Fatigue of a
hard March, attacked them with a Resolution and Vigor that at first surprised
them, and after an obstinate-Fight* so disordered them, that though the Night
prevented the further Prosecution of the Action, yet it was generally
concluded, That if the Prince had been at Liberty next Day to have pursued the
Action with seven or eight Thousand English, who were ready to have joined him,
he might in all Appearance, not only have relieved Mons, but have made such an
Impression into France, as had been often designed, but could not be done
before: And I dare say, if Luxemburg had had the like Advantage over the
Prince, the Dutch would have heard further of it; but the Prince was bound up
by a limited Authority, and so could not pursue the Advantage he had acquired
against the French.

The Success of the Battle at Mons, though the Prince's Army were withdrawn,
gave new Life to the Spaniards and Confederates, that the War would go on
according to the Ratification of the Treaty at the Hague, exchanged the Day
before the Fight, by Sir William Temple and the States, whereas Beverning's
Peace at Nimeguen was concluded without the States; besides, English Forces
arrived daily in Flanders, as if the King were now resolved to join with the
Dutch in carrying on the War pursuant to the League; which made the
Confederates as well as the Spainards refuse to agree to Beverning's Peace.

Besides, neither the French Pretensions to the County of Beaumont, and the
Town of Bovignes, nor in what Plight the six Towns should be delivered up,
whether demolished, or in the Plight they then stood, nor the Dependences upon
the Six Towns were adjusted by Beverning's Peace: But this Hope of the
Spaniards and Confederates shall cost them dear, and only serve to advance the
French Terms, and intolerable Ravages of the French upon them.

For the French cared little for the Confederates in Disjunction with the
Dutch, and as little for the Dutch, when he had obtained his Ends upon the
Confederates; and therefore the French fall to their wheedling Trade again with
the Dutch; and the French King sent a Courier to Nimeguen, to satisfy the
States in those Clauses of the Treaty, wherein they seemed justly to except
against Beverning's Conduct, thereby to cover the Credit of that Minister who
had been so affectionate an Instrument in the Progress of the Treaty; and gave
them (the States) Liberty a little to soften the Rigor the French had as yet
exercised in the smallest Points contested with the Spaniards; and at last
dispatched an Express to the Dutch Ambassadors, with Power to remit all the
Differences which obstructed or retarded the Conclusion of the Treaty between
France and Spain, to the Determination of the States themselves.

This Bait these Gudgeons swallowed as if no Hook had been in it; so that
several Towns and Provinces proceeded with a General Concurrence to the
Ratifications of the Peace, that they might lie ready in their Ambassadors
Hands to be exchanged, when that of Spain's should be signed; and so diligent
was Beverning in carrying on the French Designs, now they were thus entertained
in Holland, that they huddled up the Treaty between France and Spain* and by
the twentieth of September, the Ratifications of it were exchanged with the
usual Forms, and now the Dutch Ambassadors are become Mediators of (or
Conspirators in) this Treaty, whilst Sir Lionel Jenkin* the King's Mediator,
only stood still looking on and having no Hand in it; and all the Ambassadors
of the other Allies, as well as the Spaniard, enraged and exclaiming against it.

During this Conspiracy, the French Troops made Incursions into the rich Parts
of Flanders, which had been covered in the time of the War; and there exacted
so great Contributions, and made such Ravages where they were disputed, that
the Spanish Netherlands were more ruined between the signing of the Peace, and
the Exchange of the Ratifications, than they had been in so much time during
the whole Course of the War. At last the Outcries and Calamities of the poor
Flemins moved the Spaniards out of their slow Pace, so that they were forced to
accept of the Terms the French and Dutch would give them.

And now the Dutch had done the French Work with Spain, the will do the rest
without the Dutch; and piecemeal made the Duke of Lorrain, the Emperor and
King of Denmark, and all the Princes of the Empire submit to such Terms as the
French pleased: The Particulars and manner of it, you may read in the second
part of Sir William Temple's Memoirs, which are printed.

And now the French King had by the Help of the Dutch, made his Market by the
Peace at Nimeguen, let us see how he improved it after: The French King sets up
a Court of Claims in Alsatia and Flanders, to determine the Dependences upon
those Towns, which he kept by the Treaty of Nimeguen, both in Flanders and
Alsatia, where he is sole Judge, and executes his Judgments by Military
Execution: It Is scarce credible the Ravages he made hereby, and what Titles he
set up: I Will give but one Instance herein, mentioned by Sir William Temple, p.
370. The Town of Tournay was to have been given up to the Spaniard by the
Agreement made between our King and the Prince; this was left out in the French
Terms accepted by the Dutch; and Aeth was to be one of the six Towns to be
delivered up to the Spaniard by the Dutch Terms with the French; and the French
had dismembered above sixty Towns which were dependent upon Aeth, and added them
to the Chatellence, or Bailywick of Tournay; and were thus belonging to Aeth,
when the Spaniard transferred Aeth to the French by the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle: but now Aeth must be restored to the Spaniard in the Condition they
left it, and not what they found it: So that by these Acquisitions which the
French got by this Treacherous Peace, he got more in Consequence, than by the
War.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of this Reign, to the End of the Oxford Parliament.
WHen the Parliament had given the King 1200000 l. for carrying on an actual
War against France in January last, the Popish Plot was then in Embrio, and the
Parliament were so mortified by the Answer which the King made to them upon the
twenty eighth of May before, for advising him to enter into a League with the
States General of the United Provinces, against the Growth and Power of the
French King, and Preservation of the Spanish Netherlands, etc. that they never
durst meddle more in it; and it may be concurred more readily in giving the
King 1200000 l. for carrying on the War against France, upon the League which
he had made at the Hague, by Mr. Thyn, though Sir William Temple refused to
have any Hand in it, as is said before.

The Commons in Parliament for the first ten Years of this Reign were Tories,
and all their Business was against the Protestant Dissenters from the Church,
scarce taking notice of the Papists, till the Breach of the Triple Alliance;
the second Marriage of the Duke of York; the second Indulgence for Liberty of
Conscience; the Attempt upon the Smirna Fleet; the shutting up of the
Exchequer; and the King's making War upon the Dutch in Conjunction with the
French: these thus successively acted, opened the Eyes of the greater part of
the Commons, that for their own and the Nation's Safety, they became more
numerous in the House than the Tory Party; yet retained their Loyalty to the
King, I verily believe, as firm as any English Men before them.

But out of the House the Feuds of the Tories and Whigs were as invenomed, as
those between the Guelphs and Gibelines, which for three hundred Years involved
Germany and Italy in intestine Wars: The Tories cried up the Court, and the
Court countenanced them; and the Tories having the Dominion of the Press,
printed all Sorts of Irritating Libels against the Whigs, and if the Whigs
answered, they were prosecuted for printing Illicite; when the Tories could
make no other Reply, but that the Whigs were running back to 1641.

The Tories had got a new invented Doctrine of inconsistible Terms, called,
Passive Obedience: I would willingly be informed in the Grammatical
Construction of these two Words, how a Noun Adjective or Participle, can alter
the Signification of a Noun Substantive; for if any one be subject to another,
and be commanded or forbidden by this other, it is Disobedience if he does not
the Command of this other: How therefore Passive joined to Disobedience, can
make it Obedience, had need of a better Interpretation than what the Tories
give; which is, if you cannot obey, you must suffer: But this is another
Proposition; and so Disobedience here is Disobedience still; and the true
Construction of Passive Obedience, is Disobedience, and be hanged for it.

The Tories and Whigs in these Feuds, were apt to take Fire and divulge, ^ay it
may be invent Stories of one another, and the Popish Party nourished Designs
against both; and being countenanced by the Tory Party, in the Interval between
the Prorogation of the Parliament which met by Anticipation (as Sir William
Temple calls it) in January 1677-78, made a great Out^ry, which was blazed by
the Tories, That there was a Design by the Whigs of killing the King: but it
happened, Mr. Hawles says in Fitz-Harris's Trial, f. 3. to be in such a Place
and Manner, as afterward Oats discovered the Papists intended to have done it.

Hereupon Mr. Cleypole (Oliver's Son-in-law) was imprisoned in the Tower, (the
Place you will see, where the Papists acted all their Designs) for designing to
kill the King; and in Trinity Term 1678, Mr. Cleypole had an Habeas Corpus to
the King's Bench, and was brought up in order to be bailed, and produced
Persons of Worth to bail him; but the Penalty of the Bail set by the Court was
so high that the Bail refused to stand, and Mr. Cleypole was remanded to the
Tower: But the Term after, when the Matter of which he was accused, appeared to
be the Design of other People, he was let go, for fear the Examination of it
should go further in proving the Popish Plot than any thing at that time
discovered; and therefore no further Inquiry was made on whose, or on what
Evidence he was committed.

The first who gave Light to the Popish Plot was Titus Oats, which if it had
depended upon his single Testimony, had not like to have gone any further, the
Court and Tories being so industrious to ridicule it, if some other Accidents
should not make Oates's Testimony more credible: Oats therefore refers himself
to Coleman's Papers, where the whole Design would appear to have been carried
on for the last five Years.

The Court could not but inquire into the Truth of this, but proceeded so
slowly in it, that Coleman had time enough to convey away all the Papers of his
last 2 Years, with his Book of Entries of them, tho his Servant Boatman upon
his Examination deposed, he saw Coleman's Book of Entries but two Days before
Coleman was made Prisoner, and that had usually Letters every Post from beyond
Sea: However the Letters which were found, amazed the greater Part of the
Council.

But tho these Letters began this Plot in the Year 1673, yet it is evident by
the Testimony of Florence Wire, who was a Roman Catholic, that a Popish Plot
was carried on in Ireland, in the Year 1665 and 1666, and brought to Maturity
in the Year 1667. For Col. Kelly and Col. Bourn were sent into Ireland from the
French King, with a Commission to muster as many Men as they could, the French
King promising to send an Army of Forty Thousand Men, to establish the Roman
Catholic Religion, upon St. Lewis's Day in August: But the French King, as
before noted, had other Designs in his Head, and at that time was engaged to
make good the Dauphin's Title to Brabant and the other Spanish Territories, and
so kept his Word no better with the Irish, than he had done his Faith in the
Pyrenean Treaty: the Irish hereupon complained to the Cardinal of Bovillon, of
the French King's Breach of Promise to them, and that he should turn his Army
against the Catholic King, and not redeem Ireland from its Heretical
Jurisdiction, which you may read at large in Plunket's Trial, and how it was
carried on till the Discovery of that in England; and all this proved by Roman
Catholics.

If those Counselors which were not engaged in the Popish Plot were amazed at
this Discovery of Coleman's Letters, those who were engaged in it were not less
surprised; and the Parliament being to meet some few Days after, I think the
1st of October; the King hereupon, as aforementioned, took Counsel whether he
might not prorogue it to a further Day; and 'twas said Chancellor Finch was of
Opinion he might, whereupon Mr. Seymour (now Sir Edward) then Speaker of the
Commons, went out of Town: but upon Advice of John Brown Clerk of the
Parliament, that so many Members of both Houses must meet and sit when a
Prorogation was made, Mr. Seymour was recalled, and the Houses met, and were
prorogued accordingly.

Between this Prorogation and the meeting of the Parliament, Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was murdered Oct. 12. and if the Council were amazed at Coleman's
Letters, the whole Nation was not less at the Murder of Sir Edmund, and the
time set for the meeting of the Parliament being about 9 or 10 Days after, the
Court thought not fit to make another Prorogation, to take new Counsel upon the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

Here I think fit to relate one Story concerning the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, which I find no where in Print, and the rather for that Sir R. S. so
ridicules Prance's Evidence, because he recanted before the King in his Closet
all that he had been examined and swore to about Sir Edm. Godfrey's Murder,
which he again recanted after he came to Prison; a Papist he was, and by
Profession a Silver-Smith, and wrought for the Priests and others in
Somerset House, and was assisting at the Murder of Sir Edm. Godfrey, and also
at the carrying the Body out of Somerset House; and sometime after the Murder
of Sir Edm. Godfrey was discovered some of Prance's Neighbors having observed
that Prance did not come to his House for several days, they represented it to
some Members of the House of Commons, that they had a great Suspicion that
Prance had a Hand in the Murder of Sir Edmund; and thereupon they got an Order
to seize Prance, and bring him before the House, which they did, and the House
ordered Sir Rich. Everard and Sir Charles Harboard to examine him.

Before the Murder, Le Fair, Pritchard and other Priests treated with Bedlow,
to be assisting in the Murder of Sir Edm. but Bedlow, tho he promised it,
relented, and did not come; but the Monday after the Murder, viz. Oct. 14. he
met Le Fair in Red-Lyon Court, who charged him with not keeping his Word, but
charged Bedlow to meet him at 9 a Clock in Somerset House, and there told
Bedlow that tho he was not assisting as he promised in the killing of Sir Edm.
yet if he would be assisting in the carrying him off, he should have 2000 l.
Bedlow then desired Le Fair, if he might not see the Body, who told him, yes;
which Bedlow did, and then they advised about the Disposal of it, and Bedlow
advised the sinking the Body in the River with Weights, which was not agreed
to; thus far Bedlow deposes: but in seeing the body, Bedlow saw Prance there in
the Company too, but did not know him before.

Bedlow says, he was troubled in Conscience, having twice taken the Sacrament
to conceal the Business, and went to Bristol, where God put it into his Heart,
that some Murders were past, and greater to come, for Prevention whereof he was
convinced it was his Duty to come to London to reveal this Wickedness, which he
did, and came into the Lobby of the House of Lords to make a Discovery, where I
then saw him.

In the mean time Sir Charles Harboard and Sir Rich. Everard having examined
Prance, and the House being set, left Prance to the Care of the Constable of
Covent Garden; who brought him into the Lobby of the House of Lords, where
Bedlow seeing him, but never before he saw him in Somerset House, Bedlow
charged the Guards to seize him, for that he was one of those he saw at
Somerset House, where the Body of Sir Edm. Godfrey lay: and by the same token
he had then a black Peruke, but now none; hereupon Search being made, the
Peruke was found. Here I make a twofold Remark, one of the Strangeness of the
Discovery of Prance by Bedlow who had never but once seen Prance before, and
that by Candlelight, and in a Peruke, should yet upon the first Sight of him
know him again without Peruke; the other, is the Clearness of Sir Edm.
Godfrey's being murdered, and the Body's being in Somerset House, upon Monday
after the Murder the Saturday before; and from hence it was that Prance became
an Evidence in this Discovery.

Now let us see how things stood upon the Meeting of the Parliament upon the
21st of October 1678, both abroad and at home. And herein both Houses were as
warm in Enquiry into them, as the Court was cold.

It was but in January before, that the Parliament had given the King 1200000
l. for carrying on a War against France, in Conjunction with the Dutch, and
their Allies: and upon their Meeting, they found a treacherous separate Peace
made by a Faction of the Dutch with the French, and upon French Terms, wherein
the King had taken Money of the French to join with this Dutch Faction in it.
Besides the King's Guards, which he might increase as he pleased, as well as
keep up those he had, there was now another Army raised, which now it was of no
further Use abroad, they dreaded as much as they did the French Arms now he had
subdued the Confederates, by the Dutch Disjunction from them; and the Discovery
of the Popish Plot carried on at home, whilst these things were thus agitated
abroad, was to them a Demonstration, the same Councils which governed abroad
did so at home.

And if the Parliament were thus amazed at their Sitting, it was no way
lessened when as they found that in this very Month no less than 57 Commissions
were discovered for raising Soldiers, granted to several Romish Recusants, with
Warrants to muster without taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and the
Test, countersigned by Sir J. W. Secretary of State; whereupon, the Commons
committed him to the Tower; yet the King next Day discharged him, with a
Reprimand to the Commons: but upon the Commons Address to the King about it,
the King, as before in his Declarations of Indulgence, promised to recall them.

However, the Commons appointed a secret Committee to enquire to the Bottom of
the Popish Plot; who having made some Progress in it, upon Friday the 1st of
November came to this Resolution, Nemine contradicente, That upon the Evidence
that has already appeared to this House, this House is of Opinion, That there
has been, and still is, a damnable hellish Plot, contrived and carried on by
Popish Recusants, for assassinating and murdering the King, subverting the
Government, and rooting out and destroying the Protestant Religion. Which being
the same Day communicated to the Lords, they unanimously and readily concurred
with the Commons in it; and upon the 5th, the Commons impeached the Earl of
Powis, the Viscount Stafford, and the Lords Arundel of Warder, Petre, and
Bellasis, of High Treason.

The Commons having proceeded thus far in searching into the Popish Plot, upon
the 27th of November proceeded in their next Fear of the Army raised, and now
indeed in Flanders, where the French Army raged, after the Dutch had made their
separate Peace, without Opposition, and the English Army only a Burden to the
Country, and of no Use to restrain the French Ravages; and Voted,

1. That it is necessary, for the Safety of his Majesty's Person, and
preserving the Peace of the Government, That all the Forces which have been
raised since the 29th of September 1677, and all others which have been since
that time brought over from beyond Seas from foreign Service, be forthwith
disbanded.

2. It is the humble Opinion of this House, That the Forces which are now in
Flanders may be immediately called over, in order to their disbanding.

3. That the House would to Morrow Morning resolve it self into a Committee of
the whole House, to consider the Manner of disbanding the Army.

The five Popish Lords had been impeached by the Commons about a Fortnight, and
no Articles exhibited against them, when the King gave the Commons an Account,
that he had given Order for seizing Mr. Mountague's Papers, upon Information
that he had held several Correspondences, whilst he was Ambassador in France,
with the Pope's Nuncio, without any Direction or Order of his Majesty.

But Mr. Mountague, the same Day, produced two Letters from my Lord Treasurer,
whilst he was Ambassador in France, which being read, the House resolved to
impeach the Treasurer, and the same Day ordered a Committee to draw up Articles
against him; which on Saturday the Committee did, and on Monday following
impeached the Treasurer upon them: whereas the Commons had not yet exhibited
any against the Popish Lords. This was upon the 23d of December.

But if the Treasurer was constant to himself, I do not understand how the
Commons Impeachment of him in the 4th Article could consist with the King's
Displeasure against him for the quite contrary, viz. That he suppressed the
Evidences, and reproachfully discountenanced the King's Witnesses in Discovery
of the Popish Plot: And Sir William Temple says, page 391. That the Treasurer
was fallen into the King's Displeasure for bringing the Popish Plot into
Parliament against the King's absolute Command.

However, the Parliament granted the King 693388 l. to disband the Army, and
also an Additional Duty upon Wines for 3 Years: but no more Money being like to
come this Sessions, upon Monday the 30th of December he prorogued the
Parliament to the 4th of February next, and then told them, That it was with
great Unwillingness that he was come to tell them that he intended to prorogue
them; that all of them were Witnesses he had not been well used, the
Particulars of which he would acquaint them with at a more seasonable time,
(but when will that be? for he never saw them after:) In the mean time, he
would immediately enter upon the disbanding the Army, and do what Good he could
for the Kingdom, and Safety of Religion, and that he would prosecute the
Discovery of the Popish Plot, to find out the Instruments of it, and take all
the Care that is in his Power to secure the Protestant Religion as it is now
established. How well this was performed you will soon see; and before the 4th of
February he dissolved this Eighteen-year-old Parliament. The Vogue went, It was
upon the Account of my Lord Treasurer, tho I believe, upon severer Thoughts, it
will seem rather to have been done upon the Account of the Popish Lords and
Popish Plot. These Feuds in the Nation, and Jealousies between the King and
Parliament, stifled the Apprehensions of the dreadful growing Power of the
French King, and made fair Weather for him to prosecute his boundless Ambition,
without any Regard of his Faith or Honor, wherever he could extend it.

Never did one Parliament succeed another so early as the next did this long
Parliament; for the King, by his Proclamation, dissolved the Long Parliament
upon the 25th of January, and the same Day issued out Writs for a new one to
meet at Westminster the 6th of March following; which was just 40 Days between
the Test and Return.

In this Interval, the Blaze of the Parliament's Vote of their Apprehensions of
a damnable and hellish Popish Plot had taken deep Impressions in the Minds of
Men in general; and the Whigs taking Advantage of it, in this short Interval
run down the Tories without Opposition: nay, even the King himself apprehended
there could be no Hopes of attaining his Ends in the next Parliament, but by
seeming zealous in the prosecuting the Discovery of the Popish Plot, and that
he would not longer be governed by Favorites and single Councils.

There had been several Debates in the House of Commons, of the dangerous
Consequences in reference to the Duke of York's Succession to the Crown, and
that the Bottom of the Popish Plot centred in the Duke's being a Papist, and
the presumptive Heir to the Crown; but I do not find they came to any Vote upon
it, yet resolved upon the 8th of November to make an Address to the King, That
the Duke might withdraw himself from his Person and Councils; and in Conformity
therewith, the Duke went, or was sent into Holland: and upon the meeting of the
Parliament, the King acquainted them how great things he had already done for
the preventing the Progress of the Popish Plot; as the Exclusion of the Popish
Lords from their Seats in Parliament, and the Execution of several Men upon the
Score of the Plot, as well as the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; but above
all, that he had commanded his Brother from him, because he would not leave
malicious Men room to say, he had not removed all Causes which could be
pretended to influence him toward Popish Counsels; and tells, That as he had
not been slack in putting the present Laws in Execution against Papists, so he
was ready to join in making such further Laws as may be necessary for the
securing the Kingdom against Popery; and then demands a Supply, and concludes
with his Desires to have this a healing Parliament.

The House chose Mr. Seymour, the Speaker of the last Parliament, to be their
Speaker in this, but the King rejected him, which was no good Presage of a
healing Parliament; and so the Commons chose Mr. Sergeant Gregory, and the King
accepted him.

The Commons began where the last Parliament left, in prosecuting their
Impeachments against the Earl of Danby, and the Popish Lords in the Tower; but
who should be first tried, and what were the Jurisdiction of the Bishops Right
of Voting in their Impeachments, and their Judgments in Cases of Blood, run
quite through this Sessions, wherein the Lords and Commons seldom agreed. There
were two things which made the Earl of Danby's Case more favorably spoken of;
one, That tho he was prosecuted several Weeks after the Popish Lords were
committed, yet the Commons would not proceed in their Impeachments against the
Popish Lords before the Lords had given their Judgments upon the Earl's Plea;
The other was a Vote of the Commons upon the 9th of May, That no Commoner
whatsoever should presume to maintain the Validity of the Earl of Danby' s
Pardon without Leave of the House first obtained, and that the Persons so doing
shall be accounted Betrayers of England: and there was no Nobleman a professed
Lawyer; so that tho the Earl's Plea upon his Pardon was Matter of Law, yet no
Commoner must presume to plead his Cause.

The King, besides his sending the Duke of York beyond Sea, that the World
might now see how otherways he was become a new Man for the future, upon the
20th of April 1679 made this Declaration in Council, and in Parliament, and
after published it to the whole Nation, how sensible he was of the ill Posture
of his Affairs, and the great Dissatisfaction and Jealousies of his good
Subjects, whereby the Crown and Government were become too weak to preserve it
self, which proceeded from his use of a single Ministry, and of private
Advices; and therefore professed his Resolution to lay them aside for the
future, and be advised by those whom he had then chosen for his Council in all
his weighty and important Affairs, together with the frequent Advice of his
great Council in Parliament: and indeed in this Council were many worthy
Members; my Lord of Shaftsbury was President of it, and the then Sir Henry
Capel, and Sir William Temple, Members of it.

But this Declaration of the King's, added to the sending the Duke of York into
Holland, had not the King's desired Effect; the Commons, (besides the Dread of
the Popish Plot as well at present, but more in consequence) after the King had
declared he would not alter the Succession of the Crown in the right Line, were
no ways satisfied with the Disbursements of the Money, nor the disbanding the
Army, yet were resolved it should be done, and voted another Sum of 26462 l.
for it; but it was not carried without some Difficulty, that these Moneys
should be paid into the Exchequer, but Chamber of London: however, the Commons
carried, That the Money so raised should be appropriated to that Use, and to
that End appointed Commissioners to disband the new-raised Army, and so voted,
That the Continuance of any standing Forces in this Nation, other than the
Militia, to be illegal, and a great Grievance and Vexation to the People,
hereby meaning the King's Guards. They also ordered a Bill to be brought in,
for annexing Tangier to the Imperial Crown of England; and voted, That those
who did advise the King to part with Tangier to any foreign Prince or State, or
were instrumental therein, ought to be accounted Enemies to the King and
Kingdom.

But how jealous soever the Commons were of the King, yet they conceived it was
his Life which secured them from the Fears they dreaded of the Duke's coming to
the Crown; and therefore upon the 11th of May voted, Nemine contradicente, That
in Defense of the King's Person and the Protestant Religion, this House does
declare, that they will stand by his Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes; and
that if his Majesty shall come to an untimely End (which God forbid) they will
revenge it upon the Papists.

It seems the Commons had more Care of the King than he had of himself; for he
not only countenanced the Plotters, but ridiculed the Plot. In his Speech at
the opening this Parliament, he told them he had not been idle in discovering
the Plot; and in the last, he told Sir William Temple he was displeased with
the Earl of Danby for bringing the Popish Plot into Parliament, against his
absolute Command. Oliver's Professions and Actions never appeared so
hypocritical and deceitful as this King's; and all this after the Parliament
had voted there was a hellish Conspiracy by the Papists against his Life: and
this proved by a Cloud of Witnesses, agreeing in the Manner and Circumstances
of it, as Oats, Bedlow, Prance, Dangerfield, Bolron, and Mowbray, many of
which had never seen one the other before they gave their Testimonies.

Objection. These were Witnesses of suspected Fame, therefore no Credit ought
to be given to them. But admit this were true, which is not, for except
Dangerfield, and while Prance was frighted with Terror, there was no Objection
against Oats, Bedlow, Mowbray, and Bolron, it will admit of a twofold Answer.

1. Truth is one, and consists in entire parts, whereas Error and Falsehood is
infinite; and therefore it had been impossible that Mowbray and Bolron, who had
never seen Oats or Bedlow before they gave their Testimonies, and Bedlow who
had never known Mowbray, Bolron, nor Oats, should concur not only in the
Design of killing the King, but in the Manner, Place, and Circumstances of it.

2. Admit these Men's Evidence might not have been credited in other Cases, yet
it is fit to consider Witnesses in civil or criminal Cases; in civil Cases Men
may make Elections of what Witnesses they please, and it is their Fault if they
make not use of Men of know Integrity and Repute, that more Credit may be given
to their Evidence: and the End of civil Actions and Contracts is, that they may
be known; but immoral and wicked Actions are Deeds of Darkness, and contrived
so as that they may not be known; so that the Knowledge of them comes to pass
either by Accident, or from the Conspirators themselves: as if only one Man
sees a Murderer or a Thief kill or rob another, if his Testimony shall not be
taken because otherwise an ill Man, Multitudes of Murders and Thefts might pass
unpunished. So if Cicero, when Fulvia first discovered Catiline's Conspiracy to
him, had told her she was a Whore, and no Credit could be given to any thing
she said, Rome might have been in a Flame as London was, and all the Senators
Throats might have been cut.

But admit no Credit could be given to any or all these Men's Testimonies, who
were all Roman Catholics; I would know what Objection could be against Mr.
Jenison (a Gentleman of Birth and Quality) who gave no Evidence at Ireland's,
Wakeman's, Pi^kering's, or Grove's Trials, and changed his Religion when he
heard that Ireland, who was his Father Confessor, at his Death denied that he
was in Town, but in Staffordshire, when Oats and Grove's Maid said he was in
London in August 1678, and printed it, and the Reasons of it; and also at my
Lord Stafford's Trial in open Parliament deposed, That Ireland told him there
was but one that stood in the way, and that it was an easy thing to poison the
King, and that Sir George Wakeman might easily and opportunely do it; and that
in August 1678, (when Ireland at his Death declared he was in Staffordshire)
Ireland told Mr. Jenison in London, when he was newly returned from Windsor,
how easily the King might be taken off, and asked Mr. Jenison if he would be
one of them who should go to Windsor, and assist at the taking off the King,
and proffered Mr. Jenison to remit 200 l. which he owed Ireland, if he would:
Then Ireland asked if he knew any stout Irish-men; who answered he knew Captain
Levallian, Mr. Kerney, Brohal and Wilson. Ireland told him he knew Levallian
and Wilson; and then Ireland asked him if he would go with them, and assist
them in taking off the King: after this Ireland told Mr. Jenison he was going
to the Club, where Mr. Coleman, Mr. Lavallian, and Kerney would be, and he
wanted 80 l. which he desired Mr. Jenison to return him.

Mr. Jenison further deposed, That his Brother, Mr. Thomas Jenison (a Jesuit)
said, If C. R. will not be R. C. which he interpreted to be, Si Carolus Rex non
esset Rex Catholicus, non diu ^^ret Rex Carolus; and that it was no great Sin
to take him off: Mr. Jenison desiring a new Commission in the new raised Army,
his Brother told him he would procure him one from the Duke of York, and that
there was another Army to be raised, but this was not to be till the King was
taken off; and this I say, that about this time there was a general Rumor of a
Page being killed upon a Couch in the Night at Windsor, where the King was laid
but a little before; and that the King, upon the Fright of it, came next
Morning to London; and that it was Prince Rupert who, with much Importunity,
got the King (having been drinking hard before) from the Couch, and put him to
Bed; and that the Page who was killed asleep upon the Couch, was wrapped up in
the Cloak the King was in.

The Commons likewise resolved Nemine contradicente, That the Duke of York
being a Papist, and the Hopes of his coming as such to the Crown, have given
the greatest Countenance and Encouragement to the present Conspirators, and the
Designs of the Papists against the King and Protestant Religion.

But the Designs of the King was, how to get Money for providing a Fleet for
our common Security now in time of such a Peace as the French King had granted
Christendom, after the King had taken his Money to join in it, and after he had
taken the Parliament's Money to enter into an actual War against France; and
after the Parliament had twice given Money for disbanding this Army, which not
succeeding, the Commons dreading how Moneys given at this time of Day might be
employed, took no more Care in it than the King did in the Discovery of the
Popish Plot; so he prorogued the Parliament upon the Twenty seventh of May to
the Fourteenth of August, and upon the Twelfth of July dissolved them.

We shall better take a View of what followed the Prorogation of the Parliament
in England, if we take a Step into Scotland, and see what is doing there. Upon
the 3d of this Month of May, John Balfour of Kinlock, David Hackston of
Rathilelet, George Balfour of Gilston, James Russel in King's Kittle, Robert
Dingwall a Farmer's Son in Caddam, Andrew Guillon a Weaver in Balmerinoch,
Alexander Henderson and Andrew Henderson Sons of John Henderson of
Rillbrachment, and George Flemming, Son to George Flemming of Balbuthy,
murdered Doctor Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews, who, before the King's
Restoration, had held an exalted Place in the Scottish Presbytery, and was in
high Esteem among them, in as vindictive a manner as was that of the Marquess
of Montross about twenty one Years before, as being a perjured Apostate
Prelate, a Villain, a Persecutor of the Godly, a Betrayer of Jesus Christ and
his Church; and which augmented the Horror of the Fact, if my Author of the
second Address to the Freemen of England, page 58. says true, Th^^ they
several times beat down the Archbishop's Daughter upon her Knees, begging her
Father's Life, and trampled upon he^ and wounded her.

This barbarous Act was a Prelude to what followed; for upon the 29th of this
Month, a Party of about 80 of the Covenanters met at Ragland in Scotland, well
mounted and well armed, and proclaimed the Covenant, and burnt several Acts of
Parliament made against it, and for establishing Prelacy, since the Year 1660,
and would have affixed their Declaration at Glascow, but were prevented by the
King's Forces for that time.

This Rebellion of the Covenanters, initiated by so horrid a Fact, did not
extend so far, as the Covenanters in their Fren^^ and Zeal imagined; yet upon
Sunday the 1st of June they rendezvouz'd about fifteen hundred Men upon
Louden-Hill; on^^ Wier commanded the Foot, and the Horse was under Robert
Hamilton, one Patron, with Balfour and Hackston, (which two (...) assassinated
the Archbishop.)

With this Force they took the City of Glasgow; and to she^ how all Crowns and
Scepters must vail to them, they published two Proclamations. The first of
which was, We the Officers of the Covenanted Army, do require and command (...)
the Inhabitants of the Burgh of Glasgow, to furnish us with 24 Carts and 60
Horses for removing our Provisions from this Place to (...) Camp, wherever we
shall set down the same, and to abide with us for that End during our Pleasure,
under pain of being reputed our Enemies, and proceeded against accordingly.

The other was, We the Officers of the Covenanted Army, do require and command
the Magistrates of Glasgow to extend and banish forth thereof all Archbishops,
Bishops, and Curates, their Wives, Berns, Servants, and Families, and Persons
concerned in the King's Army, within 48 Hours after publishing hereof, under
highest Pains.

And then they published a long Declaration of their taking up Arms for a free
General Assembly, and free and unlimited Parliament, to redress the manifold
Grievances there enumerated, and humbly to request his Majesty to restore all
things as he found them when God brought him home to his Crown and Kingdoms;
that was, to the Dominion the Rump-Parliament in England had over them: which
you may read at large in the aforesaid Author, from page 67 to 74.

To these Declarations the said Author, p. 17. adds, they barbarously treated
the dead Body of one Graham, whom they had killed at a Conventicle: They
committed insufferable Insolences in the Houses of the regular Ministers and
Loyal Gentlemen as they marched along to Glasgow, stabbing and gashing his
Majesty's Picture wherever they found it: They behaved themselves barbarously
in the House of the Archbishop of Glasgow, where they burnt his Books, cut in
pieces his best Furniture and Hangings, and almost killed a Gentlewoman with
Blows who was left to keep the House, for saying, Gentlemen, I hope you will
remember you are in an Archbishop's House. They sacrilegiously entered the
Cathedral of Glasgow, and finding a Tombstone over two of the Children of the
Bishop of Argile, with an Inscription of a Modern Date, they dug up their
Bodies, run them through with their Swords, and left them lying above Ground.

In the mean time the Council of Scotland were not idle, but raised an Army,
and quartered it at a place called Blackborn, to prevent the Covenanters
Approach to Edinburgh, and gave the King an Account of these things, and
expected his Majesty's further Orders: And now I Will tell a wonder which will
scarce be believed in future Generations. The King sent the Duke of Monmouth
from London upon the 20th of June, and the Duke rode above three hundred Miles
upon that day and the two next days, and upon the 23d ordered and disposed the
King's Army raised by the Council, that he fought the Covenanters and routed
them, killing about seven hundred of them, and took above eleven hundred of
them Prisoners; and now it may be you will hear of a Wonder in Consequence
after this Fight as great as the Fight, and the Duke's Journey before it.

I do not question but the Design of the Court in sending the Duke of Monmouth
into Scotland to suppress the Covenanters, was by it to make him odious to the
Presbyterians, and other Dissenters from the Church of England, in case he
suppressed the Covenanters, which tho the Duke did, yet the End designed by the
Court in it did not succeed.

For the dreadful Apprehension of the Duke's Succession to the Crown of
England, had taken a deep Impression in another sort of Men besides Dissenters:
and where Men are fearful of Danger, they will seek all means how to prevent
the Danger, especially where the Power of doing ill is greater; and therefore
another sort of Men, no Whigs, might have their Eyes upon the Duke of Monmouth,
as the only means to prevent the Duke of York's Succession to the Crown; his
Title to the Crown of England, if he could get an Act of Parliament for it,
being as good as that of John, alias Robert Stuart, the Son of Elizabeth Moore,
from whom the King and the Duke of York were both descended, and in whose Right
they claimed the Crown of Scotland, if not those of England and Ireland.

However, this gave the Lie to the Tories, that all those were
Commonwealths-Men who would not submit to the Illegal and Arbitrary Will of the
King, and their Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and that Kings, Jure Divino, may
do what they list, tho God has set Laws and Bounds to all the created Bodies of
Heaven and Earth, and all other Creatures in them. But how mischievous these
Doctrines have proved to these three Kings of the Scottish Nation has been
already said, and I say it has been such flattering Doctrines as those that
ruined all these Kings and Kingdoms (except the Gibeonites, Joshua 9. the State
of Venice, and that of Geneva, for Du Salez was a just and virtuous Prince)
from which Commonwealths arose. Who ever, before King James and King Charles
the First's Reign in England, heard of talking of Commonwealths in England, and
the several sorts of Governments, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, which
two latter, tho they have the same Names, yet no two of either in their
Constitutions were like one the other? And as these Commonwealths took their
Rise from the Tyrannies of Kings and Princes; so the exploded Government of the
Rump, if it were a Democracy or Commonwealth, gave Life to all those
Confusions, Perjuries, Breach of Leagues, and devilish Practices of this Reign,
which would have been intolerable in any other, and would have been opposed, if
not by rising in Arms against them, yet at least in not so profusely pouring
out Money for not continuing and carrying of them on.

The Popish Faction were more jealous of the Duke of Monmouth, than the Tories
were of a Commonwealth, and the rather because there was a Pamphlet printed,
that the King was married to the Duke's Mother, and rumoured abroad that Sir
Gilbert Gerrard had a Black Box, in which the Marriage of the King with the
Duke's Mother was fully proved and made out; and the fear of the Duke of York's
Succession was so fixed in Men's Minds, that the Story of the Black Box was
generally divulged, and for ought I know, believed by those who were fearful of
the Duke of York's Succession.

If this could be made out, the Popish Faction would lose the Tories and
Passive-Obedience-Men, who at present were their dearest Joys, and without them
they had not Means to carry on their Design of propagating the Catholic Cause;
they were sure of the King (tho it is believed he loved not the Duke of York)
and therefore the King made three Declarations, the first of the second of June
1679, wherein he calls the Report of his Marriage or Contract with Mrs.
Walters, alias Barrow, the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, false and scandalous; and
upon the sixth of January following, declared, that they who should say he was
married or contracted to the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, were neither his nor
the Duke's Friends, and declared in the Presence of Almighty God, that he was
never married nor contracted to any other Woman but his Wife Queen Catherine;
and upon the third of March following, declared in Council, and entered it into
the Council-Books in the Presence of Almighty God, that he was never contracted
or married to any other Woman but his Wife Queen Catherine: and the Popish
Party were sure enough no Issue would spring from thence to the Prejudice of
their Cause.

And that the King might gratify this Faction, as well as he had done the
Nation in sending the Duke of York out of it, he sends the Duke of Monmouth
after him; but the Duke being informed that Banishment is a Punishment which
the King cannot inflict upon any Man unless he be convicted of some Crime, the
Duke of Monmouth returns again, and the Duke of York follows him, with this
different Success, that the Duke of Monmouth had all his Places of Profit and
Trust taken from him, and the Duke of York was sent High Commissioner into
Scotland, where the Duke of Monmouth's Victory at Blackborn had left a clear
Field in Scotland for the Duke of York to play what Game he pleased; but how
well this agreed with the King's Speech at the opening of the Parliament, That
he had commanded his Brother to absent himself from him, because he would not
leave malicious Men room to say that he had not removed all Causes which could
be pretended to influence him to Popish Councils, a little time will show: but
before we take a View of the Duke of York's Actions in Scotland, it is fit to
see how things were carried on in England, between the Dissolution of the
Parliament and the meeting of the next, or third Westminster-Parliament of this
Reign.

The King by Proclamation dissolved the Parliament upon the 12th of July 1679,
and issued out Writs for the meeting of another the 17th of October following;
but like the usual Methods of other things in this Reign, when they met, he
prorogued them to the 26th of January following, and then prorogued them to the
5th of April following, viz. 1680, and from thence to the next 17th of May: And
when they then met, prorogued them to the first of July, and from thence to the
21st of October, when he graciously declared they should then sit. And now
let us see what is doing in the mean while for the discovery and suppressing of
the Popish Plot.

To humor the Court the Tory Party set their Wits to work to ridicule the
Popish Plot, and Roger L'Estrange, as Pensioner of the Party, comes weekly, or
oftener out in defiance of it, who is Party, Judge, Licenser, and Rifler of the
Press, whilst his Antagonist Care (who wrote The Weekly Packet of Advice from
Rome, wherein he discovered the Frauds and Superstitions of that Court and
Church) is not only thereupon arraigned, convicted and sentenced, for printing
illicite, or without License; but by an Order of the Court of King's Bench, it
was ordained, That the Book int^led, The Weekly Advice from the Church of Rome,
or the History of Popery, shall not from thenceforth be printed or published by
any Person whatsoever.

Then a Design was set on foot to throw the Popish Plot upon the Presbyterians,
by leaving Papers of a Plot in the Lodgings of the principal Persons, who were
active in the discovery of the Popish Plot, and then to search their Houses,
and prosecute them upon it, and these Papers to be given in Evidence against
them* Mrs. Cellier was a principal Agent herein, and Dangerfield as her
Instrument, at first made an Attempt herein upon Colonel Mansel, who was
prosecuted upon it, but the Examination of it was referred to Sir William
Jones, then Attorney General, upon whose Report of it to the Council, they
thereupon voted Colonel Mansel innocent, and Dangerfield guilty, and that this
was a Design of the Papists to lay the Plot upon the Dissenters Charge, and a
further Pro^ of the Popish Plot. But this was such a Crime in Sir William
Jones, that he was soon after put out of his Place, and Sir Robert Sawy^^ put
in, who would not venture the loss of his Place for such another Report.

By this time my Lord Chief Justice's Zeal, which he professed for discovery of
the Popish Plot, was inverted into the quite contrary, and he was not of the
Opinion of the Council: For after this Dangerfield procured his Pardon, and
then discovered the whole Plot, which he printed; hereupon Mrs. Cellier was
prosecuted, and tried before my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs upon the eleventh of
June 1680. and Mrs. Cellier excepting against Dangerfield's Evidence, he having
his Pardon, the Case was sent to the Court of Common Pleas, for their Judgment
upon it; who gave it, that Dangerfield's Evidence was good: yet let any Man
read the Trial, and see how the Chief Justice rated and vilified him, so as
Mrs. Cellier was quit; and after the Trial committed Dangerfield to Prison,
upon the account there was a Defect in his Pardon, though it was not then
before him, whether there was any Defect in his Pardon or not.

Then the Popish Party set another Design on foot, to suborn the Discoverers of
the Popish Plot, for which Mr. Reading was tried and committed, and also to
suborn, defame and scandalize the King's Evidence in the Discovery of the
Popish Plot: for which Thomas Knox and John Lane were convicted upon the twenty
fifth of November 1679, and John Tasborough and Ann Price upon the third of
February following.

Another Step toward the Discovery of the Popish Plot and Subversion of
Popery, was to discharge those in Prison upon it; and in order to it, you may
read in the Trial of Sir George Wakeman, Corker and Marshal, what a Stress my
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs put upon Oats his not accusing Sir George Wakeman,
upon his Letter before the Council, when Oats was so tired, weak and
confounded with his other Evidence, that he was scarce able to stand; and how
the Chief Justice repeats this, and bids the Jury weigh it well, and not be
amazed or affrighted at the noise of Plots, and that Sir George Wakeman's,
Corker's and Marshal's Blood lie at Stake, as did his and the Juries Souls,
etc. And in my Lord Castlemain's Trial, how he undervalued Dangerfield's
Evidence, and told the Jury that Treason must be proved by two Witnesses, and
if they doubted upon one, it was his Opinion it was but a single Evidence.

These Prisoners thus discharged, the next Design to crown the Work, was to
make a Precedent, That no future Prosecution should be made for convicting
Roman Recusants; and to that end, in Trinity Term 1680, before the Parliament
met, the Chief Justice Scroggs discharged the great Inquest of Oswaldston,
before they had given in their Presentiments of several Bills of Indictments
against the Duke of York and other Roman Catholics.

I do not find that in all these Transactions, the King made use of the Council
which he chose the twentieth of April 1679, where my Lord Shaftsbury was
President, and Sir Henry Capel, Sir William Temple, and many other noble
Persons were Members of it, when he declared in Council, and Parliament, and to
the whole Nation, How sensible he was of the ill Posture of his Affairs, and
the great Dissatisfaction and great Jealousies of his Subjects, whereby the
Crown and Government was become too weak to preserve it self, which proceeded
from a single Ministry, and of private Advices; and therefore professed his
Resolution to lay them wholly aside for the future, and to be advised by those
able and worthy Persons whom he had then chosen for his Council; and by the
frequent Advice of his Parliament in all his weighty Affairs. I do not find
when he dissolved this Council, yet I am confident none of these things were
done by their Advice: yet this I find that none of these were present, when the
King in Council the third of March 1679, declared against his Marriage with the
Duke of Monmouth's Mother, and this was within the Year after the twentieth of
April 1679. How the Duke of York carried on the Design of the Discovery of the
Popish Plot, and endeavored the Suppression of Popery in Scotland at this
time, is not yet ripe to be declared; but in this Posture things stood in
England when the Parliament met the twenty first of October 1680.

Upon the opening of the Parliament, the King told them, The several
Prorogations he had made, had been very advantageous to our Neighbors, and
very useful to him; for he had employed that time in making and perfecting an
Alliance with Spain, suitable to that which he had before made with the States
of the United Provinces, and they also had with Spain, consisting of mutual
Obligations of Succor an^ Defense.

So then it was not for the Transactions aforesaid, and the sending the Duke of
York High Commissioner into Scotland, which no doubt but the Parliament, if
they had been sitting, would have boggled at, but for making and perfecting
Alliances with the States of Holland; and if any such Alliances were making, or
made, what would the sitting of the Parliament have hindered them* I Am sure they
might and would have advanced them.

It was in November 1677, that by the Agreement between the King and Prince of
Orange, the French should deliver up to the King of Spain, the Towns of Aeth,
Charleroy, Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Valenciennes, St. Gillain, and Binch;
Lorain to that Duke, and the Towns which the French had taken in Alsatia to the
Emperor: and in case of Refusal within two days after by the French King our
King was to declare War against the French King, and join with the Dutch States
and Confederates to compel the French to it; and at the Prince's Departure
promised him never to depart from the least Point of it.

It was not two Weeks before the King brake this Promise, and to amuse and
raise a Jealousy among the Confederates by Mr. Thy^, (Sir William Temple
refusing to have any hand in it) about the latter end of December following
made a separate League with the Dutch States upon the Parliament's giving him
1200000 l. to enter into an actual War against France.

In May following, viz. 1678. the King took French Money to join with a Faction
in Holland, to make a separate Peace with France, upon delivery of six of the
nine Towns to the Spaniard, whereof two of the three not to be delivered to the
Spaniard, were Tournay and Valenciennes, worth all the rest; and the Duke of
Lorain and the Emperor left loose and uncertain.

In July following, upon the French refusal to deliver up these six Towns to
the Spaniard, the King would declare War against France, and join with the
Dutch and the rest of the Confederates in it.

Hereupon Sir William was sent to the Hague, and in six days time concluded a
League with the States, that if within fourteen days after the Date of it,
France did not declare to evacuate these six Towns, Holland engaged to proceed
in the War against France, and Sir William sent over the Conditions to be
ratified by the King.

During these Transactions in Holland, and it may be before the League came
over to be ratified by the King, the King sent Du Cres with Instructions to Sir
William Temple to remove from the Hague to Nimeguen, and to divulge that the
King and French King had absolutely agreed and consented to a Peace, and that
he had brought Orders to Sir William Temple, to go straight to Nimeguen, where
he should meet with Letters from my Lord of Sunderland the King's Ambassador at
Paris, with all the Particulars concluded between them: The Fourteen Days for
the French Agreement to evacuate the Towns, running so fast away in the mean
time, that Beverning and his Faction, upon the last of the Fourteen Days,
pleaded a petty Necessity of huddling up that treacherous Peace which left
Christendom to the Mercy of the French.

Would not one think it strange now, that the Dutch and poor Spaniard should
have such a mutual Confidence in our King's Faith, and to trust to his mutual
Obligations of Succor and Defense? Or that the King should be so staid in
making this League? for it was above eighteen Months after the Prorogation of
the last Parliament, to the Meeting of this, and above Fifteen Months from the
Dissolution of it; and yet so hasty in all his other Leagues.

After the Benefits which Christendom, as well as England, may reap by these
Alliances, if our Divisions at home do not make our Friendship less
considerable, the King thought fit to renew all Assurance that can be desired
for Security of the Protestant Religion, which he is resolved to maintain
against the Conspiracies of our Enemies: Can any Man who reads the Transactions
between the Prorogation of the last Parliament, and the Meeting of this, force
a Belief of this? And concur with any new Remedies which shall be proposed,
which may consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its due and
legal Course of Descent; That is, Let the Wolf be Shepherd, and let the Sheep
make what Laws they please for their Preservation.

Was it not known that the Duke of York was a Jesuited Papist; whose Maxims
are, That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, which he esteemed all others
in England but those of his own Romish Faction to be? Could the King believe
that the Duke's Succession could be any Security to the Protestant Religion (as
the King calls it) which the Duke esteemed Heresy, and to be rooted out by Fire
and Sword? or that any other but the Duke's Faction could be protected by him,
when he esteemed them Heretics, Schismatics, Church-Robbers, and no
Christians?

It Is true, at this time the King of Portugal was made a Prisoner, to restrain
him from his immoral and wicked Actions, whilst his Brother in his Imprisonment
acted as Regent of Portugal, in his Brother's Name: But upon the Duke's
Succession, how could a Regent act when the King was not a Minor, but of full
Age double, and at large, in the King's Name, and contrary to his Will and
Pleasure, and this to consist with the Security of the Protestant Religion or
Laws?

In the Debates in the House of Commons, many Expedients were propounded, how
the established Government in Church and State could be preserved, and none
could be found in case the Duke succeeded: so the Country Party moved, that the
Court Party would propound Expedients herein; but either they could not, or had
no Instructions from the Court to warrant such Expedients as they should
propound.

But if the due and legal Descent of the Crown must be preserved, though to the
Destruction of the Church and State; they who advised the King to be so
positive herein, should have done well to have declared what Law in England
declares the Descent of the Crown of England, or how this becomes due. I am
sure the Act of the first of Henry the IV intailed the Crown upon the King, and
the Heirs of his Body; and so did that of the first of Henry VII. before he
married the Lady Elizabeth, Edward the Fourth's Daughter; and if Henry the
seventh's Title to the Crown had been good by inherent Birthright, yet he had
been an Usurper: For his Mother, under whom he claimed, lived all his Reign,
and so she did some time after Henry the VIII became King, as you may read in
Stow's History, p. 487. And how was the due and Legal Succession of the Crown
of England observed in the Reign of Henry the VIII, when by his Will he might
name what Successor he pleased, as has been said; or in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when it was in Parliament declared Treason to affirm the Parliament
might not dispose of the Succession of the Crown in her Reign, and a Praemunire
at this Day? And let any Man show that ever there were three Kings before these
of the Scottish Race, in the Saxon, Danish, or Norman Race, which succeeded
successively by inherent Birthright, I will submit that all I have said is not
true: and why then must such a Stress be put for the preserving the Descent of
the Crown in its due and legal Course, without declaring what is that due and
legal Course, to endanger the Subversion of the Church and State of England?

Then the King recommends to the Parliament, a Strict Enquiry into the Popish
Plot, and that the Lords in the Tower be brought to a speedy Trial, without
which he did not think himself or the Parliament safe. The constant Vogue was,
That the King dissolved the two last Parliaments to preserve the Lords in the
Tower from being brought to Trial; and I am sure that you will soon hear that
the King did not believe his and the Nation's Safety did consist in the Trial
of the Lords in the Tower.

Then the King tells the Parliament what Danger Tangier was in, and what vast
Expense he must be at to keep it: And the Commons last Parliament drew up an
Act to settle it upon the Imperial Crown of England, and that they who did
advise the King to part with Tangier to any Foreign Prince or State, or were
instrumental therein, ought to be accounted Enemies to the King and Kingdom.
And what Care the King took to keep it, will soon appear, tho 'twas said, the
Parliament (I think it was out of the Chimney-Bill) gave him 40000 l. per Annum
toward the Preservation of it to the Crown of England.

The King goes on and says, That above all the Treasure in the World, which he
was sure would give him greater Strength both at home and abroad, than any
Treasure can do, is a perfect Union among our selves, yet says not wherein we
should unite. Truth and Unity are one, and consist in entire Parts; but
Falsehood and Discord are infinite: What Truth or Unity could be in the King's
loose and irregular Actions, so confounding, and every day varying from what he
had promised before? Or how is it possible for the Nation to unite under Terms
which are inconsistible and impossible, viz. Unite to preserve the
Constitutions of the Kingdom, and yet be at no Discord with the King, who they
were morally certain, would make it his Business to subvert them?

If we should be so unhappy (the King says) as to fall into such
Misunderstanding among our selves as would render our Friendship unsafe to
trust to, it will not be wondered at if our Allies shall begin to take up new
Resolutions, and perhaps such as may be fatal to us; and advised them not to
gratify our Enemies, and dishearten our Friends by any unreasonable Disputes,
viz. to take all by an implicit Faith. I do not understand what the King means
by Misunderstanding among our selves, which may render our Friendship to our or
his Allies unsafe; nor does he say wherein such Misunderstanding consists; I Am
sure the Parliament misunderstood him when they gave him 1200000 l. to enter
into an actual War against the French King, in the Defense of these Allies; and
when he had got the Money, to make a separate Peace with a Faction of the
Dutch, to the Ruin of his Allies; and take French Money for it: and to get the
Parliament twice over to disband this Army, for fear he should turn it against
them and the Nation; and now 'twas disbanded, to give Money to raise another,
upon Pretense of assisting these Allies, now they were forced to such a
dishonorable Peace with the French; or that our Allies, as the King calls
them, would ever trust to any more of his Alliances.

If any should so happen (the King says) the World will see it is no Fault of
his, for he had done all that was possible for him to do to keep us in Peace
while he lived, and to leave us so when he died.

Can any Man believe the King believed himself herein? Or that any Man will be
his Voucher for it? Even my Lord C. F. out of the Field of his sweet lisping
Eloquence, could not gather one Rhetorical Flower to make a Flourish upon this
Speech; nor assure the Parliament upon his Veracity, that Now, Now was the time
to secure their Religion and Properties: nay, the Commons gave so little Credit
to this Speech, that they would not deign to debate it, or one Paragraph in it.

Neither the Ba^t of Tangier, nor the King's making Alliances with the Dutch
and Spaniard (if any such were in his Ramble of Prorogations of this
Parliament) would make the Commons give more Money: This Parliament met in a
contrary Humor to that of the Long Parliament, and that from contrary Causes;
for that Parliament adored him as their Deliverer from the Rage and Persecution
of the late times, whereas this Parliament met in Dread and Terror of the
Nation at present, and were frighted at the Prospect of the Consequence of it
after the King's Death.

The Commons heated by the Dissolutions of the two last Parliaments, when they
were searching into the Discovery of the Popish Plot; and exasperated against
the Tories, for ridiculing the Popish Plot, and for abhorring petitioning the
King to let the Parliament sit, in order to prosecute and secure the Nation
against it, etc. proceeded in another Temper, I think, than any other ever
before: and in Truth I do not desire the Prosecution of the Commons in the Long
Parliament in the first ten Years against the Protestant Dissenters, and of the
Commons of this Parliament against the Tories, should be taken for Precedents
by any Parliament in time to come.

When Parliaments met annually, or at least frequently, I think a Complaint
cannot be found against any Man for Breach of Privilege: but when there were
long Intervals of Parliaments, from whence the Consequence resolved into long
Sittings of Parliaments, which began in the Reign of Henry VIII, then the
Inconvenience (I may say) of Privilege of Parliament first began; nor do I find
any before the latter end of Henry VIII, nor does Mr. Petit, in his Precedents
from Arrests, and other Privileges of Parliament Men, cite any before the
Thirty fourth of Henry VIII, in Case of Mr. George Ferrers, Burgess for the
Town of Plymouth, being arrested for Debt; and this was taken for such a
Novelty, that he takes up near seven Pages to recite the Proceedings of the
Commons upon it; and how the King being advertised thereof, called the
Chancellor, the Judges, the Speaker of the Commons, and the gravest Persons of
them, wherein he commended the Wisdom of the Commons in maintaining their
Privileges (which he would not in any Point have infringed) and that the
Privileges of Parliament extend to the Servants of the Commons from Arrests, as
well as to the Persons of the Commons. It Is worthy Observation with what
Sobriety and Justice the Commons proceeded herein: They ordered their Sergeant
forthwith to repair to the Compter in Breadstreet, wherein Mr. Ferrers was
committed, with his Mace to demand his Delivery, which the Sergeant did to the
Officers of the Compter, who notwithstanding refused to do it, and beat and
hurt some of the Serjeant's Officers, and broke his Mace; and during the Brawl
the Sheriffs of London came in, who countenanced the Officers of the Compter,
and refused to deliver Mr. Ferrers, and gave the Sergeant proud Language, and
contemptuously rejected his Message: Hereupon the Commons commanded the
Sergeant to demand the Sheriffs of London to deliver Mr. Ferrers, by showing
them his Mace, which was his Warrant for so doing; whereupon the Sheriffs
delivered him accordingly; but then the Sergeant having further Command from
the Commons, charged the Sheriffs to appear personally on the Morrow by eight
of the Clock, before the Speaker in the nether House (or of the Commons) to
bring thither the Clerks of the Compter, and such other of their Officers as
were Parties in the Fray, and to take into Custody one White, who had wittingly
procured the said Arrest, in contempt of the Privilege of Parliament.

The next day the two Sheriffs, with one of the Clerks of the Compter, and the
said White, appeared in the Commons House, where the Speaker charging them with
their Contempt and Misdemeanour, they were compelled to make immediate Answer,
without being admitted to Counsel; and in conclusion the Sheriffs, and the said
White were committed to the Tower, and the Clerk (which was the Occasion of the
Fray) to a place called Little Ease, and the Officer which did the Arrest,
called Tailor, with four other Officers, to Newgate, where they remained from
the Twenty eighth to the Thirty first of March, and then were delivered at the
humble Suit of the Mayor and their other Friends.

The next Breach of Privilege reported by Petit, is eight Years after, viz. the
fourth of Edward VI, by one Withrington, who made an Assault upon the Person of
one Brandling, Burgess of New Castle; but the Parliament drawing toward an
End, the Commons sent Withrington to the Privy Council; but the Council would
not meddle in it, and sent the Bill of Mr. Brandling's Complaint back again to
the Commons according to the ancient Custom of the House; whereupon the Bill
was sent to the Lords from the Commons, when Withrington confessed he began the
Fray upon Dr. Brandling, upon which he was committed to the Tower. This was in
the Year 1550.

Mr. Petit finds not another Breach of Privilege, till the Fourteenth of
Elizabeth, twenty one Years after, which was done by one Arthur Hall, for
sundry lewd Speeches used as well in the Commons House, as abroad; who was
warned by the Sergeant to appear before the Bar of the Commons to answer for
the same, and upon his Speech, upon the humble Confession of his Folly, he was
remitted, with a good Exhortation given him by the Speaker. Here I observe
these three Particulars.

1. The Rarity of these Breaches of Privileges of Parliament in former times.

2. The Justice of the Commons in their Proceedings of Breach of Privilege, to
cite the Person or Persons to appear before them, to answer for themselves
before the House passed any Censure upon them.

3. That in none of these Censures they enjoined the Delinquent to pay their
Fees to their Sergeant, for the Sergeant is the King's Officer, and by the 26th
West. 1. no Officer of the King's shall take any Fee or Reward for doing his
Office, but what he receives from the King, upon Penalty of rendering double to
the Plaintiff, and be further punished at the Will of the King. And Sir Edward
Coke in his first Inst. Lib. 3. Sect. 701. Tit. Extortioners, says, this was
the ancient common Law, and the Penalties added by the Statute; and that tho
some Statutes since have allowed the King's Officers in some Cases to take Fees
for executing their Offices, yet none other can be taken but what such Statutes
allow; and that all Officers of the King, who take Fees otherwise, are guilty
of Perjury. I would know by what Law the Commons Sergeant takes his Fees, and
how the Commons can absolve him from Perjury for taking such Fees.

Whereas in this Parliament rarely a Day passed wherein Men upon bare
Suggestions, and absent, were not judged, and Execution ordered for high
Breaches, and notorious Breaches of the Commons Privileges, yet most of these
not foreknown, and ordered to be taken into Custody, tho in Northumberland and
Yorkshire: and rarely I think any of them were discharged without paying their
Fees, but what Fees was what the Sergeant pleased; nay, the Commons outrun all
which was ever thought of before: For on Tuesday the 14th of December, having
voted one Mr. Herbert Herring to be taken into Custody, and Mr. Herring
absconding from being taken, the House resolved, That if he did not render
himself by a certain Day, they would proceed against him by Bill in Parliament
for endeavoring by his absconding to avoid the Justice of the House. Though I
doubt the Lords, in the Temper they were in, nor the King neither, would have
passed such a Bill.

It was strange methought that the Commons should be so zealous against any
Arbitrary Power in the King, and take such a Latitude to themselves; which puts
me in mind of a Story I have heard of an old Usurer, who had a Nephew, who had
got a License to preach, and the Uncle having never done any thing for his
Nephew, he resolved to be revenged upon his Uncle in a Sermon which he would
preach before his Uncle in the Parish where he lived, and made a most invective
Sermon against Usury and Usurers; but after the Sermon was done, the Uncle
thanked his Nephew for his good Sermon, and gave him 2 Twenty-shilling Pieces:
the Nephew was confounded at this, and begged his Uncle's Pardon for what he
had done, for he thought he had given him great Offense; No, said the Uncle,
Nephew, go on and preach other Fools out of the Conceit of Usury, and I shall
have the better Opportunity of putting out my Money.

Yet so zealous were the Commons against Popery and Arbitrary Power, that upon
the 15th of December they resolved that one Mean for the Suppression of Popery
is, That a Bill be brought in to banish immediately all considerable Papists
out of the King's Dominions.

And that a Bill be brought in for an Association of all his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, for the Defense of his Majesty's Person, the Defense of
the Protestant Religion, and for the Preservation of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, against all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever, and for preventing
the Duke of York, or any other Papist, from succeeding to the Crown.

And upon the 16th of December the Commons read another Bill the first time for
exempting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of
England from the Penalties imposed upon the Papists; and upon the 18th ordered
a Bill to be brought in to unite his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

In this Ferment of the Commons this Parliament, they run counter to the
Commons of the last Parliament; for then they chose Mr. Edward Seymour to be
their Speaker, and when the King refused him, they were much disgusted: but in
this Parliament the Commons the 25th of November impeached him upon four
Articles, and a Motion was made for an Address to be made to remove him from
his Majesty's Council and Presence. And in the last Parliament the Commons
would not proceed to the Trial of the Popish Lords in the Tower, before the
Lords should give their Judgment upon the Earl of Danby's Plea; whereas in this
Parliament they proceeded to the Condemnation of my Lord Stafford, without
taking any notice, that I can find, of having the Lords Judgment upon the
Earl's Plea.

The Commons took Care also to prosecute and impeach all those that
countenanced the Popish Plot, or were Abhorrers of petitioning the King for the
Meeting of the Parliament in the manifold Prorogations of it; and voted, That
it is, and ever has been, the undoubted Right of the Subjects of England, to
petition the King for the Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, and Redress of
Grievances.

And that to traduce such petitioning as a Violation of Duty, and to represent
it to his Majesty as tumultuous and seditious, is to betray the Liberty of the
Subject, and contributes to the Design of subverting the ancient legal
Constitutions of this Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary Power.

The first that fell under these Votes was Sir Francis Withens (after made a
Judge) a Member of the Commons, whom they voted to be a Betrayer of the
undoubted Rights of the Subjects of England, and ordered him to be expelled the
House for this high Crime, and to receive the Sentence at the Bar of the House
kneeling; which he submitted to.

The next was Sir George Jefferies, then Recorder of the City; and ordered that
an humble Address be made to the King to remove him out of all public Offices,
and that the Members which served for the City should communicate this Vote to
the Court of Aldermen.

Upon this Account (tho the Commons discriminated the Crime) they ordered Sir
Giles Philips and Mr. Coleman to be sent for into Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms, for detesting and abhorring the petitioning for sitting of the
Parliament, and voted it a Breach of Privilege of Parliament: the like the
Commons did by Captain William Castle, Mr. John Hutchinson, Mr. Henry Walrond,
Mr. William Stavel, Mr. Thomas Herbert, Sir Thomas Holt Sergeant at Law, and
Mr. Thomas Staples: and because Sir Francis North (Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas) advised, and was assisting in drawing up a Proclamation against
petitioning for the sitting of the Parliament; the Commons voted, That it was a
sufficient Ground for the House to proceed against him for high Crimes and
Misdemeanors. The like Vote passed against Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Judges
of the King's Bench, and Sir Richard Weston one of the Barons of the Exchequer.
I do not find these Votes went further; but the Commons actually impeached Sir
William Scroggs of High Treason, for discharging the Grand Jury of Middlesex
before they had finished their Presentiments, and for the Order made in the
King's Bench against Care's Packet of Advice from Rome, (...) the History of
Popery, that it should be no more printed or published by any Person
whatsoever. I do not find the Articles particularly recited, but they were
engrossed upon the 7th of January, and the Impeachment carried up to the Lords
by my Lord Cav^^dish, and received by the Lords.

Note, in this common Danger the Commons ordered Leave to bring in a Bill for a
general Naturalization of all Protestant Aliens, giving them Liberty to
exercise their Trades in all Corporations. Now it is time to see wherein the
Lords and Commons did agree, and wherein they ran counter.

The Lords agreed with the Commons in repealing the Act of 35 Elizabeth, viz.
for Payment of 20 l. per mensem for every Man who resorted not to his
Parish Church, being so terrible a Law, that it lay dormant above 80 Years, and
in the Feuds between the Tories and Whigs, it was begun to be put in Execution;
which the Commons apprehending would make a Breach so wide as to let in Popery,
which would make no Distinction between Dissenters and the Sons of the Church,
they brought in a Bill for repealing the said Act of 35 Eliz. which passed the
Commons upon the 26th of November, and was sent up to the Lords, who agreed to
it.

As the Lords joined with the Commons in passing this Repeal, so did the
Commons join with the Lords in their Vote the 4th of January, viz.

Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That
they do declare that they are fully satisfied, that there now is, and for
diverse Years last past there has been, an horrid and treasonable Plot and
Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in
Ireland, for massacring the English, and subverting the Protestant Religion,
and ancient established Government of that Kingdom. To which the Commons added,
That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the Expectation that Party had of his
coming to the Crown, has given the greatest Encouragement to the Popish Plot,
as well in Ireland as here.

But the Lords ran counter to the Commons in the Bill entitled An Act for
securing the Protestant Religion, by disabling James Duke of York to inherit
the Imperial Crown of England, and Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; for after the Reading it the first time in the House of Lords, and
the Question being put, whether it should be read a second time, it was
resolved in the Negative by above a double Majority of Votes.

If the Lords and Commons ran counter in some things, the King and Commons ran
counter almost in every thing. The King's main End in calling this Parliament,
was to get Money for the Preservation of Tangier, and in perfecting the
Alliance he had made with Spain.

The Commons would not give any Money upon the Account of Tangier, for three
Reasons: One was, For that as the state of the Nation stood, it might augment
the Strength of the Popish Party, and increase the Danger of the Nation:
Another was, There were several Regiments besides the Guards in pay in England,
which might be transported to Tangier with little Charge, and be maintained
there as cheap as here: And the third was, That that Garrison was the Nursery of
Popish Officers and Soldiers.

The Commons would not give Money for the pretended Alliance of mutual
Obligations of Succor and Defense with Spain, for three Reasons.

1. The Jealousy they had of the King's Sincerity in this Alliance, and the
more because the King did not declare to them what manner of Alliance this was,
and it might be more to the Prejudice than Benefit of this Kingdom; or if it
should have been to the Benefit of the Kingdom, they could have no more
Assurance of the Performance of it, than they had of the Triple League, that
made with the Prince of Orange, or that made between the King and States of
Holland by Mr. Thyn on the King's Part, which were all broken almost as soon as
made.

2. The Impossibility of any Benefit which could arise to England and Spain by
such an Alliance: for if all Christendom, after the separate Peace which the
King joined with the Dutch Faction in, could not uphold Spain and the Spanish
Netherlands from falling under the Dominion of the French, how could the King,
in the feeble and distracted state of the Nation, be in a condition to support
it without them?

3. The Unreasonableness of giving Money upon this Account; for tho oftentimes
the Kings of England have demanded Supplies for maintaining vast Wars, yet
never any King of England before demanded Supplies for making Alliances, and
not declare what such Alliances were.

But if any such mutual Alliances of Succor and Defense were made between our
King and the King of Spain, I Am sure they were ill observed by the King; for
two Years after, viz. 1682, the French blocked up the City of Luxemburgh, and
the next Year took Courtray (one of the six Towns delivered back to the
Spaniard, by Beverning's separate Treaty from the Confederates) and keeps it to
this Day; and so the French King does Luxemburgh, which he took by plain Force
from the Spaniard the next Year after, viz. 1684. I wish I could find any
mutual Succor of Defense the King gave the King of Spain in any of these,
either by this Alliance, or as the King was Guarantee in the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, which in his Proclamation against the Dutch, in the second Dutch War,
he declared he would maintain.

Nor did the Commons only run counter to the King's Designs of getting Money,
but considering the dangerous and weak state of the Kingdom, as by the Debt the
King had contracted by shutting up the Exchequer, and his squandring away
almost all the ancient Revenues of the Crown; and to prevent the like upon the
Revenue settled upon the King since his Restoration, upon the 7th of January
resolved.

1. That whosoever shall lend or cause to be lent, by way of Advance, any Money
upon the Branches of the King's Revenue, arising by Customs, Excise, or
Hearth-money, shall be adjudged a Hinderer of the Sitting of Parliaments, and
be responsible for the same.

2. That whosoever shall accept or buy any Tally or Anticipation upon any part
of the King's Revenue; or whosoever shall pay such Tally hereafter to be
struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the Sittings of Parliaments, and be
responsible therefore in Parliament.

Now let us see wherein the King run counter to both Lords and Commons. After
the Lords had agreed with the Commons in the Repeal of 35 Eliz. the Bill was
taken from the Lords Table, and never heard of after, which no Man durst have
done without the King's Command, at least Privity. Herein you may observe the
Insincerity of the King's Indulgences, for dispensing with the Penal Laws
against Dissenters, when he nourished those Ends by them which the Parliament
dreaded; and now the Parliament would have legally eased them, the Bill must be
ravished away.

Here is a greater Wonder yet to be told of this Parliament; for
notwithstanding all these Discords between the Lords and Commons, and the King
and the Lords and Commons, yet they all reconciled in making the Act against
the Importation of Irish Cattle, etc. perpetual, thereby to perpetuate the
Discords between the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, as much as those between
Whig and Tory. And in this posture of Affairs the King prorogued the Parliament
from the 10th to the 20th of January 1681, and upon the 18th dissolved them.
This Dissolution caused a great Amazement in the Nation; but in some measure to
allay it, the King summons another to meet the 21st of March following, at
Oxford. This raised a Jealousy in the Nation and many of the Nobility, that
there was some hidden Design nourished in the Court, which might have dangerous
Influences upon the Nation and the Parliament too.

Hereupon 16 of the Nobility petitioned the King against the Meeting of the
Parliament at Oxford; and my Lord of Essex, upon the Delivery of it, made a
short Speech, which I believe was not forgotten afterward.

The Lords in their Petition set forth, That the King, by diverse Speeches and
Messages to both Houses of Parliament, declared to them the Danger which
threatened his Person and the whole Kingdom, from the mischievous and wicked
Plots of the Papists, and the sudden Growth of a foreign Power, from which no
Remedy could be provided, unless by Parliament, and the uniting the King's
Protestant Subjects.

That upon the 21st of March 1679, his Majesty having chosen a Council of many
honorable Persons, declared to the Parliament and whole Nation, That being
sensible of the Evil of a single Ministry or private Advice, for the future he
would refer all things to that Council, with the frequent Advice of his great
Council of Parliament.

That to their unspeakable Grief, that Parliament was soon after prorogued, and
dissolved before it could perfect their intended Relief and Security to the
Nation; and tho another were called, yet they were not permitted to sit till
the 21st of October last, when his Majesty declared, That neither his Person
nor the Kingdom could be safe till the Plot was gone through; yet upon the 10th
of January following it was prorogued, whereby all their pious Endeavors to
save the Nation were overthrown, and the good Bills for uniting his Protestant
Subjects brought to naught, the Discovery of the Irish Plot stifled, and the
Witnesses to prove the same discouraged, whereby the Strength and Courage of
our Enemies both at home and abroad, are increased, and our selves and Country
left in Danger to be lost and brought to Desolation.

That in these Extremities, under God they had nothing to comfort them but the
Hopes of the Parliament's meeting at the Day to which they were prorogued; but
that not only failed by their Dissolution, but to call another at Oxford, where
neither Lords nor Commons can be in Safety, but exposed to the Swords of
Papists and their Adherents, of whom too many were crept into his Majesty's
Guards; the Liberty of Speaking destroyed, and the Validity of their Acts left
disputable: That the Straitness of the Place could not admit of the Concourse
of People which follow the Parliament: That the Witnesses to give Evidence
against the Popish Lords and others would be put to great Charges, which they
cannot bear, nor trust themselves under the Protection of the Parliament, which
it self is under the Power of Guards and Soldiers; and therefore pray that the
Parliament may meet and sit at Westminster. Sir W. J. adds another Reason, That
the Meeting of the Parliament at Oxford would have the Inconvenience of making
use of the Journals of the Houses, and other Records.

I do not find what Answer the King gave the Lords, but he expressed his
Displeasure by a Frown: and how loose soever he was in all his Promises to the
Parliament, you will see him steady in this of the Parliament's meeting at
Oxford, yet not forget the Lords that petitioned him, whereof the Duke of
Monmouth, the Earls of Bedford, Essex, and Shaftsbury, were four. But before we
proceed to discover what was done in this short Interval between the
Dissolution of this last Westminster Parliament and the meeting of that at
Oxford, it will not be amiss to take the Resemblance which was between the
Tories and Whigs at this time, with the Prerogative-Men and Puritans during
Laud's Regency in the Reign of King Charles the First.

In those Times the Prerogative and high-flown Churchmen, however they were
countenanced and preferred by the Court, yet of all Factions were the least
considerable in the Nation, and had the least Interest in it, even less than
the Papist; and when they had by their Extravagancies and tyrannical Dominion
given such a Reputation to the Puritan Party, as by Contradiction or Opposition
of them to be able to raise a War in the Nation* they were not only less
assisting the King in it than the Papists, but generally ran counter, and they
and their Sons joined with the Puritans against the King: So that the King
being assisted in the War by the Nobility and Gentry, who desired to preserve
the Constitutions of the Church and State, and by the Papists, the Storm fell
upon them without Distinction; so that these equally exasperated against the
Factions, upon King Charles's Restoration were easily reconciled to join
against them: and thus it continued not only in the Body of the Nation, but in
the Parliament for the first ten Years after the King's Restoration.

But then the Popish Designs at Court beginning to appear almost barefaced,
the Commons began to tack about, but so did not the Lords, especially the Lords
Spiritual, who could not forget the Injury done, not only to their Persons, but
their whole Order, as well in throwing them out of the Lords House, as
extirpating Episcopacy: and the King having multiplied a Nobility of his
Favorites, these joined with the Bishops (who yet maintained the King's
absolute Power, under a new Title of Passive Obedience to it) had a great
Majority opposite to the Commons.

As Laud's Instruments had the Dominion of the Press, whereby they vented all
their Spite against the Puritans, and persecuted them if they made any Answer,
so did the Tories; and as Laud's Faction stigmatized all others (except
Papists) which were not of their Faction, with the Name of Puritans, so did the
Tories all other but Papists, with the Name of Whigs. But herein the Tories in
this Reign had a great Advantage above the Prerogative-men in King Charles the
First's Reign; for this Prince was of a more parsimonious Nature, not at all
becoming so great a Prince, and had not one third of the Revenue which his Son
had, who profusely scattered it amongst his Minions and Favorites: and sure it
will set an ill Character upon his Memory, to have it left upon Record by what
strange ways to Honor and Justice, he made himself a Drudg to his Favorites
to get Money from his Subjects to support them; whilst he became a Pensioner to
the French King himself, and was so loose in all his Leagues which he made with
all other Princes and States.

After the Popish Plot broke out, and the King had dissolved the Long
Parliament, the whole Genius of the Nation became quite altered, as plainly
appeared in their Election of the Commons in these two succeeding Westminster
Parliaments, who for their Quality were equal to any House of Commons that ever
was before; and the Tories have now as little an Interest in the Nation as the
Prerogative-men had in King Charles the First's Reign i^ Laud's Regency.

However the Tories were balked of the Expectation of their Pensions, by the
Commons giving no Money in these two last Parliaments; yet they abated nothing
of their Impudence in making all but themselves and the Papists to be Whigs,
and that a^ was now running back to Forty One, and into a Commonwealth. In this
Disguise, since the Meal-Tub Plot had no better Success* one Fitz-Harris the
Son of Sir Edward Fitz-Harris (both Irish, and Papists) sets up another like
that of the Meal-Tub, but was carried on with higher Countenance; for the
Countess of Powis was the greatest concerned in that, but you will see a greater
concerned in this, tho the Design was as dark as secret, and the Discover^ of
it by all Court-ways endeavored to be suppressed. So much as was suffered to
come to Light was,

Edward Fitz-Harris was the Son of Sir Edward Fitz-Harris, (...) (it is said)
was an Agent in the Irish Rebellion, if not in the Massacre in 1642. and this
Edward Fitz-Harris was a great Correspondent with the Duchess of Portsmouth,
and her Wom^n Mrs. Wall, and the Confessor of the French Ambassador: and the
Duchess had several times supplied Fitz-Harris with Money, and at one Time
with 250 l.

Fitz-Harris became acquainted with one Everard beyond Sea* where they were in
the French King's Service: There was a strange Story of this Everard, for after
the King's Restoration he was (...) about three Years kept in a dark Dungeon in
the Tower, where, it is said, the Nails of his Fingers and Toes grew like the
Taken of a Hawk: but the Fact for which he was committed was as (...) as was
Fitz-Harris's Design.

About the Beginning of February, after the Parliament (...) dissolved,
Fitz-Harris renews his Acquaintance with Everard and represented to him the
Advantages he might have by forsaking the English Interest, and ingratiating
himself into the (...) and Popish.

Fitz-Harris told Everard he might be serviceable to this Intere^^ if he would
make a Pamphlet, which might reflect upon the King^ to alienate him from the
People, and the People from the King^ Everard said he would do any thing for
his Interest, but did (...) understand this to be so; yet Fitz-Harris, upon the
21st of (...) gave some Heads by Word of Mouth to draw such a Pamphlet.

Everard acquaints several with what Fitz-Harris had said, and persuaded one
Mr. Smith, in a concealed manner, to hear the further Discourse between
Fitz-Harris and him: Everard also persuaded Sir William Waller to be there in
like manner.

Upon the 22d Mr. Smith came to the Place appointed, but Sir William Waller did
not: there Fitz-Harris gave Everard Instructions, That the King and all the
Royal Family must be traduced to be Popishly and Arbitrarily affected from the
Beginning; that King Charles the First had a hand in the Irish Rebellion; and
that King Charles the Second did countenance the same by preferring
Fitzgerald, Fitz-Patrick, and Mont-Garret, who were in the Irish Rebellion;
that the Act forbidding the calling the King a Papist, was to stop Peoples
Mouths, when he should incline to further Popery, which appeared by his
adhering so closely to the Duke of York's Interest, and hindering him from
being proceeded against in Parliament, and hindering the Officers put in by the
Duke, to be cast out; and for that the Privy-Counsellors and Justices of the
Peace which were for the Protestant Interest, were turned out of all Places of
Trust; and that it was as much in the Peoples Power to depose a Popish
Possessor as a Popish Successor; and seeing there were no Hopes the Parliament,
when they should meet at Oxford, could do any Good, the People were bound to
provide for themselves.

After this, Everard and Fitz-Harris agreed to meet there the next Day; and in
the mean time Everard sent a Letter to Sir William Waller to meet there, and be
concealed, to take notice of the Passages: Sir William came, and was secretly
placed by Everard; but before Sir William was so placed, Everard gave him two
Copies of the Instructions which Fitz-Harris gave Everard to draw up into a
Libel, which Sir William marked.

Soon after Fitz-Harris came and enquired of Everard what he had done; who
answered, he had drawn two Copies of the Business, and prayed Fitz-Harris to
see how he liked them: Fitz-Harris altered one of them, yet thought it not full
enough, but would have it fair wrote out for the French Ambassador's Confessor.
After that, Everard desired Fitz-Harris to give him his Instructions in
Writing, in which Paper Fitz-Harris wrote, That it was in the Peoples Power to
depose a Popish Possessor as well as Successor, and other treasonable Heads.
And next Day Fitz-Harris came to Everard for a Copy fair written out, which was
delivered to Fitz-Harris, who promised Everard a Recompense, which was to be
the Entrance into the Business; but Everard should be brought into the Cabal,
where several Protestants and Parliament Men were to give an Account to the
French Ambassador of what was transacted. But before Fitz-Harris was to receive
the Libel back, he was to go to my Lord H -- of Escrick.

Before this, Fitz-Harris had received of the Duchess of Portsmouth 250 l. to
bring my Lord H -- to the King's Interest, Mrs. Wall said; which Fitz-Harris
pursued so well, that my Lord waited several times upon the Duchess, and found
the King there; and the Night before my Lord Stafford's Sentence, Fitz-Harris
came to my Lord from the King, and told him, that the King would take it as a
great Resignation of my Lord to the King's Will and Pleasure, if the next Day
my Lord would go vote for my Lord Stafford.

This Design was to be carried on in the Name of the Nonconformists, and put
upon them, and to be dispersed by the Penny Post to the Protesting Lords and
leading Men in the House of Commons, who were to be taken and searched so soon
as they received it. Everard said the Court had a Hand in it, and th^^ the King
had given Fitz-Harris Money, and would give him mo^^ if it had Success; and the
King told Sheriff Cornish, that Fitz-Harris had three Months before his
Apprehension been with the King, and acquainted him that he was in Pursuit of a
Plot, which much related to his Majesty's Person and Government; which the King
did countenance, and gave him some Money.

Sir William Waller acquainted the King with the Particulars he had taken
whilst he was concealed: the King thanked Sir William, and commanded Secretary
Jenkins to issue out a Warrant for apprehending Fitz-Harris, and Sir William to
take Care for the Execution of it.

But Sir William was no sooner gone, but Sir William said he was informed by
two worthy Gentlemen, that the King was highly offended with him, and the King
said he had broken all his Measures, and that he would have him taken off one
way (...) other.

Sir William was as forward in taking Fitz-Harris, as before he was in
discovering his Plot; and having apprehended him, he was committed to Newgate,
where he was examined by Sir Robert Clayton and Sheriff Cornish, to whom
Fitz-Harris declared his Willingness to discover the whole Design the next Day
after: but Fitz-Harris next Day was removed to the Tower* which was not done to
Sir Thomas Gascoign, and the Popish Lords.

Upon the 21st of March the Parliament met at Oxford; the Members of the
Commons were generally the same as the last Parliament, and those which were
not, were of the same Kidney (...) the others were; so that they proceeded
where the last Commons left, and sat but seven Days, wherein they had these
fo^^ Considerations under their Debates; first, the preparing a (...) against
the Duke of York's Succession; the second, the taking the Bill of the Repeal of
the Act of 35 Eliz. out of the House of Lords; the third an Inquiry into
Fitz-Harris's Business; the fourth a Prosecution against the impeached Lords in
the Tower.

The Commons spent the three first Days in choosing their Speaker, and
confirming him, and in taking Oaths as the Laws direct; so that it was Thursday
the twenty fourth of March before they entered upon any Business, and being
dissolved upon the Monday following, they could make but little Progress upon
the four Particulars aforesaid; and each of them was so green, that the Court
would not endure much Enquiry into any one of them.

Upon the Debate of Fitz-Harris's Business, one of the Members reported how
that one Hubert had confessed that he had fired the City of London, upon which
the House resolved to examine him next Morning, but before the House sat next
Morning, Hubert was hanged to prevent it; and they remembered there was a Design
to have tried the Popish Lords in the Tower by Indictment, to prevent which the
Commons exhibited general Impeachments against them, with that Success that the
Lords were never tried upon Indictments, and the Judges gave their Opinions
they could not.

Hereupon the Commons ordered an Impeachment of Fitz-Harris, upon Friday the
twenty fifth of March, and ordered Sir Lionel Jenkins to carry it up to the
Lords, who at first refused it, saying, The sending of me upon this Message
reflects upon my Master the King, and do what you will I will not go. Hereupon
seveveral moved to call him to the Bar, and several Speeches were made of his
Offense; but at last he relented, and carried up the Impeachment to the Lords,
but the Lords threw it out.

But the Lords having thrown out the Impeachment, the Commons, the next Day
being Saturday the twenty sixth, ran high in their Debates upon it: One said,
this was to have no further use of a Parliament, but to serve a present
Purpose: Another said, Indictments were brought against the Lords in the Tower,
yet that was no Impediment against their Impeachment in the Lords House; and
the last Day of the last Sessions of Parliament, the Lords accepted an
Impeachment of the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs; and that this Denial of Justice
by the Lords, was greater than my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs's Denial of taking
Presentiments from the Grand Inquest of Middlesex, by how much the Commons of
Parliament are the great Inquest of the Nation. Another said, this is a new
Plot against the Protestants, of which Fitz-Harris is accused, and the Commons
impeach him, and the Lords say, We will not hear it; and that if it were not
for the Lords, Fitz-Harris might have discovered all the Conspiracy, and the
Protestant Religion might have been saved; and therefore moved, That the
denying this Impeachment, tends to the Subversion of the Constitution of the
Parliament, and of the Protestant Religion.

Another said, That this was a Confirmation of the Design to murder the King,
and the Duke consenting to destroy his own Brother, and our King; and therefore
moved, That if any Judge, Justice or Jury proceed upon Fitz-Harris, and he be
found Guilty, That the House would declare them guilty of his Murder, and
Betrayers of the Rights of the Commons of England: to which was added upon the
Motion of Sir W. J. or that any Inferior Court shall proceed, etc. which was
passed.

The Reason of these Votes were, That if Fitz-Harris were tried upon an
Indictment, he must have been tried singly upon the Fact, whether he were
guilty or not of contriving and dispersing the Libel, but upon an Impeachment
the Commons might enquire into the whole Conspiracy.

Sunday March 27. The Houses sat not, and the next Day, Monday 28, in the
Morning the King came suddenly and unexpectedly to the House of Peers, and sent
for the Commons and dissolved the Parliament, and immediately took Coach and
drove to Windsor, leaving both Houses in an Amaze, and the City of Oxford in a
Hubbub.

If it were Sir William Jones who wrote the just and modest Vindication of the
two last Parliaments, viz. the last Westminster Parliament, and this at Oxford,
page 393. he says, The Peers at Oxford were so wholly ignorant of the Council,
that they never thought of a Dissolution, till they heard it pronounced; yet
the Duchess of Mazarine published the News at St. James' s many hours before
it was done.

If the Nation, as well as the Parliament and City of Oxford, were amazed at
this Dissolution and Manner of it; they were not less with the Declaration that
followed it, which though the King did not communicate to the Council till
Friday the eighth of April, yet the next Page says, Monsieur Barillon, the
French Ambassador, read it to a Gentleman upon the fifth of April before, and
demanded his Opinion of it, which the Ambassador might better remember because
of the great Liberty the Gentleman took in ridiculing it to his Face.

It Is observable that that Declaration was printed in French as well as
English; and many Gallicisms in it, and particularly, That it was a Matter
extremely sensible to us, which was a Form of speaking peculiar to the French,
and unknown to any other Nation.

The Substance of the Declaration contained the Dissatisfaction the King took
at the two Westminster Parliaments, that they gave him no suitable Return to
support the Alliances which he had made for the General Peace of Christendom;
nor for the further Examination into the Plot; nor for the Preservation of
Tangier; and for their Votes, That no Man should lend any Money upon any
Branches of the Revenue, or buy, or pay any Tally of Anticipation upon any part
of the King's Revenue. (This was not so, for the Commons restrained them to the
Custom, Excise, and Chimney-money given for other Ends; see the Votes) that
they passed a Vote, That the prosecuting of Protestant Dissenters was a
Grievance to the Subject, etc. by which they assumed to themselves a Power of
suspending Laws; So the Commons might do any other Law found by Experience to
be grievous and dangerous to the Subject, and must do so in order to repeal
such Laws; and did not the King do so twice before by his Declaration of
Indulgence, though to a contrary End to what the Commons intended?

That these Proceedings caused him to dissolve that Parliament, and to assemble
another at Oxford, who had warning given them of the Errors of the former, and
were required to make the Law of the Land their Rule; and adding, that he would
not depart from what he had formerly declared concerning the Succession, yet
declared he was ready to hearken to any Expedients by which the Religion
established might be preserved, yet the Monarchy preserved; viz. How to
preserve Fire and Water mingled together: and was not the Monarchy of Scotland
preserved, though his Grandfather reigned twenty Years in Scotland while his
Mother was alive, without her, and so continued after her Death?

That no Expedient would be entertained but a total Exclusion; nor could be,
nor did the King ever propound any, how otherwise the established Religion
might be preserved.

That the Business of Fitz-Harris was carried to that Extremity, that there
were no hopes of a Reconciliation, etc. and put the Houses out of a Capacity of
transacting Business: it was upon Friday the twenty sixth of March, the Commons
sent up the Impeachment of Fitz-Harris, and there were but Saturday and Sunday
between this and the Dissolution of the Parliament, and the Houses sat not on
Sunday, so that the King's no Hopes (or indeed Fears) of a Reconciliation were
very sudden; Why might not the Lords, if they had been permitted to have sat
upon Conferences with the Commons, and hearing their Reason, have altered their
Resolutions, which is usual? and it seems this Resolution of the Lords was very
sudden, and admitted of no great Debate, to receive the Impeachment of
Fitz-Harris, and the same Day to throw it out, which caused him to put an end
to that Parliament.

However the King says, that notwithstanding the Malice of ill Men, who
labored to persuade the People that he intended to lay aside the Use of
Parliaments, he declared that no Irregularity in Parliament should make him out
of love with them, and that he was resolved to have frequent Parliaments (yet
lived near four Years after, and never called another) and in the Intervals
would use his utmost endeavors to extirpate Popery, and redress the Grievances
of his Subjects (the truth of this will best appear hereafter.

This Declaration, which carries the Title of his Majesty's Declaration to all
his loving Subjects, was ordered to be read in all the Churches of England; but
if the Matter of it were so surprising and amazing to the Nation, the Manner of
it was not less. For never any King of England before, as King, no not this
King's Father or Grandfather, ever spoke to his Subjects, but either personally
in Parliament, or under the Broad Seal of England: Whereas this Declaration is
only Signed Francis Gwyn, it might have been as well Edward Coleman, and the
Subjects as much obliged to have taken notice of the one as of the other.

And the Reason is twofold, one, That the Chancellor or Keeper is responsible
if he puts the Seal to any Declaration or Proclamation not warranted by Law;
and therefore my Lord Chancellor Finch's Sagacity, in not putting the Seal to
this Declaration, was as apparent as his Veracity, which he would not expose in
seconding the King's Speech at the opening the last Westminster Parliament: And
the other is to avoid all Impostures and Cheats, which might otherwise be
imposed upon the Nation, under the Name of the King.

That we may take a better View of the rest of this King's Reign (if it be
worthy to be called so) it is fit we look into Scotland, and see what is doing
there for the Discovery of the Popish Plot; but it is fit to look a little back,
and take notice that the King in his Speech at the opening of the Second
Westminster Parliament, told them that to take away all room for any Jealousy
of his not prosecuting the Discovery of the Popish Plot, he had sent his
Brother beyond Sea; but having by the Duke of Monmouth, wholly suppressed the
Kirk Party in Scotland, he fairly sends for the Duke of York back again, and
from an Exile made him Viceroy or Regent of Scotland, where all things lay
open for him to prosecute his Designs as he pleased.

When the Duke came into Scotland, the Earl of Argyle was one of the first that
waited upon him: The Earl's Story will better appear, if first you take his
Character.

He was Son of the Earl of Argyle, after made Marquess by King Charles the
First, who so preferred him, to take him off from heading the Kirk Party, and
thereby to oblige him to become of the King's side; which had no Effect, for
the Marquess, above any other of the Scottish Nobility, was a most zealous
Assertor of the Kirk's Power, and was the Head of them when Montross took up
Arms against them; but though the Marquess was most unfortunate in it, yet it
no ways abated his Zeal to the Kirk, nor was he less esteemed by them.

When Cromwell had overthrown Duke Hamilton, and taken him Prisoner, who came
into England, not to establish the National League and Covenant, but to deliver
King Charles out of Prison: The zealous Kirk Party were highly offended at it,
and the Marquess of Argyle was the principal Agent to call Cromwell into
Scotland to suppress the Hamiltonian Faction, and to establish the Kirk; which
Cromwell then did (though he undid it soon after) and for this the Marquess was,
the first Year after the King's Restoration, condemned and executed for High
Treason, upon which he lost all his Honors as well as his Estate.

But in all the Marquess's Actions, his Son, the Lord Lorn, run counter to him,
and when this King Charles was in Scotland, he was of all others the most
obsequious to him; and afterward when Middleton made some Incursions into
Scotland for the King, Lorn was most assisting in them: Hereupon, after the
Marquess was attainted and executed, King Charles restored his Son to all his
Father's Estate and Honors except that of Marquess.

Afterward the Earl of Argyle continued constant in his Integrity to the King
in all his Civil Affairs, and was most zealous and forward in suppressing
Tumults, and Field-Conventicles; so that before the Duke came into Scotland,
the King had so entire a Confidence in the Earl, that he gloried that in thirty
Years (which must be computed from the King's going into Scotland in 1650) he
never received one Frown from the King: how he should become such a prejured
Traitor after the Duke's coming into Scotland, is now to be enquired into.

The Earl of Argyle was one of the Lords of the Articles, and by the Duke made
one of the Committee for the Articles of Religion, which by the Custom of
Scotland, and by the King's Instruction, was to be the first thing treated of.

In this Committee, an Act was prepared for securing the Protestant Religion,
which approved the Confession of Faith; and also the Act containing the
Coronation Oath, to be taken by all the Kings and Regents of Scotland, before
their entry to exercise their Government.

This Act, as drawn, was less binding to the Successor of the Crown, as to his
own Profession; yet did oblige as strongly the Maintenance of the Protestant
Religion in the public Profession by all others, as before, and added a Test
to be taken by all in public Emploiments, to exclude the Popish Party out of
them: and because in case of a Popish Successor, all Fines and Forfeitures by
Papists would be insignificant, viz. remitted, this intended Act did ordain,
that such Fines and Forfeitures, one half should be to the Informers, the other
to charitable Uses.

But this Act being so contrary to the Duke's Design, the Committee of Religion
was discharged from meeting again; and another short Act was brought into
Parliament, ratifying all former Acts for securing the Protestant Religion: so
that in this first Act the Duke pursued not his Instructions, but went contrary
to them, and to the Custom of Scotland.

At the passing this Act the Earl of Argyle proposed that all Acts against
Popery might be added, which was opposed by the King's Advocate, and some of
the Clergy; yet seconded by Sir George Lockhart, and the President of the
Sessions, it passed without a Vote: but such was the Jealousy of the
Parliament, that this did not secure the established Religion, that several of
the Members desired other Additions and Acts, which the Duke in open Parliament
promised, when Time and Opportunity offered, should pass; but when at any time
this was proposed, the Test was obtruded.

If the Parliament were so zealous to secure the established Religion, the Duke
was not less to secure the Succession of the Crown of Scotland, shrewdly struck
at in England, in the very Person of the Duke; and to that end a Bill was
brought in and passed, wherein it was declared High Treason to affirm that the
Succession of the Crown of Scotland can be altered from the next of Proximity
of Blood: but how agreeable this was to the Title of the Bruces and Stuarts,
who had no Title to the Succession of the Crown of Scotland but by Act of
Parliament, has already been showed; and how disagreeable this Act was to the
Duke's Grandfather's Succession to the Crown of Scotland, without any Act of
Parliament, let any Man judge.

This Act was not only thus contrary to the Laws and Usages of Scotland, but
the Act is equivocal, if not contradictory to the Duke's Design: for there is a
difference between the next Heir and the next in Proximity of Blood; as if a
Man had several Sons, and the eldest has a Son or Daughter, his Father living,
and after his Father dies, his eldest Son's Son is Heir, and his other Sons and
Daughters are next in Proximity of Blood; the Heir being a degree in Blood
further removed from the common Ancestor, than his Uncles or Aunts: and this
was the case of Richard II. of England, Son of the Black Prince, Edward the
Third's Eldest Son, who succeeded to the Crown of England, though his Uncles,
the Dukes of Clarence, Lancaster, York and Cambridg, were nearer of Blood to
Edward the Third.

This Act for the Succession of the Crown of Scotland, was succeeded by another
called the Test, as contradictory to it self, as contrary to the Act of
Succession, to be taken by all Persons in public Trust in Scotland, wherein
they solemnly Swear, in the Presence of the Eternal God, whom they invoke as
Judge and Witness of their sincere Intention of this their Oath,

That they own and profess the true Protestant Religion contained in the
Confession of Faith, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the Sixth,
and believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable to the Written Word of
God: That they will adhere thereto, and endeavor to educate their Children
therein, and never consent to any Change or Alteration contrary thereto; and
renounce all Popish and Fanatical Doctrines inconsistent with the said
Protestant Religion and Confession of Faith. And by this their solemn Oath they
Swear, That King Charles the Second is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil;
and renounce all Foreign Jurisdiction of the Pope, or any other Person: and
promise to bear true Faith and Allegiance to the King, his Heirs and Lawful
Successors, and to their Power to defend all their Rights and Prerogatives. And
by this their solemn Oath they Swear, They judge it unlawful for Subjects, upon
pretense of Reformation, or any Pretense whatsoever, to enter into any
Covenants or Leagues, or to convene, etc. in any Council to treat of any Matter
of State Ecclesiastical or Civil, without his Majesty's special Command, or
express License; or to take up Arms against the King, or those commissionated
by him: That they will never rise in Arms, or enter into such Covenants or
Assemblies: That there lies no Obligation upon them by the National Covenant,
or the solemn League or Covenant, or any other way to endeavor any Change or
Alteration of the Government, either of Church or State, as by Law established:
and promise and swear to the utmost of their Power, to maintain the King's
Jurisdiction against all deadly, and as they shall answer it before God: and
that they took this Oath in the true and genuine Sense and Meaning of the
Words, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or Evasion, and never to
accept of any Dispensation from any Creature. So God help them.

By these two Acts you may observe the Scottish Temper, (whether it were
natural, or in contradiction to the Kirk-Party, I will not say, nor how much
higher it flew than the Tory in England) but because of the extraordinariness
of these two Acts, it is fit to make some Reflections upon them. Such another
Law as that of the Succession, was made the twenty first of Richard the Second,
in the Case of Roger Mortimer, which lasted not longer than the next Year
after, when the Law was not only repealed, but Henry the Fourth succeeded
contrary to it; whereas this Law continued for above eight Years after, when it
not only lost its Force, but another Face appeared in Scotland, and so
continues in spite of this Law. Now from this treasonable Law, let us make
some Remarks upon this ranting, swearing Law, called the Test.

We have said elsewhere, that all Oaths are assertory of the Truth of Things,
Speech and Actions in time past, or promissory to do or forbear to do some Act
in time to come: and now let us consider what is Truth, and the End of an
assertory Oath.

Truth is proper to intellectual and reasonable Creatures; and is either the
apprehension of intelligible Beings, as God, a Law, the Soul, Time, etc. which
can never be the Objects of Sense, and of the Causes and Consequences of
Intentions, Speech and Action, for Sense is not of Futurity, but of present
Things and Actions; the Consequence or Inference will be whether good or bad,
just or unjust, etc. However all intelligible Beings, and the Causes of Things
and Actions are ever assumed, not sworn to; and if another does not nor will
assent to them, swearing to the Truth of them will be to no purpose: So it is
of the Consequence of Speech and Actions; if another be not convinced from the
Reason of such Consequence or Inference, swearing it to be so will never do it.

But though sensible Things, Speech and Actions, are perceived by the Senses,
and understood to exist or be, yet these are known to be by some, and not by
others; and in Justice and Judgment, the end of an assertory Oath is to inform
the Judge of the Truth of what a Man knows, which otherwise might be concealed:
and here I say, that as God's Name in Religion, Piety and Justice, is to be
invoked, when it is not in vain, but for God's Honor; so otherwise to use or
abuse his sacred Name in vain, is dishonorable to God, and makes it vile and
contemptible. Now let us see how the ranting Swearing of this Test agrees with
the Religion and Obligation of an Oath, and observe it in its Particulars or
Confusion. It begins,

I solemnly swear in the Presence of the Eternal God, whom I invoke as Judge and
Witness of this my sincere Intention of this my Oath, that I own and profess
the true Protestant Religion contained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in
the first Year of King James the Sixth.

So that here is a most horrible Swearing, and Invocation of God's sacred Name,
and yet neither an assertory nor promissory Oath; for an assertory Oath, is of
some Act or Speech in time past, which was transient, and not when the Oath was
taken; and a promissory Oath is of time to come: whereas in this Oath the Taker
swears in the present time he does own the Protestant Religion recorded in the
Confession of Faith in the first Year of King James the Sixth. I believe there
is such a Record, entitled, The Confession of Faith, in the first Year of King
James the Sixth, because Spotiswood and other Scottish Authors say so: but to
swear by the Eternal God, that it contains the true Protestant Religion (when
the Name is not in it) is such an implicit Faith as can scarce be found in the
most superstitious in the Church of Rome. Christian Faith is a Belief of God's
Revelations in the Scriptures; to which if any add or dimniish, his Name shall
be blotted out of the Book of Life, Rev. 22. 18, 29. But where the Scots found
their Confession of Faith in the first Year of King James, Knox no where tells,
tho he was the Founder of it.

And I believe the same to be agreeable to the Written Word of God.

But what need you swear by the Eternal God you do so? If you demonstrate or
give the Reason of your Belief, which you do not, this might convince another,
which your Swearing never will.

That I will adhere thereto, and endeavor to educate my Children therein.

The more obstinate Man you, and so much the worse for your Children.

And never consent to any Change or Alterations thereto.

This might have been left out, for if you adhere to it, you cannot consent to
any Change or Alteration.

And renounce all Popish and Fanatical Doctrines inconsistent with the said
Protestant Religion, and Confession of Faith.

I take a Renunciation to be a Disclaimure of what was before; so that if you
renounce all Popish and Fanatical Doctrines, etc. it seems before you owned
them: yet you neither tell what these Popish and Fanatical Doctrines are, or
wherein they are inconsistent with the Protestant Religion and Confession of
Faith; or how you come to know so: and if you do not, it ill becomes you to
prostitute God's sacred Name, to swear to what you do not know.

And by this my solemn Oath I swear that King Charles the Second is the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil.

By which of your Senses do you know this, by your seeing, smelling, touching
or tasting? Or if it be by another's having told you so, will you swear to
whatever another tells you? Or if another should tell you that King Charles the
Second is not the only Supreme Governor, etc. will you swear by the Eternal
God he is not so? or if King Charles should be dead when you are swearing this,
which he may for ought you know, how long will you hold of this Mind?

And that I renounce (what, again?) all foreign Jurisdiction of the Pope, or
any other Person.

If I cannot take your Word, I Will not think the better of it for your swearing
to it.

And promise to bear true Allegiance to the King, his Heirs, and Lawful
Successors.

It Is well if you hold long in this Mind; but before you renounced all foreign
Jurisdiction of the Pope, suppose (and be not affrighted at it) King Charles
the Second, and his Lawful Successor, should now be contriving the bringing in
this Foreign Jurisdiction; how by the Eternal God, would you be^^ Faith and
Allegiance to them herein?

And to my Power defend all their Rights and Prerogatives, etc.

Yet you neither declare what these Rights and Prerogatives are, which you
swear to defend; and it is twenty to one you do not know these Rights and
Prerogatives; and so you solemnly swear to you know not what: or suppose the
King and his Lawful Successor should say it was one of his Prerogatives to
bring in the Papal Jurisdiction; how would this consist with your solemn Faith
and Allegiance to the King and his Lawful Successors, and your renouncing all
Foreign Jurisdiction?

And I judge it unlawful for Subjects, upon Pretense of Reformation, or any
Pretense whatsoever, to enter into any Covenants or Leagues, or to convene,
etc. in any Council, to treat of any Matter Ecclesiastical or Civil, without
his Majesty's special Command, and express License, or to take up Arms against
the King, or those commissionated by him.

So that here you judge without any Reason of your Judgment, and must have your
Judgment pass for current because you swear to it; and at this rate you may
swear and judge as you please, and sure never before was ever Religion or
Judgment established upon such Foundations.

That I will never rise in Arms, or enter into such Covenants or Assemblies.

For all your swearing to this, yet I believe my Lord Commissioner will not
trust to your Oath, and the rather because you were so loose to it in observing
your solemn League and Covenant, which you swear with as servent Affection, as
you now seem to do to this, and with Hands and Heart lifted up to the most high
God.

That there lies no Obligation upon me by the National Covenant, (...) solemn
League and Covenant, or any other way to endeavor any Change or Alteration of
Government, either in Church or State, as now established.

Does there lie no Obligation upon you by the solemn League and Covenant, etc.
to endeavor any Change or Alteration in Church or State? why, you as solemnly
swear that as this; and by that you swear to extirpate Prelacy, and here you
swear never to endeavor any Change of it. Or do you think you please his
Highness my Lord Commissioner herein, whose Business it is, not only to make
Alterations, but to subvert your Church and State? And if you will make no
Alterations in either, it will not be long before you shall see Alterations
made in both without you.

And I promise and swear to maintain the King's Jurisdictions against all
deadly, as I shall answer it before God.

Why this again? For before you swear to maintain all the King's Rights and
Prerogatives, and what does the King's Jurisdiction add to them? However you
are very prodigal of your Swearing; and if his Highness will not believe you
for your Swearing before, you will try how far he will believe you now.

And that I take this Oath in the plain and genuine Sense and Meaning of the
Words, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or Evasion, and never to
accept of any Dispensation from any Creature. So God help me.

This is well sworn to interpret your Truth and Sincerity, especially when the
whole Oath is Confusion, Equivocation, or Contradiction, and not one plain and
intelligible Sentence in it.

In the Debates in Parliament for passing this Test, the Earl of Argyle
declared his Opinion, That as few Oaths as could be should be imposed; and that
the Oath of Allegiance and Declaration had effectually debarred all Fanatics
of getting into any Places of Trust; and though some Papists had swallowed the
Oath, yet a Word or two of Addition to guard against them, was all he judged
necessary.

The Earl opposed the dispensing with the King's Sons and Brother's taking the
Test, for that the King and People were of one Religion, and hoped the
Parliament would do nothing to loose what was fast, nor open a Gap for the
Royal Family to differ in Religion; for their Example, if it once appeared to
the People to be honorable, would have more Followers than a Thousand others
would have; and therefore wished, if any Exception were, it might be particular
to his Highness: which the Duke opposing, the Earl concluded, if it did pass,
it would do more hurt to the Protestant Religion, than all the rest of the Acts
and many other Acts would do good.

This Plainness of the Earl was the Cause of all that befell him, as he was
afterward told by the Bishop of Edinburgh; but the first Appearance of the
Duke's Displeasure, was two Bills given in against him, one by the Earl of
Errol, the other by the King's Advocate, who acknowledged it to be done by
Commandment, otherwise it was without his Line. These struck at the Earl's
Estate and Honors; only that of Errol was, that the Earl's Estate might be
liable to pay him and others for the Debts contracted by his Father: The
Advocate's Claim was to all his Heritable Offices.

But the Duke being informed that a Judgment in this Case, would have exposed
the Marquess of Huntley's Estate, (who was a zealous Papist) the Duke of his
own Accord put a full Stop to it; for he found, he said, it did plainly impugn
the King's Prerogative, and might be of ill Consequence.

After this the Parliament was adjourned, and a new Design was to get a
Commission from the King, to review all the Earl's Rights and heritable
Offices, and to charge his Estate for more than 'twas worth: Hereupon the Earl
applied himself to the Duke against such a Commission, and entreated him, that
if any quarreled his Right, his Case might be remitted to the ordinary
Judicatories according to the established Laws of the Land; but this was not
granted, yet the Duke was pleased to allow the Earl time to go into the Country
to bring his Evidence, with a Promise no Commission should pass till the Earl's
Return. But you will see something more than the Earl's Estate was designed.

For the Earl was no sooner gone, but he and the President of the Sessions were
turned out of it: Hereupon the Earl wrote to the Earl of Murray, the King's
Secretary, praying leave to wait upon the King, which he was pleased readily to
grant; and upon his Return to Edinburgh, begged the same Favor of the Duke,
who told him he might not kiss the King's Hand till he had taken the Test.

Here you may observe, the Test was not to be taken by any but those who bear
Office, nor to be imposed upon any before the First of January 1680, and this
was about the Beginning of November before: and the Earl being acquainted that
one of the Clerks of the Council was appointed to summon the Earl to the
Council the next Day, which he conceived to be to take the Test, he asked the
Duke, if with his Favor he might not have the Allowance by the Act? The Duke
told him no; and the Earl urged it again in vain; all the Delay he could obtain
was but till Thursday the third of November, the next Council-Day of Course:
Then the Earl said, he was the less fond of the Test, because he found some who
had refused it, were still in Favor, and others, as the Register, who had
taken it, were turned out; at which his Highness laughed. But how comes your
Highness, said the Earl, to press the Test so hastily? Sure there are some
things in it which your Highness does not overmuch like. To which the Duke
answered angerly and in a Passion, most true, that the Test was brought into
Parliament without the Confession of Faith; but the late President caused put
in the Confession, which makes it such as no honest Man can take it (which is a
greater Contravention and depraving the Test, than the Perjury and Treason
charged upon the Earl for them;) then the Earl replied, he had the more Reason
to advise.

In this Interval the Earl spoke with the Bishop of Edinburgh, and saw his
Explanation of the Test, and that of the Bishop of Aberdeen, and the Synod's
Explanation of the Test, and the Explanation of it by the Synod and Clergy of
Perth, and that of the Earl of Queensberry; which as they differ all from one
another, so were they printed and made public, and which you may read at large
in the Earl of Argyle's Case.

It Is observable, that tho by the Test they swear the Confession of Faith,
recorded in the first of King James the sixth, To be founded upon and agreeable
to the Word of God, and that they will never consent to any Change or
Alteration thereto, and at last swear they take it in the plain and genuine
Sense and Meaning of the Words without any Equivocation; yet the Bishop of
Aberdeen, and the Synod, in the 2d Article of their Explanation say, We do not
hereby prejudg the Churches Right to, and Power of making an Alteration in the
said Confession, as to the Ambiguity and obscure Expressions thereof, or of
making a more unexceptionable Frame: and having made several other Exceptions,
the Sixth Article concludes, When we swear that we take the Test in the plain
and genuine Sense of the Words, etc. we understand it only so far as it does
not contradict the Exceptions.

And the Synod of Perth makes four explanatory Exceptions to the Test, and the
fifth concludes, When we swear in the genuine and literal Sense, we understand
it so far as the Test is not opposite or contradictory to the aforesaid
Exceptions; and before they subscribed this, they were allowed to insert after
the Oath, We underwritten, do take this Oath, according to the Explanation made
by the Council, approved by his Majesty's Letter, and do declare we are no
further bound by it.

Thus things stood with others, when the Earl of Argyle, upon Wednesday the
Second of November waited upon the Duke, and humbly besought him to decline his
present taking of the Test: but if his Highness would have a present Answer, he
begged that he would accept of the Earl's refusing it in private, which the
Duke denied; then the Earl desired he might go home and consider, and he would
either give Satisfaction, or the time prescribed by the Act of Parliament would
elapse, and then he would go off in Course and without Noise, which the Duke
absolutely refused: upon which the Earl asked what good his appearing in
Council to refuse (I think it should have been reside) there would do? to which
the Duke answered, he need not appear, but employ some Friend to speak for him,
and named one.

Hereupon the Earl drew a Letter to the Person the Duke named, wherein he
expressed his constant Resolution to continue a true Protestant and loyal
Subject, which were the true Ends of the Test: but the Letter concluding a
Delay of taking the Test (which no honest Man, the Duke said, could do) and the
Duke having given some Indication how little pleasing that Office would be to
him; neither the Person named by the Duke, nor any Friend of the Earl's would
by any means accept of it.

But the Earl being advised that an Explanation of the Test would be more
acceptable, the Earl drew a short one, and put it into his Pocket, but would
not offer it till he knew the Duke's Pleasure; and being told by the Bishop of
Edinburgh, it would be very kindly accepted, the Earl went into the
Council Chamger, and with an audible Voice, read his Explanation of his taking
the Test, close by the Duke, whereupon it was administered to him, which the
Duke accepted with a Smile, and commanded him to take his Place, which at that
time was next the Duke, and the Duke spoke several times privately to him, and
always pleasantly: However the Earl was so cautious, that after he had made the
Explanation of the Test in Council, he would not communicate it to any other.

The Earl's Explanation was, I have considered the Test, and I am desirous to
give Obedience as far as I can. I Am confident the Parliament never intended any
contradictory Oaths, therefore I think (...) Man can explain it but for
himself; accordingly I take it as far as (...) is consistent with it self, and
the Protestant Religion: And I do declare that I mean not to bind up my self in
my Station, and in a lawful Way, to wish and endeavor in a lawful Way, any
Alteration I think to the Advantage of the Church and State, not repugnant to
the Protestant Religion and my Loyalty; and this I understand as part of my
Oath.

And as the Earl was so cautious in not communicating his Explanation of the
Test, so was it never so much as charged upon him that he ever disparaged the
Test, or dissuaded any other from taking it: However this must be the Grand
Work for his, and only his Destruction; for, as was said, many others had
explained their taking the Test, much more contradictory than the Earl had
done, and printed and published their Explanations.

Next Morning the Earl waited upon the Duke, expecting his Yesterday's
Countenance, and beginning to speak, the Duke interrupted him, and said he was
not pleased with his Explanation: the Earl answered he did not give it till the
Duke allowed him: the Duke acknowledged the Bishop of Edinburgh had told him,
that he intended an Explanation, but the Duke said, he thought it would have
been a short one, such as the Earl of Queensberry's: to which the Earl
answered, he heard what he said, and that the Earl said the same thing in
private to him; and the Earl going on to say more, the Duke interrupted him,
saying, It Is past with you, but it shall pass so with no other.

The next Day after the Earl was summoned again to the Council, to take the
Test as one of the Lords of the Treasury, and an extraordinary Council was held
at the Abbey: Where, so soon as they were met, the Test was tendered to the
Earl, saying as before, when the Earl of Roxburgh standing behind the Duke, and
never heard to speak in Council before, with Clamor asked what the Earl of
Argyle had said? which the Duke told him; upon which Roxburgh desired that what
the Earl had said the Day before might be repeated, which at first he declined,
till he was peremptorily commanded by the Duke; the Earl then said, he had a
Note of what he had said in his Pocket, which the Duke commanded him to
produce, which he did, and was willing to sign it; but the new Lord President
(now made Chancellor) and the new made Register, did not agree whether the
Earl should then sign it, the Treason not appearing, as when they talked of it
in private: So the Earl was bid to withdraw, and when he was called in, he was
positively required to sign the Paper he had given in; to which the Earl
answered, that if the Words did please them, as when they were given in, he
would; but if there were the least Matter of Displeasure in them, he would
forbear: whereupon he was removed, and being called in, he was told he had not
given the Satisfaction required in the Act of Parliament in taking the Test,
and therefore could not sit in Council: to which the Earl answered, that he
judged all the Parliament meant was to exclude the Refusers of the Takers of
the Test from their Places, to which he submitted, and that as he had served
his Majesty faithfully within doors, so he was resolved to do without doors,
and so made his Obeisance and went out. But now the Earl saw his Estate, Life
and Honor were struck at, he communicated these Secrets to some for his own
Vindication.

Upon Saturday the fifth of November, the Earl waited upon the Duke again, and
told him he was strangely surprised that the saying he could not bind himself
up in a lawful way, etc. as contained in the Paper, was looked upon as a Crime,
when as he had said the same to him before without any Offense, and that the
Duke then said they were unnecessary Words, that the Earl scrupled needlessly,
and that he was not tied up by that Oath as he imagined; and that, after a
little Pause, the Duke told him, you have cheated your self, you have taken the
Test: to which the Earl answered, then he hoped his Highness was satisfied; but
the Duke, after some other Expostulations, told the Earl, That he and some
others had a Design to bring Trouble upon a Handful of poor Catholics that
would live peaceably however they were used, but that it should light upon
others.

Now the Design appears barefaced: for, would you think it, the Earl having
delivered the Explanation of his taking the Test by the Duke's peremptory
Command, this is interpreted a publishing of it; and upon Tuesday the eighth of
November, a Council was called without calling the Earl to it, and an Order was
sent by one of the Clerks of the Council to the Earl, that before 12 a Clock
next Day, he should enter himself a Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, and a
Warrant was sent to the Deputy Governor to keep him Prisoner, wherein the Word
Sure firmance, tho fairly writ, was struck out: The Earl obeyed, and by himself
alone, in a Hackney Coach, rendered himself a Prisoner accordingly: And now
you will see how absolutely in this deputed Authority the Duke demeaned himself
without Reserve; what then might be expected from him in Case he should become
King?

The Earl some Days after he had rendered himself Prisoner, wrote to the Duke,
telling him how he had obeyed his Highness and Council's Order in rendering
himself a Prisoner, and how that he wrote no sooner, lest he might be thought
too impatient of Imprisonment, which appeared to be the Effects of high
Displeasure, which he hoped he no ways deserved, and was resolved to continue
all Duty and Obedience to his Majesty and Highness, and begged to know what
Satisfaction was expected, where and how he might live in his Highness's
Favor: to which no Answer was returned, but a Summons charging the Earl with
leasing making, and depraving of Laws: And after another Summons came out, and
published, with Sound of Trumpet, charging the Earl with Perjury and Treason;
but when it was told the Duke that such a Process threatened the Earl's Life and
Fortune, the Duke said, Life and Fortune! God forbid.

The very Day, November the eighth, that the Council ordered the Earl to render
himself a Prisoner, the Council sent a Letter to the King, wherein they sent
the Earl's Explanation of his taking the Test, and how they had commanded his
Majesty's Advocate to raise a Pursuit against the Earl upon it; yet expecting
his Majesty's Commands for their further Prosecution of it.

But the King might command what he pleased, his Commissioner and Council would
do what they would with it: for before any Return of their Letter, they caused
the King's Advocate to exhibit an Indictment against the Earl, upon the Points
of slandering and depraving: And after the Return of the King's Letter, they
ordered a new Indictment against the Earl, containing, besides the former
Points, the Crimes of Treason and Perjury, before they acquainted the King with
it.

The Earl thus mewed up, that he might not give any Offense, twice petitions
the Duke and Council, that Sir George Lockhart might be his Advocate to plead
his Defense, yet both times refused; the Reason of these Petitions were, that
without Leave none would dare to plead the Earl's Cause, for fear of the King's
Displeasure: However, by the Act, 11 Jac. 6. Cap. 90. It is the undeniable
Privilege of all Subjects accused for any Crimes, to provide themselves
Advocates, to defend their Lives, Honors, and Lands, against whatsoever
Accusation: So by the 11 Jac. 6. c. 90. it is declared, That in case Advocates
refuse, the Judges may compel them. Hereupon the Earl drew up a Letter of
Attorney, constituting Alexander Dunbar to require Sir George Lockhart to plead
for him, which the Duke no sooner heard, but said, If Sir George Lockhart plead
for the Earl, he shall never plead for my Brother nor me.

But the Earl might set his Heart at rest, for whatever Counsel he had, his
Case was fore-judged, before heard: However, for forms sake, upon the Twelfth
of December 1681, the Earl was brought by a Guard of Soldiers before the
Justice Court, where the Earl of Queensberry was Chief Justice General, and the
Lords Narin, Collingtoun, Newtoun, and Hirkhouse, Lords Justiciary sitting in
Judgment. It is inconsistent with the Design of this Treatise to set down the
Earl's Speech at large, and the long and learned Pleadings of Sir George
Lockhart, and Sir John Dalrymple, for the Earl's Defense, and the King's
Advocates pleading against the Earl, and their Doubling's and Tripling's; yet
it is fit to say something of them, and leave the Reader at Liberty to read them
at large in the Earl's Case, which is printed.

The Earl in his Defense only claims the Privilege of the meanest Subject, tho
under an ill Character, to explain his own Words in the most benign Sense, and
how strange and impossible it would be to believe he intended any thing but
what was suitable to the Principles of his Religion and Loyalty, though he did
not express himself at all.

Then he enlarged, how from his Youth he had made it his Business to serve his
Majesty faithfully, constantly, and to his Power, especially in all times of
Difficulty, and never joined or complied with any Interest or Party contrary to
his Majesty's Authority, and so, that he never received a Frown from his
Majesty these thirty Years; and that even in this Parliament, how he had showed
his Readiness to serve the King and Royal Family in so vigorously asserting the
Lineal Succession of the Crown, and in offering Supplies to his Majesty and
Successor; and that he had always kept his Tenants in Obedience to his Majesty.

How strange then is it, that Words spoken for the clearing his own Conscience,
should be wrested into Treason, especially where the same was done before by
many Orthodox Clergy, whole Presbyteries, Synods, and some Bishops? so that an
eminent Bishop took the Pains to write a Treatise that was read over in
Council, and allowed to be printed, and a Copy given to him, which contains all
the Expressions he is charged for, and many more may be stretched to a worse
Sense; and having wished all Happiness to the King, and a Continuance of the
Lineal Succession, left his Defense to his Advocates, Sir George Lockhart and
Sir John Dalrymple: then several Letters from General Middleton and the Earl of
Glencarn were read, testifying the Earl's Loyalty and Services to the King.

The Treason charged upon the Earl in the Indictment consists of these six
Heads.

1. That the Earl considered the Test, and was desirous to give Obedience to it
as far as he could; clearly insinuating thereby he was not able to give full
Obedience. 2. That he was confident the Parliament never intended contradictory
Oaths; thereb^ to insinuate to the People that the Parliament did impose
contradictory Oaths. 3. That every Man must explain for himself, and take it in
his own Sense; whereby that excellent Law lost its Obligations. 4. That he took
the Test so far as it was consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion;
which depraved the Test, and misrepresented the King's Parliament's Proceedings
in the highest Degree. 5. That he did not mean, by taking the Test, to bind up
himself from wishing and endeavoring any Alteration in a lawful Way which he
shall think fit, for advancing the Church and State: where, by his Example, he
invited others to be loose from the Test, to make Alterations. 6. That he
understood this as part of his Oath; which was Treasonable Invasion upon the
Royal Legislative Power, as if it were lawful for him to make to himself an Act
of Parliament.
For the better understanding the Earl's Case, it is fit to consider, first, the
Test was not to be imposed upon any but those who bear Office; and the Earl was
desirous to have laid down all his Offices, which was denied him. Secondly, it
was not to be imposed before the first of January, whereas all these
Proceedings against the Earl upon the Test, were not only unwarrantable, but
the Council usurped the Royal Legislative Authority by imposing the Test upon
the Earl before. Thirdly, that this Explanation of the Test by the Earl, was by
the Duke's Command and Allowance of the Council one Day, and the next Day made
Treason for publishing it, the Earl being peremptorily commanded by the Duke to
deliver the Explanation he had drawn in Writing to the Council.

1. The Earl's Counsel insisted, that the Earl having before always dutifully
and loyally behaved himself to the King, his Words and Intentions ought to be
interpreted in the best Sense, and in his Favor. 2. That the Act against
Leasing-making, and depraving the King's Laws, were for plain Words and
Speeches, tending to make Discords between the King and People, and were never
intended against a Person in Judicature, required to give the true Sense of a
Law to the best of his Skill and Conscience; and that it would be strange in
such a Case, that this should be a Crime, if one Man differ from another;
whereas oftentimes not only learned Lawyers, but the Judges themselves differ
about the Interpretation of Laws. 3. That the Act of Parliament does not impose
the Test generally, but as a Qualification for those who shall bear public
Office; and therefore it is just and commendable in any Person who has a
Scruple of Conscience upon him, to declare his meaning in taking of it how he
understands it; it matters not whether he errs or not, for Conscientia etiam
erronea obligat, especially where a Man's Conscience is opposite to his
Interest, as in this Case, to lose his Preferment; nor was this any Reflection
by the Earl upon the Act of Parliament, nor their Prudence in imposing the
Test. 4. Tho the Earl could not take the Test, otherwise than he explained it;
yet by the Act, there was no greater Penalty than that Habetur pro recusante,
he should not hold his Places of Trust. 5. That the Counsel allowed the Earl's
Explanation, by bidding him take his Place, after he had made his Explanation.
6. The Earl's Explanation could not be treasonable, viz. Animo defamandi,
whenas he only made it to the Council when required, whereas some Bishops,
whole Presbyteries and Synods had made Explanations of the Test, and in
downright Terms charged it with Inconsistencies and Contradictions, and these
allowed to be printed, before the Earl made his; and even the Council
themselves had made an Explanation of it, before the Earl was tried, tho the
Parliament was then in being, and this made public. Q. If this were not more
Treason than the Earl's, tho his Counsel durst not say so. 7. That the Earl by
making his Explanation, has assumed a Legislative Power: to which it was
answered, The Legislative Power extends to all, but the Earl's Explanation
refers only to himself, how he understood he might take the Test; and this was
done without any Diminution to the Legislative Power of making or interpreting
Laws; and if the Legislative Power be not satisfied, it cannot extend any
further than that the Earl shall be a Refuser of the Oath, which is neither
Treason nor Perjury, as was charged upon the Earl. 8. That the Earl was ready
to give Obedience as far as he could, did not import the Parliament had imposed
an unlawful Oath: for here is no Impeachment of the Justice or Prudence of the
Lawgiver; nor can any Law be so plain, especially affirmative Laws, as this is,
that every Man shall understand it alike; and if one Man declare one Sense of
it, and another otherwise, how does this become Treason in one or the other, or
import the Injustice or Illegality of the Law? 9. That the Earl was confident
the Parliament never intended contradictory Oaths; which was so far from being
treasonable, that, considering the plain downright Objections spread abroad of
the Inconsistencies and Contradictions of the Test, it was a high Vindication
of the Parliament. 10. Therefore he thinks no Body can explain it but for
himself; which having no reference to any other, this cannot be taken for any
diminution of the Parliamentary Authority, or depraving of the Law. 11. That he
takes it so far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion:
if this be a Crime, the Earl is neither the Beginner nor Promoter of it; so
many Bishops, Synods, and Presbyteries having before printed it with Allowance
from the Council: nor the Promoter of it; for the Earl said this only for
himself, and was passive in it, being required by the Council to make his
Explanation, and if they divulged it, 'twas their Fault. 12. That he did not
bind up himself in his Station, and in a lawful way, to wish and endeavor any
Alteration, he thinks to the Advantage of the Church or State, not repugnant to
the Protestant Religion and his Loyalty. This has reference to the Earl in his
Station, as he is a Peer of Scotland, who has not only a Right in Parliament to
debate freely of any Law in being, but is a Member which has a Legislative
Right and Vote to repeal as well as make Laws; and herein can no more bind up
himself, than one Act of Parliament can bind another Parliament.
Note, the Earl does not say this is part of the Test-Oath, but part of his
Oath in the Sense he takes the Test, which makes no alteration of the Test.

The King's Advocate, Sir George Mackenzy, being one of the Conspiracy in
contriving the Earl's Destruction, you need not fear but he will strain his Wit
to make good his Indictment of the Earl.

He begins with a long Invective against the juggling Covenant; and this
excellent Law, the Test, was established to prevent the like for the future:
and that no Law is of private Interpretation, and if it were, Men would be
loose from Obedience to all Law; and concludes with a Lie, that there was no
force upon the Earl to take the Oath, that he took it for his own Advantage.

It Is true, no private Interpretation of any Law is of force to bind another;
and whatsoever Interpretation another makes of any Law, it makes no Alteration
in the Law: but if a Man be asked his Opinion of any Law, or Point in Law, and
he gives it according to the best of his skill, shall this be taken for Treason
and depraving of the Law, and a Man be in danger of his Life for it? This was
the Earl's Case, he was called upon by the Duke to take the Test, with his
Explanation before he did it; and whereas Mackenzy says there was no Force upon
the Earl, I Am sure, if my Author says true, the Earl refused to give in the
Paper, whereof he is indicted, and proffered to lay down his Offices upon it,
till the Duke peremptorily commanded him to do it: if this were not Force, I
would know what is; I Am sure there was no Force, but Corruption and Bribery
upon the Advocate, to enter into this villainous Conspiracy against this Noble
Earl, to murder him under the Pretext of Justice, which is to be esteemed
sacred. And let any Man read his whole Harangue, and see if there be any thing
in it but forced and strained Inferences; or any one Proof against the Earl,
within the Act 60 Parl. 6. Mary, or the 9 Act. Par. 20. Jac. 6. which makes it
Treason to make false Construction of Laws to others, with a Design to raise
Sedition and Dissension among the King's Subjects; so that some Overt Act or
Speech to others with a Design to raise Sedition, etc. must be proved; and not
what is said in the Council, or any Court of Judicature.

However, as was the Advocate, such were the Assizers, whereof the Marquess of
Montross (the Earl's Father's most bitter Enemy) was the Foreman, and the rest
of the Pack of the same Stamp; who, with one Voice, found the Earl guilty of
Treason, Leasing-making, and Leasing-telling; but like conscientious Men,
having made the Earl to have forfeited his Life, Honor and Estate, by a
Majority they find the Earl innocent of Perjury, which they could get nothing
by.

So that the Noble Lord Lorn is become the Forlorn late Earl of Argyle; yet the
Earl, not to be wanting to himself in this deplorable State, next day but one,
viz. December the 15th, by a Friend humbly entreated to speak with the Duke:
who returned Answer, It was not ordinary to speak with Criminals, except with
Rogues on some Plot, where Discoveries might be expected. By this you may see
what Spirit governed this Prince, and what might be expected from him, if he
became King.

The next Day after the Earl's Sentence, viz. December the 14th, the Council
gave the King notice of it, and expected his further Pleasure, now the Work is
done to his Hand: but it seems his Highness was very impatient till he had the
Earl's Blood; for he said, If the Express from the King came not timously, he
would take upon himself what was to be done; by which you may see what an
Ascendency the Duke had over the King: However, the Earl upon the sixteenth,
petitioned the Duke, that he might send a Petition to the King, which was
refused.

Things brought to this Extremity, and the Earl hearing that some Troops, and a
Regiment of Foot were to be brought down from the Castle to the Common Goal,
from which Criminals were usually brought to Execution, he resolved to try to
make his Escape; and the rather, because about seven at Night, he had notice
that new Orders were given for further securing him, and that the Castle Guards
were to be doubled, and that none were suffered to go out without showing their
Faces, and therefore a Friend advised him not to attempt it; No, said the Earl,
now is the Time, and so he attempted it, and it pleased God he escaped.

Hereupon the Lords of Assize, upon the twenty third of December, pronounced
the Earl guilty of the Crimes of Treason, Leasing-making and Leasing-telling,
for which, being detained in the Castle of Edinburgh, out of which, since the
Verdict, having made his Escape, therefore they adjudged the said Earl to be
executed to Death, and his Name, Memory and Honors to be extinct; and his Arms
to be riven forth, and delete out of the Book of Arms, swa that his Posterity
may never have Place, nor be able hereafter to bruick or joyse any Honor,
Offices, Titles or Dignities within this Realm i^ time coming; and to have
forefaulted all his Lands and Tenements, etc.

But tho the Earl be escaped out of Prison, whereto shall he flee? For Terras
(I Am sure Britannicas) Astraea reliquit; he had some thoughts of casting
himself at the King's Feet, but those soon vanished, for the same Counsel which
governed in Scotland, raged all England over; and so privately he passed into
Holland, where for some time we leave him, and see what is doing in England.

Mr. Hawles in his Remarks upon Fitz-Harris's Trial, F. 18. out of Tully's
Offices, lays this down for a Rule, That nothing is profitable but what is
honest; for which Tully gives many Reasons, but nothing so convincing as the
Examples he brings in public and private matters; and tho the Empire was vast,
and he bore a great Figure in it, and was very knowing in the Greek and Roman
Histories, yet was he not able to bring a hundredth Part of Examples to prove
his Position, as had been in this little Island in the space of eight Years:
And in his Preface, gives six Reasons for the Disaffection to the late
Government, viz. Exorbitant Fines, cruel and illegal Prosecutions, outrageous
Damages, dispensing with the Test and penal Laws, and undue Prosecutions in
criminal, but more especially in capital Matters. But these I take to be the
Effects of those Councils which governed in England ever after the King's
Restoration, tho they did not so manifestly appear till the Duke was sent into
Scotland, and after the Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford; and for these
first six Years after the Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, the Tories
in England as well as in Scotland, were the Tools which the Popish Faction made
use of for carrying on their Designs, then they were laid by, and the Whigs set
up, as they thought, to finish the Work.

The Tories were so far from being suppressed by the Proceedings of the Commons
against them last Westminster Parliament, that they only so much more irritated
them against the Whigs after the Dissolutions of the last Westminster and
Oxford Parliaments, and this was what the Popish Party desired.

The King's Declaration, signed Francis Gwyn, was not only obeyed by the
Tories, but entertained with unexpressible Joy, and celebrated with manifold
Returns of Thanks to his Majesty; and now nothing but Halcyon Days were
expected, and an absolute Dominion over the Whigs: and the King, to gratify the
Tories in their Jollity, and after the Bill for repealing the Act of 35 Eliz.
was taken out of the House of Lords before it was passed, which little sorted
with the King's Declarations of Indulgence, has this Law now put in Force
against the Dissenters, and prosecuted with that Violence, that many thousands
of Families were undone by it, yet little of the Money levied upon them was
brought into the Exchequer, and you may be sure the Prosecutors would take
their own share, and it was no difficult Matter to get a Grant, or at least a
Pardon for the King's. Among the rest of the Worthies in this pious Business,
one Jenner a Lawyer was one, who for this and other meritorious Acts, was after
knighted and made one of the honorable Barons of the Exchequer; and Sir Dudly
North, the Keeper's own Brother, was another: and though these Men were
excepted out of the Act of Indemnity made by this King, and Informations
against them in the Exchequer, and among the rest, against this Jenner, yet
upon pleading their Pardons, I do find no great matttr came of them. And now
since the Meal-Tub Plot, and that of Fitz-Harris had no better Effect, the
Court sets up another to throw the Popish Plot upon the Nonconformists.

You have heard before how there appeared to be a Popish Plot carried on in
Ireland, ever since the Year 1665, for establishing the Popish Religion, and
that several Witnesses were brought out of Ireland to prove it, and how that
the Lords in Parliament having thoroughly enquired into it, did upon the sixth
of January last, viz. 1680-81, send this Message to the Commons,

Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, that
they do declare that they are fully satisfied that there now is, and for diverse
Years last past, has been an horrid and treasonable Plot, continued and
carried on by those of the Popish Religion in Ireland, for massacring the
English, and subverting the Protestant Religion, and the ancient Government of
that Kingdom, to which they desire the Concurrence of this House, to which the
Commons agreed.

The Evidence by which the Lords discovered this Plot, were generally Irish,
and of the Popish Religion, and it is probable, were Partakers of the Design of
this Massacre, and had not their Pardons; or if they had, they were poor, and
had no means to subsist, now the Oxford Parliament was dissolved and no
Prospect of another, especially having now lost their Friends and Dependence
for having given their Evidence of the Discovery of the Plot, and were in a
strange Country. In this state the Court employed a sort of Men, partly by
Terror, and partly by their Necessities, to work upon the Irish, to pervert
their Evidence another way.

And the Cause being the same, it had the same Effect upon others as well as
the Irish: for the Oxford Parliament being dissolved, and all Hopes of Enquiry
further into the Popish Plot, growing desperate; Dugdale, Turbervile and Smith,
not having (that I can find) gotten their Pardons, and having lost their
Dependances upon their having given their Evidence, and being reduced to the
same Necessities the Irish Witnesses were, were easily wrought upon to smother
the Popish Plot, and to swear another upon the principal Inquirers into the
Popish; nay, even my Lord H -- (tho not in the like Circumstances) could not
procure his Pardon till his Drudgery of Swearing was over.

The Foundation thus laid, now we proceed to show how the King made good his
Declaration for calling frequent Parliaments, and in using his utmost
Endeavors of extirpating Papacy; and it is without any Precedent, that ever
any King before did truckle to such vile and mean things, to invert his
Declaration, and his manifold repeated Promises to the Parliament.

The 28th of March the Parliament at Oxford was dissolved, and upon the 27th of
April following, an Indictment of High Treason was preferred against Edward
Fitz-Harris to the Grand Jury at Westminster for the Hundred of Oswalst; but
the Grand Jury having the Vote of the Commons of the 27th of March so fresh in
their Memories, desired the Opinion of the Court, whether they might safely
proceed upon it: and you need not doubt but the Court gave their Opinion they
might. So the Grand Jury found the Bill.

From the time that Fitz-Harris was removed from Newgate to the Tower, which
was 10 Weeks before this Indictment, he was kept so close Prisoner, that his
Wife, nor any others, were permitted to come at him; whereas the Lords
impeached in Parliament had the Liberty of the Tower, and for any Man to visit
them.

Yet Fitz-Harris's Wife, foreseeing the Design of the Trial of her Husband, had
gone to Counsel, and had a Plea drawn to the Jurisdiction of the Court; to
which the Attorney General demurred, and Fitz-Harris's Counsel joined in the
Demurrer.

It were Vanity and extreme Arrogance in me, to judge of the nice Pleadings on
both sides, concerning the Form and Substance; or to give a Reason why the
Court overruled Fitz-Harris's Plea, since the Court did not.

Yet, I say, the Reports of Coke, Dier, Plowden, and others, would have proved
dry Businesses, if the Courts of Westminster Hall had given such Judgments as
the King's Bench did in Fitz-Harris's Case.

And I say also, That no Man lives out of Society and Commerce; and that in
every Country there are Laws for the Preservation of Men's Lives, and to protect
them in Society and Commerce; and that in every Country there is a Power which
is loose from these Laws, and gives Laws to all the Subjects of those Countries.

But because all Laws are vain unless they be executed, every Country has
Judicatories wherein these Laws are executed, which differ in different
Countries. The supreme Power of this Nation resides in a Parliament, whereof
the King is the Head; and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Representatives of the Commons, are the Body.

These Courts of Judicature have their distinct Jurisdictions, and are
restrained to certain Rules and Methods: the highest of these Courts are the
Body of the Parliament, viz. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons,
which have distinct Jurisdictions, but are not bound up in their Judicatories
by such strict Rules as other Courts are.

Other Courts take Cognizance of civil and criminal Cases between particular
Men; but these Courts of Parliament take Cognizance of the State and Grievances
of the Nation, where only they find Relief: and tho no other Courts take
Cognizance of Matters transacted in Parliament, yet either of these Courts take
Cognizance of all Proceedings in other Courts, and not only reverse all illegal
Proceedings in them, but punish the Judges of all other Courts for any Errors
or Abuses committed by them: so if any Person or Person shall grow so great as
to be dangerous to the Public, tho they be out of the Reach of other Courts,
yet they are subject to these Courts of Parliament; and by these Courts the
English Nation have preserved their Liberties and Laws, now France and Spain
have lost them, which before had their Assemblies of the States (all one with
our Parliaments) and in losing them have lost their Liberty and Laws, to the
Arbitrary Will of their Princes.

The Jurisdiction of Parliaments has been in all Ages in England esteemed
sacred, so that other Courts rarely presumed to take Cognizance of Cases which
were in the Jurisdiction of, or depending in Parliament; for this was to depose
the Parliament, and usurp their Jurisdiction: nor do we read that ever any
other Court assumed this Authority, but in the Reigns of Kings affecting
Tyranny and Arbitrary Power.

The first Judges which (I think) gave their Opinion, That the Courts in
Westminster Hall might take Cognizance of Causes determinable in Parliament,
were Tresilian and Belknap, in 11 Rich. II. for which they were impeached by
the Commons in Parliament, of no less than High Treason; and for which, by
Judgment of the Lords in Parliament, Tresilian was hanged, and Belknap
banished. Mr. Williams, in his Pleadings for Fitz-Harris, cites another Case in
20 Rich. II. of a Person who exhibited a Petition in Parliament, which
suggested something which amounted to High Treason (which it may be was
determinable by Common Law.) This Person was after indicted at Common Law,
found guilty, and pardoned; but because the Business was depending in
Parliament, the Prosecution and Judgment were made void in Parliament.

The next Case, I think, (but of an higher Nature, for Tresilian and Belknap
only gave their Opinion) was that of Sir John Elliot, my Lord Hollis, etc. 5
Car. I. when an Information was exhibited against them in the King's Bench,
they pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, being for Matters transacted in
Parliament: the Court overruled their Plea, and gave Judgment against them,
and Reasons (such as they were) for their Judgment: but in the 19 Car. I. upon
a solemn Debate in the Commons House, and upon their Reasons given at a
Conference with the Lords, the Judgment of the King's Bench, Reasons and all,
were reversed by a Writ of Error in the Lords House; and after, the Judges who
gave the Judgment were impeached of High Treason by the Commons, for
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom.

This Case of Fitz-Harris I take to be the fourth of this kind, yet shall open
a Gap for a fifth: but that this Case may be better understood, it will be
necessary to distinguish between an Indictment or Information, and an
Indictment by the Commons in Parliament.

An Indictment or Information is at the Suit of the King, and the Judges and
Jury are tied up to some single Issue; as in this Case of Fitz-Harris, the
Trial was, whether he was guilty or not of the Treason whereof he was indicted.

But an Impeachment of the Commons is at their Suit, and of all the Commons of
England; nor are they tied up to one single Issue, but impeach for Treason, and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors in the same Impeachment; they assume to
themselves, That all the Commons in England have a Right in the King, and all
the Laws and Constitutions of the Nation, and therefore can impeach where none
of the Courts of Westminster Hall can take any Cognizance at the Suit of the
King, either by Indictment or Information.

After Fitz-Harris was committed to Newgate, he was examined by the Earls of
Essex and Shaftsbury, Sir Robert Clayton, and Sheriff Cornish, who found in him
a Disposition to discover the bottom of the Popish Plot, and also to make a
further Discovery of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; but the next Day
Fitz-Harris was carried to the Tower, and kept close Prisoner, and out of their
Power, to whom Fitz-Harris promised to make a Discovery.

The Commons conceiving themselves and all the Commons of England concerned in
this Plot (wherein the French Ambassador, his Confessor, my Lord H --, the
Duchess of Portsmouth, and her Woman Wall, and even the King himself, for
Fitz-Harris had several times acquainted the King with it, and the King gave
him Money, and countenanced it, were Agents) impeached Fitz-Harris, thereby to
enquire into the Bottom of this Business, which no Court in Westminster Hall
could do; and this I take to be the Reason of the Commons Vote of the 27th of
March 1681, That if any inferior Courts shall proceed upon Fitz-Harris, and he
be found Guilty, the House will declare them guilty of Murder, and Betrayers of
the Rights of the Commons of England: And so it fell out, that Fitz-Harris
being indicted upon the single Issue of contriving and publishing the Libel,
was convicted and executed upon it, tho he desired to proceed upon the
Discovery of this Plot to the Earls of Essex, Shaftsbury, and to Sir Robert
Clayton, and to make an End of his Evidence against my Lord H --, which was
denied. So that whether Fitz-Harris was murdered in his Person or not, it is no
Question but his Evidence for further Discovery of this and the Popish Plot was
murdered by this Trial.

I will make these Remarks more upon this Trial, that in the Case of Tresilian
and Belknap, the Nation was in no other Danger than the Courts of
Westminster-Hall's invading the Jurisdiction of Parliament; and the Case of my
Lord Hollis, Sir John Elliot, Mr. Seldom, etc. was only for Misdemeanour;
whereas the King's Person, and the Safety of the Nation, were concerned in the
Discovery which Fitz-Harris might have made, (see Mr. Hawles's fine Remarks
upon the Practices and Illegalities of the Judgment of the Court not warranted
by the Common or any Statute Law) and that the Consequences of this Trial were
manifoldly more mischievous to the Nation than if Fitz-Harris's Design had
taken Effect.

The Fright of Fitz-Harris's Discovery of this new Popish Plot being seemingly
allayed by his Death, Revenge, with winged Haste pursues the Discoverers of the
old. It was in Trinity-Term that Fitz-Harris was tried and executed; and after
this Term, an Indictment of High Treason was exhibited to the Grand Jury of
London against Stephen College, a mean Fellow, but a great Talker against the
Popish Plot, who was more known by the Name of Protestant Joiner than Stephen
College. The Foreman was one Wilmer: This Indictment would not down, but the
Grand Jury returned an Ignoramus upon it, for which Wilmer was forced to fly
his Country.

The Design not succeeding in London, the Scene against College is laid at
Oxford; the Judges were Chief Justice North, Justice Jones, Justice Raimond,
and Justice Levins: To make sure of a Bill to be found there against College,
the King's Counsel had prepared Witnesses at the Assizes to post thither; and
there, to make sure Work, the King's Counsel are privately shut up with the
Jury till they had found the Bill, which Mr. Hawles says was a most
unjustifiable and unsufferable Practice.

Whilst these things were contriving, College had the Honor, as well as
Fitz-Harris, to be committed and continued a close Prisoner in the Tower, yet
the Lords impeached in Parliament had the Liberty of it, and free Access was
permitted to them: it is true indeed, College was permitted to have a Solicitor
and Counsel, which was Mr. West, I think a Plotter or Setter in the Rye-Plot,
as dark as Fitz-Harris's, and as like it as two Apples are one to the other.

But this was not out of Favor to College, but to betray him; for when the
Bill against College was found at Oxford, Murrel a Jailer, and Seywel a
Messenger were sent to bring College to Trial; who, after they had taken him
out of Prison, run him into a House, and by Order of the King's Counsel, took
from him all his Instructions for his Defense, and carried them to the King's
Counsel, as well to disable him to make his Defense, as to enable the King's
Counsel how to proceed against him by some way he was not provided to make his
Defense.

Upon Colledge's Arraignment, he demanded his Papers taken from him by Murrel
and Seywel, which were denied by the Court till he had pleaded guilty or not to
his Indictment. Here take notice* that Sir Francis Pemberton, Sir Thomas Jones,
and Justice Raimond, having done the Court's Job in Fitz-Harris's Trial, a new
Set of four is made to do this of Colledge's; the chief of these was Sir
Francis North (a Man cut out to all Intents and Purposes for such a Work, and
as if born to do it, his Father was a Committee-Man in all the late Times
against King Charles I. and his Grandfather one of the seven who condemned
Archbishop Laud) it is no matter who were the other three, for North was the
Mouth of the Court.

This was the first time that ever any Prisoner had his Instructions taken from
him to make his Defense, and at a time when there were such Contrivances to
take away his Life. My Lord Chief Justice told College, he took not away his
Papers; but College replied, they were taken from him upon pretense of
bringing them to his Lordship.

The Court and Counsel had a twofold Design upon College in seizing his
Papers; one, to trapan College to plead guilty or not before they delivered
the Papers; which having done, it was too late to plead either to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, or that the Indictment was erroneous, as it was, it
being of different Natures, as, for Treason and Misdemeanors.

Here I leave it to the Learned to judge whether the Court and King's Counsel
did not in this Indictment endeavor to depose the Parliamentary Authority, and
usurp it themselves; for tho the Commons may impeach generally for Treason and
Misdemeanors in the same Impeachment, yet neither by the Common, or any
Statute Law, any such Indictment can be.

The other Design was to disable College to make his Defense after his
pleading not guilty: College finding himself thus beset tho a mean Man, yet
with a Roman Courage said, This was a horrid Conspiracy, not only against his
Life, but against all the Protestants of England: And herein he proved a true
Prophet.

The Courage of the Man put the Court and King's Counsel to the Whisper* which
was never before done in any Court of Common Law; and now the Court must be
adjourned, the Pretense being for Dinner, tho they had breakfasted but a little
before: and before their Return, the King's Counsel altered their Method of
proceeding against the Prisoner from that they before designed; and so sorted
their Evidence that they might not contradict one another, and so would not
examine some of his Evidence.

Yet upon the Return of the Court, the Attorney, Sir R. S. for fear his
Instructions might not well be remembered or understood, moved, the King's
Evidence might be examined in the hearing of one another; which tho overruled,
yet 'twas not observed: and to satisfy the Jury, the Court (Sir F. N.) told
them in summing up the Evidence, they would inform the Jury what part of it was
Treason, and what Misdemeanor, which they did not. Mr. Hawles's learned Remarks
herein, as well upon Law and Practice, are worthy the Consideration of the
Parliament.

The Court and Counsel thus armed Cap-a-Pe, and the Prisoner bound Hand and
Foot, you need not doubt of a glorious Victory over him: And now let us see by
what valiant Combatants they a^chiev'd it.

The first Champion against College, but whether to prove Treason or
Misdemeanour is not yet determined, was Stephen Dugdale, That in a Barber's
Shop and a Coffee-house he had spoken vilifying Words of the King; that
College had showed him several scandalous Libels and Pictures, of which he was
the Author; that College had a silk Armor, a Brace of Horse-Pistols, a
Pocket-Pistol, and a Sword; that he had several stout Men would stand by him,
that he would make use of them in Defense of the Protestant Religion, and that
the King's Party were but a handful to his.

To pass over the Improbability of Colledge's designing Treason against the
King, and trust the Management of it to Papists, and none of them ever
discovered the thing they swore, till after the Parliament at Oxford, tho most,
if not all, were pretended to be transacted or done before; let us see what
Credit could be reasonably given to any of the Evidence against him.

1. Dugdale' s Evidence was confronted by Dr. Oats, who testified that Dugdale
said, He knew nothing against any Protestant in England; and being taxed by
Oats, that he had gone against his Conscience in the Evidence he gave to the
Grand Jury at London against College, Dugdale said, It was long of Colonel
Warcup (a worthy Person, who, for this and such like Services, is since
Knighted) for he could get no Money else. Elizabeth Hunt testified, That after
College was in Prison, Dugdale told her, He did not believe Colldge had any
more hand in conspiring against the King, than the Child unborn; and that he
had as live have given an 100 l. he had never spoken what he had; and that he
had nothing to say against College which would touch his Life: and Yates
testified, that when he said College was an honest Man, and stood up for the
King and Government; Dugdale answered, I believe he does, and I know nothing to
the contrary.

Haynes swore College said, Unless the King would let the Parliament sit at
Oxford, they would seize him, and bring him to the Block; and that he said, The
City had fifteen hundred Barrels of Powder, and ten thousand Men ready at an
hour's warning.

2. To confront this Evidence, Hickman testified that Haynes swore, God damn
him he cared not what he swore; for it was his Trade to get Money by Swearing.
Mrs. Hall said she heard Haynes own, That he was employed to put a Plot upon
the Dissenting Protestants. And Mrs. Richards said, She heard him say the same
thing. Whaley said, Haynes stole a Silver Tankard from him: And Lun said,
Haynes said, The Parliament were a Company of Rogues for not giving the King
Money; but he would help the King to Money enough out of the Fanatics Estates.
Everard testified that Haynes said, His Necessity and hard Pay drove him to say
any thing against the Protestants. Turbervile swore, College said at Oxford,
That he wished the King would begin; if he did not, they would begin with him,
and seize him; and that he (College) came to Oxford for that purpose.

3. Oats said, Turbervile said, a little before the Witnesses were sworn at
the Old Bailey, That he was not a Witness against College, nor could give any
Evidence against him; and that after he came to Oxford, he had been sworn
before the Grand Jury against College; and that the Protestant Citizens had
deserted him, and God damn him he would not starve.

John Smith swore, Colledge's speaking scandalous Words against the King, and
of his having Armor, which he showed Smith, and said, These are the things
that will destroy the pitiful Guards of Rowley; and that he expected the King
would seize some of the Members of Parliament at Oxford, which if done, he
would be one should seize the King: that Fitzgerald had made his Nose bleed,
but before long he hoped to see a great deal more Blood shed for the Cause:
that if any, nay Rowley himself, came to disarm the City, he would be the Death
of him.

4. To confront this Evidence, Blake testified that Smith said, Haynes's
Discovery was a Sham-Plot, a Meal-Tub-Plot. Bolron said, Smith would have had
him swore against Sir John Brook, my Lord Shaftsbury, and College, things of
which he knew nothing, and told him what he (Bolron) should swear, lest they
should disagree in their Evidence. Oats testified, Smith said, God damn him,
he would have Colledge' s Blood: and Mowbray testified that Smith tempted him
to be a Witness against College and Sir John Brook, and said, if the
Parliament did not give the King Money, and stood on the Bill of Exclusion,
that was Pretense enough to swear a Design to secure the King at Oxford: And
Everard and others testified, Smith said he knew of no Presbyterian or
Protestant Plot; and said, Justice Warcup would have persuaded him to swear
against some Lords a Presbyterian Plot, but he knew of none.

These were the material Evidences thus confronted, which should prove
Colledge's Treason and Misdemeanour for taking away his Life: But this Evidence
was so baffled, that for Shame the King's Counsel never played them after
against any other but my Lord of Shaftsbury, but were forced to set up for new
against my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, etc.

Objection. In criminal Cases, especially of Treason, if Evidence did not arise
from the Conspirators, who are supposed to be ill Men, scarce any other means
can be found for preventing or punishing these; and that Dangerfield was of an
ill Fame, and Dugdale, Smith, and Turbervile, were Witnesses in Discovery of
the Popish Plot, and so their Evidence is to be credited as well in this as in
the Popish Plot.

Answer. Nor would the Popish Plot have been believed, if it had no Foundation
but the Credit of the Witnesses; but Coleman's Letters, Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey's Murder, and Harcourt's Letters of it that Night to Evers my Lord
Aston's Confessor, etc. gave more than sufficient Evidence of the Popish Plot:
beside, the Evidence in the Popish Plot did arise from the Evidence of their
own Accord, not hired and sought to give it, as in this. And can any Man
believe that College, so zealous a Protestant, should design the Destruction
of the King, and contrive it by Papists, to whom he was so averse? And it were
Madness to think College could do this alone; for none of all the Evidence
swear any other to be concerned with him in it.

There were other Evidence against College, viz. Mr. M^sters, Sir William
Jennings, about Words which College should speak; and Atterbury, Seywel, and
Stevens, concerning finding Pictures in Colledge's Possession when they seized
him: but, as Mr. Hawles observes, these, by no Law in England, could be made
Treason, admitting all they said to be true: But tho at College this Scene
began, and he was executed as a Traitor, it did not end in him, as he
prophesied.

For Colledge's Blood was too mean a Sacrifice to appease the offended Ghosts
of the martyred Roman Saints, and was but an Inlet to spill nobler Blood;
therefore upon the 31st of August he was executed, and upon the 24th of
November following, 1681. the Earl of Shaftsbury had a Bill of High Treason at
the Sessions of the Old Bailey, London, preferred against him.

I will not here curtail any of the Remarks which Mr. Hawles has made upon this
Bill, or the Trial of my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney's, Mr. Cornish's and
Wilmer's Trials, but leave them entire to the Reader; it is enough for me to
show how well the King, by these Trials, made good his Declaration of
preserving the Protestant Religion, and his utmost Endeavor to extirpate
Popery: yet I shall make some Remarks upon my Lord Shaftsbury's Case which Mr.
Hawles either has not, or not so fully.

Upon the 20th of April 1679, the King, after he had sent the Duke into
Holland, dissolved his old Privy Council, and chose a new one, whereof the Earl
of Shaftsbury was President; and in Parliament declared the ill Effects he had
found of single Councils and Cabals, and therefore had made Choice of this
Council, which next to the Advice of his great Council of Parliament (which he
would often consult in all his weighty and important Affairs) he would be
advised by this Privy Council: and to take away all Jealousy that he was
influenced by Popish Councils, he had sent his Brother beyond Sea.

But now, quanto mutatus! No more Parliaments so long as this King lives. The
Council, whose Advice, next the Parliament, he would take, is now dissolved,
and the President's Life is sought for; the Duke of late sent away, that he
might not influence the King's Councils, is now returned, and governs all, and
made High Commissioner of Scotland, where, at this time, he is contriving the
Destruction of the noble Earl of Argile, whilst his Brother is doing that of my
Lord of Shaftsbury, and both act their Parts under the Vail of sacred Justice.

But how to bring the Earl of Shaftsbury upon the Stage, was Matter of great
Inquiry; other Evidence besides Irish, and those College had so baffled, could
scarce be found; and this Evidence, 'twas feared, would no more prevail upon a
London Grand Jury, than before it did when the Bill was preferred against
College.

Captain Henry Wilkinson was a Yorkshire Gentleman, who having served King
Charles I. in his Wars, and been very instrumental in the Restoration of King
Charles II. being fallen into Decay (a Fate usually attending the Cavaliers who
served either of those Kings) was for his Sufferings, Integrity, and Honesty,
preferred by the Earls of Craven and Shaftsbury to be Governor of Carolina,
and one of his Sons to be Surveyor-General of it, and another a Register.

Captain Wilkinson made use of the little Stock he had left, and such Credit as
he could procure, to fit himself upon this Account, and hired a Ship called the
Abigail, of a hundred and thirty Tuns, and victualled her for the Master and
ten Men, and such other Passengers as he should take in.

In this Number, one Mr. John Booth desired that he and his Family might
accompany the Captain to Carolina, which was agreed to; but the Captain being
under several Disappointments, and the charges of the Ship of four Months lying
in the River, insupportable, the Captain was arrested and thrown into the
Compter; from whence he removed himself to the King's Bench. The Captain's
Necessities were equal, or more than those of the Irish Evidence, but the
Captain (at least as he supposed) had no need of a Pardon for any thing
designed against the King or Government, as the Irish Evidence had; so the
first Attempt upon the Captain was to hire him to give Evidence against my Lord
of Shaftsbury.

If Empson and Dudly were so zealous to fill Henry the 7th's Coffers, by
straining the Penal Laws to utmost Rigor, as the Vogue went, Graham, Baynes
and Burton, were as zealous to pack Juries, and procure Evidence for carrying
on this black Design; but I do not find Burton was in this upon Captain
Wilkinson.

Upon the eighth of October, Baynes made his first Attack upon the Captain, and
told him, that he had been lately with Mr. Graham, who had a great Interest
with my Lord H. and that the Captain could not but know much of my Lord
Shaftsbury's Designs, and that he had now a desired Opportunity to discover
them; and urged the Captain not to deny the proffer, and that he need not fear
his getting a Pardon: but the Captain was constant that he knew nothing of any
such Design. By this time Booth was a Prisoner in the King's Bench, as well as
the Captain; and upon the eleventh, Booth attacked the Captain, and told him he
might have 500 l. per annum, or 10000 l. if he would discover what he knew of
my Lord Shaftsbury's Design against the King, and that the Captain should
appear at Court, and have Assurance of it from Persons of Honor; but this
wrought not upon the Captain neither. Upon the thirteenth Baynes, Booth and
Graham renewed the Promises Baynes and Booth had made, and that he should have
the King's Promise for the same, and his Royal Word for a Reward for his
Sufferings; and that Graham was sent by some of the Council to bring the
Captain to the King, and that he had an Order for it: but all would not do; for
the Captain was resolved not to go to White Hall if he could help it. Upon the
fourteenth Booth told the Captain, that Mr. Wilson, my Shaftsbury's Secretary
(who was a Prisoner in the Gate House) had sent to the Council, that he would
come and discover all he knew; and therefore he urged the Captain to have the
Honor of being the first Discoverer, and that to the former Promises the
Captain should have 500 l. per Annum settled on him in Ireland by the D. of
York: but all to no purpose.

Upon the fifteenth, Booth and Baynes attackt the Captain again: the Captain
asked Baynes why he was so urgent for his Testimony; Baynes answered, That as
yet they had none but Irish Evidence, which would not be believed, but if the
Captain came to it, he was not blemished in his Credit; and then Baynes told
him, if he would not go, he (Baynes) had a Habeas Corpus from my Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton, to carry him to White Hall.

In the Afternoon the Captain was carried by his Habeas Corpus to Whitehall,
and examined in the Secretary's Office by my Lord Conway, and Secretary
Jenkins; and in his Examination, in comes the King into the Office, as before
he had done into the Duchess of Portsmouth's Chamber, when my Lord H -- came
to kiss her Hand, and there the King told the Captain he had served his Father
and him faithfully, and hoped he (the Captain) would not now decline his
Obedience; to which the Captain answered, he never deserved to be suspected:
then the King told him he had not the Opportunity to serve his Friends, but
hoped he might: then the King examined him what he knew of my Lord Shaftsbury's
having a Design against his Person; but the Captain upon his Oath denied he
knew any thing, so the King left him to the further Examination of Secretary
Jenkins.

But this Business did not stay here; for the Captain was carried into another
Room, where were present the King, my Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, and several other of the Nobility, with Graham, Baynes and Booth;
where my Lord Chancellor was very sharp upon the Captain, and put several
Questions to the Captain, which he could not answer, and told the Captain,
there were two sorts of Advancements, and that the Captain was like to come to
his Trial before the Lord Shaftsbury.

The Business was, Booth had sworn that the Captain had a Commission from my
Lord Shaftsbury, for a Troop of fifty Men, to be my Lord's Guards against the
King, and that Booth was listed in it: This Booth had sworn, but was so
unfortunate in it, as to swear, this was when the Parliament was at Oxford, at
which time the Captain was making his Preparations for his intended Government
of Carolina: but whether the King believed the Captain or Booth, is unknown,
but it stopped here, and the Captain was no higher advanced upon Booth's Oath,
nor could be prevailed upon to be a Witness against my Lord Shaftbury, though
his Wife was as much tempted to have it so, as the Captain was; so the
Captain's only Advancement was, to be remanded to Prison.

However, it was resolved that my Lord Shaftsbury should be prosecuted, and so
upon the 24th of November a Bill of High Treason was preferred against him to
the great Inquest at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey: and Baines proved a
true Prophet, though Booth swear to the Captain's Command of Fifty Men, to be a
Guard to my Lord; for the Jury neither believed him nor the Evidence so baffled
at Colledge's Trial, nor the Irish Evidence added to that, and so returned an
Ignoramus upon it.

Suetonius, in the Life of Tiberius, says, he could never have made such
Ravages upon the Roman Empire, and exercised such Cruelties, if he had not been
backed by an Officious and flattering Senate, which carried the Face of Justice
in it: and tho it be evident, that for near Eighty Years, these three Kings of
the Scottish Race had been endeavoring to establish an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government over this Nation, yet except King James the First, who, if his
Necessities had not forced him, would have never had a Parliament after the
first, and who by his own Authority created so many Monopolies, and
Benevolences, and in the Parliament of the 12th and 18th Years of his Reign,
without any Color of Justice, imprisoned so many worthy Gentlemen, without the
Benefit of Habeas Corpus's, for their Debates in Parliament; yet these other
two pretended to raise their Tyrannies under the Form of Justice, and therefore
Charles the First after he for Fifteen Years together, had not only exceeded
his Father in granting Monopolies, and raising Money by Loans, Benevolences,
Coat and Conduct Money, but also in taking the Customs without Grant of
Parliament, and such as were never granted by Parliament, and in further
raising Ship Money, and imprisoning the Members of Parliament without Benefit
of their Habeas Corpus's; yet he thought best to do it by such Judges as he
should make: So this King, in the Executions of Fitz-Harris and College, would
have the Color of Justice by a Form of Law, for which there was no Law.

But as the Knights of Malta could make Knights of their Order for eight Pence
a-piece, yet could not make a Soldier of Seaman: So these Kings, tho they
could make what Judges they pleased to do their Business, yet could not make a
Grand Jury, from whom the Judges in all criminal Cases between the King and
Subject must take their Measures: these Grand-Juries in London are returned by
the Sheriffs, and the Sheriffs are chosen by the Livery.

This Difficulty after my Lord Shaftsbury's Case, put the Court to their
Trumps, and at present a Stop to their Proceedings: The Assistance of the Duke
of York was necessary, but at this time he was as busy in Scotland about my
Lord of Argyle, as his Brother was in England about my Lord Shaftsbury.

The City upon the Dissolution of the Four last Parliaments, were aware of the
Designs of the Court, and chose Sheriffs accordingly; when Colledge's Bill was
preferred, Mr. Cornish and Bethel were Sheriffs, and now another such was
preferred against (...) Lord of Shaftsbury, Sir Thomas Pilkington and Mr. Shute
were Sheriffs; who, tho at other times Sheriffs would rather fine than serve,
yet at this time none refused to serve, so that unless Sheriffs of another
Stamp were chosen, all would be to no Purpose. It Is scarce credible what a
Noise the not finding my Lord Shaftsbury's Bill made; all Justice, now the Tory
Party cried, was stopped, if these Ignoramus Juries were not set aside: R. L.
S. proclaimed Forty one would inevitably return; and this countenanced by the
Court, flew out of the City, all the Country over, so that scarce any other
thing was to be heard but of Ignoramus Juries, and what would follow from them.

It was the latter End of Michaelmas Term, the great Inquest returned an
Ignoramus upon the Bill of High Treason preferred against my Lord Shaftsbury,
and in the Vacation all Wits were set on work how to take the Election of the
Sheriffs of London out of the Power of the City, and no other Expedient could
be found out but by taking away their Charter, which if it could be done, would
not only entitle the Court to making of Sheriffs, but open a Gap to their
making a House of Commons; for near 5/6 of the Commons are Burgesses and Barons
of the Cinque Ports, who would not dare to contest their Charters, if the City
of London could not hold theirs. So that in Hilary Term following, a Quo
Warranto was brought against the City for two heinous Crimes, viz. That they
had made an Address to the King for the Parliament to sit for Redress of
Grievances, and to settle the Nation, (yet King Charles the First thought the
Parliament's Vote of non-Addresses to him, was a Deposing of him) and that the
City had raised Money toward repairing Cheapside Conduit, ruined by the Fire
of London.

The City pleaded their Right, and the King replied, upon which there was a
Demurrer, but Judgment was not given upon it till Trinity Term 1683. However
the Novelty of the thing caused an Amusement upon the Generality of the City
and Nation too, whereto this tended. In the mean time the Duke having done his
Work in Scotland, was returned to London, and his Zeal for promoting the
Catholic Cause, outwent his Patience for the Court's Judgment upon the
Demurrer to the Quo Warranto; so that Courtiers of the First Magnitude appeared
barefaced for the next Election of Sheriffs, and Sir Dudley North (Sir
Francis's own Brother) and Sir Peter Rich were returned, one by a shameless
Trick, the other by open Force. Tho the Court had gained this Point, they
thought not fit to push it further till the Demurrer to the City Charter were
determined, in which such Haste was made, that only two Arguments were
permitted on either Side, one in Hilary Term 1682-83, and the other in Easter
Term following, and so Judgment was given in Trinity Term next after, against
the City.

The Judgment against the City was as strange as the Election of the Sheriffs,
for it was without any Reason, and by two Judges only; one was Sir Francis
Withens (who had heard but one Argument, and I believe understood but little of
that) and who after, in the Absence of Sir Edward Herbert, delivered that for
his Opinion which Sir Edward, when present, disowned; and Sir Thomas Jones.
However, they said Justice Raimond was of their Opinion, and so was Saunders,
the Chief Justice, tho he was past his Senses, and only had Sense enough to
expostulate with them for then troubling him, when he had lost his Memory.

But the Court of Kings Bench were not so ripe for this hasty Judgment, as that
at White Hall was for Discovery of Plots against the Government and Justice of
the Nation; of which they set three on Foot: viz. A Plot to surprise the
Guards; the Rye-Plot, to murder the King and Duke as they should come from
New Market; and the Black Heath Plot, for the People to rise upon a Football
Match: if those Sheriffs would not do the Court's Work, you may be sure the
next should, where the King should have the Nomination; but these were as
trusty as any the King could make, and it was now Graham and Burton's Work to
find Good Jurymen, and then the Sheriffs would be sure to return them.

In all these Plots, for ought I can find, the Fox was the Finder; my Lord H --
and Rumsey, in that of the Guards; Lee and Goodenough in that of Black Heath;
Keeling and West in that of the Rye-Plot. Lee was set to trapan Rouse and Baker
in the Black Heath Plot. Rumball (at whose House 'twas said the Rye-Plot was to
be acted) upon his Death denied he ever knew of any. But the Great Design was
upon my Lord of Essex, and my Lord Russel, one the most eminent of the
Nobility, for his great Honor, and all eminent Virtues; the other of the
Commons; and both zealous Protestants, and Opponents to the Design of
introducing Popery and Arbitrary Power.

I will not again curtail Mr. Hawles's learned Remarks upon my Lord Russel's
Trial, on the Thirteenth of July, 1683. yet I must observe, how that that Day,
whether my Lord of Essex killed himself, or was to be killed, the King and his
Brother were both in the Tower when the Act was done, and immediately Notice
was sent to the Old Bailey, to give Notice of it to the Court, that in the worst
Sense, Use might be made of it by the King's Counsel against my Lord Russel.

The Blaze of the Earl's having murdered himself, having had its designed
Effect upon my Lord Russel's Trial, the next Step was to satisfy the Nation the
Earl murdered himself; and to this Purpose the Coroner's Inquest must
necessarily sit, and give their Verdict; but so the Business was ordered, that
before the Jury was impannelled, the Earl's Body was taken out of the Closet
(where 'twas pretended he murdered himself) and stripped of his Clothes which
were carried away, and the Closet washed; and when one of the Jury insisted upon
seeing my Lord's Clothes in which he died, the Coroner was sent for into
another Room, and upon his Return, told the Jury, it was my Lord's Body, not
his Clothes, they were to sit upon: and when it was moved that the Jury should
adjourn, and give my Lord's Relations Notice, Tha^ if they had any thing to say
on my Lord's Behalf; it was answered* The King had sent for the Inquisition,
and would not rise from the Council Board till it was brought.

I do not find, that when the like Practices were used, and whe^^ the Coroner's
Inquest found Sir Thomas Overbury died a Natural Death in the Tower, that two
Years after, when Reves, the Apothecary's Servant, made the first Discovery of
Sir Thomas his being poisoned, that Reves was prosecuted for flying in the Face
of the Government, and questioning the Justice of the Nation, as Mr. Speak and
Mr. Braddon were for endeavoring to discover the Murder of my Lord of Essex.
I Am sure their Inducement for the Proofs of it, were manifoldly more than
Reves's were of Sir Thomas Overbury's; and I wish I understood what their
Crimes were more than Reves's: but that being for the King and Justice of the
Nation, they ought to have been encouraged, if there had been no foul dealing
in the Earl's Death.

After the Death of these Noble Persons, the rest of the Game was played without
scarce any Rub: Colonel Sidney, Bateman, Walcot, Hone and Rouse, followed for
Treason all, and all of different Complexions; and where Treason could have no
Color, actually to take away the Lives of the Opponents of Popery and
Arbitrary Power, Misdemeanors are set on foot to take away their Means of
living; Fines from 10000 to 100000 l. for words against the Duke; though by
Magna Charta, a Salvo Contenemento is reserved for Misdemeanors against the
King. Graham and Burton would find Juries for all, and the Sheriffs would
return them to do the Work.

But the Rage and Tyranny against the Opponents of Popery and Arbitrary Power,
was not more illegal than the Indulgence to the Lords impeached by Parliament;
for the King resolving to have no more Parliaments, upon the present
Constitution, made Judges to take Bail for them to appear next Parliament:
Hereby as much invading the Rights and Jurisdiction of Parliament, as the
Judgments against Fitz-Harris, College, my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, etc.
were illegal; which though at Common Law they might have been Treason, yet by
the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third, the Judges in Westminster Hall
were prohibited to take Cognizance of them, and by the Act of 13 Car. 2. c. 51.
wherein the Prosecution ought to be within Six Months after the Fact, and the
Indictment within three Months after.

Though the City of London, and many other Cities in England, those their
Sheriffs; yet the Sheriffs of all the other Shires and Counties of England were
named by the King: so that the King's next care was how to subvert the
Constitution of Parliament, and like Oliver Cromwell, have a House of Commons of
his own making: For the House of Commons is compunded of five hundred and
thirteen Members, whereof but ninety two are Knights of Shires; so that near
5/6 are Burgresses, Citizens and Barons of the Cinque Ports: The Generality of
the Corporations which send these Members are poor decayed places, and so not
able as the City of London to contest their Charters, or if they could, they
had little hope to keep them, now London could not hold theirs. Yet this would
cost the Court a great deal of time to bring Quo Warranto's against above two
hundred Corporations; and now all Hands are set at work to prevail upon these
poor Inhabitants, and mighty Rewards are promised to those who should surrender
them: but because Money was scarce, Bargains were made with Multitudes of them,
to have Grants of Fairs for surrender of their Charters, and those which
refused had Quo Warranto's brought against them.

To humor the Court, and in perfect hope that in time the Mountains would
bring forth, a Multitude of Corporations (or rather some loose vain Men, who
assumed the Names of the Corporations) by heaps surrendered their Charters; and
at excessive Rates (I cannot say renewed, but) took new ones, whereby the King
reserved to himself the Power of disposing of all Places of Profit and Power,
which at present was entrusted in their Hands who had betrayed their former
Trust: nor did these Men care for the expense of purchasing their new Charter,
tho it were to the starving the Poor of their Corporations, who should have
been fed with the Moneys expended in the Purchase.

But a Multitude of lewd Fellows, who in meaner Corporations, were all as
willing to betray their Charters as the Richer, yet had not Money to purchase
new ones, and without it nothing could be had, and never was King furnished
with such a Lord Keeper (for by this time North, who had drawn the King's
Declaration against petitioning for a Parliament, and for which he was
impeached in Parliament, and had so highly merited in Colledge's Trial, was
made Lord Keeper) and Attorney General for taking Money with both Hands; though
by their Oaths they ought to have, to the best of their Skill, informed the
King of the Justice and Lawfulness of all those things which were to pass the
Seals: and this put some stop to the hurry of the surrender of Charters.

But in these Corporations there were some Members, who made a Conscience of
their Oaths, and betraying their Trusts, and according to the Obligation to
both, performed their Duties; but these were prosecuted as Rioters and
Tumultuous Persons, and fined extravagantly, even to their undoing, and
imprisoned till payment, and bound to their good Behavior.

These things were not carried on with that Security, but some Umbrages of fear
there were, that some Disturbances might arise before they could be brought to
Perfection: to quell them, if they should happen, The Duke had secured
Scotland, and had 20000 Foot and 2000 Horse, and a Year's Pay, to be assisting
upon all Occasions; a greater liberty was given to the Irish than ever; and to
crown the Work, Tangier is demolished, and the Garrison which was a Nursery of
Popish Officers and Soldiers, is brought over and placed in the most
considerable Parts of England.

Whilst the King is framing this goodly Structure, the French King, against his
Faith at the Treaty of Nimeguen, by foul and base Treachery, seizes upon
Strasburg on the Rhine (the most considerable City of Germany) and by plain
Force took Courtray, and the City of Luxemburgh from the Spaniard,
notwithstanding the late Treaty of Mutual Assistance between the King and
Spain, and had increased his Men of War at Sea to be more and greater than
those of the King's; and his New Foundland Fishery, to be twenty fold more
than it was 1660. and the English fallen not to 1/^ of what it was: yet in this
dreadful State, the Feuds of Whig and Tory no ways abated, and both so stupid
as if neither were concerned in this Design common to them both.

But though this most religious and gracious King (for so the Tories will have
him, to whom all their nonsensical Doctrine of Passive Obedience is due) had by
the help and indefatigable Industry of the Tories, laid this Foundation for the
Ruin and Destruction of this Church and State, yet he lived not to complete
this goodly Structure, for he died upon the sixth of February 1684-85. (it may
be the sooner, because he made no more haste to do it) in the thirty seventh
year of his Reign, computing it from his Father's Death, after he had lived
fifty four Years, eight Months and eight days.

The Character of King Charles II.
HIS Person was of a very well composed Structure, tall above the ordinary
Stature of other Men not much; much more resembling his Grandfather Henry IV.
of France, by his Mother, than his Father, or his Grandfather King James: And
as in his Person he more resembled Henry than either his Father or Grandfather
James, so did he in his Humors; for both had lively and pleasant Wits, and
would be wondrous facetious and pleasant with those which humored them in
their Pleasures, and were of free Access; whereas King Charles the Father, was
grave and severe in his way, hard of Access, and that by such strained Terms of
Submission as were never heard of before in England, and, I believe, no where
else: and King James was slovenly in his Behavior, and more servile to his
Favorites than they to him. Like his Grandfather Henry, Charles gave himself
up to all sensual Pleasures, without any Control; but unlike his Father, who
was temperate and chaste: Like his Grandfather Henry in Profession of his
Religion, for both seemingly professed that which neither believed; Unlike his
Father, who while he did what he would, was severely addicted to what he
professed: Unlike to his Father and Grandfather Henry in Covetousness, but like
his Grandfather James in profuse Prodigality to his Favorites, but unlike his
Father and Grandfather Henry in Parsimony, ill becoming so great Kings: like
his Father and Grandfather James, in laying the Foundation of the Ruin of the
Grandeur of England abroad, and the Church and State at home; unlike his
Grandfather Henry, who laid the Foundation of the Grandeur of France.

Tho Henry and Charles were esteemed Clement and Merciful Princes, till the
Rage of the latter end of Charles's Reign, yet both were most vindictive
against any who reproached their licentious Liberty in their lustful Pleasures;
as appears by Henry's putting the Duke of Biron to Death (more, as Sir Walter
Raleigh observes, for the Taunt he gave when Henry brought Madam Gabriel to the
Siege of Amines, That she was the Fortune of France, than for Biron's
Conspiracy with the Duke of Savoy) and by that of cutting off Sir John
Coventry's Nose, for the Report which was of Sir John, that he asked the
Question, Which of the King's Favorites, Men or Women? Unlike to both Father
and Grandfather James, Charles was to his own Cousin-German, the
Elector-Palatine, for they both, at least seemingly, endeavored to have
restored the Prince's Father to his Country after he was dispossessed of it by
the Emperor and King of Spain; whereas after this Prince was restored to a part
of it by the Treaty of Munster, this King, without any Offense or Provocation
given him by the Elector, assisted the French to ruin and destroy it.

But he is gone, God knows by what means, and the Possession of the Crown takes
away all Attainders: And now he is gone, he left the Nation more vitiated and
debauched in their Manners than ever it was before by any other King; having
not only squandered away the ancient Revenues of the Crown, which were esteemed
sacred, and which should have supported it against foreign Force and intestine
Discord, but left such a Debt upon it as never before was heard of, nor
contracted by such means, having prostituted the Majesty of his Crown in
becoming a Pensioner to France, and advancing that Interest to be as formidable
and dangerous to the rest of Christendom as to his own Dominions; and embroiled
(...) Subjects in intestine Feuds and Discords, as if thereby he designed them
an easy Prey to the French and Popish Interest; and having by Bribery and
Corruption so vitiated all public Offices, both Sacred, Civil, and Military,
that they became habitual, and so fixed, that it would become difficult, if
possible, to reform them.

And as this King's Actions were little and dark, so was his Funeral, for never
any King, who died possessed, was so obscurely and meanly buried; hurried in the
dead of the Night to his Grave, as if his Corpse had been to be arrested for
Debt, and not so much as the Blue-Coat-Boys attending it; his Brother, then
King, showing as little Gratitude to him for all his Favors, as he had done to
the Nation for all their Loyalty, and incredible Sums of Money poured upon him:
And as his Father and Grandfather had not a Stone to cover their Graves,
thereby to preserve their Memories in future Generations; so neither had he,
nor any of his Name hereafter is like to have, as King of England.

But now he is gone, all the dreadful Presages of the four last Parliaments are
come upon the Nation; and nothing left to secure the Nation's Fears, unless
that the Crown being so in Debt, and the Excise for the King's Life dying with
him, the Parliament would not be so prodigal of their Bounty, as to grant this
King's Successor such a Revenue, which might enable him to attain his Ends, by
the Ruin of the Church and State of England.

The Good Deeds of King Charles II.
1. HIS dispensing with the Act of Navigation in the first Dutch War, whereby
he was enabled to continue the War against the Dutch two Years longer than he
did, and the Dutch otherwise might have fired the Ships in our Harbors a Year
sooner, and forced the King to a more inglorious Peace than that he made in the
Year 1667, whilst the Parliament, in the Temper it was in, sat still, and took
no notice of these things.

Objection. If the King has Power to dispense with the Act of Navigation, by
the same Reason he may dispense with other Laws; and so the Laws of the Nation
will be loose, and subject to the King's Will at his Pleasure.

Answer I. I wish all Legislators in passing Laws would be of another Temper
than when the Rump made this Law, which was in spite of the Dutch, without any
Consideration of the dreadful Consequences it has brought upon the Nation both
within and without; or in another Temper than the Parliament was in in the
twelfth Year of the King, when they passed or confirmed this Law without any
consideration of Times, whether in War or Peace.

II. If the Act of Navigation had been in general a good Law, yet Times must be
distinguished; and in War, Civil Laws are silent: so that for the Preservation
of the Public, the King may destroy particular Men's Interest, as in case of
firing the Suburbs of a City to preserve the City, and destroy the Fruits of
the Ground rather than these shall sustain an Enemy to the endangering the
whole Nation: but it was much more reasonable for the King to grant Liberty,
without any Destruction or Wrong to his Subjects, to dispense with the Act of
Navigation, and give all Foreigners Liberty to import Gunpowder and all sorts
of Naval Scores, etc. for the Nation's Preservation in the time of War with the
Dutch. And, I say, it was Prudence in Oliver, tho in time of Peace, to dispense
with the Act of Navigation in reference to the Trade to Norway and Sweden,
after the Norway Merchants had represented to him, how grievously the
Norwegians, by this Act imposed upon not only the English Subjects, but upon
Oliver himself, in building and fitting up his Men of War.

2. The second better Act of King Charles, was his dispensing with the Law
against Foreigners partaking the Benefits of the natural-born Subjects of
England, by permitting Brewer and his Walloons (tho Papists) after they fled
from the Rage of the French Ravages in Flanders in 1667, to plant and settle
themselves in the West; whereby the English became instructed how to make and
dye fine Woollen Cloths 30 per Cent. cheaper than they could before: and herein
the King imitated two of his most glorious Predecessors that ever reigned in
England, I mean Edward III. and Queen Elizabeth, Princes who no ways affected
Tyranny or Arbitrary Power.

I say the King might justly and legally do this; for tho the King cannot
dispense with Laws which have a complicated Interest with himself and Subjects,
to the Wrong of his Subjects; yet the King may dispense with those Penalties
which properly belong to him, even in criminal Cases, as to the Life and Estate
of an Offender, and therefore much more where there is no Offense, and the End
for the public Good: as in this Case of Brewer, and all other Foreigners, the
Penalty is, if they trade, they shall pay Strangers Duties; but this is to the
King; and if he pleases, he may take to other Duties than his natural-born
Subjects pay, whereby the Foreign and Fishing Trades which are carried on in
Holland might not be carried out of England, and thereby the Navigation of
England become double or treble to what it now is, and the ruined and even
desolate Coast-Towns of England flourish, as Hamburgh, Amsterdam, Gottenburgh,
Diep, St. Maloes, and other Ports. Would not this be not only for the
enriching, but strengthening the Nation, and that in a double Proportion? for we
should be so much more rich and strong here, as other Nations would be less,
and in a worse state to make War upon us. Nay, should we only make our Ports
free, as Leghorn, Marseilles, and as of late the Pope has Civita Vecchia, would
not the Nation be so much more enriched as the Goods imported are more? I would
know from whence else it was that France became so enriched above all other
Countries (for Mines they have none) but from the vast Trades the English,
Dutch, Swedes, and Danes, drove in France?

And suppose the King should dispense with Foreigners purchasing Lands in
England, and not take them, as he may do if he pleases, whereby Millions of
Money would be brought into England, the Lands we shall have still; and would
not the Nation be so much more enriched hereby as the Purchase-Monies are more?
And would not the Nation be so much more peopled and strengthened, as the
Purchasers are more? and the King's Revenue by Excise and Customs so much more
increased, as the Consumption of these and their Descendants shall be more?
Merchants, to enrich themselves and the Nation, run great Hazards, and are
often undone in their Merchandising; whereas the Nation, nor any Man else, runs
any Hazard by Foreigners purchasing Lands in England.

Ambitious Princes, to acquire more Subjects, run great Hazard, and destroy and
make Men miserable, and ruin Countries, to accomplish their Designs; whereas
none of these attend the Permission of Foreigners to trade and inhabit among
us: and when they are once settled, theirs and the Nation's Interest will be
the same, and both alike obliged to defend them.

Xenophon, in Cyropaedia, says, That by reason of the Goodness and Justice of
Cyrus's Reign, many Nations became his Subjects. Will any say Cyrus was less a
King hereby? Or should we be less a Nation, if by the Benefit of our many
Advantages in Trade we should by others increase our Trade, which we cannot of
our selves? Nay, should we not so much more enrich and strengthen our selves?
When I consider these things, I wonder Foreigners should be at such Charges to
purchase their Freedom by an Act of Parliament, whenas the King may do it if he
pleases; unless it be that their Posterity shall not inherit: but if the King
may permit Foreigners to purchase without taking the Forfeitures, or grant them
a License to purchase, he may grant them a License to settle their Estates as
they please.

3. The third good Act of K. Charles, was his marrying the late Queen to his
present Majesty, tho by the manner of it, it seems to me he did it by Surprise;
and I Am apt to believe, if he could well have come off from it again he would,
as appears by the Story.

4. We may add this fourth, That he bred up the late Queen and her Sister after
the Religion of the Church of England.

A DETECTION OF THE Court and State of England, DURING THE REIGN OF King JAMES
II, etc.
BOOK V.
WHAT before King Charles II. acted in Masquerade, King James did barefaced;
and here you will see how plain and easy a Passage the Absolute Will and
Pleasure-Men, and Passive Obedience-Men had made for this King to overthrow the
whole Church and State of England, and by what steps he proceeded in it; the
King's Speeches looking one way, and he going quite contrary.

Upon the 6th of February in 1684/85. the Day of his Brother's Death, the King
declared in Council, That since it had pleased God to place him in that
Station, to succeed so good and gracious a King, as well as so kind a Brother;
that he thinks fit to declare his Endeavors to follow his Brother's Example,
more especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his People, and
make it his Endeavor to preserve the Government both in Church and State, as
it is by Law established; Commends the Church of England's Principles and
Members; knows likewise, that the Laws of England are sufficient to make the
King as great a Monarch as he can wish; and therefore, as he will never depart
from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so he will never invade any
Man's Property.

The next Sunday after his Brother's Death, the King went publicly to Mass,
and that Week (I think) he ordered his Brother's dying in the Communion of the
Church of Rome, and before his Death, his receiving his Viaticum, and other
Ceremonies of that Church, and attested by Father Huddleston, to be printed;
and also the Papers taken out of the King's Strong-box, showing, that however
he outwardly appeared otherwise in his Life, yet in his Heart he was sincerely
a true Roman Catholic: So that however he promised to preserve the Church of
England, as by Law established, yet his Profession was of the Church of Rome,
which curses the Church of England, and declares them Heretics, Schismatics,
and Sacrilegious Persons, with whom no Faith is to be kept.

The King's Father, Charles I, took the Customs before granted by Parliament;
this King took both Customs and the Excise, granted only for the Life of his
Brother, before they were given him by Parliament: How this corresponded with
the King's Promise but the Week before, that he would never invade any Man's
Property, I do not understand; for tho in every Government no Man has Property
against the Supreme Power, yet by the English Constitutions, the Supreme Power
of the Nation is in the Parliament, in Conjunction with the King: and the
King's taking both the Customs and Temporary Excise for his Brother's Life, by
his only Will and Pleasure, was as much a Violation upon the Property of the
Subject, as if he had taken the rest of their Goods and Inheritances.

To the King's Promise of preserving the Church and State of England as by Law
established, he adds, That he will imitate his kind Brother in his great
Clemency, and Tenderness of his People.

The first Act of the King's Clemency and Tenderness to his People, was
extended to Dr. Oats; but tho the Act was completed in this King's Reign, the
Scene was laid in his good and gracious Brother's, when Oats was Fined 100000
l. for Scandalum Magnatum against the Duke of York, in saying, The Duke was
reconciled to the Church of Rome, and to be kept close Prisoner till the Fine
was paid.

Oats being thus mewed up, upon the King's coming to the Crown an Indictment
of Perjury is contrived against him upon two Points; one, That Ireland was not
in London from the 3d of August in 1678, till the 14th of September next
following; when Oats, in Ireland's Trial, said, He was in a Consult concerning
the killing the King, about the middle of August: The other was, That Oats was
at St. Omers all April and May in 1678; when Oats, in Harcourt and
Whitebread's, etc. Trials swore, They were at a Consult the 24th of April,
concerning killing the King, and establishing the Popish Religion. But that a
better View may be had of this Trial of Oats, it is fit to look back into King
Charles II's Reign.

It seems evident to me, That after the Dissolution of the Parliament at
Oxford, (and I believe it will to any other that shall read King Charles's
History) that he designed never after to have another Parliament, until he
should get the Corporations to surrender their Charters, so as they should
elect no other Members than pleased him; and in the mean time to take off the
Heads of those who were zealous in prosecuting the Popish Plot.

Upon the Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, the Feuds between the Whigs
and Tories were in highest Ferment; so that whatever was done against the
Whigs, was cried up by the Tories, and Addresses made by them to the King, that
they would live and die with him, in them. And because the Whigs (as they were
called) would not find Bills against my Lord of Shaftsbury and College, they
resolved to carry the Election of Sheriffs in 1682, wherein Mr. Dubois and Mr.
Papillon (Whigs) stood Candidates against Sir Peter Rich and Sir Dudley North
(Tories); but they resolved by Right or Wrong Rich and North should carry it,
and so they did; but by what Right, you may judge by the Prints.

The Tories having gained this Point, Sir R. S. Gra. and Burt. are Instruments
for packing Juries; the Judges, North, Pemberton, and Saunders, etc. shall do
their parts for declaring Charters void, and for Trying Fitz-Harris, my Lord
Russel, Colonel Sidney, Sir Thomas Armstrong, etc.

But the taking off the Heads of the Whigs was but half this Design; the
impeached Lords in the Tower must be let loose, or the Game was but half
played: This was so ticklish a Point, that neither Pemberton nor Saunders could
be brought up to it; but Saunders dying, and Pemberton removed to the Common
Pleas, Sir Geo. Jeffries was set up to do this Work, which he did to content,
and so was initiated to do what other Journey-work the Court should order. And
now before him Oats is to be tried for Perjury, upon the two Points aforesaid.

Ireland was tried above six Years before, viz. in December 1678, before a Jury
of Judges in the Old Bailey, and so was Whitebread and Harcourt within about a
Month less than six Years, viz. in June 1679. Ireland pleaded he was not in
London from the 3d of August till the 14th of September; and Whitebread,
Harcourt, etc. pleaded that Oats was at St. Omers all April and May in 1678;
so that if their Witnesses said true, 'twas impossible Oates's Testimony of
Whitebread's being at the Consult in April, and Ireland's in August, could be
true.

That Oats was in Town in April and May in 1678, was proved by Sir Richard
Barker, Mr. Walker a Minister, Mr. Clay a Romish Priest, Mrs. Mayo, Sarah Ives,
Mr. Smith (Oates's Schoolmaster, with whom Oats dined about the Beginning of
May) Mr. Page, and Butler (Sir Richard Barker's Coachman.) But besides Oats
and Bedlow's swearing Ireland was at the Consult in August, only Sarah Pain
(who had been Servant to Grove, one of the Jesuits) swore Ireland was in Town
in August.

Oats thus mewed up, the St. Omers Boys are sent for over in all haste (and
you need not doubt had new Instructions) and the Crew of Staffordshire
Witnesses: the Boys to swear Oats was at St. Omers all April and May; the
Staffordshire Witnesses, that Ireland was in Staffordshire, or thereabouts, in
August and September. Jeffries was the Judge, and you need not doubt of a Jury,
to chime into Jeffries summing up the Evidence.

Things standing in this Posture, Oats is tried upon the 9th of May upon
Perjury, upon these two Points. At the Trial, Oats could get only four
Witnesses to appear, (and 'twas a Wonder he could get any) viz. Mr. Walker the
Minister, who after so long time, durst not trust to his Memory, to swear
positively Oats was in Town, unless he should have the Minutes of his
Examination before; and so Mr. Page; but Mayo and Butler both swore Oats was
in Town: but unless Sarah Pain could be found, 'twas impossible for Oats to
prove Ireland was in Town in August, for Bedlow was dead, and Oats could not
swear for himself.

But Ex tempore verum nascitur. Ireland was Confessor to Mr. John Jenison,
Father of Mr. Thomas Jenison, (a Jesuit in this Conspiracy, and who died in
Newgate) elder Brother of Mr. Robert Jenison: This Mr. Jenison having been at
Windsor in August 1678, came from thence to Ireland's Chamber the 19th, and
found him pulling off his Boots on the Frame of a Table, being newly come from
Staffordshire. Ireland asked him from whence he came? who told him, from
Windsor. Ireland enquired about the Diversions of the Court; Jenison said, His
Majesty's chief Delight was in Hawking and Fishing, accompanied only with two
or three, early in the Morning: How easily then might he be taken off! answered
Ireland. Then Ireland asked Mr. Jenison if he would be assisting in taking off
the King? which if he would, Ireland said he would forgive him 20 l. which he
owed Ireland. Afterward Ireland asked him if he knew any Irish-men, who were
courageous and stout? Jenison told him he knew Captain Levallian, Kerney,
Broghall, and Wilson: then Ireland asked him if he would go along with these,
and assist in taking off the King? which he refusing, Ireland said he knew
Levallian and Kerney, and set down the other two Names in writing, and said he
was going to the Club to Mr. Coleman, Mr. Levallian, and Kerney; and dunn'd Mr.
Jenison for the 20 l. which he owed Ireland: but Ireland, at his Death, denying
he was in Town, from the third of August till the fourteenth of September, Mr.
Jenison changed his Religion upon it, and printed the Reason; and after upon
his Oath at my Lord Stafford's Trial declared this, and a farther Account of
the Conspiracy against the King, and for introducing the Popish Religion.

If living Testimonies shall be doubted, yet I conceive I shall put it out of
doubt, that Ireland was in Town, when his Staffordshire Witnesses said he was
in Staffordshire, by a Proof which could not be bribed or corrupted.

One Mr. Benjamin Hinton, a Goldsmith in Lombard Street, was Ireland's Cashier;
and Mr. Hinton going out of Town at that time in Aug. 1678, met Ireland at or
about Barnet, coming for London, when Ireland told him, that he had
extraordinary Occasions for Money, and urged Hinton to go back with him; but
Hinton told him, his Man could do Ireland's Business as well as he, and his
Occasions would not permit him to go back. I asked Mr. Hinton the Truth of
this, to which he would not give me any Answer; but be this true or false, it is
entered into Hinton's Book of Accounts, paid to Mr. Ireland' s own Hands,
whereas the other Entries are, paid by his Order: and it is said Mr. Hinton's
Man would depose he paid these Moneys to Ireland himself.

Mr. Hinton afterward failing, a Commission of Bankrupt was sued against him,
and his Book of Accounts was delivered, and kept at the Widow Vernon's
Coffee-house in Bartholomew Lane, on the back side of the Royal Exchange, where
any Man may see the Truth of this Entry. I am assured Mr. Hinton was in Court
at Oats his Trial, to have testified this, but was terrified from it for fear
of being undone.

However Oats was found guilty of Perjury upon both Points in this Trial,
before Jefferies and his Brethren; and his Sentence was to be whipped from
Aldgate to Newgate, the next Wednesday after, and the Friday after (but a Day
between) from Newgate to Tyburn, which was put in Execution with the utmost
Rigor; the Stripes of the first Whipping being so sore and green upon the
second, that few other Men could have undergone the second; to stand in the
Pillory five times in the Year, and to be a Prisoner during Life, which was as
close as his Whipping was severe. This was the first Act of this King's
Clemency and Tenderness to his People, in Imitation of his good, gracious and
kind Brother, and this before any general Pardon (as is usual upon Kings coming
to their Crowns) or the Parliament had met: but it might be easily presaged
whereto this tended; and tho it began with Oats, yet Dangerfield underwent as
severe a Punishment, with a worse Fate, for discovering the Meal-Tub Plot, to
have thrown the Popish Plot upon the Presbyterians.

These were the Preparations which King James made before the Parliament met,
to demonstrate to the World and them, how sincerely he had made good his
Promise to his Privy Council, That he would never invade any Man's Property,
and imitate his good and gracious Brother in his great Clemency and Tenderness
to his People; and make it his Endeavors to preserve the Government both in
Church and State, as it was established by Law: By Law; no new Laws can be
made, nor old ones repealed, or the Subject taxed, but by Parliament. But
Flatterers in this King's Father, and Grand-father's Reign, ascribed these
Powers to the King without Consent in Parliament, and that Obedience was due to
their Absolute Will and Pleasure; and the Parasites of this King and his
Brother did the same, but under a new Doctrine, termed Passive Obedience: but
these Princes not trusting to this, would make a Parliament Felo de se, and by
corrupting them in their Principles, ruin the Being of them, and so to be at
the sole disposing of the Prince.

The House of Commons is made up of 513 Members, whereof 92 are Knights of
Shires and Counties, the rest are Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque
Ports, so as the Knights of the Shires are not near one Fourth of the House of
Commons. The King creates the Temporal Lords in Parliament, and names the
Spiritual: so that if the King can make the Members of Corporations to give up
their Charters, and take such as he shall grant, it will be in his Power to
make above of the House of Commons.

The Parliament at Oxford being dissolved, the Contrivance of the Court was to
play this Game; but because Quo Warranto's against all the Charters in England,
tho the King had made Judges, and the Sheriffs would be sure to return such
Juries as should be sure to do the Work, would take up so much time, as King
Charles should never live to enjoy the Fruits of his Design;

'Twas therefore contrived, that after the Court had got North and Rich
Sheriffs to return such Juries as should do their Work, to begin at the City of
London; and if the Court could have Judgment against their Charter, few or none
of the other Corporations would presume to abide the Contest.

So said, so done; for in Trinity-Term, in 1682, Judgment was given against the
City Charter, yet there were three remarkable Observations upon it: First, It
was without any Precedent. Secondly, It was by two Judges only, and but two
Arguments upon it, and no Reason given of it: And Thirdly, it was ushered in
but two Days before, by pretending the discovering of a Plot to amuse the
Nation; so as no Man presumed to take notice of the Legality of this Judgment,
for fear of being prosecuted for Arraigning the Justice of the Nation, and
flying in the Face of the Government.

Hereupon Swarms of the richer Sort of Corporations surrendered their Charters,
and took new ones, as the King pleased, and paid dear for them, and the King in
return of their Kindness granted them new Fairs and Markets; but tho the richer
Sort of the Corporations could pay the Keeper North, and Attorney Sawyer sound
Fees for their Purchase, yet a Multitude of the meaner Sort could not come to
their Price, and without Money no New Charters could be had, which put a Rub to
the completing this Work in King Charles his time; yet the good Will of the
Members of these petty Corporations was not less.

The King's Care for the Knights of Shires, was less than for the Corporations;
for the Sheriffs, Lords, and Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of Peace being of
the King's Nomination, and the Tory Party having perfectly subdued the Whigs,
the King by the same Power which made North and Rich Sheriffs, could have what
Knights of Shires he pleased.

King James made good his Word he promised his Privy Council, that he would
never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown; (of which no
Question is to be made, but those which his good and gracious Brother had left
him possessed of, were the principal) and how hasty soever he was after in his
Actions, yet he took great Care how to exercise the Prerogative his Brother
assumed in modelling Corporations, to improve it to his utmost Advantage; and
therefore, though his Brother died upon the 6th of February, 1684-85, yet no
Parliament met till the 19th of May, and then they did not sit to act before
the 28th, which is much more than threefold the time from the issuing out of
the Writs, and the 40 Days of their Meeting.

In the mean time all Hands are set on work to choose such Members as should do
the Court's Work; they were sure enough of such Corporations as had surrendered
their Charters, and bought new ones; the beggarly ones, which could not come up
to the Price of renewing their Charters, were graciously promised to have new
ones Gratis, as they after had, if they behaved themselves well in the Choice
of their Members: The Lords and Deputy Lieutenants were as imperious in the
Choice of Knights of the Shire, as my Lord Mayor was in the Choice of North and
Rich for Sheriffs. But that we may take a better View of the Acts of the
Parliament of King James, it is fit to consider how the Case stood with the King.

King James while he was Duke of York, was observed to be constant to his Word,
and a true Friend, which made him more courted than his Brother; he had a
Revenue of near 150000 l. per An. and was a frugal and careful manager of it;
and this he brought as an Accession to the Crown, when he became King: K.
Charles had more built, and better furnished his Royal Palaces (which he had
not given away) than any King of England before; and the Parliament about six
Years before his Death, had given him 600000 l. for building thirty new Men of
War, to make his Fleet more formidable than that of the Dutch, or French King,
and the Nation in Peace unless among our selves; so that it might have been
reasonably expected a much less Revenue than what King Charles had, added to
that of the Duke's, might have supported the ordinary Expense of the Crown, if
no extraordinary should happen.

Notwithstanding all this, the King upon the 28th of May, told the Members
(such as they were) the same things he told his Privy Council, that he might
not seem to have said it by chance; and in return thereof, he expected they
should settle his Revenue (because he had taken it without them) during his
Life, as it was in the time of his Brother, for the Well-being of the
Government, which he must not suffer to be precarious, which I believe was the
first time any King of England so caressed a Parliament; but these (if they
were worthy to be called a Parliament) being made to his Hand, the King might
do and say to them what he pleased.

Before the Kings of the Scottish Race came to bear rule over us, the Methods of
Parliaments were to represent the Grievances of the Nation; and upon Redress of
them the Parliament gave the King a Gratuity, which before the 35th of Queen
Elizabeth, did never exceed one Subsidy, and two Tenths of Fifteenths; and the
King in return, granted an Act of Pardon to his Subjects: Thus a mutual
Correspondence was entertained between the King and Kingdom.

But when King James the first came to the Crown, the representing the
Grievances of the Nation, by his disorderly Reign, was Language intolerable to
him, so that of four Parliament* (which were all he had in his Reign) in the
last he boasted, He had broke the Neck of three of them; and his Son broke the
neck of the four first Parliaments of his Reign: yet such was the Temper of
those Times, that to humor th^se Princes, the Parliament of 18 Jac. I. and the
1st Car. I. altered the Methods of Parliament, and that of the 18th gave King
James two entire Subsidies; and that of the 1st Car. I. gave King Charles two
entire Subsidies before Grievances were redressed. King James I. in return of
their kindness, not only brake the Neck of the Parliament, but committed many
of the worthiest Members close Prisoners to the Tower, for pre^^ming to debate
them: King Charles did not commit any Members of this Parliament (tho he did in
his 3d and 4th Parliament) but brake the Neck of the Parliament rather than
they should enquire into the Duke of Buckingham's Actions, and the imbezelling
the Moneys given by the Parliament for the Support of the Palatinate.

Heretofore Grievances were in the Nation, whereas at the Death of King Charles
the II. the whole Nation was in a most grievous and dangerous State, which the
Parliament of King James (if it be worthy to be so called) took so little
notice of, that instead of representing the State of the Nation to King James,
they without redressing any, gave him a Revenue, to enable him to ruin Church
and State, upon the Foundation which his Brother had laid.

The 1st Act was to settle the Customs and temporary Excise upon the King as it
was settled before upon his Brother; but the King had little reason to thank
them for that, for he took both before they gave them, and called them by that
Title, His Revenue.

The 3d Act was an Imposition upon Wines and Vinegars, imported between the
24th of June 1685, until the 24th of June 1693, toward a Supply for Repairs of
the Navy, and providing Stores for the Navy and Ordnance, and other his
Majesty's weighty and important Occasions: They shall soon find the weight and
importance of his Majesty's Occasions. But this was not the only Reason; the
Customs which were 800000 l. per annum, as granted to his Brother, and a
greater Revenue than any King of England (except the religious Houses, granted
to Henry the VIII.) had before, would have done this: They add their thankful
Acknowledgment of his Majesty's favorable and tender regard of his Commons;
They had but little experience of it yet, and shall find less afterward.

The 4th Act grants in Imposition upon all Tobaccos and Sugars, from the 24th
of June 1685, to the 24th of June 1693, for the Repairs of the Navy, and
providing Stores for the Navy and Ordnance, and the payment of Debts due to his
late Majesty's Servants and Family, and other the King's weighty and important
Affairs: But this Act being represented to be dangerous to the Trade of our
Plantations, some of the Members said for the King, if it succeeded so, the
King promised not to collect them, so the Act passed. But the Plantations being
sore oppressed by this Act, claimed the Benefit of the King's Promise, but were
answered, It was Insolence in any Subject to challenge the King of his Promise,
which was all the Benefit they reaped by it.

The 5th Act granted the King an Imposition on all French Linens, and all
East India Linen, and several other Manufactures of India, and French wrought
Silks and Stuffs, and all Brandies imported from the first Day of July 1685, to
the first day of July 1690. The reason of this Act was, the Duke of Monmouth's
Rebellion, and the Acknowledgment of his Majesty's favorable and tender regard
of his Commons.

And that there might be a nearer Conjunction between the King and his dear
Brother of France, for carrying on their great and important Affairs, the
Parliament repealed the Prohibition of French Wine, Vinegar, Brandy, Linen,
Cloth, Silks, Malt, Paper, or any Manufactures made or mixed with Silk, Thread,
Wool, Hair, Gold or Silver, or Leather, being of the Growth and Manufacture of
France, by the 29th and 30th of King Charles the Second.

The 9th Act enables the King to make Grants, Leases and Copies of Offices,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the
same; and if this were not enough, it confirms the Grants already made: so that
all the sacred Patrimony of the Crown, which was not squandred away by his
Brother, this King is entitled to do by Law.

Yet after all this, that this good King might be at no unnecessary Charges,
the 10th Act makes provision for necessary Carriages for him in his Royal
Progress and Removal, how grievous soever to the Subject.

The 11th Act provides Carriages by Land and Water, for the use of his
Majesty's Navy and Ordnance.

And after all this, the 12th Act grants the King five Shillings per Tun
extraordinary upon every Voyage, which any Foreign Ship shall make from Port to
Port in England, and twelve pence per Tun for every Voyage which a Foreign
built Ship, not free, shall make.

I have heard this Revenue with the Hereditary Excise, and the other Revenues
of the Crown, computed at 2400000 l. per Ann. to which Revenue if you add
150000 l. per Ann. which the King had when he was Duke of York, the whole will
amount to two Millions five hundred and fifty thousand Pounds per Ann. which
was threefold more than ever any King of England (except Hen. VIII.) had before
this King's Brother.

But Quorsum haec? for except the Tumult which the Duke of Monmouth raised, the
Nation was at Peace abroad; so that by granting the King this Revenue, one of
these two Consequences would necessarily follow: either the King might maintain
an Army of forty thousand Men, to ride the Nation as he pleased; or if he would
contract his Expense to 700000 l. per Ann. which, I say, was a greater Revenue
than ever King of England (except Hen. VIII.) had before his Brother, he might
in less than seven years time, hoard up more Money in his Exchequer (allowing
ten Millions to be in England) than was in the Nation; and thereby render the
Nation in as bad a State as Egypt was in the Reign of Pharaoh, in the seven
Years Famine, when the Egyptians were forced to sell the King their Land to buy
them Bread. Now let us see to whom this Revenue was given, and who gave it.

This King was a professed Jesuited Papist, whose Principles are, That not only
the Givers of this Revenue, but the whole English Nation (except the Popish
Faction) are Schismatics, Sacrilegious Persons, and Heretics, with whom no
Faith is to be kept; and could any Man believe this profuse Donative which
these Men gave, who called themselves a Parliament, could change the King's
Nature, and the Principles of the Jesuits, which forsooth must be infallible,
so that the King should neglect these, and employ this Revenue for the benefit
of Schismatics, Heretics and Sacrilegious Persons?

And if in all free Assemblies, a Violence or Contempt upon any one, who has a
Right of Suffrage, invalidates all the Acts of that Assembly; what then shall
be deemed of this House of Commons, where such Violences were offered in the
Election of the Knights of Shires, and where so many Corporations were either
over-awed to surrender their Charters, or had perfidiously against their Oaths
given them up to take new ones, as the King pleased? And if the first Act of
Henry IV. repealed all the Acts of the 21 Rich. II. because they entrenched
upon the fundamental Rights of the Nation, I Am sure there is more Reason for
the Parliament to repeal the Acts of this pretended Parliament, where so many
Violences and Frauds were done before their Assembly, which we do not read were
done before the Parliament of 21 Rich. II. met.

And as this grave Assembly heaped such a Revenue upon the King without redress
of one Grievance, so they took no care to secure the Nation by a general Act of
Grace or Pardon for time past, but left all to the King's good Nature, who had
promised to imitate his good and gracious Brother, but especially in his great
Clemency and Tenderness to his People. And now the Parliament had done the
King's work, they had done their own too; and for the time to come, he will do
what he pleases without them: yet at present, he only prorogued them till
November following, when they shall hear more of his Mind. And now it is time to
see what the King acted between.

The first Act of Gratitude which the King testified to the Memory of his good
and gracious Brother, was his obscure and mean Burial of him, as you have heard
before.

And after the King had defeated the Tumult raised by the Duke of Monmouth, his
next Act of Gratitude to his kind Brother, was to sign a Warrant of Execution
for the Duke (his Brother's beloved Son) without any Trial or Process of Law
against him: But his Grandfather James the First had either done the like, or
at least not unlike it, when he came to Newark upon Trent, in his Passage to
London, at his first coming to the Crown; one was said to cut a Purse,
whereupon the King without more ado signed a Warrant for his Execution to the
Sheriff, and the poor Fellow was executed accordingly.

The Duke suffered upon the 15th of July, but the Issue of Blood did not stanch
with him* for toward the latter end of August, a Special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer was granted to Sir George Jefferies, and four other Judges, to try
the Duke of Monmouth's Adherents in the West: But as the Duke suffered without
any Trial, and so was unjustly put to Death, so I believe, this Commission was
initiated by such a Trial as can scarce be paralleled by any other; and this
was the Case.

Alicia Lisle, a Woman of extreme Age, was Wife of Lisle, (one of King Charles
the First's Judges, and who was President of the High Court of Justice, as
'twas then called, in the Trials of Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and my
Lord Capel; and also in the Trial of Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, etc.) and
had entertained after the Defeat of the Duke of Monmouth, one Hicks (a
Nonconformist Minister) who was with the Duke, not in any Proclamation that he
was so; and one Richard Nelthorp (a Stranger to Mrs. Lisle) who was in the
Proclamation, and Outlawed of High Treason; for which she was tried at
Winchester for High Treason, for comforting and assisting Rebels.

It appears by the public Prints, the Jury were so unsatisfied by the
Evidence, (Hicks not being in any Proclamation, and Nelthorp unknown to Mrs.
Lisle) that they thrice brought her in Not Guilty; at last, upon Jefferies
Threats, they brought her in Guilty of High Treason, and so had Sentence passed
upon her accordingly, which in Women is to be burnt, but the Execution was by
beheading of her; so that whether the Sentence was just or not, the Execution
was unjust; for though the King may pardon or mitigate the Punishment of any
Crime against him, as to pardon Treason, or to mitigate the Execution to
beheading, which is part of the Sentence, yet he cannot alter the Punishment
into any other than the Law prescribes: but the Convention after King William
came in, were so dissatisfied in her Case, that though they could not restore
her to Life, yet they reverst the Judgment for her Death.

From this uncertain Justice, Jefferies and his Brethren make haste to proceed
in their Commission Summo Jure, and from Winchester, by Salisbury, upon the 3d
of September (a day famed for Oliver's Victory over the Scots at Dunbar, over
King Charles the II. at Worcester, and for his Death) arrives at Dorchester;
and because time was precious, the next day Jefferies contrives this Stratagem
to shorten his Work.

Thirty Persons being found by the Grand Inquest to have assisted the Duke of
Monmouth, when they came upon their Trials, and before they had pleaded,
Jefferies told them, that whosoever pleaded Not Guilty, and was found so,
should have little time to live, and if any expected Favor, he must plead
Guilty.

But the Prisoners trusted little to what Jefferies said, and pleaded Not
Guilty, yet 29 were found Guilty, and immediately Sentence was passed upon
them, and a Warrant of Execution signed upon Monday following; after which a
couple of Officers were sent to the Goal, to take the Names of all the
Prisoners, who told the Prisoners, if they confessed, they might expect Mercy,
otherwise none was to be hoped for: these wretched Men thus wheedled, pleaded
Guilty, and so at one Sentence Jefferies condemned 292, whereof 80 were
executed.

From Dorchester Jefferies proceeded to Exeter, and used the same Stratagem as
at Dorchester: for one Mr. Four Acres being arraigned, and pleading Not
Guilty, yet being found so, had immediately Sentence passed upon him, and
Execution awarded upon it; whereupon 243 pleaded Guilty, and by one Sentence
had Judgment passed upon them.

From Exeter Jefferies marched to Taunton, where some few pleaded Not Guilty;
but being found, had immediately Sentence and Execution awarded; the rest
terrified, pleaded Guilty, and had Sentence passed upon them: and thence
Jefferies marched to Wells, where he finished his bloody Assize, where and at
Taunton he condemned above 509, whereof 239 were executed, and had their Heads
and Quarters set up in the principal Places, and High Roads of Somerset and
Dorsetshires, to the terror of Passengers, and annoyance of those Parts. In
these Executions I find one remarkable Story; it is printed in a Treatise,
called The New Martyrology, fol. 478.

Colonel Holmes, and 11 more of those condemned at Dorchester, were carried
from Dorchester to Lime toward their Execution, by six in a Coach, and six in
a Cart; and at Lime they were put in a Sledg prepared to carry them to be
executed; but the Horses could not be driven to go, but turned backward:
whereupon the Coach-horses were taken from the Coach, and put to draw the
Sledg, but then the Sledg broke; so the poor Men were forced to go on their
Feet to their Execution.

I will not dispute the Justice of these Executions; but I say, Justice ought
to look forward, viz. to terrify others from committing like Crimes, never
backward to take Pleasure in punishing; and a black Brand is set upon the
Reigns of those Princes which shed much Blood: nor do we read in any Story,
such a Sea of Blood flowed from Justice as did in less than eight Months after
this King began his Reign: and that which rendered it more remarkable was the
King's Profession to his Privy Council, and after to the Parliament, That he
would imitate his good and gracious Brother, but above all, in his great
Clemency and Tenderness to his People.

But if Justice looked forward in Jeffries's Executions, it did not in Kirk's,
(who was one of King James's Major-Generals in the Expedition against the Duke
of Monmouth) who when after the Duke's Defeat he came to Taunton, caused 90
wounded Men, who had been taken Prisoners, not permitting their Wives or
Children to speak with them, to be hanged, with Pipes playing, Drums beating,
and Trumpets sounding; and after, their Bowels to be burnt, their Quarters to
be boiled in Pitch, and hanged in several parts of the Town: and I have heard,
that when afterward Kirk was charged with this Inhumanity, he excused it, that
he could do no less, it being but part of the Instructions he had from the
Right Honorable the Earl of F --, General in this famous Expedition.

As yet no Pardon could be hoped for to any one, but by those which could
purchase it by the Ruin of their Estates; and those which could not purchase
one, were sold for Slaves to the Plantations.

When Justice could take no further place, then out comes a Pardon, but so
ridiculously cruel, as will scarcely be believed; for not only those who
escaped were excepted, but a Company of Girls, some of 8 or 9 Years old, who
had made some Colors, and presented them to the Duke of Monmouth while he was
at Taunton, these were excepted by Name; and no Pardon could be purchased for
this Treason, till the Girls Parents had paid more for it than would have
provided a Marriage Portion when they should come of Age.

But suppose the King did imitate his good and gracious Brother in his great
Clemency and Tenderness to his People, and that Justice only looked forward in
these Executions; yet we will give Instances wherein this King did not imitate
his good and gracious Brother in his great Clemency and Tenderness to his
People.

Alderman Cornish, tho he had committed two horrible Crimes in the Reign of
King Charles; one, in presuming to examine Fitz-Harris while he was a Prisoner
in Newgate, before he was hurried from thence to the Tower, to prevent his
further Examination; the other, that he testified at Fitz-Harris's Trial, that
King Charles told Mr. Cornish, that the King did countenance Fitz-Harris in his
Design, and had given him Money; yet King Charles was so good and gracious, as
not to take away Mr. Cornish's Life.

But the offended Ghosts of Coleman, Ireland, Harcourt, etc. were no ways
appeased by the Blood which flowed from the Stripes of Oates's Sentence;
nothing less than a Sacrifice of humane Blood must be offered to them, and this
to be performed by affixing Sacred Justice to it.

Upon Tuesday the -- of October, Mr. Cornish, having no dread of any Accusation
upon him for any Crime, but freely following his Profession, was clapped up close
Prisoner in Newgate, without use of Pen, Ink, or Paper, till Saturday Noon,
when he had notice of an Indictment of High Treason against him on Monday
following, and could get no Friend to come to him till 8 a clock at Night: Next
Day Mr. Cornish's Children petitioned the King to have his Trial put off, which
was referred to the Judges (who you may be assured had their Instructions) who
denied it, tho he knew not whether his Trial were for Treason against this or
the late King, and his most material Witness was above 140 Miles off, and was
also denied a Copy of the Panel of his Jury.

The Charge of High Treason against him was, That in the Year 1682, he had
promised to be assisting to James late Duke of Monmouth, William Russel
Esquire, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, in their Treasons against King Charles II.

The only Witness to prove this was Colonel Rumsey; who swore, That about the
latter end of October, or beginning of November, at Mr. Sheppard's House,
Ferguson told Mr. Cornish, that he had read a Paper to the Duke of Monmouth,
Lord Russel, Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, which they desired should be
read to Mr. Cornish; that Mr. Sheppard held the Candle while it was reading,
and afterward they asked him how he liked it, who said he liked it very well.
He remembered two Points in it very well; one was for Liberty of Conscience, the
other was, That all who would assist in that Insurrection who had had Kings
Lands, or Church Lands, should have them restored to them. Rumsey did not hear
all the Paper, but observed only these two Points; it was a Declaration on a
Rising, and when the Rising was to have been, it was to have been dispersed
abroad: there was a Rising intended at that time, and Mr. Cornish said, He
liked the Declaration, and what poor Interest he had he would join in it.

Rumsey had sworn at my Lord Russel's Trial, that Mr. Cornish was not at the
Reading or the Declaration by Ferguson; and being taxed for it in this, said it
was out of Compassion to the Prisoner; and Mr. Sheppard, who was subpoena'd for
the King, testified Mr. Cornish was not there.

Richard Goodenough was the other Witness, which was about Words foreign to
Rumsey's Testimony, about seizing the Tower, and a Rising in the City; which if
what Goodenough said had been true, yet Mr. Cornish could not have been found
Guilty of Treason: for tho by the first Act of Parliament after the Convention
of King Charles II. Words were made Treason against the King during his Life,
yet were they to be prosecuted within six Months, and the Person to be indicted
in three Months after; whereas these Words were pretended to be spoken in
Easter Term in 1683, which was two Years and a half before.

Add hereto, the Words were imperfectly said by Goodenough, and might be
applicable to a pretended Riot, wherein Mr. Cornish was concerned; and that
Goodenough was upon ill Terms with Mr. Cornish, because he would not trust
Goodenough to be his Undersheriff. You may read the Trial at large, with Mr.
Hawles his fine and learned Remarks upon it; and how rudely Mr. Cornish and his
Witnesses were used at his Trial, and how notwithstanding his Quality, after
Conviction he was tied, as if he had been a boisterous and dangerous Rogue, and
that by Order, and executed with the utmost Rigor of the Law for this
far-fetched and ill-proved Treason. But these Tories shall soon see they labor
for others, not for themselves; and these whom they now persecute shall have
the Ascendant over them. And I observed this of Sir Thomas Jones, who was Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and most active in this Trial, that he was one of
the first, if not the first, who was turned out of his Place for giving his
Opinion, the King could not dispense with the Test and Penal Laws.

The Design thus deep stained in humane Blood, first budded in Ireland; but
whether it was in Affirmance of the King's Promise to his Privy Council, and
after repeated by him in Parliament, that he would make it his Endeavor to
preserve the Church and State of England as by Law established, let any Man who
reads the following Story judge.

The Book styled the State of the Protestants in Ireland, said to be written by
Bishop King, fol. 58. says, That King James was no sooner settled in his
Throne, but he began to turn out some Officers who had been most zealous for
his Service, and had best deserved of him, merely because they had been counted
firm to the Protestant Religion and the English Interest, such as my Lord
Shannon, Captain Robert Fitzgerald, Captain Richard Coote, Sir Oliver St.
George; and put in their places, Kerney (one of the Russians designed to murder
Charles II.) Anderson (a mean Fellow) Sheldon (a professed Papist) and one
Graham: and fol. 59. says, the Duke of Ormond was sent for abruptly, and
divested of the Government; and immediately the modelling of the Army was put
into the Hands of Colonel Richard Talbot, a Man of all others most hated by the
Protestants, and who had been named by Mr. Oats, in his Narrative, for this
very Employment; so that many who believed nothing of the Plot before, gave
Credit to it now, and said, That if Oats were an ill Evidence, he was
certainly a good Prophet. Now let us see the Character the Bishop gave Talbot,
and the manner of his reforming the Army.

Talbot knowing how necessary it was to have the Army fitted for his purpose,
prosecuted it in such manner as might be best expected from a Man of so
insolent a Temper. He exercised at the same time so much Barbarity and
Falsehood, that if the Army had not been the best principled with Loyalty and
Obedience in the World, they had mutiny'd, or at least dispatched him. In the
Morning he would take an Officer into his Closet, and with all the Oaths,
Curses, and Damnations, which were never wanting to him, he would profess
Friendship and Kindness to him, and promise him the continuance of his
Commission, and in the Afternoon cashier him with all the Contempt he could
heap upon him; nay, perhaps while he was thus caressing him, he had actually
given away his Commission: As for the Soldiers and Troopers, his way with them
was, to march them from their usual Quarters to some distant place, where he
thought they were least known, where they should be put to the greatest
Hardships, and where he stripped them; the Foot of their Clothes, for which
they had paid, and the Troopers of their Horses, Boots, and Furniture, bought
with their own Money; and sent them to walk barefooted 100 or 150 Miles to
their Homes or Friends, if they had any: sometimes he would promise them
something for their Horses, but then they must come to Dublin for it; if any
came to demand the small Pittance he had promised them for their Horses, or
Arrears of Pay, he contrived it so, that they must be obliged to wait till they
had spent twice so much as they expected, and most of them, after all, got
nothing: by which means 2 or 300 English Gentlemen, who had laid out all, or a
good part of their Fortunes, and contracted Debts on Commissions, were left not
worth any thing, but were turned out without Reason, or any Consideration, and
5 or 6000 Soldiers sent a begging. Yet this Talbot, Bishop Tyrrel, so early as
in July 1685, (in the Interval of King James's Parliament) recommends to the
King as the most fit Man to be Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, as you may read in
his Letter to the King in Bishop King's Appendix, fol. 295. So that whatever
the King said, either to his Privy Council or Parliament, he was proceeding on
his Design he had been long before contriving.

I do not find the Parliament, at their next Meeting in November, took notice
of any of these things; but the King, in his Speech to them at their Meeting,
made it (to me it seems) plainly appear he designed the same in England which
he was practicing in Ireland.

He told them, That the Militia, so much before depended on, was not sufficient
for his Occasions, and that nothing could do but a good Force of
well-disciplined Troops in constant Pay to defend as from such, as either at
home or abroad are disposed to disturb (...): That in Truth his Concern for the
Peace and Quiet of his Subjects, as well as for the Safety of his Government,
made him think a necessary to increase the Number as he had done. This he ^wed
as well to the Honor and Security of the Nation, whose Reputation was so
infinitely exposed to all our Neighbors, by having been laid open to the late
wretched Attempt (Monmouth's) that it is not to be repaired without keeping
such a Body of Men on foot, that none may ever have the Thoughts again of
finding us so miserably unprovided: That it was for the Support of this great
Charge, which is now more than double what it was, that he asked their
Assistance, in giving him a Supply answerable to the Expense it brings along
with it: That he could not doubt, but what he had begun, so much to the Honor
and Defense of the Government, would be continued by them with all Cheerfulness
and Readiness, which is requisite for a Work of so great Importance.

Then he goes on, and says, Let no Man take Exception that there are some
Officers in the Army not qualified according to the late Tests for their
Employments; these Gentlemen (he said) he must tell them, are most of them well
known to him, and having formerly served him on several Occasions, and always
approved the Loyalty of their Principles by their Practice, he thinks them now
fit to be employed under him; and that he would deal plainly with them, that
after having had the Benefit of their Services in such a time of Need and
Danger, he will neither expose them to Disgrace, nor himself to the want of
them, if there should be another Rebellion to make them necessary to him.

Then he cajoles them, and tells them he is afraid some Men might be so wicked
to hope and expect that a Difference might happen between them and him: but
when they consider what Advantages had arisen to him and them, in a few Months,
by the good Understanding they have hitherto had, what wonderful Effects it had
already produced in the Charge (Change) of the whole Scene of Affairs abroad,
so much to the Honor of the Nation, and the Figure it ought to make in the
World, and that nothing can hinder a further Progress in this way to all their
Satisfactions, but Jealousies and Fears among our selves; he will not apprehend
that such a Misfortune could befall him and them, as a Division, or but Coldness
between them, nor that any thing could shake them in their Steadiness and
Loyalty to him, who (by God's Blessing) would always make them all Returns of
Kindness, with a Resolution even to venture his own Life in the Defense and
true Interest of this Kingdom.

H^^e let us see how this King's Speech corresponded with that to his Privy
Council, and that of the 28th of May before, and his Actions between the
Prorogation and Meeting of the Parliament; and I will speak it in the Person of
the King.

At my first coming to succeed so good and gracious, as well as so kind a
Brother, I then promised to endeavor to follow his Example, and more
especially in his great Clemency and Tenderness to his People; his Kindness to
me I have endeavored to show in his solemn Burial, and the Execution of his
Son, without any legal Trial or Process: and sure none of you but must needs
take notice how I have endeavored to imitate him in his great Tenderness and
Clemency to his People, not only in the Mercy I extended to those who assisted
in Monmouth's Rebellion, but in the Trials of Oats and Cornish, tho my good
and gracious Brother thought it not fit so to do.

I then told you, as I would never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives
of the Crown, so I would never invade any Man's Property: but this must be only
understood in England; for since that I have given Colonel Richard Talbot (whom
I intend to make Lord Lieutenant in Ireland) an independent Commission to
reform the Army in Ireland, and to take the Troopers Horses, Pistols, Swords
and Boots, and the Arms and Clothing of the Foot, which they had bought and
paid for, without paying for them.

I then told you, I would endeavor to preserve the Church and State of
England, as established by Law; but now I tell you, that I have employed some
Officers in the Army, not qualified according to the late Tests; and will deal
plainly with you, I will neither expose them to Disgrace, nor my self to the
want of them.

The Militia is not sufficient for my Occasions, nothing but a good Force of
disciplined Troops, in constant Pay, will do it; and to that purpose, I think
it necessary to increase the Number to the proportion I have done, viz. double,
for which I ask your Assistance, in giving me a Supply answerable to the
Expense it brings along with it.

Tho I have disbanded the Army in Ireland, which were as true
Passive-Obedience-Men as could be got for Love or Money, yet were they not fit
for my Occasions; and tho I have increased my Army in England to such a
Proportion as you now see, and officer'd with such Officers as are not
qualified by the late Tests, yet they are not fit for my Occasions, and for
which I ask your Assistance, in giving me a Supply answerable to the Expense it
brings along with it: yet let no Man be so wicked, as to hope this may put a
Difference between you and me; but consider what Advantages have arisen to us
in a few Months by the good Understanding we have hitherto had, and the
wonderful Effects it has already had. Now let us see what Influence this King's
Speech had upon the Members.

The Lords, hand over head, ordered Thanks to the King for his good and
gracious Speech; but it did not pass so hastily with the Commons, but they
debated it Paragraph by Paragraph: and because the Militia had not been so
forward as the King would have them, they voted, that they would take into
their Consideration how to make it more useful in time to come, in case such
dangerous Attempts should be made, as in Monmouth's Rebellion; and upon the
16th of November made this Address to the King.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Faithful Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, do in the first place (as in Duty bound) return Your Majesty most
humble and hearty Thanks for your great Care and Conduct in the Suppression of
the late Rebellion, which threatened the Overthrow of this Government, both of
Church and State, and the uttter Extirpation of our Religion as by Law
established, which is most dear to Us, and which Your Majesty has been
graciously pleased to give Us repeated Assurances You will always Defend and
Support, which with all grateful Hearts we shall ever acknowledge.

We further crave leave to acquaint Your Majesty, that we have with all Duty
and Readiness taken into our Consideration Your Majesty's gracious Speech to
Us; and as to that part of it relating to the Officers in the Army, not
qualified for their Employments, according to an Act of Parliament made in the
25th Year of the Reign of Your Majesty's Royal Brother of Blessed Memory,
Entitled, An for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, We
do out of Our bounden Duty humbly represent unto Your Majesty, that these
Officers by Law be incapable of their Employment, and that the dangers they
bring upon themselves thereby, can no ways be taken off but by Act of
Parliament: Therefore out of the great Deference and Duty we owe unto Your
Majesty, who has been so graciously pleased to take notice of their Services to
you, we are preparing a Bill to pass both Houses for Your Royal Assent, to
Indemnify them from the Penalty they have now incurred; and because the
continuance of them in their Employments, may be taken to be a Dispensing Power
with that Law without Act of Parliament, the Consequence of which is of the
greatest Concernment to the Rights of all your Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects, and to all the Laws made for security of their Religion; We therefore
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of your Majesty's House of Commons, do most
humbly beseech Your Majesty, that You would be graciously pleased to give such
Directions therein, that no Apprehension or Jealousies may remain in the Hearts
of Your Majesty's Good and Faithful Subjects.


This Address was like the shutting the Stable-door when the Steed was stolen;
these Commons had no such Apprehensions when they heaped such an exorbitant
Revenue upon the King, to enable him to maintain an Army of 40000 Men, to ride
them and the Nation when he pleased; and now they see the King drives a Way
which tends to the Nations as well as their Destructions, they tell the King
such Ways may give Apprehensions and Jealousies in the Hearts of His Majesty's
good and faithful Subjects. Did not the Commons in all the four Parliaments in
King Charles the 2d's Reign, declare what would be the Consequences of the Duke
of York's coming to the Crown? and did the Duke's Actions, while he was Regent
in Scotland, any ways alleviate those Parliaments Fears? Could this Parliament
(as 'twas called) now they were got together again, and saw Colonel Talbot with
an independent Commission from the Lord Lieutenant, so barbarously disbanding
the Army in Ireland, because guilty only of being Protestants, yet believe the
King would admit of no Papists in his Army in England? Could they believe that
once professing of the King, who was a Jesuited Papist, that he would maintain
the Church and State as by Law established, would wash out all the Jesuit
Principles which had taken such deep root in him, that no Faith is to be kept
with Heretics, which the King esteemed these, who had prostituted him with
such a vast Revenue, and all the Nation besides who were not of his Faction, to
be; but that by Fire, Faggot, and all other such means they were to be rooted
out, and grow no more upon the Face of the Earth?

The Bishops retained fresh in memory, during the Reign of King Charles the 2d,
the Indignities the Factions in the late times had showed to their Persons and
Revenues, so that they were not only opposite to the Commons in passing the
Bills which the Commons had prepared for uniting the King's Protestant
Subjects, when they perceived the Danger the Nation was in by the Popish
Designs; but stiffly opposed the passing The Bill of Exclusion against the
Succession of the Duke of York, and all along King Charles his Reign,
countenanced the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as thinking themselves, and
their Order most secure under it; but herein their Politics failed them.

For now the Bishops perceived a more terrible Storm coming upon them, by a
Faction who never showed Mercy to any opposite to them whenever it came in
their Power; and the Doctrine of Passive Obedience had made a plain and easy
Passage for the Popish Faction to take Possession of this Power: The Bishop of
London therefore, after the Lords had voted an Address of Thanks to the King's
Speech, moved in the name of himself and all his Brethren, that the House would
debate the King's Speech, which, as it was extraordinary and unusual in the
House, so was it not less surprising to the King and Court, who now dreaded the
Lords would concur with the Commons in their Address; to prevent which, the
King first prorogued, and then dissolved the Parliament, and never called
another in all his Reign: And thus the King made good to the Parliament, in his
Speech to them the 28th of May, That the best Way to engage him to meet them
often was, to use him well, and did expect that they would comply with him in
what he desired, and that they would do it speedily, that it might be a short
Sessions, and that he and the Parliament might meet again to all their
Satisfactions: and for the Bishop of London, the King shall remember his Motion
in due time, when he shall plead no Privilege of Parliament.

The King having so ill performed his Promise to the Parliament, of often
meeting of them, where he might hear of it again, which by no means he would
endure; after he had dissolved them, had a fair Field without any Rub to do
what he pleased; and to petition him, or represent the Grievances of the Nation
out of Parliament, shall be a great Crime, next to High Treason: And now it is
time to observe the Steps the King proceeded by, to maintain the Church and
State of England, as by Law established.

His Brother had laid the Foundation of making a Parliament felo de se, by
hectoring and making Bargains with Corporations to surrender their Charters,
and taking new ones from him; whereby he reserved a Power, that if they did not
send such Members as pleased him, he would resume the Charters he granted them:
and herein he made a great Progress, till his Keeper and Attorney General
refused to grant Patents to such poor Corporations as could not pay their Fees,
so as a new Keeper or Chancellor, and Attorney General must be had, who would
grant Patents gratis, or a Stop would be made in the Progress of so noble a
Design.

In a lucky Hour my Lord Keeper N -- died at Astrop-Wells, I think when
Jeffries was in his March to the West, and for a Reward of my Lord Jeffries's
Clemency that he showed, had the Seals given him, with the Title of Lord
Chancellor; but the Attorney was not so lucky, but lived to be turned out, and
another put in his Place, which would perform his Office more charitably to
these indigent Corporations, which could not pay their Fees in taking new
Patents, after they had perfidiously betrayed their old.

But this was but one Step toward this Holy Work; the King, to make a through
Reformation, will make the Judges in Westminster Hall to murder the Common Law,
as well as the King and his Brother designed to murder the Parliament by it
self; and to this end, the King, before he would make any Judges, would make a
Bargain with them, that they should declare the King's Power of dispensing with
the Penal Laws and Tests made against Recusants, out of Parliament.

However herein the King stumbled at the Threshold; for it is said he began with
Sir Thomas Jones, who had merited so much in Mr. Cornish his Trial, and in the
West; yet Sir Thomas bogled at this, and told the King, He could not do it: to
which the K. answered, He would have Twelve Judges of his Opinion; and Sir
Thomas replied, He might have Twelve Judges of his Opinion, but would scarce
find Twelve Lawyers of his Opinion. The Truth of this I have only from Fame;
but I Am sure the King's Practice in reforming the Judges, whereof all (except
my Lord Chief Baron Atkins, and Justice Powel) were such a Pack as never before
sat in Westminster Hall, gave credit to it.

But if the Lord Chief Justice Thorp, for taking a Bribe of 100 l. was adjudged
to be hanged, and all his Lands and Goods forfeited, in the Reign of Edward the
3d, because thereby as much as in him lay, he had broken the King's Oath made
unto the People, which the King had entrusted him withal; and if Justice
Tresilian was hanged, drawn and quartered, for giving his Judgment that the
King might act contrary to one Act of Parliament; and if Blake, the King's
Counsel, Vsk, the Undersheriff of Middlesex, and five more of Quality, were
hanged in the Reign of Henry the 4th for but assisting in Tresilian's Judgment;
What then did these Judges deserve, which made Bargains with the King
beforehand, to break the King's Oath he had made to the People, and entitled
the King to a Power to subvert the Laws, and gave Judgment beforehand to act
contrary to them? Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justice tells us, That King
Alfred (the Mirror of Kings) hanged Darling, Segnor, Cadwine, Cole, and 40
Judges more, because they judged in particular Causes contrary to Law: But sure
this was not more to Alfred's Honor, than it was to the Dishonor of King
James, to make Bargains beforehand with Judges, to give Judgment contrary to
the Laws themselves; and unless they would break the King's Oath to his People,
they should not be his Judges.

The Laws and Constitutions of this Nation, as has been already noted, make it
a Kingdom, whereof the King is Head, and the Nation the Body; so that if you
take away the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, there is neither King nor
Kingdom. Did not the King then descend from his Majesty, in rending himself
from his Kingdom, by breaking Laws, whereby he ceases to be a King, and the
Nation to be a Kingdom? And what was it for that the King would not be content
with the Sovereignty he had over the Nation, wherein his Majesty consisted, but
would strain it into a Tyranny over the Nation? It was to introduce a foreign
exploded Dominion of the Pope, denied by our Savior, and asserted by the
Devil; whereby how absolute soever the King would be over his Subjects, yet
himself and Kingdom must be at the Pope's Disposal, to be deposed and
destroyed, as the Pope pleased.

Bishop King in the State of the Protestants in Ireland, fol. 18. gives this
Account of one Moore a Romish Priest, who preached before the King at Christ's-
Church in Dublin, in the Beginning of the Year 1690, where he told him to his
Face, that he did not do Justice to the Church and Churchmen; and amongst other
things said, That Kings ought to consult Churchmen in Temporal Affairs, the
Clergy having a Temporal, as well as Spiritual Right in the Kingdom; but Kings
had nothing to do in the Management of Spiritual Affairs, but were to obey the
Orders of the Church.

Thinking Men could not conceive this dispensing with the Penal Laws and Tests
against Dissenters, was any ways intended in favor of the Protestants; for
notwithstanding the Slaughter Jeffries had made of them in the West, the rest
all over England were imprisoned, and forced to give Security for their good
Behavior. Nay, my Lord D. of Albermarle, who had done the K. so signal
Service, in keeping the Devonshire Men from joining with the D. of Monmouth,
must be sent out of England to Jamaica; and the Earl of Pembroke, and others,
who had been so active in suppressing Monmouth, were scarce thanked, and but
coldly entertained at Court.

If things were acted with this (indeed barefaced) dissimulation in England,
they were not less in Ireland; for the King having revoked the Duke of Ormond
from his Lieutenancy, and given Talbot an independent Commission, to make such
a reform of the Army there, as is aforesaid, made my Lord Clarendon
Deputy-Lieutenant, and Sir Charles Porter Chancellor, who arrived there the
10th of January 1685-86, with a Charge to declare that the King would preserve
the Acts of Settlement and Explanation inviolable, and to assure all his
Subjects, he would preserve these Acts as the Magna Charta of Ireland: but this
Declaration compared with Talbot's reforming the Army in Ireland, seemed as
strange, as that the King's dispensing with the Penal Laws and Tests, was in
favor of the Protestant Dissenters in England.

In Scotland the King had so settled Affairs there, when he was Commissioner,
that after the cutting off the Earl of Argyle, he did not doubt to carry on his
Designs more barefaced there than in England or Ireland; and therefore tho he
did not call a Parliament till April 1686, yet in his Letter to them of the
12th he takes no Notice of the Protestant Dissenters, but recommends to them
his innocent Roman Catholic Subjects, Who had with their Lives and Fortunes
been always assistant to the Crown in the worst of Rebellions and Usurpations,
tho they lay under Discouragements hardly to be named: These he heartily
recommended to their Care, to the end, that as they have given good Experience
of their true Loyalty, and peaceable Behavior, so by their Assistance they may
have the Protection of his Laws, and that Security under his Government, which
others of his Subjects had; not suffering them to lie under Obligations which
their Religion cannot admit of: by doing whereof they will give a Demonstration
of the Duty and Affection they had to him, and do him most acceptable Service.
This Love he expected they would show to their Brethren, as they saw he was an
indulgent Father to them all.

The King having settled his Prerogative in Westminster Hall, by dispensing
with the Penal Laws and Tests, in the Beginning of the Year 1686 granted a
Commission of Ecclesiastical Affairs; but it was not opened to act till the 3d
of August following: why it lay so long dormant I do not find, but only guess,
that the King might the better settle his Dispensing Power in the Country, by
such Judges as he had made, as well as in Westminster Hall; and that he might
be more at leisure to carry on the Design for surrender of Charters, (wherein
one Robert Brent, a Roman Catholic was a prime Agent) and great Care was
taken, that the beggarly Corporations might surrender their Charters, and take
new ones, without paying Fees: and if any should be so honest, as to insist
upon their Oaths and Trust reposed in them, for Preservation of their Charters,
to be prosecuted as riotous and seditious Persons. But in regard the Commission
of Ecclesiastical Affairs was not printed that I can find, nor is in the State
Tracts, I thought fit to insert it here, as I had it in Manuscript from a
learned Hand.

JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the most Reverend Father in God, our Right Trusty, and Right well-beloved
Counselor William, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan; and to Our Right Trusty and Right well-beloved Counselor George,
Lord Jeffries, Lord Chancellor of England; and to Our Right Trusty and Right
well-beloved Cousin and Counselor Lawrence Earl of Rochester, Lord High
Treasurer of England; and to Our Right Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin
and Counselor Robert, Earl of Sunderland, President of Our Council, and Our
Principal Secretary of State; and to the Right Reverend Father in God, and Our
Right Trusty and well-beloved Counselor Nathaniel, Lord Bishop of Duresme; and
to the Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and well-beloved Thomas,
Lord Bishop of Rochester; and to our Right Trusty and well-beloved Counselor
Sir Edward Herbert, Knight, Chief Justice of the Pleas, before us to be holden
assigned, Greeting.
We for diverse good, weighty and necessary Causes and Considerations, Us
hereunto especially moving, of our mere Motion, and certain Knowledge, by force
and virtue of Our Supreme Authority and Prerogative Royal, do assign, name and
authorize by these our Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, you
the said Arch Bp of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor of England, Lord High Treasurer
of England, Lord President of Our Council, Lord Bishop of Duresme, Lord Bishop
of Rochester, and our Chief Justice aforesaid, or any three or more of you,
whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, from time to time, and at all
times during our Pleasure, to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under us all
manner of Jurisdiction, Privileges and Preheminences in any wise touching, or
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions within this our Realm
of England, and Dominion of Wales; and to visit, reform, redress, order,
correct and amend all such Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities
whatsoever, which by the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, can,
or may be lawfully reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or
amended, to the Pleasure of Almighty God, and increase of Virtue, and the
Conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And we do hereby give and
grant unto you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the
said Lord Chancellor to be one, thus by Us named, assigned, authorized and
appointed, by force of Our Supreme Authority and Prerogative Royal, full Power
and Authority from time to time, and at all times, during Our Pleasure, under
us, to exercise, use and execute all the Premises according to the Tenor and
Effect of these our Letters Patents, any Matter or Cause to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. And We do by these Presents give full Power and Authority
unto you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the Lord
Chancellor to be one, by all lawful Ways or Means from time to time hereafter,
during Our Pleasure, to enquire of all Offenses, Contempts, Transgressions and
Misdemeanors, done and committed, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Our Realm, in any County, City, Borough, or other Place or Places, exempt or
not exempt, within this our Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, and of all
and every the Offender or Offenders therein; and them and every of them, to
order, correct, reform and punish by Censure of the Church. And also We do give
and grant full Power and Authority unto you, or any three, or more of you as is
aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, in like manner as is
aforesaid, from time to time, and at all times during Our Pleasure, to inquire
of, search out, and call before you all and every Ecclesiastical Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Dignity soever, as shall offend in any of these
Particulars before mentioned; and them and every of them to correct and punish
for such their Misbehaviours and Misdemeanors, by suspending, or depriving them
from all Promotions Ecclesiastical, and from all Functions in the Church, and
to inflict such other Punishment or Censures upon them, according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. And further we do give full Power and
Authority unto you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you
the said Lord Chancellor to be one, by virtue hereof, and in like manner and
form as is aforesaid, to inquire, hear, determine and punish all Incest,
Adulteries, Fornications, Outrages, Misbehaviours and Disorders in Marriage,
and all other Grievances, and great Crimes or Offenses which are punishable or
reformable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Our Realm, committed or done, or
hereafter to be committed or done, in any Place exempt or not exempt, within
this Our Realm, according to the Tenor of the Ecclesiastical Laws in that
Behalf; Granting you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you
the Lord Chancellor to be one, full Power and Authority to order and award such
Punishment to every such Offender, by Censures of the Church, or other lawful
Ways, as is abovesaid. And further, We do give full Power and Authority to you,
or any three or more of you as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor
to be one, to call before you or any three, or more of you as aforesaid,
whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, all, and every Offender, and
Offenders, in any of the Premises; and all such as you, or any three, or more
of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall
seem to be suspected Persons in any of the Premises which you shall object
against them; and to proceed against them, and every of them, as the Nature and
Quality of the Offense, or Suspicion in that Behalf shall require; and also to
call all such Witnesses, or any other Person or Persons, that can inform you
concerning any of the Premises, as you, or any three or more of you, as is
aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one; and them, and every
of them, to examine upon their Corporal Oaths for the better Trial and opening
of the Truth of the Premises, or any Part thereof. And if you, or any three or
more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
shall find any Person or Persons whatsoever obstinate, or disobedient in their
Appearance before you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof
you the said Chancellor to be one, at your Calling and Commandments, or else in
not obeying, or in not accomplishing your Orders, Decrees and Commandments, or
any thing touching the Premises, or any Part thereof, or any other Branch or
Clause contained in this Commission; that then you, or any three or more of you
as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall have full
Power and Authority to punish the same Person or Persons so offending, by
Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, or other Censures Ecclesiastical: And
when any Persons shall be convented, or prosecuted before you as aforesaid, for
any of the Causes above expressed, at the Instance and Suit of any Person
prosecuting the Offense in that Behalf, that then you, or any three or more of
you as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall have
full Power and Authority to award such Costs and Expenses of the Suit, as well
to and against the Party as shall prefer or prosecute the said Offense, as to
and against the Party, or Parties that shall be convented, according as their
Causes shall require, and to you in Justice shall be thought reasonable. And
further, Our Will and Pleasure is, That you assume our well-beloved Subject
William Bridgman, Esquire, one of the Clerks of our Council, or his sufficient
Deputy or Deputies in that behalf, to be your Register, whom we do by these
Presents depute to that effect, for the registring of all your Acts, Decrees,
and Proceedings by virtue of this our Commission; and that in like manner, you,
or any three or more of you, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, by
your Discretions shall appoint one or more Messenger or Messengers, and other
Officer or Officers necessary and convenient to attend upon you for any Service
in this behalf. Our Will and express Commandment also is, That there shall be
two Paper-Books indented and made, the one to remain with the said Register, or
his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, the other with such Persons, and in such
Places, as you the said Commissioners, or any three or more of you, whereof you
the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall in your Discretion think most fit and
meet; in both which Books shall be fairly entered all the Acts, Decrees, and
Proceedings, made or to be made, by virtue of this Commission. And whereas our
Universities of Oxford and Cambridg, and diverse Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, Colleges, Grammar Schools, and other Ecclesiastical Incorporations
have been erected, founded, and endowed by several of our Royal Progenitors,
Kings and Queens of this Realm, and some others, by the Charity and Bounty of
some of their Subjects, as well within our Universities as other Parts and
Places, the Ordinance, Rules, and Statutes whereof are either embezeled, lost,
corrupted, or altogether imperfected; We do therefore give a full Power and
Authority to you, or any five or more of you, of whom we will you the
aforementioned Lord Chancellor always to be one, to cause and command, in our
Name, all and singular the Ordinances, Rules and Statutes of our Universities,
and all and every Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, Colleges,
Grammar-Schools, and other Ecclesiastical Incorporations, together with their
several Letters Patents, and other Writings, touching or in any wise concerning
the several Erections and Foundations, to be brought and exhibited before you,
or any five or more of you as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, willing, commanding, and authorizing you, or any five or
more of you, as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, upon
the exhibiting, and upon diligent and deliberate View, Search, and Examination
of the said Statutes, Rules, and Ordinances, Letters Patents, and Writings, as
is aforesaid, the same to correct, amend, and alter. And also, where no
Statutes are extant in all or any of the aforesaid Cases, to devise and set
down such good Orders and Statutes, as you, or any five or more of you, as is
aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall think meet and
convenient to be by us confirmed, ratified, allowed, and set forth for the
better Order and Rule of the said Universities, Cathedrals, and Collegiate
Churches, Colleges, and Grammar-Schools, Erections and Foundations, and the
Possessions and Revenues of the same, as may best tend to the Honor of
Almighty God, Increase of Virtue, Learning, and Unity in the said Places, and
the public Weal and Tranquillity of this our Realm. Moreover, our Will,
Pleasure, and Commandment is, That our said Commissioners, and every of you,
shall diligently and faithfully execute this our Commission, and every Part and
Branch thereof, in manner and form aforesaid, and according to the true Meaning
hereof, notwithstanding any Appellation, Provocation, Privilege, or Exemption,
in that behalf to be made, pretended, or alleged by any Person or Persons,
resident or dwelling in any Place or Places, exempt or not exempt, within this
our Realm, any Law, Statutes, Proclamations, or Grants, Privileges, or
Ordinances, which be or may seem to be contrary to the Premises,
notwithstanding. And for the better Credit, and more manifest Notice of your
doing in Execution of this our Commission, our Pleasure and Commandment is,
That to your Letters missive, Processes, Decrees, Orders and Judgments, for or
by you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid, to be awarded, sent
forth, had, made, decreed, given, or pronounced, at such certain public Places
as shall be appointed by you, or any three or more of you as is aforesaid, for
the due Execution of this our Commission, you, or some three or more of you, as
is aforesaid, whereof you the said Chancellor to be one, shall cause to be put
and fixed a Seal, engraven with the Rose and Crown, and the Letter J. and Figure
2. before, and the Letter R. after the same, with a Ring or Circumference about
the same Seal, containing as follows, Sigillum Commissiariorum Regiae
Majestatis ad Causas Ecclesiasticas. Finally, We will and command all and
singular other our Ministers and Subjects, in all and every place and places,
exempt and not exempt, within our Realm of England and Dominion of Wales, upon
any Knowledge or Request from you, or any three or more of you, as is aforesaid,
to them or any of them given or made, to be aiding, helping, and assisting unto
you and to your Commandment, in and for the due executing your Precepts,
Letters, and other Processes requisite, in and for the due executing of this
our Commission, as they and every of them tender our Pleasure and Will to
answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.

In witness, etc.

Here I make these Remarks upon this Commission: First, That the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was first named in it, refused to act in it; so the Bishop of
Chester was put in, tho not in the first place. Secondly, How unwarily it was
drawn; for though I believe every one understands the Design of this Commission
was to introduce a Roman Hierarchy, which assumes a Power over the temporal in
order to the spiritual Good; yet here this Commission grants the temporal
Power, (viz. the Chancellor, and any other two, viz. my Lord Treasurer,
President, or Chief Justice) a Power of Excommunication, which is a pure
spiritual Act. But whilst this Commission was thus in Embrio, it is fit to
observe what was done before its coming into Act.

You have heard how severely Oats was treated for discovering the Popish Plot,
Thomas Dangerfield's turn comes now to be as severely treated, but with a worse
Fate, for discovering the Mealtub Plot, which was to have thrown the Popish
Plot upon the Presbyterians.

Dangerfield in his Depositions before the Parliament had revealed that he was
employed by the Popish Party (chiefly by the Lords in the Tower, and Countess
of Powis) to kill the King, and was encouraged, and promised Impunity and
Reward, and part of it given him by the Duke of York for that end: Upon this he
was tried in Westminster Hall, in Trinity, I think, or Easter-Term, in 1686,
upon a Scandalum Magnatum, and as Juries went, was found Guilty, and had the
same Sentence of Whipping which Oats had, and in his return from his Whipping
from Tyburn toward Newgate, was run into the Eye with a Tuck at the end of a
Cane, by one Robert Francis (a fierce Papist) of which, with the Agony of his
Whipping, he soon after died; but his Body was so swollen and martyred with his
Whipping, that 'twas a question whether he died of the Whipping, or Wound in
his Eye. You may read the Information at large, which was ordered to be printed
by the Commons, Novem. 10. 1680. and after the Speaker Williams was fined 10000
l. for Licensing it (tho by Order of the Commons) to be printed.

The same Term (I think) Mr. Samuel Johnson, (commonly known by the Name of
Julian Johnson) was sentenced by the Court of King's Bench, (Sir Edward Herbert
Chief Justice) to stand three times in the Pillory, and to be whipped from
Newgate to Tyburn, which was severely executed, for making this humble and
hearty Address to all the English Protestants in the Army raised by the King.

Gentlemen,
NEXT to the Duty we owe to God, which ought to be the principal Care of Men of
your Profession, (especially because you carry your Lives in your Hand, and
often look Death in the Face) the second thing which deserves your
Consideration, is the Service of your Native Country, wherein you drew your
first Breath, and breath a free English Air. Now I desire you to consider how
well you comply with these two main Points, by engaging in the present Service.

Is it in the Name of God for his Service, that you have joined your selves
with Papists? who indeed will fight for the Mass Book, but burn the Bible, and
who seek to extirpate the Protestant Religion with your Swords, because they
cannot do it with their own? And will you be aiding and assisting to set up
Mass-Houses, to erect that Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation amongst us, and
to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these things, and call
your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists, and by bringing the Nation under a foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen, under
the Name of Quartering, contrary to Magna Charta, and Petition of Right? Will
you be aiding and assisting to all the Murders and Outrages, which they shall
commit by their void Commissions? which were declared Illegal, and sufficiently
blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had been any need of it) for it
was very well known before, that a Papist cannot have a Commission, but by Law
is utterly disabled and disarmed. Will you exchange your Birthright of English
Laws and Liberties, for Martial and Club-Law, and help to destroy all others,
only to be eaten up at last your selves? If I know you well, as you are English
Men, you hate and scorn these things. And therefore be not unequally yoked with
idolatrous and bloody Papists: Be valiant for the Truth, and show your selves
Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all English Seamen, who
have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery, ever since 88.


The first Lightning, which the dormant Commission of Ecclesiastical Affairs
produced, fell upon the Bishop of London, a Person of Exemplary Virtue and
Loyalty, and who, besides the Nobility of his Birth, had his Father slain in
the late Civil Wars, in defense of the King's Father's Cause, and had himself,
and all his Brothers, freely and valiantly exposed their Lives in defense of
it: The Crime alleged against him was, that by the King's Letter he did not
suspend Doctor Sharp (then Dean of Norwich, now Archbishop of York) for
preaching a Sermon against the Frauds and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, by
a Power as Arbitrary, as that by which the Commissioners acted; and for this
these Commissioners suspended the Bishop, tho every one understood the true
Cause was the Bishop's Motion in the House of Lords to have debated the King's
Speech. Tantum Religio potuit swadere malorum.

I Am persuaded King Charles the II. to make a Roman Hierarchy in Scotland, made
the Bishops out of the most obnoxious of the Clergy, who besides their
profligate Lives, run the King's Prerogative there to a higher pitch, than Laud
in the King's Father's time did in England: And that toward the latter end of
his Reign he laid the same design here; for the Bishoprics of Oxford, York,
St. David's and Chester, becoming void about the latter end of his Reign, or
beginning of King James's, (I Will not name the Bishopric of Litchfield and
Coventry, for the Petticoat governed in that Election) Dr. Samuel Parker (whom
Mr. Marvel in his Rehearsal transposed calls Bays) a Man of a virulent
Disposition, and who by railing against the Church got into Preferment, and
when he was in, became a zealous Railer against them without, was made Bishop
of Oxford; Dr. Cartright, (as high for the Prerogative as Parker) was made
Bishop of Chester: and the Succession to these two Bishoprics was the more
observable, because Parker succeeded Dr. Fell, and Cartright Dr. Peirson, Men
of Piety and Learning, equal to any in their time: and one Watson (an obscure
Man) was made Bishop of St. David's; but the Archbishopric of York was
reserved for a Person of another Temper, whom these Bishops were making way for.

The Presidentship of Magdalen College in Oxford becoming void, and the Fellows
fearing a Mandamus would be imposed upon them for some Person not qualified by
the Statutes, and whom by their Oaths they could not submit to, chose Dr. Hough
for President, a Person qualified by their Statutes for that Place.

As the Fellows feared, so it came to pass; for the King sent them a peremptory
Mandamus to choose the Bishop of Oxford (Bays) their President; but he being a
Person not qualified by the Statutes of their College, which the Fellows were
sworn to observe, they in a humble Answer excused themselves, as being
otherways obliged, as well by their Oath as Statutes. I will not repeat the
Anger the King expressed hereupon, it is in Print; but sure such Language was
never used by any Prince before.

But if the King's harsh Language will not work the Fellows to his Will, he
will send the Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs among them to turn them
out of their Fellowships, (wherein they had as much Property, as any other had
to any real or personal Estate) nor shall these Commissioners stay here, but by
a new strain of Tyranny, never practiced but by Absolute Tyrants, they make the
Fellows incapable of any other Ecclesiastical Preferments.

The Fellows thus expelled, the Statutes of the College are thrown out of
Doors, to make room for a Seminary of Jesuits and Popish Priests, as much
tending to the Subversion of the established Church of England, as the Statutes
of the College.

But see how God in his Providence blasted these things; for the Bishop of
Oxford had scarce taken possession of his thus new-acquired Presidentship, when
he died; and you will soon see the Fellows restored again in spite of these
Commissioners, and Dr. Hough made Bishop of Oxford; as well as President of
Magdalen College.

If the King were zealous in advancing his Prerogative Royal both in the Church
and State of England, he will not be less in Scotland; whereupon the 12th of
February 1686-87. he issues out his Proclamation for Toleration of Religion,
(which you may read in the State Tracts) wherein he asserts his Absolute Power,
which he says, his Subjects ought to obey without reserve.

But the Toleration which the King allows his Roman Catholic Subjects in
Scotland, he will scarce permit to his Protestant Subjects in Ireland; for
Tyrconnel (for so has Talbot merited for his Service in Reforming the Army) is
not only made an Earl, but Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the room of my Lord
Clarendon, and one Fitton (made Sir Alexander, an infamous Person, detected for
Forgery, not only at Westminster, but at Chester, and fined in the House of
Lords) was brought out of the King's Bench in England, to be Chancellor and
Keeper of the King's Conscience in Ireland, in place of Sir Charles Porter.

The first Proclamation which Tyrconnel issued out was dated Feb. 21. 1687.
wherein he promised to defend the Laws, Liberties, and established Religion,
but leaves out the preservation of the Acts of Settlement and Explanation: But
tho at first he only left out the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, being
resolved first to out the Protestants, and let the Irish into their forfeited
Estates, yet did he not stay here; and Bishop King in his Treatise of the State
of the Protestants in Ireland, gives so particular and methodical an Account
how he proceeded in the destroying the Church and State of Ireland, as by Law
established, that I refer the Reader to it, not intending to lessen it by
taking parts of it.

When the Judges had been above a Year propagating the King's Power in
Westminster Hall, and in their Circuits, of dispensing with the Penal Laws and
Tests against Dissenters from the Church, upon the 25th of April 1687, out
comes the King's Declaration to all his Subjects for Liberty of Conscience,
wherein the King declares, That it had been a long time his constant Sense and
Opinion, that Conscience ought not to be restrained, nor People forced in
Matters of mere Religion; and that it was contrary to his Inclination, as he
thought it to be the disinterest of the Government, by spoiling Trade, and
depopulating Countries, etc.

Sure no Prince ever acted so in Extremes, yet his Actions so diametrically
opposite to his Profession. Here you see a Jesuited Prince pleading for Liberty
of Conscience, to the breaking down the ^aws, which before he had so often
professed to maintain; and for such a sort of Men, whom but little before he
had slaughtered, banished and imprisoned, as if he had designed to extirpate
the whole Race of them. If to reconcile these to Truth, or Reality, be not as
great a Miracle, as is in any of the Popish Legends, I Will believe them all, and
be reconciled to the Roman Catholic Church, how inconsistible soever the Terms
be.

The generality of the Protestant Dissenters having for near seven years
together, been so severely treated by the Tories, were as forward to
congratulate the King for his Indulgence in manifold Addresses, as the Tories
were in King Charles his time, in their Addresses of Abhorrence to petition the
King to call a Parliament to settle the Grievances of the Nation: However this
Declaration was so drawn in the sight of every Bird, that (of my knowledge) many
of the sober thinking Men of the Dissenters, did both dread and detest it.

That this Declaration might be more passable, Popish Judges were made in
Westminster Hall, and Popish Justices of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenants all
England over; the Privy Council was replenished with Popish Privy Counselors;
the Savoy was laid open to instruct Youth in the Romish Religion, and Popish
Principles; and Schools for that purpose were encouraged in London, and all
other Places in England: Four Foreign Popish Bishops, as Vicars Apostolical,
were allowed in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction all England and Wales over.

From instructing the St. Omers Boys how to behave themselves in their Evidence
to prove Oats was at St. Omers all April and May in 1678, my Lord Castlemain
is sent Ambassador to the Pope, to render the King's Obedience to the Holy and
Apostolical See, with great hopes of extirpating the Northern pestilent Heresy.
In return whereof, the Pope sent his Nuncio to give the King his Holy
Benediction; yet I do not find that he beforehand sent for Leave to enter the
Kingdom, as was observed by Queen Mary, Henry VIII, and before.

The Judges in their Circuits had their private Instructions, to know how Men
were affected with the King's Dispensing Power; and those who were disaffected
to it, were turned out from the Lieutenancy and Commission of the Peace.

Justice, Judgment, and Righteousness support the Thrones of Princes, but these
were Strangers to this King's ways, other Means must be found out to support
and carry them through; a standing Army is judged the best Expedient: and as
the King told the Parliament at their second Meeting, he had increased his Army
to double what it was before, so he made his Word good, that he would employ
Men in it not qualified by the late Tests; and to this end, Tyrconnel having
disbanded the English Army in Ireland, qualified by the Tests, sends over an
Army of Irish not qualified by the Tests, to increase the Army in England.

This Army thus raised against Law, committed all manner of lawless Insolences,
though the King by several Orders would have had their Quarters restrained to
Victualling-Houses, Houses of public Entertainments, and such as had Licenses
to sell Wine and other Liquors; the Officers too, when they pleased, would be
exempt from the Civil Power.

And though the King had no other Wars, but against the Laws and Constitutions
of the Nation, yet he would have the Act of the 1, 2 Edw. 6. 2. which makes it
Felony, without Benefit of the Clergy, for any Soldier taking Pay in the
King's Service, in his Wars beyond Sea, or upon Sea, or in Scotland, to desert
from his Officer, to extend to this Army thus raised by the King: And because
the Recorder of London, Sir J. H. would not expound this Law to the King's
Design, he was put out of his Place, and so was Sir Edward Herbert from being
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, to make room for Sir Robert Wright, to hang
a poor Soldier upon this Statute; and afterward this Statute did the Work
without any further dispute.

Thus this Prince did not only assume a Power to control the Laws of the
Nation at his pleasure in Civil Affairs, but when he pleased made them bend to
his Will to establish an illegal Army, and countenance the Effusion of
Christian Blood: but you will soon see God will blast these ungodly Ways; and
that not the Arm of Flesh, but Judgment, Justice and Righteousness, establish
the Thrones of Princes.

Thus Affairs stood in England, Scotland and Ireland in the year 1687. wherein
I suppose no History mentions so great and violent Alterations in so little
time, as in this King's Reign, all tending to introduce a Foreign Power, and to
enslave the Nation, yet so patiently endured by it; but the Dangers of these
Designs were not circumscribed within the bounds of this Nation, but extended
into France, where for above twenty years, a Conspiracy was carried on for
promoting these Designs thus far advanced; so that the Year 1688 had a much
more terrible Aspect upon England, than the Year 1588 had, when Philip the II.
designed the Conquest of it: for then the Nation was firm and entire for its
own Interest; whereas this Year it was not only torn in pieces by internal
Discords, but had an Army and Fleet designed to join with the French King, in
propagating his boundless Ambition, not only upon England, but upon the Empire
of Germany, Spain, Holland, the Duke of Savoy, and other Princes of Italy.

About the beginning of the year 1688, a Gentleman of High Jesuited Principles
told me, The States of Holland were Rebels against the King of Spain, and that
I should soon see the King of France would call them to an Account for it, and
humble them; and that the French King would assist our King with Men of War* I
took more heed to this, because I knew that he was frequently visited by
several Jesuits, in whose Counsels I believe the French King's Designs this
Year were locked up; for my Lord of Sunderland in his Letter, recited in the
History of the Desertion, fol. 32. protests he knew nothing of a League between
the King; yet you will see it come out another way. But my Lord of Sunderland
says, that French Ships were offered to join with our Fleet, which was refused;
however this shows there was a Design contriving by these Princes; yet at
present the Affairs of France seemed to look another way, and a French Fleet
and Soldiers in them are sent to Canada; the Design and Success you will soon
hear of.

The King having thus, as he thought, laid a Foundation (tho it proved a very
Sandy one) of his Designs; and to show how Absolute he would be in them, upon
the 4th of May passed an Order in Council, that his Declaration of Indulgence
should be read in all Churches and Chapels in England and Wales in time of
Divine Service, and that all the Bishops in their respective Diocesses should
take care to have this done accordingly.

The Bishops who knew the Declaration of Indulgence was designed to conjoin the
Protestant Dissenters with the Popish, to ruin the Established Church, easily
foresaw that the Order to them was to pick a Quarrel with them; for the King
might have ordered it to be read without, as well as by them: And, besides the
Injustice of it, it was deemed an undecent thing, that the Fathers of the
Church, in time of Divine Setvice, should be the Instruments to give a Liberty
to all whether they should come to Divine Service or not.

Besides the Bishop of London, who stood suspended, these Bishops, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Bath and Wells, Ely Peterborough,
Chichester, St. Asaph, and Bristol, were in or about the Town; and this Order
of Reading the Declaration in Churches was served upon them.

The Bishops in a humble Petition to the King gave their Reasons in Writing,
(but so cautiously, that after it was drawn up, they would let no other Man see
it before they presented it) why they could not comply with the Order of
Council.

The Chancellor, tho he thought his Commission big enough to suspend the Bishop
of London, and Vice Chancellor of Cambridg, and expel the Master and Fellows of
Magalen College in Oxford, yet it seems did not think it sufficient to suspend
these Bishops, and therefore advised the King ('it was said) to try them upon an
Information of High Misdemeanour in the King's Bench; and in order to it they
were committed Prisoners to the Tower.

Accordingly the Bishops were tried in the King's Bench in Trinty Term
following, upon an Information of High Misdemeanour, for their Petition to the
King: but how secure soever the King and Chancellor thought themselves of the
Judges, and tho Sir Robert Wright, who was Chief Justice, and Sir Richard
Allibone (a known Papist) were two of them, yet they were not all of a Piece,
for Mr. Justice Powel both learnedly and stoutly defended the Bishops Cause.

If we look down to the Bar, we shall see as strange a mixture as in the Bench;
for the late Attorney General Sawyer, and Solicitor Finch, who were so zealous
to find my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, and Mr. Cornish, etc. guilty of High
Treason, and for Surrender of Charters, now they are turned out, are as zealous
for the acquittal of the Bishops; and the then Solicitor-General, of a most
zealous Prosecutor of Abhorrers, and Searcher into the bottom of the Popish
Plot, as zealous for finding their Misdemeanour. However the Jury acquitted the
Bishops.

Unless it were when Monk came into the City the 12th of February, 1659-60. and
Colonel Cloberry told the Citizens at Guild Hall they should have a free
Parliament, or when King Charles came into London the 29th of May following,
never were such loud Acclamations of Joy expressed, as upon the Acquittal of the
Bishops; nor did the Bounds of the City terminate this Joy, but it flew like
Lightning to Hounslow Heath, where the King would be present to see the Army
exercised, wherein he trusted (more than in Justice and Righteousness) to
accomplish his Design: It seems the King was treated that Day by my Lord of
Feversham. (General of the Army) in his Tent, when the News of the Bishops
Acquittal arrived at the Army, which entertained it with a general Shout; the
King ('it was said) was startled at it, and sent the Earl to enquire the Cause;
the Earl in return told the King, 'twas nothing but the Soldiers Joy for the
Acquittal of the Bishops: And call you that nothing? replied the King, who was
much discomposed upon it; and well he might, for now he saw how little
Confidence was to be imposed in the Army he so much relied upon.

It Is a Duty incumbent upon Mankind, to honor and worship God, and give him
Thanks for the Benefits received from him, and to petition and pray to him for
continuance of them: Next after God, it is the Duty of all Subjects to honor
the King, for the Benefits they receive by his Justice and Protection, and to
petition and pray Relief from him for Oppressions and Injuries, which cannot be
redressed by the ordinary Course of Law, or where the Ministers of the Law
either cannot, or refuse to do Justice.

It Is therefore the Wisdom of our Constitution, that Parliaments frequently
meet, not only to receive Petitions against Oppressions or Injuries received,
which were not or could not be redressed by the King's Ministers of the Law,
but also to correct and punish the King's Ministers themselves, if they
transgressed or neglected their Duty.

But tho frequent Parliaments are the most proper Expedients for the Subjects
herein, yet oftentimes Accidents may be, which will not stay for relief by
Parliament, as in Case of the Bishops. In May they are ordered to have the
King's Declaration of Indulgence read in all Churches and Chapels of their
respective Diocesses; and to do it, and to give no Reasons why they could not
do it, would have been a manifest Contempt of the King's Authority; they could
not do it either in Honor or Conscience; and by an humble Petition and
Address, represent this to the King; and for ought appeared then, the King
never intended to call another Parliament, till he had modelled them as much to
his Will, as Cromwell did Praise-God Barebone's Parliament.

This Petition is made a High Misdemeanour, and the Bishops committed upon it,
and Father Petre, the Club of Jesuits, the Attorney and Solicitor-General,
Graham, Burton, etc. are all plotting how to make it so: So as now the Kingdom
is without all hopes of a free Parliament, and yet it is a High Misdemeanour to
address to, or petition the King.

And that this Order upon the Bishops to enjoin the Reading of the King's
Declaration for Indulgence, was a Design upon their Persons, as well as upon
the Church, is apparent; for after their Acquittal, Orders from the
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs were sent into all parts of England, to
return an Account to the Lord Chancellor, of those that refused to read the
Declaration of Indulgence, that they might be proceeded against for their
Contempt: but the Reign and Rage of these Commissioners was too hot to last
long; and now let us see what return of Praises and Thanksgivings the Bishops
can make to God for their Deliverance.

God requires Truth in the inward Parts, and that it should govern all the
Intentions, Speech and Actions of every Man, in his Conversation with Man, yet
more in his Prayers and Petitions to God; and if it be an High Crime of
Hypocrisy to speak or act contrary to a Man's Knowledge or Belief, for the end
designed thereby is to deceive another, though God cannot be deceived, it is a
greater Crime to approach his Omniscience with Prayers and Petitions contrary
to a Man's certain Knowledge or firm Belief.

I take it for granted, that the Bishops understood the King's Declaration of
Indulgence was an unlawful Act, and that if they had submitted to the King's
Will to have enjoined it to have been read in all Churches and Chapels of
their respective Diocesses, it had been an unlawful Act, which was one Reason
they could not comply with the King's Will; and that this Declaration was not
intended a Favor to the Protestant Dissenters, but a Design to ruin the
established Religion, and Church of England; and the enjoining the Bishops to
have read; was a Design upon their Persons, as well as the Declaration was upon
the Church; and that the King professed himself to be of the Popish Religion,
which they believed and declared to be Idolatry, in the worshipping Images, and
derogatory to God's Honor by Invocation of Saints, whereby they grant to
Creatures an Omniscience, which is inseparable from God, and only to be
ascribed to him; and that the King had owned the Papal Power, (which not only
claims a Dominion over all Kings and Kingdoms to be at the Pope's disposal, and
who had declared the Church of England to be Heretical, Schismatical and
Sacrilegious Persons, with whom no Faith is to be kept, but had assumed a Power
equal or superior to God himself, in dispensing with God's Laws, and setting
its own above them) by sending his Ambassador to the Pope, and receiving his
Nuncio.

With what Conscience then could the Bishops approach God's Altars in their
highest Acts of Devotion, and in the Prayer for the Parliament, declare to God
that he is their most religious King; and in the Litany to pray to God to keep
and strengthen the King in the Worship of God, or Religion which the King
professed?

And how could they delare to God, he is their most gracious Sovereign, when he
had imprisoned them for not submitting to his unlawful Will, and had owned a
Power which had declared them Heretics, Schismatics, and Sacrilegious
Persons; who were by all ways and means to be extirpated from the Face of the
Earth? Yet the Bishops by their Canonical Obedience were as much obliged
hereto, and to enjoin the Clergy in their respective Diocesses to offer these
Praises to God, as they were not to obey the King's Will by enjoining the
King's Declaration of Indulgence to be read by all the Clergy in their
Diocesses. To this Dilemma had the flattering Church and State in King Charles
the II's Reign (tho intending it against the Presbyterians) by their Act of
Uniformity, brought the Church and State too in the Reign of King James.

But lest this establishing of Popery should have no longer support than in the
King's Life, a new Miracle is to be added to the Legend; for the next day after
the Bishops were committed to the Tower, the Queen was brought to Bed of a
Prince of Wales: so that now they had got a Prince of Wales, and the Queen
received the Consecrated Clouts, and the Pope by his Nuncio is become
Godfather, a Foundation so infallible is laid for exalting the Papal Chair,
and extirpating the Pestilent Northern Heresy, that it is Heresy to doubt it.

But Man purposes, and God disposes; and in truth, without God's special
Assistance, not only these Dominions of England, Scotland and Ireland, but all
the Western Parts of Europe, were not to be retrieved out of (I may say) even a
desperate State; for in England the King had a standing Army of above 20000
Men, and the Whigs were but too forward to congratulate the King in his
Designs, and in humouring him, in giving him up their Charters* as the Tories
in King Charles his Reign, in their Abhorrences of the King's calling a
Parliament, and as forward then, as the Whigs now in surrendering their
Charters: The Protestant Army in Ireland not only disbanded by Tyrconnel, and a
Popish Army set up. but the Protestants disarmed; and Scotland so perfectly
subdued, that there the King's Absolute Will without reserve, must pass for
Law: The King of Spain so weak, as not able to defend himself, much less
relieve others; the Empire engaged in a War against the Turks in the East, so
as the Western Parts were in no Condition to repel the Impression the French
should make upon it: The Kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark remote, and at such
natural Enmity with one another, that if one should side with France or
England, the other would engage against it; and tho Holland were considerable
elsewhere at Sea, yet their Strength at Sea was inferior to the English, but
much more in Conjunction of the French with the English.

However something must be done, for Modesty in this State had been the highest
Crime; and of all Foreign Princes, the Prince of Orange was most immediately
concerned, not only in the Oppression of the French King upon his Principality
of Orange, and the Dangers which threatened the United Provinces, by the
swelling Grandeur of the French, but by the King's Arbitrary Proceedings in
England; for the Princess was the Presumptive Heir to the Crown of England and
Scotland. And since it is the Laws and Constitutions which erect these Nations
into Kingdoms, whereof the King is the Head, then if the King destroys the Laws
and Constitutions, he is neither King, nor the Princess of Orange Presumptive
Heir to them; besides, since the King had assumed a Power of Dispensing with
the Laws, he might as well in Dispensing with the Succession; and the Prince
was well assured, neither those about the King, nor the Pope, would much favor
his, or his Lady's Title to the Crown; nor was the introducing the Prince of
Wales into the World intended, to have either the Prince or Princess come to
the Crown of England.

The Prince of Orange thus injured by both these Kings, and being denied the
Benefit of any Humane Laws, for redress has recourse to God and his Sword for
relief, and opposes the Justice of his Cause against the Potency of his
Adversaries: Nor does he take up his Sword to vindicate his own Rights only,
but for restoring the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, to their
ancient Rights, Laws and Privileges invaded by King James, and to put a stop to
the French King's boundless Ambition and Tyranny, in Murdering, Ravaging and
Destroying, rather than making a War upon all his neighboring Princes, not
dispossessed and ruined by him. A Design so great, by so little a Prince, as no
less than a Divine Power could inspire him to such an Undertaking!

The Prince these two last years had several Conferences with the Electors of
Brandenburg, Saxony, and the Princes of the House of Lunenburg, and other
Princes of Germany, it is believed in concerting Measures how to behave
themselves against the Designs of these two Kings; but the Results were so
secret, that I find no mention of them.

But how secret soever these Results were, yet the Preparations to put them in
Execution could be no Secret, especially the Naval Preparations by Sea; though
the Dutch Ambassador assured the King, they were not intended against him, yet
refused to communicate the Design.

At this time there was not only a high Ferment in all the Nation against the
King's Proceedings, but in the Army against its mixture with Irish Officers and
Soldiers; which put the King into a great Agony, which was increased by the
Dutch Preparation: Whereupon the Marquess d' Albeville, the King's Envoy at the
Hague, upon the 2d of Sept. N. S. 23d of Aug. O. S. put in this Memorial to the
States General.

High and Mighty Lords,
THE great and surprising Preparations for War, made by your Lordships by Sea
and Land, in a Season when all Action, especially by Sea, is laid aside, giving
just Cause of Surprise and Alarm to all Europe, obliges the King my Master, who
has had nothing so much in his Mind, since his Accession to the Crown, as a
Continuation of the Peace and Correspondence with this State, to order the
Marquess d' Albeville, his Envoy Extraordinary, to know your Highnesses
Intentions thereby.

His Majesty, as your ancient Ally and Confederate, believes it just to demand
this Knowledge, which he hoped with good Reason to have heard from your
Ambassador; but as he sees this Duty of Alliance and Confederation neglected,
and that such Power is raising without communicating the Intent in the least to
him, he finds himself obliged to reinforce his Fleet, and to put himself in a
Condition to maintain the Peace of Christendom.


The States paused upon an Answer to this Memorial, when upon the 9th of
September, N. S. or the 30th of Aug. O. S. Monsieur d' Avaux, the French
Ambassador, put in a Memorial to the States, wherein he foolishly discovers the
Contrivances which had been so long hatching between his Master and King James;
for after a long Story of his Master's Desire of maintaining the Peace of
Europe, now he had actually broke it, he impertinently tells the States,

All these Circumstances, and many others, that I may not here produce,
persuade the King my Master, with reason, that this Arming threatens England.
Wherefore His Majesty has commanded me to declare to the States, on his Part,
that the Bonds of Friendship and Alliance between him and the King of Great
Britain, will oblige him (the French King) not only to assist him, (the King of
Great Britain) but also to look on the first Act of Hostility that shall be
committed by your Troops, and your Fleet, against his Majesty of Great Britain,
as a manifest Rupture of the Peace, and a Breach with his Crown.

Though the Dutch made no Answer to this Memorial, yet they made no Bones to
make this Answer to the Marquess d' Albeville's: That they had armed in
Imitation of his Britannick Majesty, and other Princes, and that they had
thereby given no just Cause of Offense by arming, when all other Princes were
in Motion; and that they were long since convinced of the Alliance which the
King, his Master, had treated with France, and what had been mentioned to them
by Monsieur le Count d' Avaux in his Memorial.

This Answer King James took all one, as if the Dutch had declared War against
him; and all the Eyes of England are now turned toward Holland, as if from
thence they expected Deliverance from the Designs of King James, and his Popish
Crew; and the Fathers and Sons too of the Church of England, are at as much
Variance in their private and public Prayers to God, as Whig and Tory were in
their Humors; for in their private Prayers they pray for Prosperity to the
Prince of Orange, and in the Liturgy they pray that God would be King James's
Defender and Keeper, giving him Victory over all his Enemies.

God was pleased to prefer the private Prayers of the Churchmen before those of
the Church, and to have granted both, had been impossible, and to put a hook
into the French King's Nose, who turned those Forces which he had raised (not
for the Peace and Tranquillity of Europe, as d' Avaux said in his Memorial to
the Dutch States) upon the Empire, where without any Declaration of War, or
Cause alleged, he first fell upon Philipsburg, which he took, and after
Heydelberg and Mainheim; and while he was thus engaged, he left the Prince of
Orange free to vindicate his Cause against King James: whereas if the French
King had turned those Forces which he employed against the Empire upon the
Spanish Netherlands, (and he might as justly have done this as that) the Prince
of Orange would have had little Force, and less Leisure to have made any
Attempt upon King James: Thus God is pleased often to turn the Wisdom of the
Crafty (I will not say Wise) into Folly and Destruction.

You have heard before how the French* King in the beginning of the Year had
sent out a Fleet to Canada; whereupon the Company of Hudsons-Bay represented to
the King their Apprehensions, it was a Design upon their Factories and
Plantations, and so it succeeded; for the French seized upon a Fort and
Plantation of theirs, called Fort Charles.

Toward the latter end of the Summer, the King, without the Knowledge of
Hudsons-Bay Company, entered into a Treaty of Commerce with his Brother of
France, in reference to the Trade of Canada, wherein it was concluded, that the
Forts and Factories should be reciprocally enjoyed in the same state they were
at the Conclusion of this Treaty, the French having taken the Fort and Factory
of Charles about three Months before. So little did this King regard the Safety
and Welfare of his Subjects, wherein his Majesty and Honor was founded, for to
pleasure and endear his Brother of France, from whom he expected mighty things
for the Advancement of his Prerogative without reserve, in England, Scotland
and Ireland.

Thus have I brought down the History of this King's Reign, to the History of
the Desertion, where at large and particularly you may read, how by a Wonder,
equal to King Charles his Coming in, King James went out: And if no human
Prospect could have foreseen where the Tyranny of King Charles the I's Reign
would have ended, if the Long Parliament in 1640 had not put a full Stop to it;
so no uninterested Person was so purblind, as not to see if the Heroic
Magnanimity of this King in his Queen's, his own and the Nation's Right, and
for the common Safety of Christendom, had not put a Stop to King James his
Designs, but the Popish Superstition, and French Tyranny, would have been
imposed upon these Kingdoms, and have overspread Christendom.

We admit these four Kings of the Scottish Race had an Hereditary Title to have
governed England, by the Laws and Constitutions of it; yet no Hereditary King
has any higher Title, nor any Man a Right to do Wrong; and for an Hereditary
King to govern otherways, is a greater Tyranny, than if an Usurper does, by how
much he adds Perfidiousness, and Breach of his Trust to it.

Yet so it was, that these four last Kings of the Scottish Race, which should
have been the Guardians of England, in preserving the Laws and Constitutions of
it, and to have maintained the Honor of it abroad, made it their Business to
have subverted them; and being thereby always at Variance and Contentions with
their Subjects, lost their own and the Nation's Honor abroad; and by taking no
Care of the foreign Concerns of the Nation, became contemptible to other
Nations: Nay, the last three Kings, instead of restraining the French Ambition
and Tyranny, joined with them in advancing of them; as if they designed to make
the French King an Universal Monarch, as well as to destroy the Constitutions
of England. And I would know a Reason why, now his Majesty King William has, by
God's Blessing, redeemed this Nation from the imminent Danger which the French
King, in conjunction with King James, designed upon the Western Parts of
Christendom, as well as these Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, any
Christian should endeavor or desire the Restitution of King James, any more
than the Primitive Christians did Dioclesian, Maximi^ and Maxentius, after God
had freed them from their Rage and Persecution by Constantine.

APPENDIX.
MY Lord Bacon compares Times to Ways, some more plain and easy to pass, others
more rugged, and more hard to pass; the former is better for him who lives in
them, the latter is better for the Reader, not only in the Pleasure of reading
the Variety of Accidents in them, but because in their Contests fine Notions
arise, which otherwise might have been concealed, and which may be beneficial
to the Readers in succeeding Times; and also in showing the Causes of these
Distempers, succeeding Generations may be admonished hereby to prevent them in
time to come.

In these Treatises we have given an Account of the manifold Varieties of
Accidents which have happened for above 80 Years in the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, France, Spain, and the States of the United Netherlands:
and though the Roman and Grecian Histories may give Instances of the like by
Land, yet none of them can show the like of the French Grandeur by Sea, in
little more than forty Years; but more especially, in that this was acquired in
the Face of two neighboring Nations, either of which could have prescribed
Laws to all the World besides herein; the one claiming the Dominion of the
British Seas, the other of the Indian and Southern Ocean.

On the other Side, Spain, which in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth was both the
Envy and Dread of these Western parts of Christendom, is now fallen into that
abject State, as it is scarce in the Power of Christendom to uphold it from
falling under the Dominion of the French; and this History in some Measure has
shown the Causes both of the Grandeur of France, and the Cadency of Spain.

To the natural Advantages which the French had above other Nations, after the
Death of Queen Elizabeth, was added, that James the first, and Charles the
first of England, whose Interest it was to have restrained the ambitious and
aspiring Humor of the French, were degenerous Princes, wholly given up to be
governed by Flatterers and Favorites, and made it their Business to usurp
another Jurisdiction over the Nation, than they could claim by their Inherent
Birthright; so that if the Long Parliament in 1640 had not put a Stop to
Charles his Career, no mortal Creature could have foreseen where it would have
ended.

King James, not to disturb his licentious and voluptuous Pleasures, stood only
still, and looking on, whilst Lewis the 13th had near broke the Interest of the
Reformed in France; but Charles in the first Act of his Reign lent the French a
Fleet to subdue the Rochellers, at that time superior to Lewis by Sea; and as
inconsiderately in the second Year of his Reign made War with France, having in
the first Year made War against the Spaniard, whereby both Spain and France
joining against the English, brought that Loss and Dishonor upon the English,
in the Expedition of the Isle of Rhee; and Charles being as loose in his
Resolutions, as inconsiderate in his Actions, after the Death of the Duke of
Buckingham, who had engaged him in both these Wars, made a secret Peace with
the French, and left the Reformed out of it, though he engaged them to join
with him in the War, whereby the whole Interest of the Reformed was rooted out:
So that the Original of the French Grandeur by Sea and Land, may be truly
ascribed to these two Hereditary Princes, James and Charles.

After the Tyranny of Charles his Reign had degenerated into the Usurpations of
the Rump, they thinking to prejudice the Dutch made the Act of Navigation,
which crampt up all the foreign Trades of England, and the fishing Trade (which
above all others is the Nursery of Seamen, and increase of Navigation) to
English-built Ships, and sailed with English, whether there be Ships, or
Mariners or not, and without any Consideration of Times, whether of War or
Peace.

Though we have in this History, and in The Reasons of the Decay of the
Strength, Wealth and Trade of England, and also in the View of the Act of
Navigation, in reference to the Laws which yet stand unrepealed, to the Trades
for Masts, Rafters, Boards, foreign Oak, Timber, Pitch and Tar, and to the
Trades for rough Hemp and Flax, and to the fishing Trades, and also to the
Safety of the Nation against Foreign Powers, at large demonstrated the Iniquity
of this Law, and the dangerous Consequences of it; yet it is fit even here to
take some Notice of it, and of the Navigation of the Nation before the Act, and
how the Case stands now by reason of it.

Before the Rump contrived the Act of Navigation, the English, as the Traders
told me, alone fished upon the Coasts of Iseland and Westmony for Ling, and the
Cod-fish called Haberdin; and at that time the Town of Alborough in Suffolk, as
I was informed, fished yearly to those Seas with 35 Sail of Vessels, called
Iselands-Barks; and the Town of Sold or Southold, with 15; and Great Yarmouth
with manifold more, the Number I cannot tell: but this I can tell, That besides
London, and other parts of Norfolk and Suffolk, which they supplied with this
sort of Fish, as also the Navy Royal, and other Ships, with this sort of
Provision, the Town of Yarmouth yearly exported to Calice, St. Valery, Diep,
Havre de Grace, St. Maloes, Breast, and other parts of France, 150000 Haberdin
and Ling; and by their Trades with these, returned Sails and Nets for their
Navigation and Fisheries. Wells and Lyn in Norfolk too, drove Trades into these
Seas, but I am not informed in how many Vessels; but I have heard the
Inhabitants of Wells complain, that they have almost lost their Trades, and I
belive Lyn wholly.

Before the Act of Navigation, the English from the Western Ports drove
threefold a greater Trade in the Newfound-Land Fishery than the French; whereas
the French now drive above twentyfold more the Trade to Newfound-Land Fishery
than the English do: And I have heard Sir William Booth say, he had seen in one
Year above 100 Sail of great French Vessels, of 20 and 30 Guns, sail into the
Straits from their Newfound-Land Fishery, besides supplying France with them,
and also their Trades to Spain and Portugal.

Before the Act of Navigation, the English from London and Yarmouth drove
considerable Trades to Greenland for Whales; which Trades, as they are wholly
lost to the English, so are they driven by the Dutch and Hamburghers, and in a
great measure carried on by the French. I remember, that the next Year after
this Revolution, the English took 14 of these French Vessels, in their Return
from the Whale Fishery: and as this Fishery is wholly lost to the English,
(which will never be retrieved by making it a Monopoly) so is that of the Town
of Great Yarmouth into France, upon the account of the Iseland and Westmony
Fishery, and the rest of the Trades of the English in that Fishery, not one
tenth of what it was before the Act of Navigation; nor from the Western Ports
to the Newfound-Land Fishery, one fifth of what it was before the Act of
Navigation: and I wish the Parliament, at their next sitting, would enquire
into the Truth hereof, to prove me a Liar. I say, That the Fishing Trades,
above all others, increase Navigation and Mariners; and if the Causes of the
Cadency of our Fisheries and Navigation be not removed, the Loss of both will
be inevitable; the Consequences whereof will be so dreadful to the Nation, that
I tremble to think of them: for as we decline, both French and Dutch will raise
themselves out of our Ruin.

Every Ship is made of her Hull, Masts, and Rigging, which are her Sails and
Cables: Timber for the Hull (or Hulk) of a Ship we have in England; but I have
showed elsewhere, how improper our English Timber is in all our Navigations,
except the New Castle Trade, and so dear in the Carriage and Working, that the
Dutch build the Hulks of Ships, of like Dimensions, for less than the English
can; and by their great Experience in Building, build Ships for all sorts of
Trades more conveniently; so that a Ship of like Dimensions, Dutch built, shall
carry near one sixth more Freight than an English.

Pitch, Tar, and Masts, we have not of our own, but trade generally to Norway
for them; and as we order the curing of our Hemp in England, it is not only
dearer here than it may be had from Liefland and Prussia, but so spalt (as they
call it) that Cables made of it will not endure the Stress of Weather, when
Ships ride at Anchor, as foreign Hemp will.

Before the Act of Navigation, the English traded to Norway in Dutch Vessels,
or Bottoms, and then imported Masts, Raff, Pitch, Tar; and this the English
might do by the Act of 1 Eliz. cap. 13. and then the English imported them so
cheap, that the Norwegians could build but six small Vessels to trade into
England: but after the Act of Navigation, when the Norway Trade was restrained
to the Norwegians and English in their inconvenient dear-built Ships, in little
more than two Years the Norwegians increased their Ships from six to above
sixty, and those of double Dimensions than the former were: but after Oliver
dispensed with the Act of Navigation, the English Norway Merchants imported
Goods so cheap, that the Norwegians were forced to sell their Vessels for want
of Employment. This Mr. Lee and Mr. Smith, Norway Merchants, were ready to have
testified before a Committee of the Commons, when Endeavors were used in 1667
for the free Importation of Timber, Board, and Raff, after the burning of the
City of London: Tho these be dead, yet I am assured Sir William Warren and Mr.
John Hammond, Norway Merchants, know this to be true.

But the Inhabitants of Liefland and Prussia trade not with us, and the Dutch,
by the Cheapness of their Navigation, and full Freight of their Vessels, import
rough Hemp and Flax from Liefland and Prussia one third cheaper than the
English can; and when these are converted into Manufacture of the Cordage and
Sails, it is free for the Dutch to import them into England by the Act of
Navigation; whereby we do not only lose the Employment of manifold thousands of
poor People, and depend upon the Dutch, but pay one fourth more for these than
if rough Hemp and Flax were freely imported.

From hence it was, and I speak this of my own Knowledge, that in the Year 1651
I was part Owner of a Vessel, built at Walderswick, before the Act of
Navigation; and of another, built by the same Builder in 1655; and this latter
cost near one sixth in proportion more than the former; and the Reason the
Builder gave was, the Dearness of Masts, Cordage, and Sails: and I have no
Reason to believe the Case is now any better, the Reasons being the same, and
our Timber much dearer, and Carriage farther; so that I do believe the Carriage
of our Timber to the Rivers where Ships are built, costs more than the Dutch
pay for their Timber where they build Ships. Add hereto, That our Fishing, and
other Vessels in Navigation, require one third more Hands to navigate them,
than the Dutch (and for ought I know than the French) of like Dimensions.

Now consider, the Fish, in all Fisheries, costs nothing but the Catching and
Curing; and that Nation which can catch them cheap, and cure them best, are
sure of a foreign Trade for them against any other: and the English, by the
Act, being obliged to fish in double dearer Vessels, and more inconveniently
built, and sailed by one third more hands than the Dutch (or French either, for
ought I know) have eternally fixed the Fishing Trade upon the Coast of England
and Scotland to the Dutch, lost the Greenland Trade, and retain not one fifth
of the Trades we had to Iseland and Newfound-Land before the Act of Navigation.

After the Dissolution of the Rump, Oliver ruled; and tho for about two Years
before his Death he gave the English some Benefit in building Vessels, by
dispensing with the Act of Navigation, in reference to the Norway Trade, yet he
took no care to relieve them by dispensing with it, for the free Importation of
rough Hemp and Flax from Liefland and Prussia, for fitting up our Vessels, and
Employment of our poor People, Men, Women, and Children; and tho he did well in
so far dispensing with the Navigation, I Am sure he did ill by his frantic
breaking with Spain, and joining with the French against it, to the irreparable
Loss of the English, and not only to the endangering the Safety of England, but
of Christendom.

It is not foreign to this Design, if Notice be taken, that after King James I.
became King of England, to the Restoration of King Charles II. only Philip III.
and Philip IV. were Kings of Spain, and both zealous bigoted Princes to the
Romish Superstition, and both weak and effeminate Princes, wholly governed by
Favorites; and Philip IV. a luxurious and vicious Prince; and that Ferdinand
II. after the Victory at Prague, endeavored to subject the Freedom of Germany
by force, which brought the Swedes into Germany; and the French siding with the
Swedes, took Philipsburg and Brisac upon the Rhine, which opened the two
Passages into the Empire, by which this present King has been enabled to make
those Wars and Ravages in the Empire which have since succeeded.

After the Restoration of King Charles II. the whole Series of his Reign was
employed in assisting the French in all their ambitious Designs; so did the
Dutch and Dane, when he had engaged them in a War with England; and the Oxford
Parliament first made the Act against the Importation of Irish Cattle, whereby
they disjoined the Interest and Dependency of Ireland upon England, and fixed it
upon France and other Countries which traded with them, and enabled the French
and Dutch to victual Ships cheaper in their Fisheries, and other Trades, than
the English could, as much to their Benefit, as Prejudice to the English.

How King James II's Conjunction with the French had brought these Nations and
Christendom to the Brink of Destruction, was said in his Reign. In this state
these Kingdoms stood, when God was pleased to give them Deliverance by the
Interpo^tion of his present Majesty; and now all the neighboring Nations upon
France, I mean Spain, the Empire, Savoy, and the Dutch, as well as England,
were alarmed at their common Danger, by the French Ambition and Grandeur; and
all their Eyes were upon England, as if from thence they expected Safety: and
now was the King of England again become the Arbitrator of Christendom, after
the four former Kings were so contemptible, and neglected by it. But in two
things the French King's Ambition, or rather Madness, put some Check to his
aspiring Designs, viz. his Contests with the Pope about his Franchizes at Rome,
and the Regalia's of France; and by the Extreme on the other side, in his
revoking the Edicts of Nants; and his Dragooning and Reforming the Protestants
of France, whereby he lost innumerable of his Subjects, to the weakening of his
own Power, and that in double Proportion; for his Enemies (as he made them)
became so much the more numerous and stronger; for those which became Exiles,
being an industrious sort of People, had contributed highly to the Increase of
the Wealth of France: so that now the Charge of the War must have been
supported by those he left; yet in this state France alone, for above six
Years, made an offensive and victorious War by Land against Germany, Spain,
Holland, the Spanish Netherlands, and the Duke of Savoy, tho all these were
assisted by the Power of England and Scotland.

Tho England embraced their Deliverance by the King, Ireland did not, nor was
it their Interest; for why should the Irish join with the English, who would
have no Trade with them against the French, upon whom the Irish depended by
their Trade and Commerce? And it is observable, That tho the French assisted the
Irish above three Years in their Wars against the English, yet it may be a
Question, Whether the French did not gain more by their Trade with Ireland for
Wools, Tallow, Raw Hides, and Provisions for their Fleet, than their Expense
for carrying on the War against the English did amount to; whereas the English,
in the War, were at a foreign Expense; and being a Naval War, were forced to
victual their Fleets at one third greater Expense than the French could do from
Ireland.

Another Advantage the French had over the English in this Naval War, was, that
Breast lying South of Ireland, every Wind, not North, in one Course carries
their Fleet to Ireland; whereas Chatham, from whence the English sent their
Fleet to oppose them, lies fivefold more remote from Ireland than Breast does:
nor can the Ships from Chatham be carried to Ireland, but by different Winds,
and steering different Courses, almost from all the Points of the Compass; for
it must be (after the Ships are come within the Buoy of the Nore) a South or
South-west Wind to carry them to the Buoy of the Gunfleet, before they turn
into the Deep Waters; then a quite contrary Wind brings them into the Downs and
Channel; and when they have sailed above a hundred Leagues, another Wind
carries them to Ireland.

From hence it was principally, that the French for above three Years together
(so long as the War lasted) sent out their Fleets upon the Coast of Ireland,
did their Business, and returned to Breast, before we could get out our Fleets
to oppose them. Yet Falmouth and Milford-Haven are much better Ports, and lie
better and more conveniently than Breast; Milford much more to have relieved
Ireland, and oppose the French Designs at Breast; yet from neither did we send
one Ship to do it.

I suppose if the Reason hereof be asked, it will be answered, That there were
no Docks, Shipwrights, or Naval Stores in either, to have supplied our Men of
War in those Ports. But from whence comes this to pass? There were two Reasons
hereof, from within, and from without; from within, Foy and Haverford-West (and
the Port Towns generally of England) are Corporations, and the Inhabitants
poor, yet proud of their Prerogatives, in excluding the rest of the Nation, and
so have so much less means for building Ships, Docks, or carrying on the
Fishing, or any foreign Trades, as the Inhabitants are fewer and poorer, and
generally they are all Beggars.

The other Reason, from without, is the Act of Navigation against Foreigners
partaking equal Benent in Trade with the Natives of England; so that tho God
and Nature have endowed this Nation with more excellent and noble Ports than
any Nation in the World of like Bigness (except Ireland) for the Benefit and
Convenience of the Nation, yet by the Iniquity and Folly of our Laws, we have
made them vain, and of no use to our selves, nor any other Nation; whereas I am
confident the French King would give any of his new conquered Provinces in the
Spanish Netherlands to have one such Port as either Falmouth or Milford Haven,
upon the Coast of Normandy or Bretaign, within the Channel. Notwithstanding
these Obstacles, the Kingdom of Ireland is again reduced to the Dominion of the
Kingdom of England: But, I say, tho we should destroy the French Fleet of War,
yet if we do not redress the Oppressions which the English in their Trades and
Navigation lie under, the Nation will be no ways secured from the growing
Greatness of either French or Dutch; for the same Causes will have the same
Effects.

EXPEDIENTS, by which the English Nation may be secured against the growing
Greatness of the French and Dutch.
APOLOGY.
WE have epitomized the Causes of the declining of the Wealth, Strength, and
Trade of England in this Epilogue, that they may be more obvious to the Reader
than if he should look for them as they lie dispersed in the Body of the
History; and I am conscious to my self of the Difficulties I labor under in
these Expedients: For a Reformation of State Affairs cannot be made, but to the
Hinderance of many particular Men, whose Education, it may be, has placed them
in their Stations; these are known, and by these I am sure to meet with all
possible Opposition: whereas in contending for the Benefit and Security of the
Nation, every body's Business is no body's Business, and not one in ten
thousand will concern themselves in it: however, Truth is sacred, and a divine
Air attends it, and what is neglected in the present time may prevail in
succeeding Generations. And I will beg but one thing of my Opponents, viz. That
they will not answer me by Clamor, but by Reason, and not Reason in Extremes;
for thereby we shall differ and wrangle in the Means without end: and let this
stand for a Maxim, That the Public, in all Business of this Concern, is to be
preferred before the Private, and the Safety of the Nation before any Man's
particular Interest.

The Security of every Country depends upon the Strength of one Country against
another, in case of War between them; and herein Countries are to be considered
as they are placed in reference to each other: The Bounds of Inland and
Mediterranean Countries, are Rivers, Lines, and Forts, which are esteemed
sacred; and a Violence done to them, is esteemed a just Cause of War; and so
long as these are preserved, the Countries within are secured from foreign Wars.

Britain is an Island which knows no Bounds but the Ocean, and the Kings of it
are Sovereigns of those Seas which beat upon the British Shores; and in
preserving this Sovereignty, Britain is more secure from foreign Invasion than
any other Kingdom in the World (how great soever) which is on the Terrene
Continent.

But this Dominion has been of late disputed by the Dutch, and is at present
by the French; nor shall the King of Britain be secure of the Sovereignty
longer than he is able to defend it against the French and Dutch, whereas at
present the French contend for this Sovereignty against the English in
Conjunction with the Dutch. But suppose by an Accident of the Times, in these
Circumstances, the French had joined the Dutch, as they did in the first Dutch
War in King Charles II's Time, not 30 Years since, what a Condition had these
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, been in? And I say, the King of
England shall never be able to maintain the Dominion of the British Seas, and
thereby secure the Safety of the Nation, unless he be able to defend it against
the French in Conjunction with the Dutch.

I Am a Lover of Mathematical Learning, because it premises its Principles
before Men begin to learn or reason from them; whereas otherwise, where Men
begin Disputing, they proceed and end in Contention and Wrangling: and, I say,
that Trade is a Principle to Navigation, but above all, the Fishing Trades; and
therefore, as you increase your Trades, so you may infinitely increase your
Navigation: and as Trade is a Principle to Navigation, so is Navigation a
Principle to maintain the Dominion of the Seas; and therefore so much as the
Trades of England be lessened, so much will the King be less able to maintain
the Dominion of the Seas upon the Coasts of England and Scotland: and this will
be in a double proportion; for so much as we lose in either, the French and
Dutch will gain, as well to the Loss of England, as to the endangering the
Safety of it against foreign Enemies. How therefore we may preserve the Trades
which we now enjoy, and increase them by our selves, and where we cannot do by
our selves, by the help of others, is the main Design of these Expedients.

Expedient I.
That the King establish his Throne in Religion, Justice, and Mercy, and that
herein the Subjects Fear God, and honor and obey the King; for if either stray
from hence, they will fall either into Confusion or Tyranny, whereby the Nation
will become divided in it self, to the endangering the Safety of it from within
and without, and never be happy till it be restored to what it was before.

Expedient II.
1. That for the Conservation of the Trades we now enjoy, and for the
Employment of our English Natives, Foreigners continue to be excluded from our
American Plantations: and herein neither French nor Dutch have any Reason to
complain; for the Dutch do the same in their Spice Trade, and so do both French
and Dutch in their African and American Plantations: but herein it is not fit
for the English to be restrained to English-built Ships, as well for the
Inconveniences which have been showed before, as for that we may want English
Timber for this and our other navigating Trades, and the King for building and
repairing his Navy Royal, wherein our English Men of War, built of English
Timber, excel all other, being more tough, and less liable to splinter, whereby
the English Men of War, built of English Timber, will endure a Battery, which
Ships built of foreign Timber will not.

2. That the home-vent of our Newcastle and Sunderland Trades in times of
Peace, be driven by the Natives of England, exclusive to Foreigners; as also
our other Trades, from Port to Port in England, and also to Ireland; tho these
be impoverishing Trades to the Nation: for the Pitch, Tar, Masts, Cordage and
Sails, generally used in these Trades, are foreign Commodities to the Nation,
and for acquiring which, we return very little of our Manufactures; and the
digging the Coals out of the Pits, and burning them in London, and other
Places, no ways enriches the Nation to supply the foreign Expense for Pitch,
Tar, etc. used in them; nor are either old Men, Women, or Children, employed in
these Trades, but only young and lusty Men, and that but half the Year: so that
Ipswich, and other Coast-Towns, which depended upon these Trades, are almost
quite unpeopled, by reason the rest of the Inhabitants find no Employment in
them. However, I Am confident that this Newcastle and Home-Trade, and that to
our American Plantations, employ above four fifths of all the Ships in all the
Trades we drive by Navigation; and therefore we'll take care to keep these, by
excluding Foreigners out of them in times of Peace: and unless Foreigners beat
us out of these Trades, they cannot get them from us.

For ought I know, the Newcastle and Sunderland Trades are better carried on in
English-built Ships than foreign, because Coals being a bulky Commodity, and
lying loose in the Hold of the Ships, in stormy Weather and rolling Seas batter
the sides of the Ships; and the English Timber being tougher than the foreign,
it better endures this than those foreign built: but it were Arrogance for any
to say, because of one Convenience no other Ships shall be employed in this
Trade; for hereby the King may want English Timber to build and repair his Men
of War: besides, all Arts and Sciences are infinitely progressive; and if the
means for carrying on Arts be restrained or denied, this will not only cramp
the Improvement of this Art, but make the present Performance of it more
difficult; and no Man that is less conversant in any Art or Business,
understands how to manage them so well as those Men who make it their Business,
and are more conversant in them.

It is therefore extreme Arrogance and Injustice in any one, to prescribe to
another, how, and by what means, he shall manage his Business, and by no other:
every Man in his Profession ought to use such just means for carrying on his
Business as he shall find most convenient, and not be restrained to such means
as another shall impose upon him; and therefore whatever my Opinion, or any
Man's else be of carrying on the New Castle Trade in English built Ships, yet
it is not fit to impose it so upon others Negatively, that they shall use no
others, Trade and all Arts flourishing most where they are more free, and have
more means to improve them: and tho I believe our Turkey and Italian Trades are
better carried on in English built Ships than others, because they being more
Warlike, and double better Manned than Foreign, they will fight their Passage
against the Algerin, Tunis and Tripoli Pirates, when other Foreign Vessels
easily become a Prey to them; yet I think it unjust to forbid the English to
trade in any other Ships into the Straits.

Expedient III.
Since the Strength and Trade of every Nation begins at the Inhabitants, it
will be the Interest of the Nation to continue the Inhabitants in it; and how
these Inhabitants may be employed to the Benefit of the Nation is the next
Consideration: And therefore it is expedient that the Liberty which at present
is granted to Dissenters from the Church, be continued, lest by proceeding
against them by severe means, as was done of late for five years together,
(viz. from the year 1635, to 1640) and since, they flee out of England into our
Foreign Plantations or into Holland, as they then did, and taught the Dutch the
Woollen Manufactures wrought in Suffolk and Essex, which was one principal
Cause that the English have almost lost all their Trades of Woollen
Manufactures in the Kingdoms and Countries within the Sound, and thereby the
Dutch Trade for these is vastly increased; and also lest they be provoked into
intestine Broils, as succeeded in the Year 1640. Nor has Holland had the
Benefit of the Persecution of the Dissenters in England only, but I do
assuredly affirm that the raging Persecution of the Protestants by Philip the
II. in the Spanish Netherlands, and by Henry the II. in France, who found an
Asylum in Holland against these Persecution^, was the Original of the Dutch
Greatness; and it may be a Problem, whether the now French King has not lost
more by his revoking the Edict of Nants, and by his Dragooning Reformation of
the Reformed, than he has got by all his Conquests in the Spanish Netherlands,
the Empire, Savoy and Spain; and after all he is not sure, but in acquiring
these he has endangered the safety of his Kingdom of France.

Expedient IV.
In the Employment of the Natives there is a twofold Consideration: First, That
the poorer sort of Youth be instructed how to be employed: And secondly, That
no Man be excluded out of any Place, from having the Benefit of his Breeding
and Labors: I see no reason why Men should merit their Freedom in any Art or
Mystery, by their being bound Apprentice to it for seven Years; for if they
have any Benefit by it, let them enjoy it: but to exclude any other from
exercising his Trade, because (though a better Artist than one bound Apprentice
to it) he has not served seven Years in it, is not only Tyranny and Injustice,
but of public Detriment.

I say it is Tyranny and Injustice, for the generality of Mankind eat their
Bread in the sweat of their Brows, and Cares of Mind, and have no other
Subsistence but by their Labors: and therefore to take from another his honest
means of Labor and Living, is a greater wrong than to have robbed him; for
this hinders him but in his present Condition, whereas it is worse to take a
Man's means of Living, than to take away his Life; for this puts a Man upon the
ungodly Courses of Thieving, Sherking and Deceit; and with what Justice can a
Man be punished for doing ill, who is not permitted to do well?

I say, the denying a Man the benefit of his Labors is a public Detriment,
for all Countries flourish by the Inhabitants Labor and Industry in Living;
and every Man's Labor being a Benefit to another, hereby the Public becomes
injured, as well as the Man that is denied the Benefit of his Labors.

Object. By the Act of the 5 Eliz. 4. it is unlawful for any to work in any
Trade, in any Corporation, or Market Town, but he who has been bound Apprentice
to it seven Years.

Answ. All Men by the Law of Nature are obliged to get their Livings by honest
Callings, and to be helpful to other Men; and Humane Laws ought to aid the Law
of Nature herein, and to punish those who hinder Men from their Labor and
Employment; and whenever Humane Laws are contrary to the Law of Nature, the
Execution of them is practicing Iniquity by a Law: If a Man has been bound
Apprentice seven Years to any Profession, it may be he has thereby a Benefit
above another not bound seven years; but shall this other therefore not
subsist, or be of any Benefit to the Nation, because that was bound Apprentice?
This is such a Topic in Reasoning, as I never desire to be conversant in.

But why must being bound Apprentice seven Years entitle a Man to a Freedom of
working in any Art or Mystery? Suppose one is bound, and is a Block-head, and
another more ingenious in it not so bound, is there any Reason that shall be
free, and this other not employed? I am assured it is otherwise in Holland,
where Men in purchasing their Freedom are not questioned how long they have
been bound Apprentice, but how well they can work in any Art or Mystery.

I agree there are some Professions which depend chiefly upon bodily Labor, as
Black-smiths, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Husbandmen, etc. which cannot be well
acquired but by being bound Apprentices to them for some Time or Years; but I
see no reason why in others which do not so much depend upon bodily Labor,
Youth should be bound Apprentice at all, but may be better instructed without
it: for as in all scientifical Learning, Youth bred up together will better be
instructed in Company, and learn by one another, than where one single Youth is
instructed by one Man; so in the Arts of Combing, Spinning, Weaving and
Knitting in Woollen Manufactures, and Silkthrowing, Weaving, and in many
others, Youth will be much better instructed in Consort and Company, than when
alone.

There is one Mr. Robert Cook, who is a more rigid Pythagorean than any (I
think) of the Ancients, for he will not drink any thing but Water, nor eat any
thing which had Sensitive Life; nay, he will not wear any thing which came of
any living Sensitive Creature; but his Hat, Clothes, Shoes and Stockings, are
all made of Linen, and so is the Bed he lies in.

After the Natives of Ireland, upon the Act against importing Irish Cattle, had
converted their feeding Grounds of great Cattle into Sheep-folds, and the Wools
of Ireland being generally better for Woollen Manufactures (as he told me) than
those in England; this Mr. Cook set up a Woollen Manufacture in the County (as
I remember) of Wexford, wherein he set on work either 40 or 80 Looms, and I
think each Loom employed ten poor Children in sorting, combing and spinning of
Wool; and would entertain none but poor married People and their Children in
working, for whom he first provided a Habitation, and all sorts of Instruments
for their Work, and Materials to work on; they needed no great Instruction how
to work, but were instructed by one another in Consort, till they had learnt
how to comb and spin; and in working in common, as they could improve
themselves, so he preferred them. I asked him why he took only poor People and
their Children? he told me, Because he was sure of them when he had most
Benefit of them, whereas if he took young single People which lived of
themselves, they would leave him when they could subsist without him.

Hereby Mr. Cook holding Correspondence with Merchants in Holland for these
Woollen Cloths, acquired great Riches; and a little before (I think the Year
before) the Revolution of England, was made Sheriff of the County (I think) of
Wexford: but being zealous against the Superstition of Rome, upon King James
his coming into Ireland, Mr. Cook came into England, and would have set up his
Trade in Ipswich, if the Town would have permitted him, tho Ipswich be scarce
half inhabited, which they would not; so he set up some Looms without the Town:
but he told me, he could not get any Children to work, tho he proffered them a
Penny in a Shilling more than was given either at Colchester or Norwich. I
never saw him but once, and this was four Years since, and now I hear he is
returned back to Ireland.

But admit binding of Apprentices were necessary in learning of Arts or
Mysteries, I would fain know what is the Art and Mystery of Wholesale or Retail
Traders, or of Vintners, that Youth should be bound Apprentice to them, or of
what use are they to the Public, but an unnecessary sort of People? And
because these are bound Apprentice, which noways contributes to the Benefit of
the Public, therefore other People which do, shall reap no Benefit of their
Labors, because these labor not at all.

Expedient V.
That for the future no Youth be bound Apprentice to any Vintner, Wholesale or
Retail Trader, whereby the Nation may reap the Benefit of those which might
have been thus bound in other Employments.

Expedient VI.
That in all the Grammar-Schools of England, Youth of both Sexes be instructed
in understanding the English Tongue, and to write it, and be taught the use of
Addition and Substraction gratis; and if any will have their Children
instructed in the Greek and Latin Tongues, let them pay for it; whereby Youth
may be better enabled to manage their Business, in Dealing and Conversing in
the World: for to speak and write in English, and Addition and Substraction, if
they be not necessary, yet are very convenient to all the English of both
Sexes. And hereby the Supernumeraries bred up in Grammar-Schools, and our
Universities, more than the Revenues of the Church can maintain, may be
restrained, and consequently a greater Uniformity in Religion wrought amongst
us.

It were to be desired too, that all learned Books, especially Mathematics and
History, were rendered into the English Tongue, as Cardinal Richlieu has done
them in French; and that in our Universities, these may be read to the nobler
and better sort of Youth from their first Principles; and that Aristotle's
Analyticks, Topics, Physics and Metaphysics be suppressed, not only as vain,
but disposing to Contention and Discord; and that the Laws of England after the
Example of the Grecians and Romans, might be rendered into the English Tongue,
and their practice less mystical and chargeable.

Expedient VII.
That in every Village a Workhouse be erected, or at least every Village
contribute to the Erecting of one in another Village for to instruct the Youth
of both Sexes in such Arts or Mysteries as are more proper in them, whereby the
Nation may reap the Benefit of their Employments, and the poorer sort of People
not forced to flee out of their Country, or become a Burden to it.

Expedient VIII.
That the Drudgeries of Drawers and Tapsters in Taverns and Alehouses, be
performed by Women, that the Men may seek better Employments: I am sure they
cannot be worse employed.

Expedient IX.
That Foreigners be excluded from the Trade in Ireland, and that the Trade
between England and Ireland be free, so that England may be the Storehouse of
the Irish Wools, Beef, Tallow, H^des, etc. as well as of the Products of our
Plantations, whereby England may have alone the Navigation, as well as the
Trade to it; and by the benefit of Manufacturing their Wools, Hides and Tallow,
not only victual our Fleet in Navigation, and the King his Navy Royal cheaper,
but also drive a Foreign Trade to France, Spain and Holland, upon the account
of salted Beef, etc.

Let Us see the dangerous State of this Nation, as the Case now stands between
England and Ireland: Our Trades to Norway, Prussia and Liesland for Pitch, Tar,
Masts, Raff, Boards, Timber, and rough Hemp and Flax, are generally a Foreign
Expense, so is that to the East Indies, which at a moderate Estimate amounts to
a Million Sterling yearly; and we have little to supply for these, but by our
Trade to Spain for Woollen Manufactures, which if we lose, the Nation could not
support the Foreign Expense in these.

Now let us see the State of our Woollen Manufactures in England, compared with
that in Ireland, in case Foreigners be permitted to trade into Ireland for
them. In England the Wools of most of the Counties on this side Yorkshire, are
brought by a Land-Carriage to Norwich and Colchester, to be manufactured there,
and after that by another Land-Carriage brought up to London, as generally your
Western Cloths are, where only the Freemen of London must buy them at their
own Prices; and then in Foreign Vent they are restrained by the Act of
Navigation to Ships doubly as dear built, and sailed with near double the Hands
Foreign Ships of like Dimensions are; and all the Western Cloths in their Vent
to Spain, Portugal, Italy and Turkey, by a much longer Voyage, than if they had
been exported from any of their Ports.

Whereas Ireland is seated better than England for the Trades of France, Spain,
Portugal, Italy and Turkey, and the Ports equally good, or better than those of
England, I Am sure much better than from London: The Irish shall have no need to
carry the Wools of Leinster and Munster to Vlster by a Land-Carriage; and when
they are wrought there, to bring the Cloths to Dublin by another, where none
must buy them but the Freemen at their own Rates, and these bound to vend them
in double as dear-built Ships, and sailed with near double the Hands of other
Nations: but if Foreigners be permitted to trade, they may have the Cloths from
the next Ports where they are wrought, and where the Artificers can live much
cheaper than in England. The same Reason will be to the prejudice of our
Leather made of Hides, Calves and Sheepskins in our Foreign Vent; and if the
Irish want Artificers, you need not fear the Dutch will furnish them: and at
this rate, how long shall we enjoy the Foreign Trade, and the Navigation to
Spain, Portugal, Italy and Turkey, with our Woollen Manufactures or Leather?
etc.

Expedient X.
That the English may import rough Hemp and Flax, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Deal
Boards and Timber in any Vessels.

Object. This will ruin our building Ships in England, and the Navigation of it.

Answ. I expect such a large general Objection; but if we never built any Ship
for these Trades, then our building Ships will not be prejudiced thereby; and
if we employ about 300 Mariners in the Norway Trade about three Months in the
year, and 150 for six Months in the year to Liefland and Prussia, is this
Employment to be preferred to the free Importation of the Products of these
Countries, and thereby save 1/4 of the Foreign Expense, and employ, it may be,
50000 People, or more, Men, Women and Children, all the year round, in making
Sails and Cordage for our Navigation, and Nets for our Fisheries; and hereby be
able to fit up Vessels for our Navigation and Fishing Trades, as cheap as the
Dutch, and cheaper than the French can?

Expedient XI.
That the English Merchants be permitted to buy Vessels for carrying on the
Fishing Trades upon the Coasts of England and Scotland; I do not mean those
mean Fisheries to supply London, and some places in England, by imposing double
Strangers Duties upon Fish imported by the Dutch by the Act of Navigation; but
such a Fishery, whereby the English may, in some measure, partake with the
Dutch in their Foreign Trades of Cod-fish, and white Herrings, and also buy
Vessels for the New Foundland Fishery.

Object. This would ruin our Natives in building Ships.

Answ. This is at large again; for if the Natives never built (I Am sure since
the Act of Navigation) one Ship for this Trade of Fishing upon the Coasts of
England and Scotland, what does this hinder them in building Ships for our
other Trades? nor does this hinder the Employment of Mariners in them, for we
have employed none in it these 30 Years: So that this Trade is like a great Man
that is Lord of a great Lake, out of which his Neighbors grow rich and
powerful by the Fish they take out of his Lake; but this Man is so in love with
his Family, that he will not permit any of them to fish but by such Means or
Instruments, as others of his Family will supply them with; but these are so
dear and inconvenient for their Purpose, that they can only supply their
Master's Family, whilst others supply his Neighbors better and cheaper; and in
this State it will be in the Power of these others, to beat him and his
Servants quite out of the Fishery, and take the whole Benefit to themselves.

In the New Foundland Fishery the English do, and always did build Vessels for
it; but these are such, that the French have almost ruined their Fisheries, I
am sure, in the foreign Vent of them; and therefore the buying Vessels for this
Trade is as necessary, as for that of the Fisheries upon the Coasts of England
and Scotland: and tho the English heretofore built Vessels for the Green-land,
Iseland, and Westmony Fisheries, yet they were such, as the Dutch and
Hamburghers have wholly worm'd us out of the Green-land Fishery, and left us
very little of the Fisheries to Iseland and Westmony.

It were to be wished, that an Experiment might be made of building Vessels for
our Fisheries, especially for that of the New Foundland in New England, where
Timber, Masts, Pitch, and Tar, are cheaper, and may be better had, than the
Dutch can import these, or bring them into Holland down the Rhine and Maes: but
the Attempt of this must be done for some Years upon a public Account.

Expedient XII.
That the English be permitted to buy Ships in the foreign Vent of our
Manufactures, and the Product of our Plantations. It Is a strange thing to me,
that in the Navigation of England, being so necessary for the Safety and
enriching of it, others not conversant in it, as the Rump were not, should
restrain it to one sort of Shipping; for such a Restraint cramps all Learning
and Reasoning in every Art or Science, without any possible Progression or
Improvement beyond it: and I say this Restraint was as absurd as impolitick; I
say it was absurd, for it sets the Cart before the Horse, for Trade is a
Principle to Navigation, and Navigation a Mean in carrying on Trade; so that as
you increase your Trades, you may your Navigation, if your Hands be not bound
up from it: but if you begin at Navigation, and tie your selves only to one
sort of Ships, it will be impossible to increase your Trades beyond it, whereby
all those Peoples Labors which are restrained to this Navigation will be lost,
and these a Burden to the Nation.

I say, this Restraint is as impolitick, as absurd and unjust; for hereby you
sacrifice not only the Navigation, upon which the Employment of People
depended, to your Neigbours, it may be your Enemies, but entitle their People
to those Trades which you so foolishly give them to your Loss, and it may be,
Undoing.

To these is added another dreadful Consequence upon the Nation, by the Act of
Navigation, which the Rump in their haste and spite against the Dutch did not
foresee, at least not consider; for the restraining the Navigation of England
to English built Ships, has so wasted the Timber of England, that in
convenient Distances for building, the King will not find Timber in England to
build and repair his Navy Royal, if this Restraint be continued; and then in
what a Condition will the Nation be? I will give some particular Instances
hereof, which I know of my own Knowledge.

Having observed the Scarcity of Timber upon the Coast of Suffolk, (which I
take to be the best of England for building Men of War) caused by the Act of
Navigation; about 20 Years since, when I was at Bristol, one Captain Baily was
building the Oxford Frigate; out of Curiosity I went to see it, and found the
Captain on Board; and falling into discourse with him, among other things, I
told him how scarce Timber was in Suffolk, but I hoped it was not so in the
West; he told me it was much less there than in the East, and that he was
forced to get Timber for building the Frigate from beyond Worcester, which was
above fifty Miles from the Place, yet the Forest of Dean between, which Queen
Elizabeth called one of the Nurseries of her Navy Royal.

About five Years since, one Captain Frame undertook to build two Men of War
for the King, and he bought Timber for building them in Norfolk and Suffolk
near 20 Miles from Great Yarmouth, from whence it was carried to Hull by Water
to him: and I have a Tenant in Suffolk, who contracted about three Years since
with Timber-Masters to be paid Sixteen Shillings a Load, or Tun, for carrying
of the Timber for the Dock at Ipswich, to build their Ships, which is, I am
confident, more than the Dutch pay for their Timber delivered at their Docks
down the Rhine and Maes.

Objection. But if the English buy Ships for the Foreign Vent of our
Manufactures, our Ship-Carpenters will be undone for want of Employment.

Answer. So here the Interest of Ship-Carpenters is opposed to the Interest and
Safety of the Nation; but if these built Ships as good and convenient as other
Nations, the Merchants would not look further: but is there any reason because
they cannot do it, the Nation must be undone? let them continue building Ships
for New Castle still, and they know no better; yet this is observable, that
though our English Builders in this Trade have had a Monopoly in it above these
Hundred Years, yet having no better Skill in it, and being too wise to be
instructed, at last about six Years since they found out, that it was better to
build them somewhat longer; yet these are the Artists our Merchants must trust
to, and no other. I am confident that the French King understands the
Advantages France reaps by the Act of Navigation, and that this was the Reason
King James in his last Declaration promised to observe this Act inviolably.

Expedient XIII.
That the foreign Vent of our English Manufactures, and the Product of our
Plantations, be as free to the English in all Trades, as they are to Spain and
Italy.

When any Man shall give a rational Answer to any of those manifold Reasons
given by 3 Jac. 6. for the Freedom of Trade to Spain, etc. I will recant all
which has been said in any of these Expedients; or that there are not the same
Reasons for the Freedom of the English in venting our Manufactures and Product
of our Plantations in all our foreign Trades, as well as to Spain, except to
Holland, who by the Cheapness of their Navigation may vend them again cheaper
in Muscovy, all the Countries and Kingdoms within the Sound, and also to Spain,
Portugal, Italy and Turkey, than the English can by their Navigation; but this
is yet but problematically said, not granted: But in case the English
Navigation were as free and easy as it is in Holland, then the Question would
be at an End.

I do not speak this against the English trading in Consort or Companies, for I
know many Trades may be better carried on in Companies than by particular Men,
but against the Usurpation and Tyranny of Companies, who because they trade,
therefore no other English shall; and this I say, that if Companies, as the
Turkey Company (which of all others is least liable to Exception) carry on
their Trades best for the Interest of the Nation, no particular Merchant could
set up in competition with them; but if they leave Room enough for the Dutch,
the French and Venetians to trade to Turkey with their Woollen Manufactures,
why should any English Merchant not of the Turkey Company be excluded herein,
yet these Trades free to other Nations? The East India Company by their Charter
claim a Liberty of Trade exclusive to the rest of the Nation, from the Cape of
Good Hope, to the North of China; which if you take in both sides of the
Red Sea, and Gulf of Persia, and the Circuits of the Islands between the Cape
of Good Hope and the North of China, is above half the Circumference of the
Earth: So do the African Company from the Kingdom of Morocco, to the Cape of
Good Hope, which if you take the Coast of Africa as it lies, is more than a
Quadrant of the Circumference of the Earth; so that these two Companies claim a
Trade exclusive to the English, of above 3/4 of the Circumference of the Globe
of the Earth; and if they had Power as great as their Claim, they might give
Laws to all the Princes of the World, as well as their poor fellow Subjects;
and it may be a Question whether they would use them better. And is not the
Hamburgh Company broke? And have not the East-Country Company upon the matter
lost our Trade into the Sound, which within these sixty Years was the best
Trade the English had for Woollen Manufactures in the World?

Expedient XIV.
That the Customs upon the French Wines consumed in England, be 1/3 more than
upon Portugal, Spanish and Italian Wines, whereas the Duties upon these are 1/3
more than upon the French; because our Trades to Portugal, Spain and Italy are
beneficial Trades to the Nation, which by the Abatement of these Duties may be
increased; whereas by the Balance of our Trade with France, taken in the
eighth Year of King Charles the Second, the Nation lost near a Million yearly
in their Trade with France.

Expedient XV.
That the Duties imposed upon Salt, Wines and Brandies, be paid by the first
Buyer after they are imported, and not the whole Cargo charged upon the
Merchant; so that what is not consumed may be exported again.

The Reason of this is, that so much more as Ships are fuller fraught, so much
cheaper will the Navigation be, not only of these but of all other Merchandise
which compound the Freight of the Ship; and hereby the Dutch, besides the
Cheapness of their Ships, by compounding their other Merchandise with Salt,
Wine and Brandies, which they import cheaper than the English, make all their
Trades to Muscovy, and all the Countries and Kingdoms within the Sound, so much
more easy and cheap, as their Vessels are more full fraught, by these.

Objection. If Salt, Wines and Brandy imported may be exported again, the King
will lose his Customs.

Answer. I say not at all, for how do they do in Holland? and by the 4 Jac. 2.
the additional Duties upon Tobaccos and Sugars are paid by the first Buyers;
and by charging the whole Cargo, these are damned to a Consumption here in
England; and if you did not, the King shall be paid for all that is consumed.
On the contrary, I say, the King is more secured of his Duties hereby, than if
the whole Cargo be charged; for let the Penalty stand, that the Merchant shall
forfeit his Cargo if he make a false Entry, and who then will run the danger,
when he is like to get nothing by it? whereas if the whole Cargo be charged, if
a Merchant scapes but once, he will be no loser; if he be discovered the next
time, he runs his Goods.

Expedient XVI.
That it be free to the English to import Salt, Wines and Brandies in any
Vessels.

The Reason of this is, because our English Navigation is so dear, that the
Dutch import these much cheaper than the English can, and therefore can export
them into other Countries cheaper; whereby the English cannot so well compound
their Freight in the Northern Vent of our Manufactures as the Dutch; whereas if
the English were free to import Salt, Wines and Brandies in any Vessels, all
the Manufactures of England might be vended from their next Ports, and not by a
tedious and chargeable Land-carriage brought up to London, to be fraighted from
thence. And this benefit the Nation has naturally above the Dutch herein, that
as our Woollen Manufactures are better than those in Holland, and may be
cheaper than there, so we can compound Fraights with Lead and Tin, which the
Dutch have not, and can ballast the Ship with Sea-coal, cheaper than the Dutch
can.

Object. If the English should freely import Salt, Wines and Brandies, we
should undo all our Mariners and Shipwrights.

Answ. What this again, and at large? So that unless you undo the Nation, you
cry out, You are undone; but if you will do as well as other Men, you need not
complain, for the English would employ you before any other: But must the
Nation be undone, because you are either ignorant, and will not, or have not
means to serve the Nation?

Now let us see how far these Men would be undone, if the importation of Salt,
Wines and Brandy were free for the English in any Vessels. If Salt were freely
imported, we should be so much better enabled to cure Fish in all our
Fisheries, and also in salting Provisions in all our Navigations, as well as
the Navy Royal, upon Occasions; and be enabled to refine Salt so much cheaper,
as Salt imported is cheaper: And what are the Ship-Carpenters hereby hindered?
for they never built one Ship for this Trade, nor know how to build any other
way than for the New Castle Trade, which is free both to employ their Shipping
and Mariners; and therefore neither would be undone, if the Trade to import
Salt by the English were free to do it in any Vessels.

For the Trade for French Wines, it is but three Months in the Year, viz.
October, November and December, and these the most perilous of all the Year
for Navigation, and in the most rude and boisterous Seas in the World, and the
outward Vent to France no ways proportionable, but less by the Returns of the
Wines; and what would be the Loss to the Nation, if these Ships were not thus
endangered by this Voyage, or the Mariners not employed in it?

The Reasons for the Import of Portugal, Spanish and Italian Wines, are not the
same with the French; but if it were lawful for the English to buy Ships for
the foreign Vent of our Manufactures, and the Product of our Plantations, the
English hereby might in Return of their Trades, import Salt, Wines and Brandies
cheaper from thence than the Dutch can; and if these were free to be imported
and exported, I see no Reason why we might not reduce the Dutch to as low a
Trade to the Sound, and to Muscovy, as they were before the Year 1635, and in a
great Measure recover the Loss of these Trades.

Expedient XVII.
That no Duties be withdrawn upon the Export of dying Stuffs and unwrought
Sugars from our American Plantations.

The Reason hereof is, that the Manufacturing of any Commodities is so much
more valuable to any Place by the Employment of the People, as the thing
manufactured is more valuable than the Principals; as it may be Wool, which is
the Price but of one Shilling, if made into Cloth, may be of eight Shillings
value, then seven Shillings will be Advantage to the Nation, by Employment of
the People; and if otherwise it were not wrought, these People might be a
Burden to it. And the dying of Woollen Cloths, and silken Manufactures, is the
best Employment for our Midland People, next the making of them; and by
withdrawing half the Duties upon dying Stuffs, we entitle the Dutch, Hamburgher
and French to dye Woollen Cloths and Silks cheaper than we can. The same Reason
is of withdrawing half the Duties upon unwrought Sugars, for hereby the Dutch
and French may refine them cheaper than the English can, and thereby make them
cheaper to themselves, and exclude us from the foreign Vent of our refined
Sugars, as much to their enriching and increase of Navigation, as to our Loss
in both.

Expedient XVIII.
That it be free for all Nations to import Pitch, Tar, Masts, Boards, Raff, and
all Sorts of Timber, and rough Hemp and Flax, into all the Ports of England and
Wales, without paying any Duties.

The Reason of this is, hereby the English, if they can get Hands, may fit up
Vessels not only for the Fishing Trades, but for all other Foreign and
Domestic Trades; and so far as Foreign Timber be employed in building Ships,
we may build as cheap.

Object. 1. The King by this will lose considerably in his Customs.

Answ. It may be so, but hereby he will gain threefold more in building,
repairing, and fitting up his Navy Royal: as I remember, when in 1667 after the
burning of the City of London, Endeavors were used to procure these to be
freely imported for the Benefit of rebuilding it; upon Search the Duties upon
Pitch, Tar, rough Hemp and Flax in all England, did not amount to 1700 l. per
Ann. and that very Year the King granted the Customs upon Masts, Boards and
Timber, to Sir Robert Paston, (after Earl of Yarmouth) only reserving to
himself (as I remember) 2600 l. per Ann. the greatest part whereof was
afterward begged: How it stands now I know not.

Object. 2. If this Importation be free, we shall undo our Norway Merchants and
Traders to Liefland and Prussia.

Answ. And why undone? They are not excluded from trading hereby: But suppose
these Traders be twenty, and they cannot, or will not supply the Kingdom so
cheap as others; shall the Interest of the Nation, by employing above (it may
be) 100000 poor People in these all the Year round, (and we hereby be enabled
at least to fit Vessels in all our Navigation as cheap as the Dutch, and
cheaper than the French) be postponed to the Interest of twenty particular Men,
who by this are no ways hindered in their Employment, if they do it as well as
others?

Expedient XIX.
That all Foreigners may be free to exercise any Mystery in any Art in any
Place in England.

The Reason of this is, because if the Nation had all the Benefits proposed in
these Expedients, and all other imaginable Advantages, they would not be of
further use to the Nation than they had Hands to carry them on.

The Commons in the third Westminster Parliament upon the 31st of December, in
1680, Gave leave to bring in a Bill for a General Naturalization of Alien
Protestants, and allowing them Liberty to exercise their Trades in all
Corporations.

But why was this leave to be given only to Protestant Foreigners? Let Us see
how the Case stands, and what Benefit the Nation can reap from it, now the
French King has expelled the Reformed out of France: As the Case stands,
Holland, France and Flanders are the Places from whence we can expect any
Benefit by this Liberty. In Holland Protestant Artificers are as free and easy
as in England; but in Flanders, though they be an industrious and honest Sort
of People, yet are they all Popish: and I am confident, if they thought they
might freely exercise their Religion in England, Multitudes of them would seek
an Asilum in England, to be freed from the Insults and Tyranny they are always
subject to from the French; and it may be reasonably expected, that Multitudes
of People in the French Conquests would flee the French Tyranny in them, if
they might be free in their Religion in England: and it is not unlike, but upon
Advantages given the French, we might procure many of them to fish from our
Western Ports, if they were free in their Religion.

Object. But this Permission would disturb the Peace, and endanger the Safety
of the Church of England.

Answ. Good Men are scarce, and so these Men had need of taking care for
themselves; and these Men are as careful of the Church, as the Freemen are of
their Privileges, and rather suffer the Nation to sink, than they any ways
endangered.

Is not the Church of England in the Kingdom of England, and protected by it;
so that if the Kingdom falls, the Church cannot stand? Did not our Savior send
his Apostles to propagate the Gospel in this World, though they suffered
Persecution and Martyrdom for it? Yet these good Men are fearful of themselves
and the Church of England, if others come to support the Kingdom, and enrich
them: When any Foreigners are planted here, have not the Churchmen, if they
will make it their Business, an Opportunity of winning them to the Church of
England, and have Reason, and the Authority of the Kingdom to do it? and if
these will not prevail, the Fault is others, not theirs.

For my part I detest the Roman Superstition and Idolatry as much as any Man,
and am as fearful of the Tyranny which the Pope claims, as well over Princes,
as Men's Consciences; yet I apprehend no Danger of either, by this Liberty
granted to Popish Artificers: for it is one thing for Jesuits and Popish
Priests to make it their Business to pervert Men to their Sentiments, and
another thing for poor Popish People to make it their Business how to subsist,
which will take up their whole time, especially where they are in a strange
Place, and Strangers to the People, (unless by accident in their Dealings for
their Support) and also to the Language of the People where they live. I would
know what Inconvenience has followed* for permitting Brewer and his Followers
(which were all Papists) to instruct our Natives in making and dying fine
Woollen Cloths: and in all the Disturbances and Tumults of the late Times after
1640, let any Man show me one Instance wherein the Walloons, and their
Descendants planted in London, Norwich, Colchester* or Canterbury, contributed
to any of them; however they had been sufficiently provoked thereto, both by
Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Wren.

Expedient XX.
That it be free for all Foreigners to purchase Lands and Tenements in England.

The Reason hereof is, because where Men purchase Lands and Tenements, they
design a Habitation, whereby the Nation will be so much more peopled as
Purchasers are more, and the Kingdom so much strengthened, and the King's
Revenues so much increased, as these Purchasers and their Families consume more
excizable Goods, or foreign which pay Customs: and so much more as the
Purchase-Money shall be more, so much more will the Nation be enriched; for the
Lands and Houses we retain still, and the Purchase-Money is an Addition to the
Treasure of the Nation: and this is so much an Advantage to the Nation, because
no Man in it runs any Hazard or Venture of Loss by it; whereas in all the
Wealth which Merchants acquire by Foreign Trades, they run not only the Hazard
of Loss* but of being undone.

Expedient XXI.
That a public Encouragement be given to all Foreigners which shall carry on
the Fishing Trade from the Ports of England, in the New Foundland Fishery, and
to Greenland, Iseland, Westmony, and upon the Coasts of England and Scotland,
for the taking and curing White-Herring and Cod-fish.

The Reasons hereof are manifold; for above all other Trades, the Fishing-Trade
increases Mariners and Navigation; for every Man in the Fishing-Trade becomes a
Mariner, whereas in the East India and other Trades, it may be a thousand
Artificers do not employ one Mariner; and in the East India Trade, it may be a
Question, whether we do not lose more Seamen or make more Mariners; and those
which survive, by reason of the Diversities of the Climates, and their feeding
upon salted Meats, and drinking sour Drinks, are so feeble, that a Fisherman is
able to fight and beat two of them: Add hereto, the Fishermen are always at
home, and so at hand upon all Occasions to serve the Nation, whereas in the
East India Trade you scarce hear of one in two Years, and not in a Year from
those to Turkey, and our American Plantations. Besides, these Fishing-Trades,
above all others, employ all sorts of poor People at home, in making Ropes,
Sails, and Nets for it.

If ever these Fisheries be retrieved, it will be with great Difficulty, and a
Work of Time, considering the Poverty of the Coast-Towns of England, and the
Potency of the Dutch and French in opposing us, who are possessed of them; and
it is more difficult to retrieve a lost Game, than not to be able to play it
before it be lost: yet this Benefit we have by it, that we have discovered how
we lost our Game, and how the Dutch and French won theirs.

In the Fisheries upon the Coast of England and Scotland, besides the King's
indubitable Right, whatever Grotius in his Mare Liberum says to the contrary,
the English may take in fresh Water and Provisions, and dry their Nets upon the
Shore, which the King may forbid Foreigners to do in their Fisheries, which may
be of great Advantage to the English; for the Dutch begin their Fisheries of
White Herring upon the Coast of Schotland or Schetland, upon the Rising Grounds
(as they call them) and follow that Fishery four Months in the Year, before the
Herrings come to the Coast of Norfolk and Suffolk, where we begin ours, which
Fishery we enjoy no longer than while the Herrings pass to the South of
Norfolk; so as the English enjoy this Fishery but about a Fortnight or three
Weeks: and I am told, the Dutch in this Fishery are threefold more than the
English, tho the English, by Men of War, force the Dutch to fish farther from
the Coast than the English do: yet this Advantage the English have above the
Dutch in this Fishery, that they can cure Red Herrings, which the Dutch cannot,
for White Herrings cannot be cured into Red, but when new taken: so that the
English, as soon as they take them, bring them to Yarmouth, Lestolf and
Pakefield, where they make them Red; whereas the Dutch fishing a Fortnight or
three Weeks before they return to their own Coasts, the Herrings become too
stale to be made Red.

For the Employment of the English Natives in making Cordage, Nets, and Sails,
for the Fishing Trades, it is requisite that Workhouses be erected in every
Port-Town for poor Children to be instructed in Spinning and making Nets; and
that rough Hemp, Flax, Pitch, and Tar, be bought at a public Charge, and laid
up in public Warehouses, and delivered to those who work, by select Officers,
so that these be not bought up by Wholesale People, and by them sold to
Retailers, to be sold to poor working People. These public Stores, tho they be
renewed, yet there need be no further Charge to the Corporation or Port after
the first, because the first being paid out of the Labors of the working
People, the Profit may buy more.

I think it were fit an Account were given to the Justices of the Peace of the
next Division, of every Port-Town, in their Quarterly Sessions, of the state of
the Stock of the Port, as well as the poor People employed hereby.

And for increase of Workmen in these Manufactures, it is fit that all
Vagabonds and wandering Persons should not be sent back to the places of their
last Habitation, but to the Ports of England, to work in them; for bunching
Hemp, and winding Ropes, require but little Skill besides bodily Labor, and
Spinning and making Nets is soon taught: and that People which are punished by
Whipping and Branding, and then let loose, should be punished with more than
ordinary Labor in these, for some time, more or less, as the nature of their
Crimes are, instead of those Punishments. So that tho our Timber be not so
cheap and convenient for building Vessels for the Fishing Trade, yet when one
is bought, we may fit it up for the Fishing-Trade as cheap as the Dutch, and
cheaper than the French, and our desolate Coast-Towns be so much more peopled,
as People shall be employed in making Ropes, Nets, and Sails, for the
Fishing-Trade.

I wish an Experiment were made of our English Hemp, cured in running Streams,
whether it would not take Tar, and endure a Straint, and not break, as well as
foreign: I am sure, of my own Knowledge, the Wretting and Curing it in running
Streams will not kill the Fish; and if for that time it makes the Water bitter,
so as Cattle will not drink it, Men, for as little Charge, may make Pits for
their Cattle to drink in them, as to cure their Hemp in them: and if, by this
means, our Hemp should make as good Cordage as foreign, I am sure above 20000
Acres might be converted to planting Hemp in the Isle of Ely, the Fen-Lands in
Lincolnshire, and manifold more in Ireland, which at present are of little use
to the Nation; and if Hemp and Flax could be cheaper hereby than they are
imported from Liefland and Prussia, the Nation would save the foreign Expense.
But if Hemp and Flax should be planted, it is fit they should be exempted from
payment of Tithes, for by it, it may be, foreign Hemp and Flax might be cheaper
imported. But then where should People be got to these? It must be by
Foreigners or Scots.

Object. Hereby you would undo the Church.

Answ. Not at all, for they have no Tithe-Hemp and Flax before they be planted,
and so the Church and Churchmen cannot lose or be undone, in not having that
they never had; and why should the Interest of twenty or thirty Men be
preferred to that of the Nation?

Suppose 10000 l. per An. should be given for binding 2000 Apprentices in the
Fishing-Trade, and these, one with another, earn 20 l. per An. this would be
40000 l. a year Benefit to the Nation; and in 10 years this would be 400000 l.
Benefit to it. I would know which way Money could otherways be better employed.

The French King, at his own Charge, erects Schools in all the Seaport Towns
of France, to instruct Youth in Mathematics in the French Tongue gratis, and
gives half Pay to all young lusty French, for two Years, who will employ
themselves in the New Foundland Fishery: and is it not fit the English should
give equal or more Encouragement to the English for carrying on our Fisheries?

Suppose a Tax were given for this end, that all such Foreigners as would bring
in any Fishing-Vessels into any of the Ports of England, the Foreigner should
be paid the full Value of his Vessel, provided he laid out Money in purchasing
a Tenement or Land in England, to secure him and his Interest in England. By
this means the Nation exports no Money, which it must do in buying a foreign
Vessel; the House and Land we still have, and gained a Vessel, and Master and
Family, which we had not before; whereby the English may be instructed to cure
White Herring and Cod-fish as well as the Dutch, and also how the Dutch and
Hamburghers have improved the Whale-Fishery, as much to their Benefit and
Navigation as our Loss.

It will be necessary, if the Nation designs to set up a Fishery from the Ports
of England, that the Returns of Fish be imported Custom free; for otherwise it
will be impossible to increase the Foreign Trade for Fishing beyond the Returns
which shall be consumed in England.

Object. This will hinder the King in his Customs.

Answ. Not at all, for the King has none in any of these Trades, so cannot lose
by Goods imported in Return of them; but I say, the King will be a Gainer by
the Excise of Beer, Brandies, and Wines, in victualling Vessels in this Trade;
and by the Consumption of these, by these and their Families at home, which are
employed in them.

Expedient XXII.
That Encouragement be given for building Vessels for the Fishing-Trade, and
our other Trades in New England.

The Reason hereof is, the English had better furnish themselves with Vessels
by their Fellow Subjects, than depend upon Foreigners for them, if this can be
as cheaply and conveniently done by those as these.

I am sure the Principals of building Vessels in New England, viz. Timber,
Masts, Pitch, and Tar, may be cheaper had in New England than the Dutch can
acquire these out of Germany and Norway; and little Iron need be used in
building them, especially if instead of Iron-bolts Trunnailing be used, which
is much better.

But this building Vessels for the Fishing and other Trades in New England,
must for some time be done by foreign Carpenters, for our English know no other
Modes in building but for the Newcastle Trade; and these are the Ships which
the Act of Navigation calls our English-built Ships, which the English are
obliged to trade in, in all their other as well as Newcastle Trade.

If the Parliament should give 2000 l. per Annum for some time, as five or six
Years, to twenty Ship-Carpenters, which build Busses, and other Vessels in
other Trades, to be paid above the Wages given in Holland, to each one hundred
Pounds a Year more; I do not believe but that they may be had upon these Terms:
and the Inhabitants of New England are an industrious and numerous People,
already build Vessels, as well for their Trades to our Plantations as to
England, and would understand how much their Interest would be improved hereby,
having Hands enough, and Materials better and cheaper than can be had in any
other place.

Expedient XXIII.
That the Ports of England be free for all Foreigners to import and export all
sorts of Merchandise.

The Reason hereof is, That the Wealth of every Nation consists in Goods more
than Money; so much therefore as any Nation abounds more in Goods than another,
so much richer is that Nation than the other: for Money is of no other use,
than as employed in Trade; and therefore wherever the Market is, Money will
follow. Holland and Spain are plain Demonstrations hereof; for there is no
Money in Holland but what they acquire by Trade, yet have Principals of Trade
neither for Navigation nor Merchandise: whereas Spain has yearly many Millions
of Treasure in it, and manifold Principals of Trade and Navigation, yet can
keep no Money, whilst Holland abounds with it.

Suppose we should lose a hundred Sail of our laden Merchantmen, and all the
Men, were it more or less, will not any Man say the Nation will be so much
impoverished and weakened as the Goods and Ships are in Value, and the Mariners
more? Convert the Proposition then, and suppose by the Freedom of our Ports
Foreigners should bring in as many Ships, and Goods of like Value, and like
Number of Mariners, would not this be as much an enriching and strengthening of
the Nation as the other was an impoverishing and weakening of it?

Does not Leghorn flourish above all the Ports of Italy, by the Freedom of it?
And does not the Pope see the Convenience of it, by making Civita Vecchia a
free Port? And does not Gottenburg flourish above all the Port-Towns of Norway,
tho made a free Port but for a time?

Sure a Stander-by would be amazed to see such vast Fleets of Dutch,
Hamburghers, Danes, and Swedes, every Year pass by our excellent and safe
Harbors of Falmouth, Plymouth, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, and Harwich, which are
always open, to encounter the Sands of Zealand, and the unsafe Passage of the
Fly or Vly, into the Ze^der Sea, where they are all the Winter in great Danger
to be stranded by stormy Weather, and to be haled over the Pampus to prevent
it, and the Rock before Hamburgh and Gottenburgh, and where they are frozen up
commonly three Months in the Year, but more, if he be told the Reason of it,
which is, Hell and Shipwreck is not more dangerous than our Ports, by the Act
of Navigation, and the Law against Freedom of Trade in England; yet the English
enjoy that Freedom abroad in France (when at Peace) in Portugal, Italy, and
Turkey, which they deny others at home: and herein we'll observe our Savior's
Rule, To do as to be done by.

Admit the Freedom of our Ports should procure no Foreigners to inhabit with
us, yet by their Trades, and laying up their Vessels in Winter-Seasons, the
Nation would acquire the Benefit of victualling their Vessels, and supplying
the Masters and Mariners with Provisions during their Abode, which would
increase our Markets, and enrich the Nation.

Object. If our Ports were free, we should undo our Natives in all their
foreign Trades.

Answ. I expected no better Reasoning; but if we keep our Newcastle Trade, and
that to Ireland, and our Plantations, exclusive to Foreigners, let any Man show
wherein this Nation can receive any Prejudice by Foreigners importing any sort
of Goods, or by exporting ours, if the Natives be free to buy Ships: for my
part I know none, except by the French bringing in wrought Silks; and this is a
needless Fear, now silken Manufactures are so well wrought here, that if raw
Silks be freely imported, silken Manufactures will be cheaper wrought here than
can be imported from France, and some fine Needle-works in Linen from France
and Flanders: forbid then that from France, but permit it from Flanders,
thereby to enable them to hold a better Correspondence with us for our Woollen
Manufactures.

CONCLUSION.
I Have done, and I do not know but that I am the first that ever began a Work
of this Nature; and I was the rather induced to it, because tho the Employment
of People, and the Freedom of Trade, be the two great Principles of the
flourishing and happy State of any Country, yet the Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy, whose Interest it is to have these, make it not their Business to
understand them: and our Merchants, who are as understanding a sort of Men as
any are in any other Country, tho they understand that Freedom of Trade and
Employment of People be the greatest Happiness of any Country, yet these
(especially those who act in Companies exclusive to the rest of their
Fellow Subjects) understand it to be their Interest in continuing the State of
Affairs, in reference to Trade, as they now stand; for hereby they have the
Employment of the Natives in their own Power, to take what they please off
their Hands in foreign Trade, and at their own Prizes (beyond which the Natives
cannot be employed in the foreign Vent of our Manufactures) and the Artificers
in them reduced to poor Estate, and Multitudes of poor People made hereby a
Burden to the Nation; besides manifold others seek their Subsistence (for all
Creatures desire to subsist) by ungodly means: And as in the foreign Vent of
our Manufactures, so the restraining the Import of foreign Commodities to our
English Merchants (especially those who trade in Companies exclusive to their
Fellow Subjects) is not less injurious than the Export of our Manufactures; for
hereby the Merchants impose what Rates they please upon our poor Artificers,
and those which cannot come up to their Terms must not be employed.

Nor is it better in the Domestic Trades of our Manufactures, for few
Manufactures can be managed but in Towns, and frequented Places, where the
Workers may be assisted by others, and with those things which they stand in
need of in their Employments; yet all our great and frequented Towns in England
are Corporations and Market Towns, which exclude thousands of Artificers out of
them, for not being free of them, or not having been bound Apprentices in them,
whilst these Freemen, by the Prerogative of their Freedom, impose what Rates
they please upon the poor Artificers, and set their own Prizes upon the
Nobility, Gentry, and others who buy of them.

He that begins any Work, labors under manifold more Difficulties, and is more
subject to Error than another who builds upon his Foundation. This is my Case,
and therefore am more excusable for the Frailties and Errors I may have
committed in this Design; but upon the Discovery of any, I promise to recant
it. I am sure my Intention is honest herein, being for the Good of my Country;
and those Labors are best which are spent in the Benefit of it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 16. r. as fierce. P. 52. l. 16. del. this. l. 17. r. this House.
P. 57. l. 16. del. the Parentheses. P. 100. l. 5. del. Comma after not. P. 118.
l. 28. after drawn add;. P. 119. l. 41. del. the last that. P. 132. l. 15. r.
Spanish Secretary. P. 135. l. 24. r. then went. P. 167. l. 30. r. then. P. 374.
l. 15. del. Comma after God. P. 378. l. 10. and 379. l. 20. for former r.
first. P. 398. l. ult. after confirmed put Comma. P. 530. l. 10. r. they will.
P. 540. l. 37. r. 20 l. P. 646. l. 1. ^. and not to do it, and give.

An Alphabetical TABLE OF THE Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
A.
ABbot, Archbishop, zealous for the Elector Palatine, 93. His plain Letter to
the King, 111, 112. Refuses to license Sibthorp's Sermon, 197. Is basely dealt
with on that account, ib. 268. His Character and Death, 238. Abhorrers of
Petitions for Parliament prosecuted by the Commons, 555, 556. Act of 35 Eliz.
repealed by Parliament, 557. but not by the King, 559. Act of Uniformity, 439.
Adjutators in the Army, 318. Albeville, Marquess, his Memorial at the Hague,
649. Algerines at War with the English and Dutch, 452. Alliance with Spain, the
Commons Votes concerning it, 558. Amboyna, the Dutch Cruelty there, 121. Ancre,
a Frenchman, his lamentable End, 86. Ann, K. James's Queen, her Character, 75.
Is averse to Villiers, and foretells what he would be, ib. 76, 124. Her Death,
88. Apprentices, 663 -- 665, 678. Arbitrary Notions; see Cowel. Archy, K.
James's Fool, 112. Argyle, Marquess, executed, 444. His Character and Story,
568, 569. Earl, his Character, etc. 568 -- 570, 575 -- 578. His Explanation of
the Test, for which he is tried and condemned, but escapes, 578 -- 586.
Aristotle's Logic censured, 22. Arlington, Lord, rudely treats the Prince of
Orange, but fails in his Design, 508. Arminians severe against their Opponents,
242. See Mountague, etc. Army declares for the King, 319. yet draw up a
Remonstrance against him, march to London, and exclude most of the Members,
328. Articuli Cleri; see Bancroft. Ashley Cooper made Lord Chancellor, 478.
Joins with the Country Party, and is turned out, 492. His Life most unjustly
aimed at, 596 -- 598. Is cleared by the Grand Jury, 599. Remarks on his Case,
ib. Askew Sir George his Success at Sea, 353, 354. Avaux, the French
Ambassador, discovers his Master's and K. James's Designs, 649, 650. Audley
Palace, what it cost, 77. Author, Story of his Father, Brother, and Himself, in
Cromwell's time, 392 -- 396.
B.
BAcon, Sir Francis, censured for Bribery, 97. Bancroft, ABp, for Absolute
Power in the King, 57, 59. Barebone's Parliament, 373. Their Thoughts of the
Dutch, 374, 375. Their Articles with them, 376. Their Acts; resign their Power
to Cromwell, 377. Barnvelt, Head of a Dutch Faction, 33, 121. Takes Advantage of
the ill Posture of K. James's Affairs, 80. Loses his Head for opposing the
Prince of Orange, 121. Batton, Sir William, joins Prince Charles at Sea, 326.
Bedlow discovers Godfrey's Murder, 534. Bill of Exclusion rejected by the
Lords, 557. Billeting of Soldiers voted a Grievance, 207, 217. Bishop of
London, his Motion to debate the King's Speech, 629. Is suspended by the High
Commission, 639. Bishops in Scotland re-ordained, 122, 262. In England voted
out of Parliament, 276. Oppose several good Bills, 490, 629. Several of 'em,
both in England and Scotland, most profligate Persons, 639, 640. Seven refuse
to read K. James's Declaration; are tried, and cleared, 644, 645. Remarks
thereon, and on their Prayers for the King, 645 -- 647, 650. Blake Governor of
Taunton, 312. Commands at Sea, 327, 351, 353 -- 355. Bohemia, History of that
Kingdom, 89 -- 93, 101, 102. Choose Frederick Count Palatine their King, 93.
Booth, Sir George, overthrown by Lambert, 409. Bridgman, Lord Keeper, his
Speech on K. Charles's Treaties, 475. Is turned out, 478. Bristol; see Digby.
Britain, its Situation, Bounds, etc. 12. Justly claims the Sovereignty of the
Seas, 659, 660. See Grotius. Buckingham; see Villiers.
C.
CAbal in 1671. who they were, 478. Their pretended Causes of the Dutch War,
479. Another in 1673. 495. Care, Henry, sentenced for writing his Weekly
Packet, 546. Carr, Sir Rob. has an extravagant Boon ordered by K. James, 61.
Made Viscount Rochester, and courted by the Countess of Essex, 63. Procures the
Ruin of Overbury, 64, 68 -- 70. Created Earl of Somerset, and married in
extravagant Splendour, 70, 71. His Fall, 74. His Pardon refused to be signed,
76. His vast Estate, 77. which is seized by the King, 79. Tried for Overbury's
Murder, ib. Castlemain sent Ambassador to the Pope, 642. Cavaliers slighted by
Charles II. 424, 426. Cecil, Lord Treasurer, saves K. James 15000 l. and how,
61. Charles I. while Prince, his breach of Faith in Spain; breaks off his
Match, 116, 117, 128. Is proposed to the French King's Daughter, 119, 125, 140.
yet her Portion not a tenth of the Infanta's, 142. The extravagant Articles of
her Marriage, 142, 143. Berule's Deputation for a Dispensation for it, 143 --
145. First 15 Years of his Reign perfectly French, 153. His great Wilfulness
and Levity, 156, 187. Makes War on Spain at Buckingham's Instigation, 157.
Commands Pennington to deliver up his Ships to the French, 162. His Warrant in
favor of Papists; dispenses with the Laws, 165, 168. His first Breach with his
Parliament, 166. His many Mistakes the first five Months, 171, 172. His ill
Success in the War with Spain, 172, 173. Breaks his Word with the Keeper, 179.
His peremptory Message to the Commons, with their Answer, and his threatening
Reply, 183, 184. Reproves his Parliament, 184, 185. His Reasons for blasting
Bristol's Articles against Buckingham, 187. The Lords Reasons against his, 188,
189. His Arbitrary Declarations after dissolving the Parliament in favor of
Buckingham, descanted on, 190 -- 192. Is accountable only to God, 190, 210,
219, 236, 268. Demands Money of his People out of Parliament, 196, 228, 252.
Imprisons the Gentry for refusing to pay, and keeps up a Standing Army on free
Quarter, 199, 228, 236. His dissembling and threatening Speech at the opening of
Parliament, with large Remarks upon it, 202 -- 206. His Message to the Commons
to hasten Supplies, 210, 211. His Answer to the Petition of Right, 213. which
he resolves to abide by, 214. Passes the Petition, 216. His unaccountable
Speech against the Commons concerning Tunnage and Poundage, with Remarks on it,
219 -- 224. Makes a Papist Lord Treasurer, 226. Commands the Speaker to put no
Question concerning Grievances, 229. Imprisons several Members of Parliament,
232, 233. who are denied Bail, 234, 235. Displeased with the Judges
Determination thereon, 235. His threatening Declaration at dissolving the
Parliament, 236, 237. Makes Peace with France to the ruin of the Reformed, 237.
Sends 6000 Men to assist the Swede, 238. His great Fickleness, 239, 271, 279,
298, 311, 330. Disturbs the Dutch fishing Trade, 259. His Instructions
concerning the Scots solemn Covenant, 264. Summons a General Assembly and
Parliament in Scotland, ib. Sends a Fleet and Army against the Scots, 265.
Boasts of his Prerogatives in calling Parliaments, which is descanted on, 268
-- 270. Marches against the Scots; is petitioned for a free Parliament* treats
with them, 272. Is forsaken by his Friends, 274, 275. Begins his Reformation
too late, 275, 286. Establishes Presbytery in Scotland, 277. Long before he
declared the Irish Rebels, 277, 278. Demands five Members of the Commons, 278,
290. Is advised to stay at London, but would not, 278. Is refused Entrance at
Hull; sets up his Standard at Nottingham; joined by the Nobility, 279. Is
worsted at Brentford, 297. Summons his mungrel Parliament at Oxford; makes
Cessation of Arms with the Irish; withdraws his Forces from Ireland, 300, 343.
His ill Success, 306, 308, 313, 315. His Counsels with the Queen discovered,
312. Deals privately with the Irish, 312, 314. His Commission to Glamorgan,
314. Submits to the Scots, 316. who sell him: Is confined, 317. Is seized by
the Army, 318. His Letters to the Queen, threatening Cromwell, by whom he is
removed to the Isle of Wight, 323. Treats with the Parliament, 324. Remarks on
his sad State, 316, 317, 325 -- 327, 333, 334. His Death, and Character, 334 --
337. A Story of him concerning Buckingham's Funeral, 337. Charles II. takes the
Covenant, and is proclaimed in Scotland, 344, 345. Flies into England; is
routed at Worcester* 346. Assists at the Pyrenean Treaty, and is slighted by
the French, 422. Sends Letters from Breda, 425. Is restored without Terms, with
an extravagant Joy; rejects Cromwell's Treaty of Commerce with the French, 426.
whom he imitates in his Guards, 427. Delivers them up Dunkirk, and assists 'em
against the Spaniard, 429. His Luxury, Debauchery, etc. 430. Calls a
Parliament, ib. Restores Episcopacy in Scotland, 445. Grants a Toleration, 447.
Afterward takes it off, 448. Makes War on the Dutch, 452. His Speech to the
Commons on that occasion, 452* 453. His vast Revenues, 453. compared with Q.
Elizabeth's, 454, 455. His slight Preparations for the War, 455, 456. Is
careless and prodigal therein, 456, 467, 468. His ill Success in the second
Fight, 459, 460. Makes a dishonorable Peace with them, 469, 495 -- 497. Enters
into a League with the Dutch and Swede, 472. but breaks it off by means of his
Sister, who soon after dies, 474. His deep Perfidiousness and Dissimulation,
475. Is a Pensioner to France, 477, 522, 523, 548, 561. Shuts up the Exchequer,
478. Makes War again on the Dutch without Cause, 478, 479. Suffered Marsilly,
whom he employed in Switzerland, to be murdered at Paris, 479. Raises an Army
under Schomberg and Fitzgerald, 487. Sends 3 Lords to the French on a dark
Design, 488. His Demands at the Treaty at Cologn, 492. Assists the French with
vast Stores, 498. Mediates a Peace betwixt France and the Confederates, 498.
Breaks his Promise to Sir W. Temple, 499, 503. His unprecedented Prorogation of
Parliament, 504. Insisted on by the Lords to be a Dissolution, 505. His Rage at
the Commons for their Advice, descanted on, 506. Adjourns them without their
Consent, 506. Endeavors a separate Peace betwixt France and the States, 507,
515. His Answer to the Pr. of Orange concerning it, 511. and to Sir W. Temple,
512. Treats with them, 516, 517. Sends Lord Duras into France, 518, 519. Treats
about a War with France, 524, 525. Is governed by French Counsels; sends Du
Cross to supplant Sir W. Temple, 526, 527. Calls his second Parliament which
met in 40 days; pretends Zeal in discovering the Popish Plot, 537. Chooses a new
Privy Council, and promises to be ruled by his Parliament, etc. 538. His great
Hypocrisy and Deceit, 539, 548, 559. Declares himself a Whore-master, 544, 545.
His dissembling Speech to the Parliament after many Prorogations, with Remarks
on it, 547 -- 552. Summons a Parliament at Oxford, 559. Is concerned in
Fitz-Harris's Plot, 564. His Declaration at dissolving the Oxford Parliament,
descanted on, 566 -- 568. His Death and Character, 604 -- 606. His obscure
Burial, and good Deeds, 606 -- 608. Died a Papist, 610. Charter of London
ravished by the Court, 600, 601, 614. and those of other Corporations taken and
surrendered, 603, 615, 633. Children more in England than employed, 27. Clergy,
when too numerous, the Cause of Factions, 240, 241, 449. Cleypole, Cromwell's
Son-in-law, imprisoned for a pretended Plot, 532. Clifford foretells another
Dutch War, 473* Made Lord Treasurer, 478. But being a Papist, is forced to
resign, 491. Cobbet Colonel taken Prisoner, 412. Cockain's Project for dressing
Cloths monopoliz'd, and the Consequences of it, 65. Coke Sir Edw. grants a
Warrant for seizing Somerset, 78. Removed from being Chief Justice, and why,
79, 82. Is prosecuted, 103. Imprisoned without Cause assigned, and sued by the
King, who is cast, 105. Not admitted into his Presence, 164. Is made Sheriff,
and why, 180. Moves for the Petition of Right, etc. 207 -- 209. Is against
trusting to the King's Verbal Declaration, 211, 212. His sharp Speech against
Buckingham, 215, 216. His Papers seized at his Death, 253. His Books made use
of by the King's Party, tho printed by the Parliament, 279. Coleman holds
Correspondence with the Jesuits, 500. His Papers, etc. conveyed away, 532.
College, Stephen, cleared by the Grand Jury of London, but basely murdered at
Oxford under a Color of Justice, 591 -- 595. Cologn, Treaty there proposed by
the Swede, 492. Commission of Ecclesiastical Affairs by K. James, 633 -- 637.
Committee of Safety, 410. Agree with Monk, 412. Are threatened by Lawson, 414.
Commons insist on deciding Elections, 52. Alarmed at the Growth of Popery, etc.
97, 98, 493, 531. Present Remonstrances to the King, 98 -- 100, 217. Their
stinging Petition against Papists, 134, 138. Zealous against them, 166, 168,
169. Grant the greatest Tax ever given before, 206. Fall upon Grievances, 207,
216, 231, 266. Their Declaration against Tunnage and Poundage, 218, 219.
Protest against paying Money not granted by Parliament, 229. Their Vow
concerning Religion, 231. Zealous against Delinquents, 274. Their Remonstrance
of all the King's Miscarriages, 278, 289. Inflamed at his demanding the 5
Members, 278, 291. whom they vindicate, 291. Pass the Self-denying Ordinance,
310. Deliver up the Militia of London to the Army, which is petitioned against,
320. Treat with the King at the Isle of Wight, 327. Refuse to grant Supplies
before the Nation is secured, 493, 531. Their Votes against the King's evil
Counselors, etc. 494. against the Lords Jurisdiction in Appeals from Chancery,
502, 504. Their Bills to prevent the French Designs, etc. 503, 555. Address the
King for a League with the Dutch, 505. Their Votes for disbanding the Army,
536. for the King's Safety, 539. against the Tories, etc. 552. concerning the
Revenue, 558, 559. Confederates, their Success against the French, 504.
Complain to our King of the French Ravages, 513. Exclaim against the separate
Peace, 529. Convention act hand over head in restoring Charles II. etc. 423,
424. Sent him 50000 l. 425. Convocation frame an Oath to preserve the Church,
and grant the King a Benevolence, 273, 367. Cook, Rob. a Pythagorean, his
manner of living, etc. 664. Cornish, Alderman, his hard Usage, is murdered, 622
-- 624. Corporation-Oath; see Oaths. Corporations unjust in excluding
Foreigners, 27, 658. Cotton, Sir Rob. his Advice to the King, 199, 200.
Covenant; see Scots. Covenanters rise in Scotland, their Proclamations, etc.
542. Their Actions; are routed, 543. Coventry, Lord Keeper, his Speech on the
King's behalf, 184. -- Mr. Henry breaks the Triple-League, is made Secretary of
State, 477, 478. Offers to sell his Place, 514. Cowel his Interpreter incenses
the Commons, 59, 60. Croke Judge, a remarkable Story of him, 259. Cromwell Lord,
his Letter to Buckingham, 157. -- Oliver, his Pedigree, and Character; how he
raised himself, 301, 302. Designs against him, 303 -- 305. His first Success,
and Loss, 310. Treats with the King, his Ambition therein, 322, 323. Intercepts
the King's Letters, 323. Storms Drogheda, and reduces all Ireland, 344. Is
declared General of all the Forces; his Success against the Scots, 345, 346.
and at Worcester, 346. Contrives how to set up himself, 348, 358 -- 361.
Summons several great Men about settling the Nation, with their Opinions, 348,
349. Furiously dissolves the Rump, with Remarks thereon, 362, 363. His first
Manifesto to the Nation, 370. Summons a Council to govern the Nation; his
Speech to them, 372, 373. Gets rid of 'em, 377, 378. Appoints another Council;
is declared Protector; his Instrument of Government, with Remarks, 379, 380.
Treats with the Dutch; his Design against the Pr. of Orange, 381, 382. His
Selfishness, etc. 383, 387. His pretended Parliament, and Speech to 'em, 385.
Is highly disgusted, and dissolves 'em, 386. Makes an unjust War with Spain,
with the ill Success of it, 387, 388. Assists the French against them, 389,
390, 401. His Ways to raise Money, 392. Is ill beloved; under great
Disquietudes* his Misfortune by a Coach, 397, 402. His third Parliament, 398.
His House of Lords, 399. Is attempted to be killed ib. Compared with the
greatest Tyrants, 399 -- 401. His fourth Parliament, 401. His ill Success at
Ostend, 402. His Army of Volunteers, and Death, 403. His good Deeds, 404, 405.
-- Rich. declared Protector, 405. Has 90 Congratulatory Addresses presented
him, 406. Recognized by his Parliament, which he is forced to dissolve, and
thereupon is deposed, 407, 408.
D.
DAnby Earl, impeached by the Commons, 536, 538. Dangerfield discovers the
Meal-tub-Plot, is vilified by the Chief Justice, 546. His Trial, barbarous
Punishment, and Death, 638. Dean, Admiral, slain by the Dutch, 371. -- Sir
Anth. sent into France to build Ships, 497. Delinquents, first use of the Word,
274. Denbigh Earl, sent to relieve Rochel, but did not, 225. Derby Earl,
routed, and beheaded, 347. Deserters hanged against Law, 643. Dewit, John, his
Character and Actions, 484, 485. He and his Brother assassinated by the Mob,
487. Digby, Earl of Bristol, his noble Character, and severe Charges against
Buckingham, 109, 110, 118, 137, 187. His Ruin designed by the Prince and
Buckingham; his Defense of himself, is recalled from Spain, 119, 138, 139.
Refuses the K. of Spain's generous Offers, 120. His Reasons for his Proceedings
in Spain, 128, 129. Is confined, and petitions the King, 139, 175, 185.
Petitions the Lords for his Writ, whereon it is sent him, 186. Is accused by the
King, etc. ib. Is committed to the Tower, 192, 193. Followed Charles I. in all
his Adversity, 193. Discords in Religion often arise from Kings, 17. Dispensing
Power; see James II. Dissenters, a Bill for their Ease past the Commons, but
fiting out by the Lords, 490. Fierce Laws against them in Scotland, ib.
Sever^ly persecuted by the King and Tories, 587. Too forward to address K.
James, 642, 647. Dover Treaty, 474. Dumbar Fight, 345. Dunkirk sold to the
French, 429. Dutch declared Free States, 26, 61, 339. Much in our Debt, 32, 33,
54. Pay Tribute for fishing, 32, 61. Get their vast Debt remitted, and their
Cautionary Towns, 80, 81. What they detained from the English, 115, 121, 249,
250, 338. Dispute the Sovereignty of the Seas with the English, 244, etc.
Refuse a Coalition with England, 350, 374. Their Engagements at Sea with the
Rump, 351, 354 -- 356, 371, 372. Their pretended Excuses, etc. therein, 351,
352, 358, 372. Animate Cromwell against the Rump, 361, 371. Are in great
Confusion, 374. Their advantageous Theaty with Cromwell, 383. Court Charles II.
to a League, 426. An Account of their former Encroachments, etc. 450 -- 452.
Their double-dealing, 452. Their Engagements, at Sea with Charles II. 457 --
461. Enter the River, and burn our Ships, 468. Get a beneficial Peace with K.
Charles, 469. yet their Smirna Fleet set upon; send Deputies to the English and
French Kings, 478, 479. whose Fleets they rout, 481. Recapitulation of their
History, 482, 483. Make a separate Peace with France, 523, 527. Complain to the
English Court of the French, 524. Assist the Pr. of Orange in saving these
Nations, 649. Their Answer to Albeville's Memorial, 650.
E.
East India Company incorporated by Cromwell, 338. Edghill, Battle there
doubtful, 296. Education of Youth, 23, 240, 448, 665. Egerton Lord Chanc.
refuses to sign Somerset's Pardon, 76. Eikon Basilike disowned by Charles II.
425. Elector Palatine; see Frederick. Elizabeth Queen forbid French and Dutch
building Ships, 30. Granted the Dutch License to fish, 32. Her sharp Answer to
them, 33. Allowed K. James in Scotland a Pension, 34. Elliot, Sir John, against
the Court, 189, 213, 231. Information against him in Star Chamber, 234, 235.
Essex Earl, the Parliament's General, 296, 297, 303. His ill Success, 307. Lays
down his Commission, 310. Essex Earl, murdered in the Tower, 601, 602.
Exchequer shut up by the King and his Cabal, 478.
F.
FAirfax, Sir Tho. for the Parliament, 298, 300, 306. Is made General, 310. --
Lord, favors Monk, 412, 414, 416. Falkland, Lord, slain; his Character, 299.
Felton stabs Buckingham, 225. Is threatened with the Rack, 227. Finch Sir Joh.
refuses to put any Question concerning Grievances, with Remarks thereon, 229,
230, 232. Is made Chief Justice, and complies with the King's illegal Actions,
253. Made Lord Keeper, 266. -- Sir Heneage, made Lord Chancellor, etc. 492,
493. His Veracity Speeches, 493, 501. Fines excessive granted the Duke of York,
602. Fire of London, with Notes upon it, 461, 462. Fishing Trade, and fishing
on our Coasts, 32, 61, 83, 87, 243, 364, 376, 390, 391, 450, 653, 654, 675,
676, 679. Increases Navigation, 390, 676. Fitton, an infamous Person, made
Chancellor of Ireland, 641. Fitz-harris, his Plot against the Dissenters, 562
-- 564. Is committed to Newgate, but his Discovery prevented, 564, 588. Is
tried and hanged against the express Votes of the Commons, 591. Five-mile-Act
against Dissenters, 458. Designed to be revived by the Lords, with Remarks
thereon, 501, 502. Flanders overrun by the French, 470. Fleetwood made General,
408. Is advised to bring in the King, 415. Foreigners to be naturalized, and
otherwise encouraged, 556, 607, 608, 674, 675. but kept out of our American
Trades, 660. France how bounded, 11, 28. Its Grandeur owing to the Stuarts,
160, 480, 496 -- 498, 651, 652. Its Success against Spain, 256. Franche County
invaded, 473. Frederick, the Palsgrave, marries the Princess Elizabeth, 67. Has
no Relief from his Father-in-law, 93, 94, 95. Enters Prague with an Army, 93.
Totally routed, and retires into Holland, 95. Goes to his Army in Disguise,
107. which is routed, 108. Takes the Covenant, and has a Pension from our
Parliament, 309. Free Ports, 679, 680. French routed at Sea by the English,
354, 378. Looked on while the English and Dutch fought, 492. Beat Spaniards and
Dutch at Messina, 503. Endeavor a separate Peace with the Dutch, 509 -- 511.
Their Imperiousness, 521. Wheedle the English and Dutch, 522, 529. French King
breaks the Pyrenean Treaty, 427, 428, 471. Expels the English out of S.
Christophers, 460. Pretends to join the Dutch, 461. Breaks his Word with the
Irish, 472, 533. Procures the Triple League to be broke, 474, 484. Sets out a
Fleet against the Dutch, 475. Declares War to propagate the Catholic Cause,
477. His Perfidiousness, etc. 484, 498, 604. His Success and Ravages on the
Rhine, Netherlands, etc. 485 -- 487, 505, 513, 524, 530. Makes Prize of English
Ships, 498. Endeavors to break the Confederacy, 509. His Promise to the States
reflected on, 523. Falls upon the Empire without declaring War, 650. and the
English Factories at Canada, 644, 650. Impolitick in his Persecution, 657, 662.
G.
GLemham, Sir Tho. for the King, 313, 316. Godfrey, Sir Edmundbury, murdered,
533, 534. Goodman Bp of Gloucester suspended at Mountague's Instigat. 273.
Grievances increased by Intervals of Parliament, 49, 61. Grotius for the
Arminians, 121. His Mare ^iberum answered at large, 244 -- 252. Gundamor,
Spanish Ambassador here, his Character, 98. Guthry, Mr. James, imprisoned and
beheaded, 443, 444.
H.
HAmbden refuses to pay Ship Money, 258. Is prosecuted, 259. Is routed, 298.
Hamilton, Marquess, sent to quiet the Covenanters, 264. Marches into England on
behalf of the King, and is routed, 326. Is executed, 342. Harman, Sir John, his
great Danger in the Dutch Fight, 459; 460. Beats the French Fleet in America;
and reduces Surinam, 468. Haslerig, Sir Arthur, against the Army, 409. Hatton,
Lady, refuses to part with Hatton-House; 274, 275. Hayton, Capt. his noble Act
against the French at Sea, 378. Hemp and Flax, 677. Henry IV. of France his
Character, 28, 29, 67. His great Design prevented by his Death, 29, 66, 67.
Henry Pr. of Wales, his memorable Sayings; and noble Character, 65, 66.
Suspected to be poisoned, and why, 66, 79. Herbert, Sir Edw. sent Ambassador to
France, is misrepresented, but boldly offers to clear himself, 96. Hewet Dr.
put to Death by Cromwell, 403. Hide, Lord Chancellor, vindicated concerning the
Sale of Dunkirk, and the Match with Portugal, 429, 430. His Fall, and
Character, 470. High Court of Justice; see Rump. Holland privately seeks a
Peace with the Rump, with their canting Letter to 'em, 356, 357. Agree to
exclude the Pr. of Orange, 382. Holmes, Sir Rob. falls upon the Dutch
Smirna-Fleet, 478. -- Colonel, his suffering in the West, a remarkable Story,
621. Hotham, Sir John, convened before the Council, 267. Keeps Hull for the
Parliament, 279, 294. but after endeavors to deliver it up to the King, 299.
for which he and his Son lose their Heads, 300. Hubert hanged for firing the
City, to prevent a Discovery, 462. Hungary commended, its Story, 89, 90.
Huntley, Marquess, loses his Head, 316.
I.
JAmes I. his Arbitrary Act at Newark, 35. Prodigal of Proclamations, 35, 48.
Caressed by all, especially the Dutch, ib. Glories in his Birthright, etc. 34,
38, 51. Historical Remarks thereon, 38 -- 47. His profane Swearing and
Drinking, 36, 71, 151. Hates the Puritans, and is highly flattered by the
Bishops, 37. His Arbitrary Proclamation at calling his first Parliament, 50.
Quarrels with the Commons about deciding an Election, 52. Lets the K. of Spain
raise Forces in his Dominions, 54. Monopolizes the Trade to Spain and Italy,
56. Is excessive prodigal to his Favorites, 59, 62, 77. Afraid to demand
what is due from the Dutch, 60, 71, 121. His Ways of raising Money out of
Parliament, 62, 106. Invades the Privileges of Parliament, 72. His loathsome way
of kissing his Favorites, 78. Much imposed on by the Dutch, 80, 81. Treats of
a Marriage for his Son with the Infanta, 86, 98, 100. Commits all to Villiers,
87, 98. Is contemned by the Dutch, 87. by France and Germany, 97. by the
Spaniards with Lampoons, 109. Hates Parliaments, 88. Huffs his Parliament in a
Letter to the Speaker, 99. His long Invective against them, 100 -- 102. Annuls
the Commons Protestation, and dissolves them by an Arbitrary Proclamation, 104.
Imprisons several Members, and the Earl of Southampton, 104, 105. His Arbitrary
Charge to the Judges, 105. His fickle and perplexed State at breaking off his
Son's Match, 114, 115, 156. Resolves to fall in with Parliaments, 115, 125.
Pretends no favor for Papists, 126, 145. His Speech on behalf of Buckingham,
and doting on him, 136, 137. His weak Letter to the French King on account of
his Son's Match, 140, 141. His Speech to the Lords of the French Council, 145.
His Death, which seemed suspicious, 147. His Character, 106, 107, 148 -- 152.
Could meet Popery half way, 148. Charged his Son to call Parliaments often,
156. James II. while Duke of York, engages the Dutch, 457, 480, 481. His two
Sons die, 468, 476. Is proposed to the Arch-Dutchess of Inspruck, but married
to the Princess of Modena, 476, 477. His Designs against England in conjunction
with France, 500, 502. The Commons Votes against him, 541, 557. Is sent
Commissioner into Scotland, 545, 568. His Actions there, 570. His Designs
against the Earl of Argyle, 575, etc. His rude Answer to him, 585. Has 22000
Scots ready to assist him, 604. His Declaration to the Privy Council on his
being King, 609, 610. which he often broke, 610, 613, 617, 620 -- 624. Takes
the Customs and Excise before given him, 610, 614. His unparalled Cruelty,
613, 620 -- 623, 638. His vast Revenue, 615, 617, 618. His ridiculous Pardon,
622. His Proceedings in Ireland, 624, 625, 632, 641. His Favor to the Papists,
625, 626, 632. Gets Judges to declare for his Dispensing Power, with
Reflections thereon, 630 -- 632, 642. Grants a Commission of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, 633, etc. Toleration in Scotland, 641. and Liberty of Conscience in
England, which is descanted on, ib. Keeps a standing Army in time of Peace,
642, 643. Orders his Declaration of Indulgence to be read in Churches, 644.
Jefferies, the Commons Votes against him, 556. Releases the impeached Lords,
611. His savage Cruelty in the West, etc. 613, 620, 621. Is made Lord
Chancellor, 630. Jesuits, their Projects in England, 200, 201. for which some
were taken, yet released by the King, 201. Ignoramus the Play, 74. Ingoldsby
sent against Lambert, 420. Inoiosa, Spanish Ambassador, presents the King a
Paper against the Prince and Buckingham, 130 -- 132. which much perplexes him,
132, 133. Johnson, Mr. Samuel, whipped for writing an honest Address to the
English Army, 638, 639. Jones, Sir Tho. his Thoughts of a Dispensing Power,
630. -- Sir Will. put out, and for what, 546. Ireland, how bounded, etc. 12. A
horrible Massacre there, 277, 343. Another designed, 448. and a Rebellion in
Conjunction with the French, 472, 533. K. James's Proceedings* there, 624, 625,
632, 641. Irish Cattle, Act to prohibit their Importation, with 9 Observations
upon it, 462 -- 467. Is made perpetual, 559. Judges, their Opinion for
Ship Money, 258. Those made by Char. II. 501. Juries hated by Cromwell, 400,
401. Are packed to murder honest Men, 601, 602, 611. Jurisdiction of
Parliaments discust in relation to Fitz-harris, 588 -- 590. Jus Divinum, 330 --
332, 544. Juxton, Bishop of London, made Lord-Treasurer, 265.
K.
KIngs their divided Will against Law, 5. Never parted with Parliaments in
Disgust till the Stuarts, 205, 267. Not wont to be present at Debates in
Parliament, 502. Never speak but in Parliament, or under the Great-Seal, 568.
Kirk, Maj. General, his barbarous Inhumanity at Taunton, 622. Kirk-Party strict
with James VI. 34. Mind the King of his Covenant, 443. See Scots.
L.
LAmbert turns against Cromwell, 399. After against his Son, 406. Is made
Lieutenant General, 408. Petitions the Rump, 409. Is turned out by them, ib.
and after turns them out, 410. Marches against Monk, 412, 414. Is sent to the
Tower, 416. Is routed, and taken Prisoner, 421. Langdale, Sir Marmad. his
Success for the King, 309. Is discontented, 311. Laud, his Rise and Character,
122, 123. Puts the King on altering Religion in Scotland, 122, 123, 242, 255,
256, 260. Gets a Bishopric by playing the Spaniel, 123. His ways to ruin
Bishop Williams, 124, 239. Proves a Firebrand, etc. 157, 166, 167, 226, 239,
242. Is made Bp of London, 226. Favors Popery, 231. His great Care of the
Church, 167, 227, 241, 242. Prosecutes his Injunctions concerning Ceremonies
with great Severity, 254, 255, 257, 258. Quarrels with the King about visiting
the Universities, 256, 257. Procures an Alteration in the Church of Scotland,
262, 263. Lauderdale, some account of him, 441, 442, 454. Is bitter against the
Presbyterians in Scotland; his Highland Government there, 490, 491. Laws, etc.
ought to be in the Mother Tongue, 363, 404, 405, 665. Lenthal made General by
the Rump, 408. Lestrange, Roger, Champion of the Tory-Cause, 500. Is employed
to ridicule the Popish Plot, 545. Levellers in the Army, 318. Liberty of
Conscience to be continued, 662. See Dissenters, and James II. Lindsey, Earl,
sent to relieve Rochel, but in vain, 225. Lisle, Lady, her unparalled Case;
is basely murdered, 620. London on ill Terms with the King, 272. yet lend him
Money, 273. Raise Soldiers under Waller, etc. 321. In Confusion, 414. Join
with Monk for a Free Parliament, 419. Is set on fire, 461. See Hubert. Long Mr.
sentenced in Star Chamber, 234. Lorain, Duke, basely dealt with by the French
King, 474. Lords, five impeached by the Commons, 535. See Jefferies. Lowden
Chancellor of Scotland, his Speech concerning Cromwell, 303, 304. Ludlow deposes
Henry in Ireland, 408.
M.
MAckenzy, Sir Geo. pleads against the Earl of Argyle, 584, 585.
Magdalen-College Story, 640. Mansfield denied landing at Calais, contrary to
Agreement, 146. Manwaring for the King's absolute Power, 197. Impeached by the
Commons, and sentenced by the Lords, 214, 215. Is promoted by Laud, 227, 256.
Marriage with France; see Charles I. Marsilly murdered at Paris, to the
Dishonor of K. Charles, 479. Marston-Moor Fight, 307. Maurice, Prince, for the
King, 298. Is lost in the W* Indies, 327. May, Tho. Esquire his Treatise of the
Civil Wars disproved, 280 -- 295. Mazarine turns K. Charles, etc. out of
France, 383. His Success against the Pr. of Conde, 388, 389. and Loss at
Ostend, 402. Opposes K. Charles's Restoration, 421, 422. Meal-tub-Plot
discovered, 546. Militia, who should have the Power of it, the chief Cause of
the War, 296. Whether it belongs to King or Parliament, ib. 329. Mombas betrays
the Dutch, 484 -- 486. Monk takes Sterling-Castle and Dundee, 347. Complies
with Cromwell, 359. Engages the Dutch, 356, 371, 372. Is caressed on his
Victory, 373. Sent to Scotland, 383. His Pedigree and Story, 384, 385. His
Regency in Scotland, 410. Is much cour^ed; secures Berwick, 411. His ill
Success; treats with the Committee of Safety, but displeased with the
Agreement; with a Story of him, 412, 413. Sends to Fleetwood, summons a great
Assembly at Edinburgh, abjures K. Charles, 413. His Success, 412, 416. Is
declared for in Ireland, 412. Marches to London, is addressed for a Free
Parliament, 416. Is carest by the Rump; his Speech to them, 417. Pulls down the
Gates of the City; sends an angry Message to the Rump, 418. Declares for a Free
Parliament at Guild Hall, and restores the secluded Members, 419. Meets the
King at Dover, and is made Knight of the Garter, 426. Monmouth, Duke, sent
against the Covenanters, 543. 'Twas believed his Mother was married to the
King, and why, 544. Is unjustly put to Death, 619. Monopolies injurious, 55,
56, 65. Montross for the King, 313, 315, 316. Is routed and executed, 344.
Morley, Col. Herbert, secures the Tower for Monk, 418. Mountague accused by the
Commons of Arminianism, 166. Is favored by the King, 166, 167, 171, 226.
Impeached by the Commons for favoring Popery, 180 -- 183, 226. Made Bp of
Chichester, 226. and after of Norwich, 227. Holds Correspondence with the Pope,
273. Muscovy, the Czar revokes the English Privileges on K. Charles's Death,
350.
N.
NAseby Fight, 311, 312. Navigation-Act made by the Rump, 350. Its
Inconveniences, 364 -- 367, 391, 455, 653, 658. Naylo^, James, his Blasphemy,
396* Newberry first Fight, 299. Second Fight, 308. Newfoundland Fishery, how
the French got it from us, 390, 391. North, Sir Francis, a Tool in the late
Times, 592. Promoted, 603. Northampton, Earl, concerned in Overbury's Death;
see Carr, and Overbury. Yet in favor with the King, tho a Papist, 72, 73*
Incourages the Irish Papists, 74. November 5. appointed an Anniversary
Thanksgiving, 58. Noy Mr. against the Court, 208. Is taken off by being made
Attorney General, 243. His Pretense for Ship Money, etc. 252.
O.
Oats Dr. first discovers the Popish Plot, 532. His excessive Fine, 610.
Indicted of two pretended Perjuries, 610 -- 613. His barbarous and illegal
Punishment, 613. Oaths, Remarks on that of the Scots Covenant, 368, 438. on the
Convocation-Oath, 369, 438. on the Corporation-Oath, 431 -- 439. Orange,
Prince, General for the Dutch, 486. Declared Stadtholder; is courted by the
French King; his noble Answer to his Proposals, 488. His Success against the
French, 492, 495. Fights the French at Mount Cassel, 505, 513. Comes into
England, 507, 515. Opposes a separate Peace, 507, 508, 511. Advises concerning
the Lady Mary, 509. His brave Resolution against the King's Answer, at which
he is much disgusted, 515. Is married, 516. Treats of a Peace with France, 516,
517. Is suspected by the Confederates, and why, 518 -- 520. but afterward
cleared, 525. Routs the French before Mons, 528. His generous Design to save
these Nations from Ruin, 648. Orleans, Duchess; see Dover. Ormond, Marquess,
makes Peace with the Irish, 343. His Design for the Prince defeated, 402.
Ossery, Lord, his Friendship with the Prince of Orange, 508. Overbury, Sir Tho.
his Story; is destroyed by the King's Favorites* 62 -- 64, 68 -- 70. His
Advice to Rochester, 64. His Murder discovered, and how, 77 -- 79. Overton Col.
conspires against Monk, 396. Oxford Parliament; see Parliament. Treaty there
broke off, and why, 314.
P.
PApists to be tolerated, 674, 675. see Popish. Parliaments, their
Constitution, Ends, etc. 48. Ought to be Annual, 49. Used to redress Grievances
before they gave Money, 49, 97, 616. Never dissolved in Anger till the Stuarts,
205, 267. Endeavored to be overthrown by Char. II. 614, 630. Parliament in
1640 redress the Nation's Grievances, 276. Enter into a Protestation, 277.
Charged with beginning the War, 280, 286 -- 296. Take the Militia from the
King, 293, 294. Seize the Fleet, 295. Raise an Army, 296. Their ill Success the
two first Years, 296 -- 298. Treat with the Scots for Assistance, 298* Take
their Covenant, 299. Place no Trust in the King, 315. Send an Army into
Ireland, 317. Their Affairs inverted by the Army, 319, 320. Order the King to
London, 321. Send Propositions to him, 322. Their warm Votes concerning no
further Treaty with him, 324. See Commons. Parliament of Char. II. their first
Acts, 430, 431, 439. Address against the King's Indulgence, 447. Their Severity
to Dissenters, 448, 458. Prohibit the Importation of Irish Cattle, 462. Grant a
Tax for the War against Holland, 467. for the Triple League, 473. for a War
against France, 475. Pass a Bill against Papists enjoying Places, 491. See
Commons. -- at Oxford; Lords petition against its meeting there, 559, 560. Sits
but 7 days; their Proceedings, 564 -- 566. -- K. James's packed one, 615, 616.
Scarce deserved the Name, 616, 617, 619. Their Acts, 617, 618. The Commons
Address concerning Popish Recusants, 628. Remarks upon it, 628, 629. Passive
Obedience unknown to our Fathers, 206. Its Inconsistence, 531. Peers
Jurisdictions in Appeals questioned by the Commons, 502, 504. Penruddock Col.
beheaded after Articles granted him, 386. Pensioners in Parliament, 490, 500.
Pentland, Scots rise there, but are terribly routed, 458. Petition of Right,
opposed by Buckingham, etc. defended by Williams, etc. 207. The Lords Saving to
it opposed by the Commons 208, 209. Is passed, 210, 216. but broken by the
King, 218, 227, 228, 236. Is printed by the King, with his Answer to it, 228.
Philip III. of Spain, his Character, 36. Philips, Sir Rob. against the Court,
174, 180, 229. Plague, a great one in 1 Jac. I. 37. A greater in 1 Car. I. 153.
A yet greater in Char. II's Reign, 458. Pontfract Castle surrendered to the
Parliament, 327. Popery, some of its Antichristian Doctrines, 149, 150. Is
promoted by K. James, 642. Pope's Nuncio heads a Rebellion in Ireland, 277,
343. His Despotick Tyranny there, 343. One arrives in England, 642. Popish
Party conceive great hopes of England from the Match with Moderna, 499, 500.
Have Commissions for raising Soldiers, 535. Are favored by K. James; see
James II. -- Plot, the Parliament's Votes concerning it, 535, 557, 587. The
Evidence in it justified, 539, 540. Some Account of it, 540, 541. Its Discovery
suppressed, and how, 546, 547. Ports, excellent ones in England, 658. Portsmouth
surrendered to the Parliament, 296. -- Duchess, who she was, 474. Prague; see
Frederick. Presbyterians join with the Royalists, 409. Printers petition
against Laud, 231. Privileges of Parliament discust, 552 -- 554. Proclamations
against talking of State Affairs, 96, 97. Prorogations of Parliament not used
till Hen. 8. Account of one in Char. 2d's time, 520, 521, 533. Protestants in
France suffer by James I. 96. and by Charles I. see Char. I. and Rochel.
Puritans increase, 154. Opposed by Laud, etc. 122, 157, 227. Persecuted by him,
258. Pyrenean Treaty, 421, 422. Broke by the French K. 427, 428, 471.
Q.
QVeen proclaimed Traitor by the Parliament, 298. Arrives in England on some
dark Designs, 428. Quo Warranto; see Charter.
R.
RAcking Men declared to be against Law, 227. Raleigh, Sir Walter, his Story,
82 -- 85. Is beheaded, the he had been pardoned, 85. Rents, whence their Fall,
463. Republicans conspire against Cromwell, 386, 399. Restore the Rump, 408.
Revenue of Q. Elizabeth, 32. of James II. which see. Richlieu, some Account of
him, 141, 142, 176. Is paralleled with Laud, 239, 240. Promotes the Contentions
in England and Scotland, 265, 272, 279. Engaged in the Irish Massacre, 277,
343. Rochel Fleet subdued by the French, English and Dutch, 174. Not relieved
by the English as promised, 225. Miserably reduced, 226. Roman Empire, the
Causes of its Ruin, 17 -- 24. Rothes, Earl, Commissioner in Scotland, 454. Rump
Parliament, their Votes concerning the King, with Remarks, 332, 333. Erect High
Courts of Justice, one of which takes off the King, 333, 346, 347. Abolish
Monarchy, 342. Their prodigious Acts, ib. Their Success in Ireland, 343, 344.
in Scotland, etc. 345 -- 347, 350. against the Dutch, 351, 353 -- 356. Propose
a Coalition with them, 350. Their Demands of them, ib. 353. Their Answer to the
Dutch Excuses, 352, 353. Their Letter to the States of Holland, 357. to the
States General, 358. Are turned out by Cromwell, 362. Their Character, etc. 363,
364. Are restored; by the Republicans, 408. Turn out Lambert, etc. and
constitute a Council of War, 409. Are turned out again, 410. and put in again
by Fleetwood, 416. Send to Monk, ib. Rupert, Prince, lost several Battles by
his Rashness, 297, 307, 311. Forced into France, 327. Saves the King's Life at
Windsor, 541. Rushworth commended, 8. Russel, Lord, murdered, 601.
S.
SAndwich, Earl, affronted by the Duke of York; is slain, 480, 481. Scotland,
Account of its Church State, 260 -- 263, 440, 441. Its Alteration endeavored;
see Laud. Great Persecution there; see Lauderdale. Scots oppose Common Prayer,
etc. and enter into a solemn Covenant against it, 263. Up in Arms; propose an
Accommodation, 265. Declare against Episcopacy, 270. Declared Traitors; enter
England, 271. Keep not the Articles of Pacification, 280, 281. Began the War,
280 -- 286. Break their Word with the King, and join the Parliament, 300, 331.
Murder in cold Blood, 316. Sell the King, 317. Their Government not liked in
England, ib. Are routed by Cromwell, which see. Their Government changed by the
Rump, 347. Have four Citadels built to curb them, 410. Their happy State under
Monk, ib. -- Parliament appoint May 29. an Anniversary Thanksgiving, 443, 444.
Their other Acts; abolish Presbytery, 444 -- 447. Grant the King a great
Revenue, and pass the humble Tender, 454. Scroggs, Chief Justice, illegally
discharges the Grand Inquest, 547. Is impeached of High Treason, 556. Sea, its
Dominion maintained by Navigation, 660. Seamen refuse to fight against Rochel,
159, 162. Are increased by the Fishing Trade, 390, 654. Secluded Members
restored; summon a Free Parliament, 419 -- 421. Seldom Mr. for the Petition of
Right, 209. His Speech concerning Grievances, 216. Self-denying Ordinance, 309,
310. Seymour Mr. invades the Commons Privilege, 507. Is impeached by 'em, 555.
Shaftsbury; see Ashley Cooper. Sham-plots of the Court, for which good Men are
murdered, 601, 602. Sharp, ABp of St. Andrews, murdered, 541, 542. Sheriffs
instrumental to save honest Men's Lives, 590, 600. Illegally chosen in London,
600, 611. Si^thorp for the King's absolute Will, 197. Slingsby, Sir Henry,
beheaded, 403. Sobiez, his Success at Sea on behalf of the Reformed, 146.
Somerset; see Carr. Southampton, Lord Treasurer, his Death and Character, 470.
Spain, how bounded, 1 Jac. I. 11, 25. Its Barrenness in People, and its Causes,
25. Never recovered its great Loss in 1588, etc. 28. Its low State, 428, 471,
472, 652. Spaniards, their Success against France, 389. Spanish Trade, tho
beneficial, forbid by Charles I. 174. Standing Army a Grievance, 539. Kept up
by K. James, 642, 643. States of England Three, not King, Lords and Commons, 8.
but Nobles, Commonalty and Clergy, 57. Strasburgh treacherously seized by the
French, 604. Succession to the Crown in England, 38 -- 47, 550. Surinam taken
by the Dutch, 467. but regained, 468. Surrey-Men rise for the King, but are
routed, 326, 327. Sweeds join with the French; at War against Brandenburg, 499,
511.
T.
TAlbot, his Barbarity and Falsehood in Ireland, 624, 625. Is made Lord
Lieutenant, 641. Tangier, the Commons Votes concerning it, 539, 557. Temple,
Sir William, employed in the Treaty at Nimeguen, 472, 478. in the Peace with
the Dutch, 495. His Conference with the King, 498. Treats of a Peace with the
French and Confederates, 499. Is highly complimented by the French, 509, 510.
His Thoughts of the Protestation against a separate Peace, 512. Is admitted to
the Debates with the King concerning the Peace, 516, 517. His going to France
prevented, 518. Test in England reflected on, 501. In Scotl. with Remarks, 570
-- 575. Tiddiman; Sir Tho. his Neglect at Bergen, 457. Tories charge the Whigs
with a Design to kill the King, 532. Promote the Popish Designs, 544, 586.
Their Impudence, 562. Tour De la, Count, his Heroic Speech to the Bohemians,
91, 92. Trade in Market Towns, 27. To Spain gainful, 165, 387, 389, 463. to
France prejudicial, 166, 389, 463, 672. In Wool, how we lost it, 338, 339, 662.
To Greenland, Newfoundland, Norway, etc. 653 -- 656. To America, Newcastle,
661. To Ireland, 656, 666. In Timber, 669. In Companies, and to East India,
etc. 670. Ought to be free, 663, 670 -- 674, 679. Traquair, Lord Treasurer in
Scotland, 264, 266. Prorogues the Parliament there, which is protested against,
267. Treason made a Stalking Horse, 322. Treaty at Munster, 339, 340. Treaties,
Account of all between the K. and Parliament, 328 -- 332. Tre^or, Secretary,
his Queries concerning Buckingh. etc. 489. Triple League, 472. Trump Van,
Admiral for the Dutch; see Dutch. Tunnage and Poundage; see Charles I. and
Commons.
V.
VAne, Sir Henry, opposes the Scots Covenant, 299. Promotes Lambert's Interest,
409. Villiers his Descent; comes into favor, 73. Advanced by Somerset's Fall,
74. His affable Carriage at first, 76. Is promoted, 77, 86, 111. Marries the
greatest Fortune in England, 88. His great Titles, 111. Disswades the Prince
from his Match with the Infanta, 113. Sets up to be popular, 115, 118, 125. His
base Dissimulation in Spain, 116, 117, 158. Charged with being a Papist, and
endeavoring to seduce the Prince, 118. His Narrative of Proceedings in Spain,
with Remarks, 127, 129. Loses the King's Favor by means of the Spanish
Ambassador, 132, 133. Restored to it again by the Keeper's fine Contrivance,
133, 134. Eager for a War with Spain, 155. His base dealing with the
Rochellers, and the Merchants, whose Ships he hired, 159 -- 163. His Behavior
at Paris, 157, 163. Is impeached by the Commons, 189, 190. Procures a War with
France, 193 -- 196, 198. His false Steps therein, 198. Is routed, 198, 199. Is
stabbed, 225. Usurer, a Story of one, 555. Utrecht surrendered to the French,
487.
W.
WAgstaff, Sir Jos. seizes the Judges at Salisbury, 386* Wales, its pretended
Prince, 647. Waller, Sir William, for the Parliament, 298, 306. See
Fitz-harris. Walloons persecuted by Laud, 254, 255. Settle in Holland, 255.
Come again into England, and encouraged by Char. II. 472, 473, 607. Walter, Sir
Joh. dissents from the Judges, and is discharged, 236. War with Holland
projected by the French, 450, 473, 478, 484. War and Peacemaking claimed by
the King, 506. Warwick, Earl, Admiral for the Parliament, 295. Wenthworth, Sir
Tho. a true Patriot, 209, 212. but made President of the North to his Ruin,
243. and Lieutenant of Ireland, 254, 260. Weston, Sir Rich. made Lord
Treasurer, tho a Papist, 226. Whigs and Tories, 531, 532. Compared with the
Prerogative-men and Puritans in Laud's time, 560, 561. Whitlock, Sergeant, his
Thoughts of Cromwell, etc. 304, 305, 348, 349, 359 -- 361. Advises to bring in
the King, 415. Wilkinson, Capt. his Story; his noble Constancy, 596 -- 598.
Williams, Lord Keeper, his Thoughts of the Spanish Match, 113. His Ruin
intended by Laud, etc. 124, 179, 253. Stops the King's Prohibition to the
Judges and Bishops, 126. His curious Contrivance on Buckingham's behalf, 133,
etc. Is commended by the King for it, 135. Ill requited by Buckingham, 136,
155. His Reasons against a War with Spain, 155. His Advices to the King, 168,
170, 302. to Buckingham, 169. His Character, 176, 177. His Requests to the
King, etc. 177, 178. Is fined and imprisoned by Laud, 239. Willis, Sir Richard,
Cromwell's Spy, 393, 402. Windebank, Sir Fr. seizes Sir E. Coke's Papers;
favors Popery, 253. Woollen Manufactures, the Inconveniences they labor
under, 666. Worcester Fight, 346. Workhouses, 665, 677.
FINIS.
BOOKS sold by Andrew Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil.
THE General History of England, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, from the
earliest Accounts of Time, to the Reign of his present Majesty King William.
Taken from the most Ancient Records, Manuscripts, and Historians. Containing
the Lives of the Kings, and Memorials of the most Eminent Persons both in
Church and State. With the Foundations of the Noted Monasteries, and both the
Universities. Vol. I. By James Tyrrel, Esquire Fol.

A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers: Containing an Account of the Authors
of the several Books of the Old and New Testament; and the Lives and Writings
of the Primitive Fathers; An Abridgment and Catalogue of all their Works, etc.
To which is added, A Compendious History of the Councils, etc. Written in
French by Lewis Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon. In seven Volumes. Fol.

An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate in Matters of Religion;
wherein all the Arguments for Persecution, and against Toleration, are examined
and refuted: With the most proper Method of destroying all Schisms, Heresies,
etc.

A Detection of the Court and State of England during the four last Reigns, and
the Interregnum. Consisting of Private Memoirs, etc. with Observations and
Reflections: And an Appendix, discovering the present State of the Nation.
Wherein are many Secrets never before made public; as also, a more impartial
Account of the Civil Wars in England, than has yet been given. By Rog. Coke,
Esquire The third Edition much corrected, with an Alphabetical Table.

Scotland's Sovereignty asserted. Being a Dispute concerning Homage, against
those who maintain that Scotland is a Fee Liege of England, and that the K. of
Scots owes Homage to the K. of England. By Sir Tho. Craig. Translated from the
Latin Manuscript, with a Preface containing a Confutation of that Homage said
to be performed by Malcom III. to Edward the Confessor, and published by Mr.
Rymer. By Geo. Ridpath.

Ridpath his Shorthand yet shorter; or the Art of Short-writing advanced in a
more swift, easy, regular and natural Method than hitherto. The second Edition.

A Discourse on the late Funds of the Million Act, Lottery-Act, and Bank of
England: Showing that they are injurious to the Nobility and Gentry, and
ruinous to the Trade of the Kingdom. By J. Briscoe. The third Edition.

Mr. John Asgil his Plagiarism detected, etc.

Emblems, by Fra. Quarles; with the Hieroglyphics: All the Cuts being newly
illustrated.

The History of Genesis, illustrated with 40 Copper Plates.

Advice to the Young; or the Reasonableness and Advantages of an Early
Conversion; In three Sermons on Eccles. 12. 1. By Joseph Stennett.

The Groans of a Saint under the Burden of a Mortal Body: A Sermon at the
Funeral of Mr. John Belcher, late Minister of the Gospel, from 2 Cor. 5. 4. By
the same Author.

Several Practical Pieces of Mr. Daniel Burgess; viz. Rules for hearing the
Word of God. The Sure Way to Wealth. The most difficult Duty made easy. Foolish
Talking and Jesting described and condemned. The Christian Decalogue, or the
Gospel's ten Commandments. The Church's Triumph over Death, a Funeral Sermon on
Mr. Robert Fleming. A Funeral Sermon from Job 14. 14. on Mrs. Sarah Bull. Holy
Union and Holy Contention described and pressed. In single Tracts, or bound up
together.

Fleming's Fulfilling of the Scripture.

Rutherford's Letters.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, on the Book of Ecclesiastes. By
Alexander Nisbet.

A Directory of Prayer; being a Commentary on the 20th Psalm. By R. Campbel*

Chamberlen's Midwifery, the third Edition.

Artamenes, or the Grand^Cyrus. In 10 Vol.

A Birchen Rod for Dr. Birch, being an Answer to his Sermon before the Commons,
Jan. 30.

A Defense of the Archbishop's Sermon on the Death of the Late Queen; and of
the Sermons of the late ABp, Bp of Lichfield and Coventry, Bp of Ely, Bp of
Salisbury, Dr. Sherlock, etc. on that and other Solemn Occasions; against the
Aspersions of two Jacobite Pamphlets.

A Tragedy, called the Popish Plot, revived. Wherein are several Letters, etc.
of Dr. Oats to the Late Kings, and other Great Men.

The Rye-house Travestie. The History of the Late Jacobite Plot, in a Letter to
the Bp of Rochester, by T. Percival.


