ENGLAND's Improvements.

In Two PARTS.

In the Former is Discoursed, How the Kingdom of ENGLAND May be Improved, In
STRENGTH, EMPLOYMENT, WEALTH, TRADE.
By Increasing The Value of Lands, The Revenues of the Crown and Church, Peace
and Amity with Foreign Nations,
Without any Charge to the Subject.

In the Latter is Discoursed, How the Navigation of ENGLAND May be Increased,
And the Sovereignty of the British Seas more Secured to the Crown of England.

TREATISE III.

By ROGER COKE.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1675.

To his Highness The most Illustrious, Heroic and Highborn PRINCE, RVPERT
Count Palatine of the RHINE, AND Duke of BAVARIA and CUMBERLAND, etc.
THe Common Law of England (most eminent Prince) makes great difference between
the Inheritance of the Crown of England and the Estates of Subjects: for the
next Heir, though of half Blood, shall inherit the Crown. Thus did Queen Mary
inherit the Crown from Edward, though but of half Blood to him: So did Queen
Elizabeth from Queen Mary, yet was but of half Blood to her. But no Subject of
half Blood shall inherit any Estate; but for want of an Heir of the whole
Blood, it shall Escheat to the King, or the Lord upon whom the Estate was held.

And as the Common Law makes this difference in Blood, so does it in the
Inheritance of the Crown, and men born out of the Allegiance of the King. For
no person born out of the Allegiance of the King, shall Inherit any Estate from
any English Subject: but the Heir of the Crown shall Inherit wheresoever he be
born. Thus did King James (your Highness Grandfather, and the happy Uniter of
the British Monarchy) Inherit the Crown of England, yet was not born in the
Allegiance of it.

The King of England, though born a Forreigner, may purchase and hold an Estate
in England; but no other Forreigner; though born of Subjects to the Crown of
England, shall take an Estate by Purchase, but the King shall have it. The
Reason of these differences I do not understand: For as the Law secures the
Inheritance of the Crown, so does it make a bar between this Nation and all
others who desire to become Subject to it. But if there were anciently any
reason for this Law, it is now ceased; since the peopling the American
Plantations, the repeopling Ireland, the Wars, and late Great Plague, have lost
and consumed so many people out of England.

As the Common Law debars the Nation of any future supply for all these Losses,
so some Acts of Parliament have put the Nation into a Hostile condition with
the World. There was a Law made in the 5 of Rich. 2. c. 3. which forbid the
English to carry forth, or bring in Merchandise, but in Ships of the King's
Allegiance, and the Mariners, or more part, Subjects: but this Law was so
intolerable, that the next year, viz. 6 Rich. 2. c. 8. the English had liberty
to Trade in Foreign Vessels, where others could not be had. But this Law thus
qualified by the Authority of the 1 Eliz. cap. 13. caused great displeasure
between Foreign Princes and the Kings of this Realm, and the Merchants were
sore grieved and damaged thereby. Therefore for the increase and Continuation
of Amity, both the Laws made by Rich. 2. were Repealed, and the English had
liberty given them to carry out and bring in Merchandise in any Vessels, paying
Strangers Duties; but if there were War, or any restraint of English Ships,
then to pay but ordinary Duties. But the English had liberty given them at all
times to import Masts, Raff, Pitch and Tar, in any Vessels, paying ordinary
Duties; the former being for the preservation of the Timber of England, the
latter for the benefit of the Navy.

But the Rump-Parliament designing a War against the Dutch, without any
consideration of this Law, or of the Statute of 14 Rich. 2. c. 6. whereby the
Merchants of England in any Realm might freight foreign Ships to that Realm, if
the Ships of that Realm would not take reasonable Gains; or of the 35 Eliz. 11.
for the preservation of the Timber of England; or of the 17 Car. 1. for
Importation of Gunpowder, which themselves had made; (all which yet stand in
force, and are unrepealed.) made a Thing, Entitled, An Act for encouragement
and increase of Shipping and Navigation, commonly called The Act of Navigation,
whereby the English are forbid to import any foreign Goods unless in
English-built Ships, whether they can get them or not, and Sailed by English,
upon penalty of confiscation of Goods, Guns, Tackle, Apparel, and Ammunition. A
War they designed, and a War they had with the Dutch, which lasted longer than
their Government; and so they left the Nation engaged in a War abroad, and the
Laws at War at home.

But though the Nation be freed from the Tyranny of the Rump, yet it still
labors under the miserable effects of this Law; for with some few alterations
it twice received the Royal Stamp, viz. 12 Car. 2. 18. and 13 Car. 2. 14. As
the terror of this Law has put this Nation into a Hostile condition with the
World, so has it suspended all those good Laws made by Queen Elizabeth and
King Charles the first, for preservation of the Timber of England, and the
maintenance and support of the Navy Royal, whereby the Nation may be best
secured from the danger of a foreign War. Your Highness at your leisure may
read how many other ways the Trade and Navigation of England have suffered
under this Law, as well in the former Treatises, as these which now implore
your Highness Protection.

In this condition then was the Nation involved in a War with the Dutch, under
the Glory and Conduct of your Highness (who though descended from the Royal
Extraction of the first Monarch of Great Britain, yet is your Highness a
Forreigner born, and so not regarded by these Laws, and therefore had little
reason to expose your self to such imminent danger in defense of them, if your
innate affection for the Honor and Happiness of the English Nation did not
otherways transcend all obstacles against it.) The Nation, as well as his
Majesty, by a universal suffrage, was satisfied with the necessity of your
Conduct for the preservation of it. I wish it were as well understood, that
these Laws, and some other Grants and Vsages, have made the Dutch so powerful
to oppose it, and the Nation in no better condition to prescribe Laws to them.

But Sir, the virtue of your Noble mind, is not circumscribed within the Pale
of Military Discipline, but extends to an Integrity and Judgment in Counsel,
equal to your Valor and Conduct in War. And the Nation stands not in less need
of your Counsel at home, than it did of your Conduct abroad: for as the Case
stands, though God should have Crowned your Conduct with such desired success,
as to have obtained an entire Victory against the Dutch; yet could not this
Nation, (the Trade and Navigation of it being restrained to Companies, and
English-built Ships and Mariners) but others, reap the benefit from it. Your
Highness is doubly qualified; so as the Nation may be happy in your Counsel, as
your Highness is a Privy-Councellor to the King, and a Member of the House of
Peers. And if the Nation by your Counsel shall partake of those benefits which
the Enemies of it enjoy, this will be so much more an Eternal Monument of your
never-dying Fame, by how much the difficulty of overcoming these Laws, and the
prejudice of the times is more.

To the virtues of your Noble Mind, is added your being born free from
Subjection to these Laws; and so with more indifference your Highness may
better judge between them and the Interest of the Nation, than another born in
Subjection, and who by a long habit has wonted to them.

Under all these Attributes of your Highness Excellencies, do these Humble
Treatises implore your Protection, of all which they stand in need: For though
one end designed by them is to procure Peace abroad, yet will they have a War
at home with three sorts of people: the Ignorant, Prejudiced, and Partial. I do
not (God knows) sully your High Name with Flattery, or private design of mine
own: nor could a less excitation than the Honor and Happiness of the Nation
have invited me to make this Humble Address to your Highness. With a sincere
Heart then (so well as I am able) from causes before known, from which all the
Consequences are inferred, I submit these Treatises to your Censure. If I fail
in my end, yet I do not understand how otherways I could have so well attained
it; and therefore hope it will in some measure plead a Pardon for this
Presumption in

(Most Eminent Prince) Your Highness most devoted and obedient Servant, ROGER.
COKE.

APOLOGY TO THE READER.
ALL men naturally desire to know. By Knowledge here, I do not mean
Intellective, Memorative, or Sensitive, (which God without any Humane
Assistance endues man with, and can never be learned or taught) but Rational
(which never comes to pass but by Education, Experience, and Conversation.) And
although all men naturally thus desire to know, and to be accounted Rational
men; yet rarely do they submit to those Anxieties of mind which ever attend
it. From whence it comes to pass, that Books Rationally written are restrained
to few Readers, and are commonly more beholden to subsequent Ages, than the
present Times.

Whereas Books which please theheat and humor of the Times, though they
contain neither Truth, Learning, or Reason, are not therefore least esteemed,
but Swarms of them are admired, and devoured in an instant; but these, like the
Ephemeris (which, if you believe Hist. An. L. 5. c. 19.
Aristotle, is be gotten of the Fire too) do die, and are forgotten in a day.

As all Learning and Reasoning is ever attended by careful consideration and
Method; so Ignorance neglecting these, abounds in Pride and Suspicion, in both
which she claims such a prerogative, that ignorant men so much more censure and
suspect, by how much less they understand: They Triumph as Victorious in every
Censure, and think they have prevented some design by each suspicion. So that
I do not question but if Socrates out of the Dust could behold this present
Age, he would perceive a generation of men, who less knowing, seem more wise
than the Athenians did in his time.

Since the publishing of the Reasons of the decay of the Strength, Wealth, and
Trade of England, and the increase of the Dutch Trade, though I never heard or
read one Proposition confuted, or the method of Reasoning contradicted; yet
from several parts I have been censured, for designing to undermine the Church,
and Academical Learning, and to introduce a Commonwealth, which is only capable
of admitting Freedom of Trade and Religion, without which Trade can never be
increased. I will add one more (which in some sense is true) that I may be
accounted a busie-body in meddling with other men's business, which is a sign I
have little of mine own; and that I contend against many opponents, and have
but few or none who will second me, or know I endeavor theirs or the Nations
Interest; and therefore none but Fools will assert such an Interest.

For the last, I say, it may be the Fate of many hundred Younger Brothers, as
well as my self, that even Conscience, in the late times, would not permit them
to take any Employment; and it was too late to begin when the King was
restored: yet it may be none but one in my Condition could have spent so much
time in enquiring into the present State of England, compared with other
Countries, as I have done: for men's business generally relates to their
Individual persons; which is either Mechanical, where from unknown Causes, men
by a habit in doing things get a Livelihood; or by Learning in some Art or
Science, to excel other men in Fortune and Reputation. These they so intend,
that their whole life is too little to answer the necessities of the one, or
the desires of the other: so that it is necessary for a third person to
undertake a business of this nature.

For my endeavoring to undermine Academical Learning, I say, it is as free for
me to oppose it, as it is for any man to defend it, and observe the method of
Reasoning I propound. And I say moreover, that if any asserter of Aristotle, or
the Logic taught in our Universities, can give any one instance, that from the
Authority or Learning of either, ever any progress of Learning in any Art of
Science was propagated in any one Proposition, I will yield the Cause.

I acknowledge I was by Gods Grace baptized a Christian in the Church of
England, and have ever been so constant an observer of it, that in all the
persecutions of it, I never Communicated with any other: and I say, that all
men are more obliged, in Conscience as well as Gratitude, to give God public
praises with other men, who alike partake public Benefits with them, than to
give him private thanks for the private benefits they enjoy; for these are
contained in the public. So that if Religion be a Communion of giving God
public Thanks (which must be prescribed by public Authority) by many men, for
public benefits they all alike enjoy; as, that they are alike Christians, and
are protected by the King and Laws in their Lives and Fortunes; which differing
in diverse places, it is necessary the Religion or public Worship of God should
be different.

But though all Nations be not of the same Religion, yet all Nations subsist in
Society and Commerce; and as every man stands in need of being supplied by
another, so does every Country. To restrain therefore the Society and Commerce
of Nations to those of the same Religion, is to violate an Institution of God
in the conservation of Humane Society, and to deny the benefits which places
mutually receive from one another. Every man when he comes into any foreign
Government, becomes subject to the Government of it, not to the Religion of it;
and though God often punished the Jews for not observing the Religion and
Ceremonies he prescribed them, yet for conservation of Society and Commerce
does he often pronounce great Judgments to them, if they oppressed the Stranger
in the Land, though perhaps in less than paying Strangers duties. Nor did I
ever read of any foreign people, who in any Country where they enjoyed a
Religion they were bred in, did make any disturbance upon the account of it.

But suppose (which I do not grant) that liberty of Religion to the Natives of
a place be necessary for enlarging Trade and Commerce; yet is this more
tolerable in a Monarchy than a Commonwealth: For Monarchy is one and
Indivisible, and therefore diversities or Factions in Religion can make no
Confusions in it; whereas Popular Governments being compounded of many, are
easily obnoxious to both.

Nor is it necessary that Trade and Commerce should only flourish in Popular
Governments; but within such places where it is more free, and men are more
secure, their Interests may be better advanced. This is evident, in that the
State of Genoua imposing 16 per Cent. upon goods imported, made the Trade
uneasy; and the Duke of Florence (who is as absolute a Prince as any with whom
the Pope has to do) taking the advantage of this Imposition by the States of
Genoua, did make Legorne a free Port, whereby it is now, under a Prince, become
the most flourishing place of Trade within the Streights. And I have it from a
good hand, that when the French King, about seven years since, made Marseilles
a free Port, the Jews in Legorne considering that Marseilles was a better
Harbor, and France a nobler Country for Trade than Italy, resolved to leave
Legorn, and establish themselves at Marseilles. The Duke of Florence hereupon
made an Edict, That in case any Christian bought a Jews house, it should be
forfeit; and this kept the Jews constant to Legorne; where as in England if a
Jew buys a house, it is forfeit to the King.

I now desire my Reader to consider me in manifold respects, and to bear with
the Imperfections, which I, or it may be any other man may be subject to in a
work of much less moment than one of this kind: For the Introduction of any
business is more difficult than the progress. And I do not know of any which
has made an attempt upon this Subject, in the differing parts of it, before me.
I am also assured these Treatises will encounter many difficulties and
discouragements. Difficulties in being opposed by the Ignorant and Interessed,
(for many particular persons may be interessed to the public Detriment) and
these are known, and many; whereas in contending for the Public, I know not
one who will be my Second. Besides, no man can so establish any Humane Action
or Learning, but he must submit the ends he designs to Gods Blessing; which in
a Luxurious and Effeminate Age cannot reasonably be expected: yet I am assured
no man can justly accuse me of any private design of mine, or reward I
propound to my self, other than if it pleases God now or hereafter to bless me,
so that these Treatises or any part of them, may be useful to my Country, or
any one in it, I may thank God I have not spent all my life in vain.

PETITIONS.
1. MOney is Treasure. 2. The Admission of foreigners to purchase Lands in
England, will add so much money to that of England, as is expended therein. 3.
The admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will cause so much
greater numbers of people in England, as the Purchasers are more. 4. The
admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will cause so many less
numbers of those in other places who may be Enemies of England, as the
Purchasers are more. 5. Unwrought Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufactures.
6. The unwrought Wools of England and Ireland are more than are wrought in
Woollen Manufactures in England. 7. Tin and Iron are Principles in the
Manufactures of Tin-plates. 8. Lead and Potters Earth are Principles in many
sorts of Earthen Manufactures. 9. The Tin and Iron of England, are more than is
used in the Manufactures of Tin Plates. 10. The Lead and Potters Earth of
England, are more than are used in Manufactures in England. 11. The French and
Dutch may have the Wools of Ireland, Lincolnshire, Kent, Sussex and Hampshire,
cheaper than the Wools of Ireland, Derby-shire, Nottingham-shire, and other
Midland Countries of England can be had at Colchester and Norwich. 12. The free
admission of Foreigners to work Woollen Manufactures in England, will add so
many more Agents therein, as the Foreigners are more. 13. The free admission
of Foreigners to work Tin Plates in England, will add so many more Agents in
them, as the Foreigners are more. 14. The free admission of Foreigners to
work Earthen Ware in England, will add so many Agents therein, as the
Foreigners are more. 15. Foreigners may work Woollen and other Manufactures
in England, with less charge than in France or the United Netherlands, viz. by
the height of the Kings Duties upon Salt and Wine, etc. and the height of the
Excise upon all sorts of Commodities consumed in the United Netherlands. 16.
Foreigners are more safe in working Woollen Manufactures in England, than in
France or the United Netherlands. 18. The free admission of Foreigners to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so many more people in
England, as the Foreigners are more. 19. Employment of people is a mean to
increase Trade. 20. The free admission of Foreigners to instruct the Natives
of England in Woollen and other Manufactures, may more instruct the Natives of
England. 21. The free permission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and
other Manufactures in the Corporations of England, may so much more Employ the
Natives of England, as the Permission is more free. 22. Corporations are the
most convenient places in England to increase Trade. 23. The free admission of
Foreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so
much greater numbers of people in England, as the Foreigners are more. 24. The
Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England are protected by
the strength of England. 25. The buying the Woollen and other Manufactures of
England, is a mean to vend them in foreign Trade. 26. The Pre-emption of
Freemen of Corporations, restrains the buying our Woollen and other
Manufactures to the Freemen of Corporations. 27. Freedom in Trade, is a mean
to vend our Woollen and other Manufactures in foreign Trade. 28. Trading in
Companies exclusive to other men, restrains the freedom of Trade of our Woollen
and other Manufactures to such Companies. 29. Exchanging foreign Goods for our
Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to have a Domestic Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures. 30. The Act of Navigation restrains the
Importation of Foreign Goods to English-built Ships, and Sailed by English, or
the Ships and of the Natives, whether they have Ships or Mariners or not. 31.
The Returns of Foreign Commodities, Exchanged for our Woollen and other
Manufactures, is a mean to conserve a Foreign Trade of our Woollen and other
Manufactures. 32. The Act of Navigation restrains the Importation of Foreign
Goods, exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures, to English-built
Ships, and Sailed by English. 33. The free admission of Foreigners to buy the
Woollen and other Manufactures of England, will add so much more Money to the
Money of England, as is expended therein. 34. Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp
and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other Foreign Commodities, may be
made more valuable than the Manufactures exchanged for them, in building Ships
and Houses, and in the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets, Sails, and in Dying our
Woollen Manufactures, as they are more and cheaper. 35. The free admission of
Foreigners to exchange Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of
Dying-Stuffs, and many other Foreign Commodities, for our Woollen and other
Manufactures, may make those more and cheaper in England. 36. Timber, Pitch,
Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other foreign
Commodities, may be made more valuable by employing our people in Building and
Manufactures, than the Money paid for them, as they are more and cheaper. 37.
The free Permission of Foreigners to sell Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and
Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other foreign Commodities in England,
may make them more and cheaper. 38. Less Treasure will be expended in Norway-
timber, Pitch, Tar, foreign Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all
other foreign Commodities, if they be cheaper vended in England. 39. The free
permission of Foreigners to import all foreign Goods, may make them cheaper
vended in England. 40. The Importation of Irish Cattle, is a mean whereby the
Kingdom of Ireland may hold a Trade with us for our Woollen and other
Manufactures. 41. The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. makes
the Importation of Irish Cattle more into England. 41. Goods are Riches. 42.
The free admission of Foreigners to import Goods into England, may add so much
more Goods to those of England, as the Importation is more free. 43. The
Exporting foreign Commodities with our Manufactures, those of our Plantations,
and the Fish caught upon our Coasts, is a mean to increase the foreign Trade
of them. 44. The free Importation of foreign Goods, may so much increase the
Exportation of them, with our Manufactures, those of our Plantations, and the
Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, as the Importation is more
free. 45. The free Permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods into
England, will cause so many greater numbers of people in England, as the
Foreigners importing Goods are more. 46. The Ports of England are more,
better, more convenient and safe, than those of France or the United
Netherlands. 47. The foreign Trade of foreign Goods with our Woollen and
other Manufactures, is a mean to increase the foreign Trade of our Woollen and
other Manufactures. 48. The free Importation of foreign Goods into England, may
make them so much cheaper, as the Importation is more free. 49. The free
Exportation of Money, with our Woollen and other Manufactures, may cause more
Money to be Exported in the foreign Trade of them. 50. The Returns of
Commodities, Exchanged in Foreign Trade for our Woollen and other
Manufactures, is a mean to increase the foreign Trade of them. 51. The Returns
of foreign Commodities, exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures, may
be so much more, as the Returns are more free.
Common Notions, or Axioms.
1. EVery thing will be so much increased, as is added to it. 2. Things may be
so much cheaper done, as the Principles may be cheaper had. 3. If things may be
increased, they may be increased by more Agents. 4. Things may be so much
cheaper done, as done with less charge. 5. Things may be more securely done,
where the Agents are more safe in doing them. 6. Things may be so much
increased, as the means are more. 7. Things may be more conveniently done,
where the places are more convenient. 8. Things will be so much more secure, as
the means of protecting them are increased. 9. Things will be so much
endangered, as the means of doing them are restrained. 10. Any place will be so
much enriched, as things are made more valuable than the charge. 11. Things
will be so much conserved, as they are less expended. 12. Things may be so much
cheaper done, as the means are cheaper. 13. Things may be so much conserved, as
the means are increased. 14. If more be added to more, the whole will be more.
ENGLAND's Improvements.
Prop. 1. Theorem 1.
THe Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will so much
increase the Treasure of England, by how much more Money is Expended therein.

Act. The Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England.

Question. Whether it will so much increase the Treasure of England, etc. I say
it will.

1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much increased, as is added to it.

1 Pet. 3. But money is Treasure.

2 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will
add so much Money to that in England, as is expended therein.

Therefore it will so much increase the Treasure of England; which was to be
demonstrated.

Annot.
And we retain the Land still, and so the Gain is clear to the Nation. Mr. Mun
in his Excellent Treatise, chap. 4. of English Treasure by Foreign Trade,
affirms it to be the only expedient to increase the Treasure of the Nation;
whereas it is demonstratively apparent, that the Admission of Foreigners to
purchase Lands in England will increase it, and that more certainly and surely.
I say this will more certainly increase the Treasure of England; for it
necessarily so much increases it, as the Money expended in it does amount to:
Whereas sometimes the Merchant loses by Foreign Trade, whereby the Nation, as
well as Merchant, loses of the Treasure of the Nation. And in the Purchasing of
Land by Foreigners the Nation ventures nothing, and so cannot lose any
Treasure or Land by it: whereas oftentimes the Ships and all the Lading is lost
in Foreign Trade, to the loss of the Nation, and undoing the Merchant. But the
Purchasing Lands by Natives, does not increase the Treasure of England, but
diverts so much Money from carrying on the beneficial Trades of England, as is
expended therein; and many other Inconveniences accrue to the Nation by it,
which do largely appear in the Annot. upon the 3d Cor. of the 26 Prop. of the
Equal Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England.

Prop. 2. Theorem 2.
The Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will so much
increase the Valuable Trades of England, as the Purchasers are more.

Act. The Admission of Foreigners to purchase Land in England.

Question. Whether it would so much increase the Valuable Trades of England: I
say it would.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are.

2 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of People increase Trade.

3 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Foreigners to Purchase Lands in England will
cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the Purchasers are more.

Therefore it will so much increase the Valuable Trades of England; which was
to be demonstrated.

Annot.
Greater numbers of People increase Trade. This is evident, as has been said,
in the Nature of Man, in that every man stands in need of being supplied by
another. Every one of these Foreigners, and of their Family, will wear
Clothes, Stockings, Shoes, and other necessaries, and furnish their Houses;
whereby so much a greater Trade must ensue as the Foreigners are more; and so
many poor people employed by them, who otherways can have no Employment. By the
Rule of Contraries then, so many People as leave the Country to increase other
places, so much decreases the Trade of the Country, and increases it in those
other places. And I appeal to any man who has been conversant in the Country
these last twenty years, whether he has not found this to be so by Experience.

Coroll.
By the same Reason, the Admission of Foreigners to Purchase Lands in England,
will so much increase the Value of the Lands of England, as the Purchasers are
more.

6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is.

Prop. And the Admission of Foreigners to Purchase Lands in England, will so
much increase the valuable Trades of England, as the Purchasers are more.

Annot.
As these Foreigners would employ so many more people in supplying their
Necessities, as the Foreigners are more; whereby those people would be enabled
to pay for what they buy of the Country-Farmor: so would the Foreigners
themselves eat and drink, whereby the Farmor's Vent would be still increased,
and so the Lands both ways become more Valuable. It is an old saying and true,
That Plenty makes Cheapness. Wheresoever therefore that Lands are plentiful in
Proportion to the People, there the Lands are Cheap. And wheresoever the people
are plentiful in Proportion to the Lands, they are Dear. I may give an instance
herein, in Ireland, and the Isle of Ely, and many other places of England,
where though the Lands themselves be fruitful, yet by reason of the Thinness of
People, and little Trade, they are of little Value. Whereas the Lands of the
Province of Holland, not so good, by reason of the multitudes of People, and
greatness of Trade, were lately at 40 years purchase. Mr. Mun in the 5th Chap.
of England's Treasure by Foreign Trade, affirms it to be the only mean or
expedient to improve the Value of the Lands of England: whereas from the
Reasons in this Coroll. the Admission of Foreigners to Purchase Lands in
England will more certainly and securely do it, though it be only upon the
account of the increase of Our Domestic Trade. Thus we see that Lands which
lie near places where great Markets and Fayrs are kept, though upon things in
our Domestic Trades, are so much more valued, as the Markets and Fayrs are
greater.

If Lands be only Valuable as the Trade of the places is, It is unreasonable
then to have so many Courts of Judicature in reference to the Title and
Security of the Lands of England, and none for the Trade of it, whereby they
only become Valuable.

Coroll. 2.
By the same reason, the Admission of Foreigners to Purchase Lands in England,
will so much increase the Value of the Revenues of the Church of England, as
the Purchasers are more.

7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands
are valuable.

Cor. 1. And the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England will so
much increase the value of the Lands of England, as the Purchasers are more.

Annot.
And so would this Admission increase the Revenues of the Crown, not only in
the value of the Crown Lands, but in the consumption of all Exciseable
Commodities; which will be so much more, as the Purchasers are more.

Coroll. 3.
By the same reason, the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England,
will so much increase the Strength of it, as the Purchasers are more.

4 Pet. 1. For greater numbers of People, increase Strength.

3 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will
cause so much greater numbers of People in England, as the Purchasers are more.

Annot.
The Glory, Majesty, and Grandeur of every Prince, consists not in the
greatness of their Territories, but in the number of their Subjects, and good
government of them; but the Subject must first be, before they can be well
governed. From hence it is that the United Provinces dare oppose two so great
Monarchs as the King of Great Britain, and the French King, by Sea and Land,
though their Territories be above three hundred times greater, more Healthful,
and better seated for Trade. And I think, that though the Countries of Norway,
Finland, Lapland, and Muscovy be above ten thousand fold more; yet the one
Province of Holland was more considerable for Strength and Wealth than all of
them: for though the numbers of those People be above one thousand fold more
than them of Holland, yet by reason of the vastness of those Territories, the
people are Thin in proportion to the Lands, and therefore neither for Strength
or Commerce scarce useful.

By the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, we Conquer
without a War: we make no man miserable, or impose any unwilling subjection
upon any man: we run no hazard of uncertainty: we impose no Taxes; and by it we
increase the Treasure and Trade of the Nation, the value of the Lands of the
Nation, and of the Revenues of the Crown, and Church, and of the Strength of
the Nation.

Coroll. 4.
By the same reason, the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England,
will so much diminish the strength of those who may be Enemies of England, as
the Purchasers are more.

5 Pet. 1. For lesser numbers of People, diminish strength.

4 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, will
cause so many less numbers of those who may be Enemies of England, as the
Purchasers are more.

Annot.
So that the Admission of Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, is doubly
beneficial to it; not only in strengthening of it, but in diminishing the
strength of them who may be the Enemies of it. I believe no man thinks, but if
the Progenies of so many Progenitors of English and French as were born in the
United Netherlands, when they supported them against the Spaniard, were now in
England and France, but that England and France would have been much more able
to have opposed them, and the Dutch in so much worse a condition to have made
War against either.

Prop. 3. Theorem 3.
Woollen Manufactures may be so much increased in England, as the unwrought
Wools of England and Ireland are more.

Subject. Woollen Manufactures.

Question. Whether they may be increased in England, etc. I say they may.

1 Ax. 3. For things may be so much increased, as the Principles are more than
are used.

5 Pet. 3. But unwrought Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufactures.

6 Pet. 3. And the unwrought Wools of England and Ireland are more than are
used in Woollen-Manufactures in England.

Therefore Woollen-Manufactures may be increased in England.

Annot.
If we increase our Woollen-Manufactures in England, these Benefits will accrue
to the Nation. First, If one pound of Wool worth one shilling made into one
piece of Cloth or Stuff, becomes worth ten shillings; then is the Manufacture
nine times more valuable to the Nation than the Land on which it is renewed,
and ten times more people are employed therein than the Shepherds and Clippers
of the Wool are: And this Employment not only at one time of the year, as the
Shearing of Sheep is, but always. Secondly, This would be a great comfort and
encouragement to the Country Farmer to pay his Rent, and maintain his Family;
whereas now the Wools of England not being wrought at home, and so the Farmer
not finding a Market at home, becomes undone, and not able to pay his Rent; and
if he seeks a Market abroad with it to sustain his Family and pay his Rent, he
commits Felony, by the Law made 14 Car. 2. 18. Thirdly, The working the Wools
of Ireland in England, would be ninefold more beneficial to England, than the
Wools to Ireland; whereas by Transporting our Wools, other places get so much
benefit to our loss.

Corollary 1.
By the same Reason, the Manufactures of Tin-Plates may be increased in England.

7 Pet. 3. For Tin and Iron are Principles in the Manufactures of Tin-Plates.

9 Pet. 3. And the Tin and Iron of England are more than is used in the
Manufactures of Tin-Plates.

Annot.
If we wrought the Manufactures of Tin in England, the Nation would not only
gain so much as the Manufacture becomes more worth than the Principles in
Foreign Trade; but we might employ many thousands of poor people, who are and
will be a Burden to the Nation, and also preserve all that Treasure which is
expended by buying them of the Dutch and Hamburger.

Coroll. 2.
By the same Reason, many sorts of Earthen Manufactures may be increased in
England.

8 Pet. 3. For Lead and Potters Earth are Principles in many sorts of Earthen
Manufactures.

10 Pet. 3. And the Lead and Potters Earth of England are more than are used in
Manufactures.

Annot.
It is almost incredible what sums of Money are yearly sent into Holland, for
Earthen-ware, though it be evident they have their Lead and Potters Earth from
England; whereby we do as much enrich them, as impoverish our selves by not
working them in England. But our Manufactures both in Tin and Earthen-ware, are
so inconsiderable in England, that Lead and Tin is Transported, paying the King
some Duties; but by reason of the benefits which accrue to the Nation by
Woollen-Manufactures, Wool is totally prohibited to be Transported: whereas if
the Manufactures of Lead and Tin were established in England, the Reason
against Exportation of them would be the same as of Wool.

Prop. 4. Problem 1.
How the Dutch and French may and do work Woollen-Manufactures, made of the
Wools of Ireland, and the Eastern and Southern parts of England, cheaper than
the English at Colchester and Norwich.

Agents, Are the Dutch, French, and English.

Question. How the Dutch and French may and do work Woollen Manufactures, etc.
cheaper.

Construction. By the 11 Pet. 3. the Dutch and French may have Wools from
Ireland, the Coast of Lincolnshire, Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire, cheaper than
the Woolls of Ireland, Derby-shire, Nottingham-shire, Lincolnshire, etc. can
be had at Norwich or Colchester, by Water and Land-carriage. I say the Dutch
and French may work the Manufactures cheaper.

2 Ax. 3. For things may be so much cheaper done, as the Principles may be
cheaper had.

5 Pet. 3. But Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufactures.

11 Pet. 3. And the French and Dutch may have the Wools of Ireland and
Lincolnshire, etc. cheaper by Water, than they can be had at Norwich, and
Colchester, by Land and Water-carriage.

Therefore the Dutch and French may work the Manufactures cheaper.

Annot.
Though the smalness of the difference of the Prices of Land and Water-carriage
from Ireland and the Midlandparts of England to Norwich and Colchester, more
than the Water-carriage from Ireland, Lincolnshire, etc. to the Ports of
France or the United Netherlands seem inconsiderable; yet in the prospect of
the consequences of it in reference to the Foreign Trade of them, it is very
considerable. For if it be better, as it is, for any Nation to earn one
thousand pound more or less by the employment of People, as in the United
Netherlands, than to have one thousand pound gotten to a Nation, and the People
not employed in it, as in Spain. And if two in the hundred charge in any place,
more than in another not subject to it, may gain the whole hundred pound, where
otherwise they Trade upon equal terms, then the whole hundred pound, as it will
be lost to that place, will be gained to this.

It is true indeed, if we had a Monopoly of Vending our Manufactures in Foreign
Trade, small charges were inconsiderable; but now the Swede, Silesians, the
Elector Palatine, and other Princes of Germany, have established Woollen
Manufactures in their Countries; and the French, Dutch, and Venetians have
enlarged their Foreign Trades of Woollen Manufactures: we are only secure of a
Foreign Trade of our Woollen Manufactures, so long as we can supply the World
cheaper and better than they can.

Having so often given instances in the former and this Treatise, of the
Subject, Agent, Act and Question of every Prop. for the future we shall omit
repeating them.

Coroll.
By the same Reason, the English may work Woollen Manufactures made of Irish
wool in the Western parts of England and Wales, and also Woollen Manufactures
made of the Wools of the Midland, Eastern and Southern parts of England,
cheaper than the French or Dutch.

5 Pet. 3. For Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufactures.

12 Pet. 3. And the English in the Western parts of England and Wales, may have
the Woolls of Ireland cheaper than the French or Dutch.

13 Pet. 3. So the English may have the Wools of the Midland, Eastern and
Southern parts of England cheaper.

Annot.
And as they have the Wools cheaper, so may the Wools of Ireland be wrought in
the Port-Towns of the West of England and Wales: And the Wools of the Midland,
Southern and Eastern parts of England, may be wrought in Port-Towns, or places
where the Manufactures without much Land-carriage of the Wools, and may be
Transported to Foreign parts by Water: As if Staples of Woollen-Manufactures
were erected at Nottingham, Gainsborough, Lincoln, Boston, Stamford, Bedford,
Cambridge, Lyn, Oxford or Abbington, Ware or Hartford, Windsor, and Winchester;
whereas the bringing the Wools of Gloucester-shire, Lincolnshire,
Leichestershire, Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Northampton, and Rutlandshire,
etc. being by a tedious Land-carriage, and commonly in the depth of Winter, to
Colchester and Norwich, the charge by Land is above treble to the
Water-carriage from Lincolnshire to Holland; or from Kent, Sussex, Hampshire,
or Dorset-shire into France. This is one Reason, to many more, which makes our
people more miserable in working them than the Dutch or French.

Prop. 5. Theorem 4.
The free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen-Manufactures in England, may
increase them in England.

3 Ax. 3. For if things may be increased, they may be increased by more Agents.

3 Prop. 3. But Woollen-Manufactures may be increased in England.

12 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen-Manufactures
in England, will add so many more Agents, as the Foreigners are more.

Therefore it may increase Woollen-Manufactures in England.

Annot.
By free Admission here, I mean in all places of England where these
Manufactures may be most conveniently wrought, and the Wools cheapest bought:
and if hereby Foreigners would be invited to work them, these benefits would
(among many others) accrue to the Nation. First, Every Forreigner which
improves Woollen-Manufactures tenfold, more or less, above the value of the
Wool in Foreign Trade, gains so much to the Nation; but if he so instruct our
Youth, that more be so instructed in any Manufacture, this will be infinitely
so much more, as the Youth instructed is more. The Walloons whom Edw. 3d
invited into England, and taught our English the Mystery of working the
Manufactures of Cloth, were very inconsiderable in numbers to those who now
work them; so were the Walloons Queen Elizabeth permitted to work in Norwich,
Colchester, and places thereabout, the Stuffs, Bays, and Says, etc. which are
now wrought in them. And if this permission, obtained by Jumps in the Reigns of
these two Princes (as prudent as any who ever swayed the English Scepter) had
been constantly continued, the Dutch and French would not have supplied so many
other places and themselves with Woollen-Manufactures; our Wools,
Fullers-Earth, and all things else conducing to the Instruments of
Woollen-Manufactures, being so much cheaper and better here in England.

As the Improvement of Woollen or any other Manufacture would thus be
infinitely beneficial to the Nation, as the Improvement is more; so the losing
of Woollen, or any other Manufacture in England, will be equally mischievous to
it. In the years 1636, 37, and 38. when Ecclesiastical discipline was so
severely exacted, about two hundred Families left the Counties of Norfolk and
Suffolk, and planted themselves at Leyden, Alkmare, and other places of
Holland, where they instructed the Dutch in the Woollen-Manufactures of Norfolk
and Suffolk. And I have heard Sir Charles Harbord (a person of great Wisdom and
Insight in Foreign as well as the Interest of this Nation) say, that if all the
Bishoprics of England were sold, and given to the Nation, it would not near
compensate the loss the Nation sustained thereby.

Coroll.
By the same Reason, the free Admission of Foreigners to work the Manufactures
of Tin-Plates, may increase them in England.

1 Cor. Prop. 3. For the Manufactures of Tin-plates may be increased in England.

13 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Tin-plates in
England, will add so many more Agents in them, as the Foreigners are more.

Annot.
If Foreigners by this freedom, or further encouragement, could be invited to
work the Manufactures of Tin here in England, the benefits which would redound
to the Nation hereby, would be the same as in the increasing our Woollen
Manufactures. Herein this difference happened, that those most Excelling
Princes Edward 3d and Queen Elizabeth gave encouragement to Foreigners to
instruct our Natives in Woollen-Manufactures, but no King of England ever did
it to Foreigners in the Manufactures of Tin; whereby though we have Tin in
England, in greater abundance than any other place has, and as I am told the
Iron made in England is more temperate and pliable than any other for making
Tin-plates, yet to this day we know not how to make one.

Coroll. 3.
By the same Reason, the free Admission of Foreigners to work all sorts of
Earthen ware, may increase the Manufactures of them in England.

Cor. 2. Prop. 3. For Earthen Manufactures may be increased in England.

14. Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Earthen Ware in
England, will add so many more Agents, as the Foreigners are more.

Annot.
As no Prince ever permitted or gave encouragement to any Forreigner to
instruct the Natives in the Manufactures of Tin; so neither have they in the
Manufactures of Earthen Ware, though our Lead and Potters-Earth be more
plentiful here in England than elsewhere. And the Dutch have little Lead or
Potters-Earth for all those incredible quantities of Earthen Ware which they
vend here, and in other Countries; and also supply themselves with but what
they have from us: So that we are but their Drudges to seek Mines and work
them, for their enriching and employment of their people. Nor do we more enrich
them hereby, than impoverish our selves; for we pay above sixfold to them for
the Manufactures, more than we receive for the Principles.

In this Discourse I desire the Improvement of the Manufactures which proceed
from our own Principles, more than those which proceed from Foreign, as of fine
Linen and Silks, etc. for these Reasons. First, We may cheaper employ our
people on them, than Foreigners can be in other Countries, so much as the
Principles are cheaper had here; whereas we must have the Foreign Principles
dearer. Secondly, We are more secure of our Employments, having the Principles
in our own power; whereas in cases of War or Interest, it is in the power of
other Princes whether our People shall be employed or not in any Manufacture,
whose Principles are in their power. Even here in England, though we be at
Peace with all the world, yet we permit not our Woolls to be exported to any
part of the world: And how mischievous it must be to any place, to have People
bred to an Employment, and to want matter to work on, I leave it to others to
judge.

Prop. 6. Theorem 5.
Foreigners may cheaper increase Woollen Manufactures in England, than France,
or the United Netherlands.

1 Ax. 3. For things will be so much cheaper done, as done with less charge.

3. Prop. 3. But Foreigners may increase Woollen Manufactures in England.

15 Pet. 3. And Foreigners may work Woollen Manufactures in England, with less
charge than in France, or the United Netherlands.

Therefore they may cheaper increase them.

Annot.
If Foreigners did cheaper increase the Woollen Manufactures in England, which
the Dutch supply Hamburg, Sweden, Poland, Muscovy, Spain, Italy, and Turkey
with; and which the French supply Spain, Italy, and Turkey with; and with which
the French and Dutch cloy our Markets here in England; we might then, so far as
the Woolls of England and Ireland would permit, not only cheaper supply all
those places which the French and Dutch do, but also so much better, as our
Woolls and Fullers-Earth is better in England than in France or the United
Netherlands: And also conserve all that Treasure in the Nation which is
expended in buying the Dutch Blacks, French Druggets, and other Woollen
Manufactures of those Countries.

An ingenious Gentleman, not long since, said, that the Dutch supplied Sweden
with course Woollen Clothes, for the Soldiery and poor people of Sweden; and
that by order of the Council of Trade there (I wish such a thing might ever be
heard of in England) many people attempted without Success, and much loss, to
make these Clothes in Sweden. But about four years since, the Lord Landscroone
(of a Merchant made one of the Nobility of Sweden, and a Member of the Council
of Trade) propounded the working these Manufactures in Sweden, in case the
Council would represent it to the King when he came to his Majority as an
acceptable service, and that for some time the Council would take of the
Manufactures at the same terms the Dutch supplied them. The Council assented to
both; and a piece of those Clothes was divided, and the Arms of Sweden and of
the Lord Landscroone stamped upon both, that the Goodness of the future Cloth
to be made in Sweden, might be compared with the Dutch. Hereupon Landscroone,
at his own charges, hires Artificers from England and Holland, who so well
plied their business, that last year Sweden was supplied with these Clothes by
the work of the Natives, and upon the same terms the Dutch supplied them. And
for the future, the Lord Landscroone expects to be a considerable gainer, as he
well deserves; I am sure the Kingdom of Sweden will be much more.

Prop. 7. Theorem 6.
Foreigners may more securely increase Woollen, or any other Manufacture in
England, than in France or the United Netherlands.

5 Ax. 3. For things may be more securely done, where the Agents are more safe
in doing them.

6 Prop. 3. But Foreigners may increase Woollen Manufactures in England.

16 Pet. 3. And Foreigners are more safe in working them in England, than
France or the United Netherlands.

Therefore they may more securely increase them in England.

Annot.
After men's Interest, they consult their Security: and herein, as Foreigners
may increase Woollen Manufactures cheaper and better in England than France or
the United Netherlands; so are they more secure in working them than in either,
or any other place upon the Continent, by reason they are more secure from the
Invasion of Foreign Princes and States. It is true indeed, that one great
reason of the increase of the Strength and Trade of the United Netherlands, was
the security men apprehended there, as well as Freedom: For the great Power of
the Dutch by Sea, was such as was not to be controuled by any, or all other
Princes, except the King of England; and the weakness of the bordering Princes
by Land was such, as the States gave Laws to them at pleasure. But the terror
of the French Invasion in 1672, has much abated the opinion the World had of
their Security in the United Netherlands. And now the Marquess of Brandenburg
(the most powerful of all the Princes in Germany) has recovered the Dominion of
Wesel, Rees, Emrick, and Orsoy, which Commands the Rhine, and is possessed of
Skinkersconce, which Commands the Rhine and Wael, the opinion of this Security
is not only much abated, but the Dutch Trade to Germany and other places up and
down the Rhine, must be precarious, as the Marquess pleases. Nor will the Dutch
easily free themselves from the Neighborhood of the French in Maestricht,
Maseike, and other places.

Prop. 8. Theorem 7.
The free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen or other Manufactures in
England, will so much increase Trade in England, as the Foreigners are more.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the effects will be as the causes are.

4 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of People increase Trade.

18 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, will cause so many more People in England, as the
Foreigners are more.

Therefore it will so much increase Trade in England.

Annot.
This is evident, as has been said, in that every one of these must wear Hats,
Shoes, Clothes, and many other necessaries, whereby Trade and Employment of
other people would be so much more, as these Foreigners by this free Admission
shall be more.

Prop. 9. Theorem 8.
The free Admission of Foreigners to instruct the Nation of England in Woollen
and other Manufactures, may so much increase Trade in England, as the Natives
Instructed in those Manufactures are more.

7 Ax. 3. For things may be so much increased, as the Means are more.

19 Pet. 3. But Employment of People is a mean to increase Trade.

20 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to Instruct the Natives of
England in Woollen and other Manufactures, may so much employ the Natives, as
the Natives instructed are more.

Therefore it may so much increase Trade in England.

Annot.
So that this Admission of Foreigners to work and instruct the Natives of
England in Woollen and other Manufactures, doubly increases Trade in England,
viz. In the persons of the Foreigners, but much more by instructing the
Natives, whereby they may be enabled better to maintain themselves and Families
with all sorts of Conveniences, than if they were worse employed, or not
employed, which is worst of all; for then they become a Charge and Burden to
the Nation.

The numbers of the Walloons which Edw. the 3d and Queen Eliz. invited and
permitted in England, and who first instructed the English in Woollen
Manufactures, were very inconsiderable to the numbers of the Natives of England
who are now employed in them, and by that means only are enabled to provide for
themselves and Families, to the increase of Trade to those people from whom
they are supplied. So that that saying, That there is but such a Trade in the
world, is only true by accident, not necessarily; for many thousands of people
might increase Trade in the world if they had means, which being denied, they
cannot do.

Corollary.
By the same reason, the free admission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in Corporations in England, may so much increase
Trade in England, as the Natives so Admitted are more.

19 Pet. 3. For Employment of People is a mean to increase Trade.

21 Pet. 3. And the free admission of the Natives of England to work Woollen
and other Manufactures in the Corporations of England, may so much more employ
the Natives, as the admission is more free.

Annot.
If five pounds given with an Apprentice to be instructed in the Mystery of
Woollen or any other Manufacture, by which means he afterward earns Thirty
pounds per Annum, this in twenty years becomes six hundred pounds: therefore if
it be better for a Nation to earn six hundred pound, or more or less, by
employment of People, than to have six hundred pound more or less given to a
Nation, and the people not employed; this five pounds thus paid for binding out
such an Apprentice, becomes more valuable to the Nation, than if six hundred
pound had been given to the Nation, and the Apprentice not employed. To invite
therefore Foreigners to Instruct the Natives of England in Woollen and other
Manufactures, and freely to admit them in all places to improve Manufactures,
will be a more certain Revenue to the Nation, than can be hoped for by the
returns of the Spanish Plate-Fleet, where the Fate of Spain depends upon the
miscarriage of it.

It Is believed, above twelve thousand of the King's Scottish Subjects yearly go
out of Scotland into Poland, Sweden, Germany, France, Holland, and other
places, and never after return into Scotland; whereby the King not only loses
the Sovereignty of them, to the diminution of his Grandeur, but those places
gain great benefits by them. If therefore five pound binding out of an
Apprentice to any Manufacture may be in twenty years five hundred pounds gain
to the Nation, the benefit which might accrue to the Nation by employing them
here, in twenty years might be above six Millions; and this supply will be so
much more seasonable, by how much the peopling of our American Plantations and
the repeopling Ireland, has depopulated the Nation of its Inhabitants.

But as the Law against Naturalization permits not Foreigners to partake equal
benefit with the Natives by improving Manufactures in England, and instructing
the Natives in them; So does the privileges of the Freemen of Corporations
exclude all the other Natives of England from increasing Manufactures in them.
And the Act of the 5 Eliz. 4. provides, that no person shall take an Apprentice
for Woollen Manufactures in any Town Corporate, except such Apprentice be his
Son, or else that the Father or Mother of such Apprentice have the clear yearly
value of forty shillings Inheritance. Nor shall any person in Market Towns, or
Villages not Corporate, take an Apprentice, or instruct any in Woollen
Manufactures, unless he be his Son, or the Parents have the clear yearly value
of three pound Inheritance.

Consequences,
From whence it follows, that the Corporations being poor, and scarce half
Inhabited, by not admitting others to supply their number and defects, become
daily more poor, and less Inhabited. And the Children of poor people in
Villages, by the Act of the 5 Eliz 4. not being permitted to be bound
Apprentices in Market Towns and Corporations, in the Art or Mystery of Woollen
Manufactures; and being denied by the Act of 31 Eliz. 7. to erect Cottages:
when they become more than the Tenements can receive, or be employed in
Husbandry, they necessarily become vagrant, Beggars, Stealars, Canters, or at
best, if they forsake not the Nation, to swell the Suburbs of London, already
too big, be Ho^^^rs, Tapsters, Drawers, and sellers of Strong waters; and the
Corporations and Market Towns by reason hereof declining, the Farmor finds
less vent for his Commodities, and small or no encouragement to employ poor
people in Tilling or Improving his Grounds. And as the Act of the Eliz. 4. has
brought all these mischiefs upon Town and Country; so was it a necessary
preparative for the Enacting the 43 Eliz. 2. for maintaining Idle and Lazy
persons in all the Parishes in England, which have produced the very many
Inconveniences complained of in the Annot. upon the 24 and 25 Prop. of the
Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England, and their Corollaries.

Prop. 10. Theorem 9.
The free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in
Corporations, may more conveniently increase Trade in England.

8 Ax. 3. For things may be more conveniently done, where the places are more
convenient.

22 Pet. 3. But the Corporations of England are the most convenient places in
England to increase Trade.

9 Prop. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, may increase Trade in England.

Therefore it may more conveniently do it in Corporations.

Coroll.
By the same reason, the free permission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in Corporations, may more conveniently increase
Trade in England.

22 Pet. 3. For Corporations are the most convenient places in England to
increase Trade.

Cor. Prop. 10. And the free Permission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures, may increase Trade in England.

Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll.
So as the benefit which would accrue to the Nation by this Admission, would
begin at the Corporations, by reason of their Convenience; whereby the people
would not only be employed, but the Corporations much more peopled, the Markets
more frequented, and better supplied with all sorts of Provisions, the Houses
repaired, and new ones built. It is said, that about a year before Queen Eliz.
planted the Walloons (which could not endure the severity of Alva's Government)
in Norwich and Colchester, that it was propounded in the Council to demolish
both those places, as Receptacles of vagrant and Idle persons, which were
burdensome to the Nation, and dangerous to the Government: whereas now it is
said, that the weekly returns of Colchester for the Woollen Manufactures of
that place, amount to near thirty thousand pound, and of Norwich to near twenty
thousand pound.

But these Corporations which might be Seminaries for employment of people, to
the incredible happiness and enriching of themselves and the Nation, by
mistaking their own Interest as well as that of the Nation, in insisting upon
their Privileges, are become so poor and unfrequented, that the Governing part
have little to do but to Tax one part of the Inhabitants to maintain the other,
though the Town-lands, and other Revenues for maintaining them, be very
considerable. The Tradesmen are generally Retailers, who understand little
more, than that more of them would eat the Bread out of one another Mouths;
and therefore their chief care is to keep out all others. These Elbow-men, as
they are Idle, and bred up in no honest Calling, so by their Privileges they
impose what Taxes they please upon the labors of the poor Artificers, (who are
the Soul of a Nation) take what they please of them, and at what prizes they
please. But then these Lords in their Exempt Jurisdiction put another value
upon them to all Foreigners to their Privileges; so that a Gentleman may buy
our own Manufactures in Italy or Turkey cheaper than of them: and if ever a
Noble or Gentleman gets into their Books, they rarely ever get out, unless they
sell Lands to cross their Books; and these are the Honorable Privileges these
Patriots of Corporations are incorporated into.

Prop. 11. Theorem 10.
The free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in
England, may increase the value of the Land of England.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are.

6 Pet. 1. But Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is.

6 Prop. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, may increase Trade in England.

Therefore it may increase the value of the Lands of England.

Coroll. 1.
By the same reason, the free Admission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may increase the value of the Lands
of England.

6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is.

Coroll. 3. Prop. 10. And the free Admission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may increase Trade in England.

Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll.
So that though the Benefits which the Nation will reap by the free Admission
of Foreigners and the Natives of England to work Woollen and other
Manufactures, would begin at Corporations, yet would they not end there. For
Lands are only valuable as the Crop or feeding Cattle on them find a Market;
and therefore no man will Plow, Sow, or seed Cattle, when he cannot hope for a
Market; and by consequence, Lands are of little or no value, where the people
are few or none; or if the people be poor, they are of a poor value. But both
ways, the free Admission of Foreigners and the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures, will not only increase the Markets with more
people, but also enable them to give the Farmor so much better prices for his
Commodities, as their Employments are better; and therefore the Interest of the
King, Nobility, Gentry and others, who are owners of Lands, are so much
concerned herein, as the value of their Lands would be hereby improved.

Coroll. 2.
By the same reason, the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and
other Manufactures in England, may increase the value of the Revenues of the
Church.

7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands
of England are valuable.

Prop. And the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, may increase the value of the Lands of England.

Coroll. 3.
By the same reason, the free Admission of the Natives of England to work
Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may increase the value of the
Revenue of the Church of England.

7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands
of England are valuable.

Coroll. 1. And the free Admission of the Natives of England to work Woollen
and other Manufactures in England, may increase the value of the Lands of
England.

Annot. upon the 2d and 3d Corollaries.
As this free admission would increase the value of the Revenues of the Church
of England, in reference to the Glebe-Lands, and the Tithes of the Crops
renewed upon the Lands in Villages; so would it increase the value of the
Revenues of the Church in Corporations, by how much the places would be better
and more built, and inhabited by a richer and better sort of Inhabitants. And
as this Admission may increase the value of the Revenues of the Church, so it
may the Revenues of the Crown, not only in the value of the Lands of the Crown,
but in the consumption of Beer, Ale, and all other Exciseable Commodities in
England; which will be so much more, as the Foreigners by this Admission are
more; and may be so much more, as the Natives by this mean may be better
enabled to eat and drink more and better.

Coroll. 4.
By the same reason, the free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and
other Manufactures in England, may increase the strength of England.

4 Pet. 1. For greater numbers of People increase strength.

23 Pet. 3. And the free admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, will cause so much greater numbers of People in
England, as the Foreigners are more.

Annot.
Though Tradesmen and Artificers make not so good and hardy Soldiers as those
who live in the Country, and are of more robust lives, yet I am sure they are
better than none: and the late King found by woeful experience, that the
Companies made up of the Apprentices and Tradesmen of London, were very good
Soldiers; and by good experience found, that both were very serviceable to him.

Prop. 12. Theorem 11.
The free Admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in
England, may more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws, and Liberties of
England.

9 Ax. 3. For things will be more secure, as the means of Protecting them be
increased.

24 Pet. 3. But the Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England
are protected by the strength of England.

Coroll. And the free admission of Foreigners to work Woollen and other
Manufactures in England, may increase the Strength of England.

Therefore it may more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and
Liberties of England.

Annot.
Though I could not give particular instances hereof in England, yet I am as
well assured of the reason in this Proposition, as if I could. Sure I am, it
was the error of Christian Princes, especially of Spain, by first imposing
upon their Subjects in their Religion, and neglecting to take care of
preserving them in their native Countries; which has so increased the Dutch
strength by Sea and Land, that they are not only able to protect their own
Trade, Church, State, Laws, and Liberties; but to give Laws to very many of the
Princes in Christendom, and to most of the Mahumetan Princes in the
East Indies. Besides, this free admission of Foreigners to work Woollen
Manufactures, as it will increase the strength of England so much more as the
Foreigners are more, and so much more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws,
Trade, and Liberties of England; so it will so much weaken those places from
whence the Foreigners come, as the residue will be less able to endanger the
Crown, Church, etc. of England.

But all these benefits, as they receive their birth by the free admission of
Foreigners and the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures
in England, so will they necessarily be strangled in their future growth, if
with equal freedom they find not vent in Foreign Trade; whereby the Nation may
be as well supplied with Foreign Commodities, whereof it stands in need; as
also other parts of the World enabled to hold Traffic and Commerce with us,
by mutual Exchange for our Manufactures, whereof they stand in need. But before
we proceed herein, it is requisite to introduce this Proposition and
Corollaries; which though more proper for the Treatise of The Danger of the
Church, State, and Trade of England, yet not being said there, it is convenient
they be inserted here.

Prop. 13. Theorem 12.
The pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations endangers the vent of Woollen and
other Manufactures in Foreign Trade.

10 Ax. 3. For things will be so much endangered, as the means of doing them is
restrained.

25 Pet. 3. But the buying our Woollen and other Manufactures is a mean to vend
them in Foreign Trade.

26 Pet. 3. And the pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations, restrains the
buying our Woollen and other Manufactures to the Freemen of Corporations.

Therefore it endangers the Foreign Trade of them.

Annot.
So long as this pre-emption is continued, the best the Nation can hope for,
is, that the Inhabitants of the Nation cannot expect any further Employment,
than the abilities of these Freemen can arise to. So that it will be impossible
to enlarge our Foreign Trades of Woollen and other Manufactures, beyond their
abilities; or to conserve the Foreign Trades we now enjoy of them, if by War or
other accident, their abilities become less. And as the Retailers in
Corporations neither Labor, nor take care in laboring for the production of
our Woollen and other Manufactures, but only how to impose upon the labourer
and those they sell to: So these pre-emption-men, neither labor, take care in
Laboring, or to bring the Manufactures of England to their Corporations; yet
not only the Artificer must be at their mercy in buying, but all the world in
selling. No question then but these men will thrive, though the Nation and all
the world suffer. Yet I would be glad to be instructed in any one particular,
what need the Nation or World has of any one of these men: I cannot tell for
France, but am confident not one of this kind of men can be found in the
United Netherlands.

In truth I have often admired, the German Empire and Kingdom of Poland should
give protection to Hamburg and Dantzick; for no member of the Empire or Kingdom
is permitted to be supplied with Foreign Commodities, or to vend the
Commodities of Germany or Poland in either place, but as they buy of, or sell
to the Burgers of them; which are Impositions as injurious as can be imposed
upon a Conquered Nation. And though Hamburg be otherwise a great Trading place
to many places of the world by Navigation, and very considerable in the
Groenland-fishing; yet the Town of Dantzick has little or no Trade, but their
pre-emption of all sorts of Foreign Commodities, wherewith the Dutch and other
Nations supply them, and they Poland; and by pre-emption of all the Commodities
of Poland, which these Burgers sell again to the Dutch and other Nations.

For my part, as I esteem the City of London to be a great ornament to the
Nation, and equally with any man desire the Grandeur and Prosperity of it, so I
wish the Grandeur and Prosperity of it were otherwise founded, than by
pre-emption of the Commodities of the Nation, and such other means, whereby the
Nation necessarily becomes impoverished; which must of necessity be more
dangerous to the City, than Country: For the Country may subsist, though
poorly, without a Foreign Trade, or a Trade with the City. But if the City
loses the Foreign Trade of our Commodities, and if the Country by its poverty
cannot entertain a Commerce with the City, the City cannot subsist at all.
Whereas, if by reason of the cheapness and freedom of vending our Commodities
the Country be enriched, though this pre-emption were taken away, the City
being the Head of a Noble Nation, and having the residence of the King's Court,
and all the Supreme Courts of Judicature, and the best Navigable River of
Christendom, or perhaps of the World, to supply it with Foreign Commodities,
and to vend our Native; it may hold a much better Trade with the Nation than
now it does.

Corollary 1.
By the same reason, the Trading in Companies exclusive to other men, endangers
the Foreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures.

27 Pet. 3. For freedom in Trade, is a mean to vend our Woollen and other
Manufactures in Foreign Trade.

28 Pet. 3. And Trading in Companies, exclusive to other men, restrains the
freedom of Trade of our Woollen Manufactures to such Companies.

Annot.
As the pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations, restrains the Foreign vent of
our Woollen and other Manufactures by Forreiners, to what these pre-emption-men
please to sell, and at what prices they please to impose: So this Trading in
Companies restrains the Foreign vent of our Woollen and other Manufactures by
the Natives of England, to what these Companies please, and at what terms they
please. So that it will be impossible to increase the Foreign Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures beyond their pleasures and abilities; or to
conserve the Trade the Nation now has under them, if by War or other accident
their abilities become less; whereby the Nation loses all the inestimable
benefits which might accrue to it by the Foreign Trade of its Manufactures: and
the wretched People, whose Livelyhoods depend upon the Foreign Trade, become
undone: for want of Employment. And as by this kind of Trading we endanger our
own Foreign Trade of our Manufactures, so we make room for the Dutch and other
industrious Nations, who are not subject to the charges and restrictions we lie
under; and fix and establish Trades by these Commodities in other Countries, so
much more as we charge or restrain ours.

Heretofore, the East-Country-Company, above all others, was the most
flourishing, and by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first,
termed, The Royal Company; for it supplied Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland,
and Lifeland, with our Woollen Manufactures, and made very advantageous returns
by Treasure, (especially Hungaria Ducats) and the Commodities of those
Countries, into England. This Trade till King Charles his Reign the English
solely enjoyed. About the beginning of King Charles his Reign, the Dutch began
to be Interlopers, rather than Traders with the English in it. But it fell out
unluckily, that in the years 1636, 37, and 38. about two hundred Families of
zealous people in Norfolk and Suffolk, who would not endure the severe
Injunctions of Ecclesiastical Discipline; forsook their Habitation; and being
bred up in the Woollen Manufactures wherewith those East-Countries were
supplied from England, and planted themselves in Holland, they there instructed
the Dutch in those Manufactures; so that we returned the Dutch a kindness, with
another sort of people the Dutch did us. Afterward the Fatal Civil Wars
ensued, so that the East-land-company not so fully supplying the East Country
as formerly.

Consequences.
The Dutch found an opportunity of increasing their Trade of Woollen
Manufactures; and the Polanders giving encouragement to the Silesians (who
bordered upon them, and then only made course Sleses) to work Woollen
Manufactures in Poland; and the Wools of Poland being much finer than those of
Silefia, these Silesians by themselves, and much more by instructing the
Polanders, have in a great measure so supplied Poland with Woollen
Manufactures, that whereas before the year 1640, the East-land Company vended
yearly 20000 broad Clothes, they now do not 4000: of 60000 Kerseys, now not
5000: of 40000. Doubles, now not 2000.

About the middle of King James his Reign, the State of that part of Suffolk
and Essex was in so flourishing a condition by reason of the East-land Trade,
that Sir Edward Coke, at the request of the Inhabitants of Ipswich, built
Fulling Mills at Bourn-Bridge, a mile from Ipswich. When they were built, the
Town proffered him 240 l. per Annum, in case he would let them to the Town; but
Sir Edward told them, at their request he built them for a public benefit, and
so he would continue them. In his Grandson Sir Edw. Coke's time these Mills
fell to 80, 60, and 40 l. per Annum; and of late, in his Son Sir Robert Coke's
time, they fell to six pounds per Annum, though the Mills cost above 2000 l.
the building: and at last the Rent would not pay the sixth part of the charge
of Repairing them; so as now they are thrown up for want of Work.

Nor is the Fate of the Hamburg-Company much better than that of the East land,
and from the same cause: for after the Civil Wars broke out here in England,
and the City of London zealously affecting the Cause, and preferring it before
any Temporal Interest; the Company either out of Zeal, Necessity, or both, did
not so well supply Hamburg as before; which the Dutch took the benefit of, and
have so well managed that advantage, that, as before we supplied Jutland,
Holstein, and the North and North-west parts of Germany with Woollen
Manufactures, we now scarce go halves with the Dutch in that Trade; and this
Company is become so poor, that they can hardly maintain their half in it.

Even the Turky-Company (which we so much glory in) by their Monopoly of
vending our Woollen Manufactures once in two years to Turkey, and exposing the
West-Country-Clothiers to bring up their Clothes to London before they please
to buy them, (a charge equal to Turkey from Bristol, or other Western parts) and
then to send them as far East, and then through the Channel, makes but room for
the French, Dutch, and Venetians to establish Trades of Woollen Manufactures in
Turkey; and so much better, by how much this Company charges and restrains ours.

Coroll. 2.
By the same reason, the Act of Navigation endangers a Domestic Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures.

29. Pet. 3. For Exchanging Foreign Goods for our Woollen and other
Manufactures, is a mean to have a Domestic Trade of Woollen and other
Manufactures.

30. Pet. 3. And the Act of Navigation restrains the Importation of Foreign
Goods to English-built Ships, and sailed by English, or the Ships and of the
Natives, whether they have Ships or Mariners or not.

Annot.
No creature endewed with less Prescience than Omniscience, can foresee the
mischiefs the Act of Navigation brings upon the Nation by this restriction. For
as every man stands of need of being supplied by another, so does every
Country. No man shall ever be well supplied by another, who will be only
supplied by those men who immediately do things he needs, or by his own
Servants: for the men who do the things I stand in need of, it may be are out
of distance, or have no means to convey them to me. But when things are made
convenient for Humane use, they are commonly sent to the most probable place
where they may find a Market, and there men resort to be supplied, and to sell
or exchange other things for them. For my part, I am no Merchant, and therefore
cannot give those instances which Merchants can hereof, in the Trade of the
Nation; yet am I as morally assured of the reason of this Gorollary, as if I
could give a Thousand particular instances of it.

1. It was proved before a Committee of the House of Commons, the 12 of Feb.
1668. That before the Rump-Parliament contrived the Act of Navigation, the
Trade to Norway for Timber, Pitch and Tar, was generally driven by the English
in Barter of our Manufactures, but then by Dollars, and the Treasure of the
Nation: and those Manufactures which were exported into Norway, were rarely
exported but by Norwegians.

2 That the Prices of Norway-Timber was become near double.

3. That our own Timber was much wasted, by reason of the Dearness of the
Norway-Timber.

4. That we had not built one Ship for that Trade since the Law, nor could ever
hope to do, so long as it stood in force, because a Foreign Ship might be
built for half the price, and be more free for Trade; whereas the Norwegians
had doubled their Ships, and built them twice as big, and increased their
Mariners from 600 to 6000, and yet Traded to no place but England; whereby the
English in a short time would necessarily be excluded the Trade of Norway,
unless they drive it by Norwegians and in Norway Bottoms.

5. That the English were then almost wholly laid aside, the Trade of Norway
being generally driven by the Norwegians and in Norway Bottoms.

6. That the English were wholly left to the King of Denmark's disposing,
whenever he pleased to impose any further abuses than were then complained of;
which were, that the English ever since 1646, and by a Treaty made between the
Kings of England and Denmark 1660, paid of a Rixdollar per Lasts for the
growths of Norway; (except the Town of Bergen) but since the late War with the
King of Denmark, they paid for Timber a Rixdollar and half per Last; for other
growths a Rixdollar and; others 2 and; and for others 3 Rixdollars: and in
measuring the Lastage, the same Ships which before the War had their Measures
adjusted were raised some 35, others 40 Lasts.

7. That it was the Interest of the King of Denmark to make the Trade of Norway
insupportable to the English; for thereby the Act of Navigation did reduce the
whole Trade to the Norwegians. As this success attended this restriction by the
Act of Navigation, in reference to the Trade of Norway, both for our
Manufactures and the Commodities of Norway: So did it not much better succeed
in the Trades of our Manufactures, and of the Hemp and Flax imported by the
Dutch in exchange of them. For the English, from the reasons in the first
Coroll. upon this Prop. having lost so inestimable a Trade into the Sound, and
by consequence the beneficial returns of Ruff Hemp and Flax from Riga, Revel,
and other places within the Sound, before the year 1640; and the Dutch by
reason of the greatness of their Trade into the Sound, not of Woollen
Manufactures only, but of Fish, Salt, Wines, Brandies, Spice, and other
Commodities, returned such vast quantities of Ruff Hemp and Flax, and by reason
of the cheapness of their Navigations, and smalness of Duties, supplied the
English so cheap with Hemp and Flax, that the poor people upon the Eastern
Coast of England, and here in London, were able to make Cordage, Nets and Sails
almost sufficient to supply the Navigation and Fishing upon the Eastern parts
of England; and the returns of these by the Dutch, were chiefly for Clothes and
other Manufactures and growths of England. But the Act of Navigation not
permitting the Dutch to import these; and the English having so lost their
Trade into the Sound; and the Inhabitants of Riga, Revel, and other places of
the Sound from whence the best Hemp and Flax comes, little Trading with us into
England; and the Act of Navigation permitting the Dutch to import the
Manufactures of Cordage, Nets and Sails,

Consequences.
It came to pass, that as the Natives lost a great exchange of their Woollen
and other Manufactures for Hemp and Flax, so did many thousands of poor people
their Employment in making Cordage, Nets and Sails: Even the Town of Yarmouth
in Norfolk, before the Act of Navigation, made yearly 2800 Tun of Cordage, now
not ten.

And the fitting up of Ships with Cordage and Sails became so dear, that in the
year 1650, several persons of good knowledge and experience in building Ships,
and any self built a Vessel of 100 Tun, and fitted her out to Sea for 505 l.
Four years after, the same Builder built another (both for the Newcastle-Trade)
of 110 Tum, and this Ship fitted out to Sea cost above 800 l. And the reason of
this dearness, the Builder ascribed to the excessive prices of Pitch, Tar,
Cordage and Sails.

Corollary 3.
By the same reason, the Act of Navigation endangers a Foreign Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures.

31 Pet. 3. For returns of Foreign Commodities, exchanged for our Woollen and
other Manufactures, is a mean to conserve a Foreign Trade of our Woollen and
other Manufactures.

32 Pet. 3. And the Act of Navigation restrains the returns of Foreign Goods
exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures to English-built Ships, and
sailed by English.

Annot.
And what are these English-built Ships, but near double as dear built, and
sailed with near double the charge of the Dutch and other Nations? so as this
charge added to the restriction by the Act of Navigation,

Consequences.
It comes to pass, that it will be impossible to enlarge either the Foreign
Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, or the returns of them beyond this
Navigation; and the Merchant computing the charges he is hereby obliged to,
finds so much less vent for our Woollen and other Manufactures, as the Returns
become so chargeable, that no profit arises to the Merchant thereby. But
besides this inestimable loss which the Nation hereby sustains in the Foreign
vent of our Manufactures, these two mischiefs necessarily attend this
restriction and charge of this Navigation. One, that we impose a necessity of
consuming the Foreign Goods returned in Barter of our own Manufactures, which
is generally in Luxury and Pride: or if any of the returns be employed in our
Manufactures, the dearness of these returns imposes a further dearness upon our
own Manufactures both in the Foreign and Domestic Trade of them. But it is time
to proceed to the Expedients by which the Foreign Trade of our Manufactures may
be enlarged.

Prop. 14. Theorem 13.
The Repealing the Acts made the 18 and 20 Car. 2. c. 1. against Importation of
Irish Cattle, may increase the Trades of our Woollen Manufactures, and for
Beer, Hops, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, Hides, Fruits, Sugars, Tobacco's; all
sorts of Silk, as well wrought as unwrought; Ribbons, Gold, Silver and
Silk-Lace with the Kingdom of Ireland, and the Trade of Victualling ships by
the Natives of England and Foreigners in the Ports of England.

13 Ax. 3. For every business may be so much increased, as the means are more.

40 Pet. 3. But the importation of Irish Cattle is a mean whereby the Kingdom
of Ireland may hold a Trade with us for our Woollen Manufactures, and Hops,
Beer, etc.

41 Pet. 3. And the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may
make the importation of Irish Cattle more.

Therefore it may increase the Trades of our Woollen Manufactures, and of Beer,
Hops, etc. with Ireland, and of Victualling Ships in the Ports of England.

Annot.
If the Repealing these Acts would increase the Trades of our Woollen and
others Manufactures and growths to 210000 l. per Annum, besides Victualling
ships, as they were before these Acts, and are now fallen to less than 20000 l.
per Annum, as Mr. John Du Boise (a worthy Citizen) has calculated; This would
be more beneficial to the Nation, than if 170000 l. per Annum were given to the
Nation, allowing 40000 l. per Annum for Principles, than to continue it in the
same condition it is in, now these Laws stand in force. But though the Nation
might hope for some relief by the Repealing or Expiration of these Laws, it can
hope for none by repealing the Act of the 15 Car. 2. cap. 7. Entitled, Trade
encouraged, for all sorts of Wire, Hats, Ribbons, Buttons, Gloves, Bandstrings,
Hangings, Stools, Chairs, Knives, Sythes, Sickles, Cizars, Sheaths for Knives,
Stockens, Caps, course Shifts and Frocks, with the Kingdom of Scotland: for the
Scottish Nation, offended by this Law, imposed 90 l. per Cent. upon all Goods
imported into Scotland from England; and making use of opportunities, have
established these Trades and Manufactures among themselves, to our Loss, as
appears more largely in the Annot. upon the 15th Prop. of the Equal Danger of
the Church, State, and Trade of England.

Prop. 15. Theorem 14.
The repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may increase the value
of the Lands of England.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the effects will be as the causes are.

6 Pet. 1. But Lands are valuable, as the Trade of the place is.

14 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may
increase the valuable Trades of England with Ireland.

Therefore it may increase the value of the Lands of England.

Annot.
Suppose 15000 people before these Acts were employed in those Commodities,
wherewith this Nation supplied Ireland; this Employment enabled them to pay for
the Provisions they bought of the Country-Farmor: But the Trade of England with
Ireland being interrupted by these Laws, the employment of these people became
proportionally lesned; and by consequence, the means by which they were enabled
to pay for the Provisions they formerly bought of the Farmour; and so the Lands
of England so much less valuable. By the Rule of Contraries then, the repealing
these Acts, will so much increase the value of the Lands of England, as the
Trades of England with Ireland are increased, whereby poor people may be
employed, and so enabled to give the Farmor better prices for Provisions, than
otherwise they could.

Corollary 1.
By the same reason, the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1.
may increase the value of the Revenues of the Church.

7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands
of England are valuable.

16 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may
increase the value of the Lands of England.

Annot.
And so the repealing these Laws may increase the value of the Revenues of the
Crown, not only in the value of the Crown Lands, but in repairing the Customs
which the King received for the Cattle imported out of Ireland into England;
which did amount to 30000 l. per Annum, for which these Laws make no
compensation to the King.

Prop. 16. Theorem 15.
The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may so much better
conserve Peace and Amity between England and Ireland, as the Trade between them
shall be more.

13 Ax. 3. For every business may be so much conserved, as the means are more.

8 Pet. 1. But Trade is a mean to conserve Peace and Amity.

15 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may
increase Trade between England and Ireland.

Therefore it may so much more conserve Peace and Amity between them.

Annot.
As the Crown of Ireland is a Crown subject to the Crown of England; so the
mutual Trade and Correspondence between them, will strengthen the Obligations
so much more, as their mutual Interests are hereby united. These, and many
other benefits attend both Kingdoms, by Repealing these Laws. The Mischiefs and
Inconveniences which have ensued by making them, in some measure appear by the
Annot. upon the 18, 19, and 20 Prop. of the Danger of the Church, State, and
Trade of England.

Prop. 17. Theorem 16.
The free Admission of Foreigners to buy the Woollen and other Manufactures of
England, will so much increase the Treasure of England, as the Money expended
in it is more.

1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much increased, as is added to it.

1 Pet. 3. But Money is Treasure.

33 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to buy the Woollen and other
Manufactures of England, will add so much more Money to the Money of England,
as the Money expended therein is more.

Therefore it will so much increase the Treasure of England.

Annot.
By free Admission, here, I do not mean the Freedom which English men enjoy,
viz. to buy them at the second hand of the Freemen of Corporations, and after
they have been charged with Land-carriage to London; but at the next Ports, or
places where they are made.

Prop. 18. Theorem 17.
The free Admission of Foreigners to exchange Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp
and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other Foreign Goods, for the
Woollen and other Manufactures of England, may so much enrich the Nation, as
the Goods exchanged may be made more valuable in the Manufactures, by
employment of our own people.

11 Ax. 3. For any place will be so much enriched, as things are more valuable
than the charge.

34 Pet. 3. But Timber, Pitch, Tar, Salt, rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of
Dying-Stuffs, and many other Foreign Goods, by employment of our People, may be
made so much more valuable, than the Manufactures exchanged for them, in our
building of Ships and Houses, in the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails, and
in Dying our Woollen and other Manufactures of England, as they are more and
cheaper.

35 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Foreigners to exchange these for our
Woollen and other Manufactures of England, may make Timber, Pitch, Tar, etc.
more and cheaper in England.

Therefore it may so much enrich the Nation.

Annot.
As the free buying our Woollen and other Manufactures of England will increase
the Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, whereby the Inhabitants will
be so much more employed in them; so by Exchanging Goods for our Manufactures,
we to our own enriching, add another employment to our People; and this so much
more valuable than the Money wherewith the Goods are bought, as the Goods
become more valuable in other Manufactures than the Money. And therefore it is
an error in the Act of Navigation, to permit all Nations to import Money into
the Nation, and to restrain the importation of Goods to the English and
Natives: for if we did too much abound in Money, this would be a burden to the
Nation, and of ill consequence to the King and Subject. For if a man, as the
case stands, may buy that for 100 l. which if Money were five-fold increased,
he shall pay 500 l. for it, he has five times the trouble in it. And all
Commodities being valued according to the plenty of Money, the Revenues of the
Crown, and Leases granted by the Nobility, Gentry, and Church, would be but one
fifth of the value, if the Money were five times more; for they must pay five
times more for the Commodities renewed upon their Farms, and yet receive but
the Rent at first reserved when the Commodities bore but of the Money. And
therefore it was a prudent Institution of Cardinal Poole (who being chosen
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, when from the Spanish Indies the
Money became so plentiful in England, that the Members of the University could
scarce buy Bread upon the Rents reserved on their Leases) to have one third to
be paid in Corn, or so much as the prices of Corn should amount to in Cambridge
market the Market Day before our Lady day and Michaelmas. And therefore if our
Treasure were more than our Neighboring Nations, I did not care whether we had
one fifth part of the Treasure we now have.

I have often said in Coffee-houses, (and I am sorry I could not find a more
convenient place in England to speak it in) at the beginning of the War between
the French and Dutch, That the French Nation would be exceedingly impoverished
thereby, and to the undoing of many thousands of the French: For the French
Trade for Wines, Salt, Paper, Linen, and other the Manufactures of France, was
above all other Nations, carried on in Foreign Trade by the Dutch Navigation,
whereby the Natives were employed, and the Kingdom and Natives exceedingly
enriched: but the Dutch Navigation being removed by reason of the War, all
these Commodities of France, which were Transported by the Dutch Navigation in
Foreign Trade, find not like vent; and by consequence, the Nation loses much
of the wealth it gained thereby, and the Inhabitants their Employment. Nor is
it in the power of France to redress this, without restoring the Dutch
Navigation: for admit the French King should take measures by our Act of
Navigation, (as they say he does) and endeavor to establish a Foreign Trade of
the Commodities of France by his own Subjects; and could make ships of
Oyster-shells and Shingle, and in an instant create Factories, and make all the
returns the Dutch do of the Commodities of France; and without Experience or
Instruction make Navigators and Mariners at his will, of his Subjects; yet so,
many of his Subjects as he makes Seamen, so many sewet he will leave to plant
Vineyards, make Paper, Linen, Salt, and other Commodities of France, and so
much lessen the Manufactures of France, as he increases his Navigation.

But the Dutch War is but an accident of the time, and it is probable when the
French King pleases, he may make Peace with the Dutch, and so restore the Dutch
Navigation again to the trade of France. But alas! who can ever untwist the
Treefold Cord of the Law against Naturalization, the Act of Navigation, and the
Freedom of Corporations here in England! Each of these is more mischievous to
us here in England, than the Dutch-War is to France: for France, as it is a
Kingdom above threefold greater than England, so in that proportion it is
doubly more peopled, and therefore may much better endure the Sequestration of
the Dutch Navigation, and establish it upon the account of the French than we
can; our Coast being almost desolate, and so poor, that they can scarce
maintain their poor; and so have neither Men nor Means to conserve the little
Trades they have, much less to increase them; and the Country scarce half
Inhabited, and so the Lands of England not half improved: and at this day I
believe the Nobility and Gentry have above twenty thousand Farms in their
hands; and to take these from Husbandry, to people our Coast, and increase our
Navigation, will leave so many fewer in the Country; yet to Eternity, for ought
is known, we must continue in this Condition.

Coroll. 1.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to sell Timber, Pitch,
Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, and many other sorts of Foreign Commodities in
England, may so much enrich the Nation, as they may be made more valuable by
the employment of our people.

36 Pet. 3. For Timber, Pitch, Tar, etc. may be made more valuable by employing
our people in building, and their Manufactures, as they are more and cheaper.

37 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Foreigners to sell these in England,
may make them more and cheaper.

Annot.
Though Trade where the Commodities are consumed to loss, becomes so much more
prejudicial, and impoverishes any place so much as such consumption is: And
therefore as all beneficial Trades ought to be made free, and by all means
encouraged; so it may seem reasonable, that destructive Trades where things are
vainly consumed, and the employment of our people hindered thereby, as are our
Trades to France and Spain for Wines; and to France for fine Linen, Lace,
Points; and the importation of Dutch Black Clothes, and French Hats and
Druggets, whereby the employment of our people is hindered, and so much of the
Treasure of the Nation exhausted as is spent in our consumption of them, ought
totally to be prohibited; yet nearly looking into it, such prohibition will
prove dangerous to our Trade at home and abroad, and also to the Peace of the
Nation.

For first, as every man stands in need of being supplied by another, so does
every place; and therefore, if we should prohibit the Importation of the
Commodities of France, though it be evident the Nation consumes them all to
loss, (except Salt and Sails) yet we cannot then but expect the French will
likewise prohibit the Importation of our Welsh Frizes, and Exeter Carseys,
Leather, Gloves, Ribbons, and several other Commodities; whereby the employment
of all our Artificers in them, being taken away, they become miserable, and the
Lands on which the Wools and the Cattle were renewed, become less valuable. The
reason is the same, if we prohibit the Importation of Dutch Black Clothes, who
take off many of our White Clothes, and other Manufactures of England.
Secondly, If we prohibit the French Hats, Druggets, and Dutch Black Clothes, we
put our selves and the World upon the Monopoly of having only such as the
English make, who will soon know the prerogative they enjoy hereby, and make
the English pay more for worse work than they did before, and make them so dear
and bad, that we shall establish the Foreign Trade of such things to the French
and Dutch; whereas the Importation of these will be an Awe upon the English, to
make ours so good and cheap, as to supply us and the world better, or they will
lose their employment. And Lastly, Such Prohibition causes Ha^red and
Heart-burning between Princes, whereby oftentimes Wars ensue, though under
other pretenses.

Therefore, if my opinion were worthy to be admitted, no Goods of any sort
should be Prohibited: but if any be imported which are Luxuriously consumed,
with little or no employment of the people, as the Wines imported are, they
should pay the King the full value in their consumption; but little or nothing,
if they could be again Transported: for the importation is beneficial to the
Nation, by improving the Rents of Houses, the employment of People in Lading
and Ualading, and in vending our Corn and Provision to the Importer. But if an
employment may happen to the People of the Nation, if things were not imported,
as in fine Linen, Lace, Points, Blacks and Druggets, encouragement should be
given to all people to instruct ours in those Manufactures; and such duties for
some time imposed on the Importation, that better hopes might be expected here,
than otherwise, in working them.

Prop. 19. Theorem 18.
The free permission of Foreigners to Import Timber, rough Hemp and Flax, all
sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all sorts of Foreign Goods, will so much conserve
the Treasure of the Nation, as they are cheaper sold.

12 Ax. 3. For things will be so much conserved, as they are less expended.

38 Pet. 3. But less Treasure will be expended in Norway-Timber, Pitch, Tar,
Foreign Hemp and Flax, and all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all other Foreign
Commodities, if they be cheaper vended.

39 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Foreign
Commodities, will make them cheaper vended.

Therefore it will so much conserve the Treasure of the Nation.

Annot.
Mr. Mun observes in his 4th chap. of England's Improvements by Foreign Trade,
that as Legorne is the most flourishing part in the Mediterranean in Trade, so
the Inhabitants have little Trade but for Goods imported by the Dutch and
English, which they buy for ready Money; and that the Great Duke lent him 40000
Crowns for a year gatis, though he knew it would be presently sent out of Italy
into Turkey to buy Commodities; the Great Duke well understanding the returns
would be profitable to him and his Subjects; yet not by Manufactures, which is
the most profitable by employing people, but by vending them, and that by
Land-carriage, to Milan, Piedmont, and other places in Italy.

But if by reason of the Freedom of Legorne, wrought Goods imported by
Foreigners, and bought with ready Money, be so profitable to the Duke of
Florence and his Subjects; I am sure the free Importation of unwrought Goods
into England by Foreigners, might be much more profitable to the King and his
Subjects, by employment of the English in their Manufactures. And if that
Permission which Oliver dispensed to the English Norway-Traders for Timber, had
been continued by the King since his Restoration, all that Money had been
still conserved in the Nation, which was expended in dearer buying Norway
Timber imported by the Norwegians, in building the City and Suburbs of London
and other places, and in building and repairing the Navy Royal, and other ships
of the English Navigation: and so might all that superfluous dearness of rough
Hemp and Flax, whereby our people lost their employment, yet in all England,
the King's duties did not amount to little more than 1500 l. per Annum; and
perhaps 20000 people might have been employed in the Manufactures of Cordage
and Sails: so we needed not have vainly been necessitated to have bought them
of the Dutch, and in our Wars with them, of the French.

Prop. 20. Theorem 19.
The free Admission of Foreigners to import Goods into England, will so much
increase the Riches of England, as the Goods imported are more.

1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much increased, as is added to it.

41 Pet. 3. But Goods are Riches.

42 Pet. 3. And the free admission of Foreigners to import Goods into England,
will add so much Goods to those of England, as the Importation is more free.

Therefore it will so much increase the Riches of England.

Annot.
I say, this free admission of Foreigners to import Goods into England, will
more certainly enrich the Nation, than can be reasonably expected by the
returns of the Growths and Manufactures of England and our Plantations in
Foreign Trade. For the Nation is necessarily enriched so much, as the value of
the Goods imported by Foreigners amounts to: Whereas the Merchant in return of
Goods by Foreign Trade, is not so secure but he may become a loser: or, if he
or the Nation gains by the returns, yet the gain is no more than the value of
the Goods returned exceed the value of the Goods Exported; which if 1/10, is
very considerable; whereas the Nation entirely gains the value of the Goods
imported by Foreigners. And in case the Merchant loses the outward Fraught, or
the returns of the Goods of England or our Plantations, the Nation loses so
much as the value of the Goods amount to. But the Nation ventures nothing by
the Importation of Goods imported by Foreigners, yet necessarily gains so much
as the Goods imported amount to in value.

And herein I observe, that Goods being valuable as they can be vended, the
places where they are vended generally receive greater benefit by the
Intercourse of People, and the varieties of Trades and Traders, than the places
whereon the Goods are wrought and renewed. So that though neither London,
Amsterdam, Hamburg, Legorne, and many other frequented places have little or no
Good; of their own growth or Manufactures yet by reason of the frequencles of
people, in many varieties of Trades, they receive much greater benefit than the
places on which the Goods are wrought and renewed. And I see no reason but if
the Importation of Goods were as free in England, as in Holland, Zealand,
Hamburg, Gottenburg, Legorne, etc. but that our Ports might be as rich and
flourishing as these; and so much more, as ours are better, and more
convenient. Whereas, by denying the World this freedom, we continue the Poverty
of the Towns upon the Coast of England, which daily decline, and even become
desolate, and necessitate the world to enrich and strengthen other places with
those Riches and People which might be much better and securely enjoyed by us.

Prop. 21. Theorem 20.
The free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, may better, more safely
and conveniently increase Riches in England, than in France or the United
Netherlands.

8 Ax. 3. For things may be better, more conveniently and safely done, where
the places are better, more convenient and safe.

41 Pet. 3. But the Ports of England are more better, and more convenient and
safe than those of France or the United Netherlands.

20 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, will so
much increase Wealth in it, as the Goods imported are more.

Therefore it may better, more safely and conveniently increase Wealth in
England, than in France or the United Netherlands.

Annot.
If the Ports of England were as free as those of the United Netherlands,
Hamburg, or Gottenburg, can any man believe the world would pass Falmouth, (the
most excellent Port of the world, and the most convenient for the Southern,
Western, South-Eastern and South-western Trades) the noble Ports of Plymouth,
Dartmouth, Exmouth, Falmouth, the famous Ports of Portsmouth and Harwich,
(equal to any other, and of all others the most convenient for the Trade of the
East and North-East parts of the World) to encounter the Sands upon Zealand, or
the Rocks before Gottenburg, or to be conveyed through the Vly and Texel into
the Zuyder-Sea, where they are so far from safety, that 500 Sail have been
stranded by one nights Tempest? Our Ports and always as open for any Foreign
Trade, especially to the South or West, as safe for Ships to come in. Theirs
are dangerous in the approach, are unsafe within, and commonly frozen up three
or four Months in the year. We have no need of the Mould of Genoua, nor take
care to draw our Ships over any Pampus, to secure them from Storms in the
Winter. Though Hamburg be a mighty Town of Trade; yet we have neither
Gluestadt, or Stoad, to give Laws to our Trade in any of our Ports, as both
those do to Hamburg. We have nothing to say for our selves, but though God and
Nature never did any thing in vain, yet we have made our Ports vain to all the
World, and almost to our selves.

The King was pleased about the beginning of the late War with the Dutch, to
Issue out a Proclamation, to invite the Dutch to come into the Ports of
England, and they and their Ships should enjoy as much privilege as if they
were Natural-born English, and their ships English-built: But then they had
incurred the danger of Confiscation of Ships, Goods, Guns, Tackle, Apparel, and
Ammunition, by the Act of Navigation. They could not have unladed their Goods
in any Port of England, because they were not Freemen of Corporations; they
must have paid the King above twenty times the Duties before they broke Bulk,
more than at Hamburg or any Port of the United Netherlands; whereby they could
never hope for any Foreign Trade by them, or expect to vend one half of them in
England. And this must have been much to the detriment of the English Merchant,
who either had sufficient, or expected to supply England in his future Trade;
so as not one Vessel came in upon that Proclamation. The King was also pleased
in that Proclamation to invite all sorts of Artificers to come into England,
and they should enjoy the benefits of Natural-born English, but if they had
come, and had enjoyed them, yet all other Englishmen are Foreigners to the
Freedom of Corporations, and so these could have little expected to have been
employed in any Art or Manufacture, either for their own or the Countries
benefit, being excluded out of all places where they might hope to employ
themselves or others; so the success was the same in both.

And as our Ports are so excellent and safe for Ships to harbor in; so by a
certain benignity of Nature, peculiar to our Country, the Rivers of England are
not so Rapid as those of the Rhine, Maze, Seine, Loire, and Garrone. As by
their Flowing they procure a benefit for bringing Goods into the Country to
supply it, and employing the people of it; so by their Ebbing they invite us to
supply the World with our Goods, and to enjoy the fruits of our own Labors.

Prop. 22. Theorem 21.
The free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, may so much increase the
Foreign Trade of our Manufactures of our Plantations, and the Fish caught upon
the Coast of England and Scotland, as the Goods imported are more.

16. Ax. 3. For business may be so much increased, as the Means are more.

47 Pet. 3. But the Exporting Foreign Commodities with our Manufactures, those
of our own Plantations, and of the Fish caught upon our Coast, is a mean to
increase the Foreign Trade of them.

44 Pet. 3. And the free Importation of Foreign Goods, may so much increase the
Exportation of Foreign Goods with our Manufactures, as the Importation is more
free.

Therefore it may so much increase the foreign Trade of our Manufactures, etc.

Annot.
As this free Importation of foreign Goods, will so much enrich the Nation, as
the goods imported are more; so it may so much increase the foreign Trade of
our Manufactures, Plantations, and of the fish caught upon our Coast, as the
goods imported are more. The Dutch, we see, by importing French Wines, Brandy,
and Salt, and exporting them with their Fish, Woollen Manufactures, and Spice,
send yearly 1500 Sail of Ships into the Sound; and forty to Muscovy; whereas
we, though our Woollen Manufactures are better, and it may be, if we had those
Trades, might be sold cheaper, yet in a year we send not above seven into the
Sound, (two whereof are Laden with Woollen Manufactures, the other five with
Balast only, which pay for their Lading commonly by Money upon Bills of
Exchange from Hamburg) and to Muscovy scarce two in three years. The reason
hereof, is the Greatness of the Dutch Trade with all these sorts of
Commodities; so that in case their Woollen Manufactures will not bear so
profitable a Price, yet they may make profitable returns, if upon the whole the
returns be profitable. Besides, the great Exportation of many other Commodities
to Muscovy, and places in the Sound, establishes so great a Commerce with the
Dutch, that those people supplied by them, dare not buy Woollen Manufactures of
others who cannot supply them with other Necessaries. Moreover, many places in
the Sound take of Ladings, part Salt, Wine, Brandy, Spice, Fish, and Woollen
Manufactures, which cannot take off an entire Lading of Fish, or Woollen
Manufactures. And this is the principal reason, that even in our Southern
Trades to foreign parts, we can scarce from any Port of England vend our
Woollen Manufactures but from the Port of London, where they find a mixture of
fraught with Lead, Tin, Sugars, Tobaccoes, and other Goods from our Plantations.

Prop. 23. Theorem 22.
The free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, may more conveniently and
safely increase a Foreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures from the
Ports of England, than from those of France or the United Netherlands.

8 Ax. 3. For things may be more conveniently and safely done, where the places
are more convenient and safe.

41 Pet. 3. But the Ports of England are more convenient and safe, than those
of France or the United Netherlands.

22 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of foreign Goods into England, may
increase a foreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures.

Therefore it may more conveniently and safely be done from the Ports of
England than from those of France or the United Netherlands.

Annot.
Though I believe God has endued this Nation with more benefits for foreign
Trade and Commerce than any other, yet for the benefit of Mutual Commerce, as
every man stands in need of being supplied by another, so does every Country:
And many places in the World, as they stand in need of our Commodities, so want
those whereof we of our selves cannot supply them. And many parts of the World
which cannot take off an entire Lading of our Commodities, may, or; and if the
residue of the Fraught be made up of other Commodities, by this means this half
or third, etc. of our Commodities finds vent.

Prop. 24. Theorem 23.
The free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, may cheaper increase a
foreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures.

17 Ax. 3. For things may be so much cheaper done, as the means are cheaper.

47 Pet. 3. But the foreign Trade of foreign Goods, with our Woollen and other
Manufactures, is a mean to increase the Trade of them.

48 Pet. 3. And the free Importation of foreign Goods into England, will make
them so much cheaper, as the Importation is more free.

Therefore it may cheaper increase a foreign Trade of our Woollen and other
Manufactures.

Annot.
So that this Importation, as it may more conveniently increase our Woollen and
other Manufactures, so it may cheaper do it. If a Vessel half fraught with our
Commodities, and half with foreign, can sell the foreign well, this may enable
the Merchant to sell our Manufactures so much cheaper, as he better sold the
foreign: Whereas, if the foreign had been dearer bought, the Markets for both
might have been lost. But the benefits which would arise to the foreign Trade
of our Woollen and other Manufactures, by the free permission of Foreigners to
import foreign Goods, does not end here: for by it our Manufactures might be
vended from the next Port; whereas now they are generally brought up to London
by long and tedious Land-carriages, and forestalled by the Freemen before they
can find any mixture of other Commodities to be vended with them in foreign
Trade. And as we thus vainly charge our Manufactures by Land-carriage to
London, before they must pass the Seas in foreign Trade; so do we the Lead and
Tin Transported to Spain, Italy and Turkey: and to what purpose this must be
done, I would fain know.

Prop. 25. Theorem 24.
The free Exportation of Money with our Woollen and other Manufactures, may
increase a foreign Trade of them.

3 Ax. 2. For more business may be done by more means.

30 Pet. 1. But Money is a mean to increase Trade.

49 Pet. 3. And the free Exportation of Money with our Woollen and other
Manufactures, may cause more Money to be Exported with our Woollen and other
Manufactures.

Therefore it may increase the foreign Trade of them.

Annot.
I will never believe that any man or Nation ever well attain their ends by
forceable means, against the Nature and Order of things. Money is that by which
all Commodities are valued, and is of no other use: if therefore a man should
give me 100 l. never to make use of it, I should scarce thank him for it. The
most profitable use of money, is so to buy, as to sell to profit. So that in
foreign Trade, the best use a Merchant can make of his Money, is, so to buy, as
to sell again to profit: But if the Goods the Merchant thus buys be sold again
in foreign Trade to profit, a double benefit hereby accrues to the Nation as
well as Merchant. This appears in the East-Indie-Trade by our
East-Indie-Company, where though the Company send great quantities of Treasure
to the East Indies, yet the returns of them, in the Trade to Spain, and other
places, produce greater quantities of Treasure. Though I can give but one
instance hereof in our Trades, I believe Instances hereof might be given in all
the Trades the Dutch drive in the World.

It may happen, that many places of the world stand in need of our Commodities,
and some people of those places have Commodities to exchange for ours; others
have Commodities which they will not exchange for ours, to the Merchant's
profit, but will sell for ready Money, so that the Merchant may make profit of
them; and so a Merchant may fraught a ship so, as to make profitable returns:
but in case the Merchant be prohibited the Exportation of Money, this may
hinder the foreign vent of all the Manufactures, which otherwise might find a
Market.

Coroll. 1.
By the same reason, the free Returns of Commodities exchanged in foreign Trade
for our Woollen and other Manufactures, may increase the foreign Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures.

50 Pet. 3. For returns of Commodities exchanged in foreign Trade for our
Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to increase a foreign Trade of them.

51 Pet. 3. And the returns of Foreign Commodities exchanged for our Woollen
and other Manufactures, may be so much more, as the returns are more free.

Annot.
To the increase of the foreign Trade of our Woollen Manufactures by this free
return, which I understand to be by all ways whereby they may be as cheap
imported into England, as into Hamburg, or any of the Ports of the United
Netherlands; may be added another foreign Trade of these Commodities, and of
the returns of those Commodities into the Ports of England, and of those again,
and so infinitely. The Dutch we see have no other Principles of Trade, but the
Fishing Trade upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, to Groenland, and of
late to Iseland and Westmony fishing; yet from these Principles, by their cheap
Navigation, and smalness of Duties imposed upon the returns of their Fish and
other Commodities imported, were enabled to manage a more considerable and
profitable Trade in the World, than all the Princes and other States of the
World could do.

Whereas all these Fishing trades (especially for those caught upon the Coasts
of England and Scotland) might cheaper and more conveniently be managed from
the Ports of England, as shall be showed: And we have the Principles of our own
growths and Manufactures, and also of our Plantations, to establish a foreign
Trade upon; and ten times more and better Harbors than those of the United
Netherlands, to secure the returns of them, and establish another Trade into
other foreign parts of the World, upon the account of them.

Prop. 52. Problem 2.
How Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper, more conveniently and safely vended
in foreign Trade from the Ports of England, than those of France, or the
United Netherlands.

Constable. By the Coroll. Prop. 4. the Woollen Manufactures of England may be
cheaper wrought in England than in France or the United Netherlands, and may be
vended in foreign Trade from the next Ports. I say Woollen Manufactures may be
cheaper, more conveniently and safely vended in foreign Trade from the Ports of
England, than those of France or the United Netherlands.

19 Ax. 3. For if more be added to more, the whole will be more.

Constable. But Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper wrought in England than France,
or the United Netherlands.

22 Prop. 3. And Woollen Manufactures may be more conveniently and safely
vended in foreign Trade from the Ports of England, than those of France or the
United Netherlands.

Therefore they may be cheaper, more conveniently and safely vended from the
Ports of England, than those of France or the United Netherlands.

Annot.
As the Wools of Ireland may be cheaper wrought in Wales and the Western Ports
of England, so may the Wools of the Midland, Southern, and Eastern parts of
England be cheaper wrought upon Navigable places in England, than in France or
the United Netherlands. And as the Ports of England are more better, and more
convenient and safe than those of French or the United Netherlands; so the
Eastern Ports of England stand more apposite and conveniently for the Trade to
Hamburg, Norway, Muscovy, and into the Sound, than those of the United
Netherlands, and nearer than those of France. And as our Western and Southern
Ports are more better, more convenient and safe than those of France, so are
they nearer than those of the United Netherlands in all Trades to the South,
South-East, Western and South-West parts of the world.

But since Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper wrought in England than France
or the United Netherlands; what reason is there the Wools of the Midland and
other parts of England should by a tedious Land-carriage be brought to Norwich
and Colchester; and when they are wrought into the Manufactures of those
places, by another Land-carriage (almost equal to the charge of carriage of the
Wools) be brought to London; and then none but pre-emption and Freemen buy
them? To what purpose are the Western Clothes under the same Charge and
Restrictions brought up to London; and then by a Navigation twice as dear as
from our Western and Southern Ports, vended in Spain and Portugal? Why after
all these Charges and Restrictions must they be vended in foreign Trade, in
Ships near double as dear built, sailed with near double the charge of the
Dutch and other Nations? Why do we deny our selves the benefit of compounding
Fraughts in foreign Trades with our Woollen Manufactures, as has been often
demonstrated? And why do we impose above twentyfold Charges upon their returns,
more than if imported to Hamburg or Holland? For these are the Reasons the
French and Dutch are well maintained in Woollen Manufactures, and our People
miserable in it; and that they supply many places of the world better than we
do, and even cloy our Markets at home with them. And since our Ports are so
much better and convenient for foreign Trade than those of France or the United
Netherlands, why must the Turkey, East-Indie, and Guiny Trades (and for ought I
know the Trades to Hamburg, Muscovy, and into the Sound) be driven from this
one Port of London? And if two in the hundred charge in any Trade in one place
above another, endangers the loss of the Trade to that other; I wish it were
calculated with how many two's in the hundred we, besides the Restrictions,
vainly charge all the foreign Trades we drive in the world upon the account of
Woollen and other Manufactures.

Prop. 27. Theorem 25.
The free permission of Foreigners to Import foreign Goods into England, will
so much more conserve peace abroad, as the Goods imported are more.

15 Ax. 3. For things may be so much more conserved, as the means are increased.

8 Pet. 1. But Trade is a mean to conserve Peace.

44 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods,
will so much increase Trade in England, as the Goods imported are more.

Therefore it will so much conserve Peace abroad.

Annot.
So that to this Plenty, Wealth, and Employment of our people at Home, this
permission will establish foreign Trades which we are strangers to, and also
add the blessing of Peace abroad. The Interest of Princes and their Subjects
employed in this Trade, will have the same Influence on any other who would
endeavor to interrupt it, as our jealousies are upon any who should attempt to
invade our Properties in our Lands and Goods. In case of War, their Interest
would be involved with ours. Hereof you may more largely read, in the Annot.
upon the 11 Prop. of the Reasons of the increase of the Dutch Trade.

Whereas when the State of the Nation was much more free in reference to Trade,
than it now stands by the Act of Navigation; yet by the Authority of the 1
Eliz. 13. this caused great displeasure between the Kings of this Realm and
foreign Princes, as well as the Merchant and people were sore damaged and
agrieved thereby.

Prop. 28. Theorem 26.
The free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods into England, will
so much increase the valuable Trades of England, as the Foreigners importing
Goods are more.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are.

2 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of people increase Trade.

45. Pet. 3. And the free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods
into England, will cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the
Foreigners importing Goods are more.

Therefore it will so much increase the valuable Trades of England.

Annot.
They would, for the many reasons heretofore said, increase Trade in
themselves, and also enable many poor people to Trade, and procure a
livelihood, by lading and unlading their Vessels, by mending and trimming their
Vessels, Sails and Rigging; and more other benefits would accrue to poor
people, which can neither be well foreseen, or enumerated.

Coroll. 1.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods
into England, will so much increase the value of the Lands of England, as the
Foreigners importing Goods are more.

6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable, as the Trade of the place is valuable.

Prop. And the free admission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods into
England, will so much increase the valuable Trades of England, as the
Foreigners importing Goods are more.

Annot.
If this number of Ships now employed in the Ports of England makes Lands of
such value, by victualling these Ships, and employing people in them; then if
the number of Shipping be increased, so would be the employment of the people,
who thereby would be enabled to buy the Farmors Commodities; and the Farmor too
would find so much more vent for his Commodities in victualling Ships, as the
Ships are more. By means whereof, not only the wast and untilled Grounds upon
the Coast might be improved, but even those in Mediterrane places might find
encouragement and vent for their Commodities; the Houses in the Towns upon the
Coast would let better to receive the Goods imported, and new ones would be
built for the same purpose.

Coroll. 2.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods
into England, will so much increase the value of the Revenues of the Church, as
the Foreigners importing Goods are more.

7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands
are valuable.

Coroll. 1. And the free permission of Foreigners to import foreign Goods,
will increase the value of the Lands of England.

Annot.
And so they would increase the Revenues of the Crown, not only by the
comsumption of all sorts of foreign Commodities which pay the King Duties, but
also of all the Beer, Ale, and all other Domestic Exciseable Commodities,
which they consume and freight their Vessels with.

EPILOGVE.
THus by freedom of working our Woollen and other Manufactures, and by the
benefit of free Importing and Exporting Foreign Commodities with them in
Foreign Trade, the Reader may understand how many ways the Nation may be
Strengthened, Enriched, and poor people employed; whereas by restraining and
unnecessary charging these, we weaken and impoverish the Nation, condemn many
thousands of people to Misery and Poverty, and establish all the benefits we
might enjoy, in other places, to the endangering the Trade and Employment of
people we now possess.

I know nothing worse resented in our Parliaments, or in ordinary Discourse,
than Monopolies, and that deservedly; for they render the Ingenuity and
Industry of many people useless, and the Improvement of any new Invention for
the public more difficult; whilst the Monopolists do things dearer, and worse.
Therefore I wish that encouragement were given to Inventors of any beneficial
Mystery any other way than by Patent of the sole use for fourteen years: for by
that means the use of it becomes less and dearer to us, and may be more useful
and cheaper to other Nations who do not Monopolize it, whereby they may enjoy
more benefit by it than can be hoped for by us.

But if a Monopoly be the restraining, the doing, or vending things exclusive
to other men, I do not understand, but the restraining the benefit of the
Improvement of the Growths and Manufactures of England to the Natives, is a
Monopoly to all the world besides. And the restraining the free exercife of
Arts and Mysteries in any Manufacture to the Freemen of Corporations, is a
Monopoly to all the Nation befides: so is the foreign Trade by Companies, of
our Growths and Manufactures, exclusive to other men, a Monopoly to the World,
as well as Nation: and the pre-emption of Freemen, a Monopoly and grievous to
both. And the restraining the vending the Growths and Manufactures of England
in foreign Trade, and to make returns into England only in English-built Ships,
and Sailed by English, is a Monopoly to both Trades: So is the vending Cattle
to the Eastern and Southern parts of England by the Scots, Northern and Western
people of England, exclusive to the Irish, a Monopoly.

I speak this only in reference to Trades which are beneficial, especially
those which more depend upon Employment of people at home: For it is
advantageous in Trades which impoverish and debauch the people, to have them
driven by few, and in Companies, and those restrained both to managing the
Trades, and the prices of the things imported; as in the Trades for French
Wines and Brandies, Italian and Spanish Wines and Fruits, and all sorts of fine
Linen, Lace, and Ribbons, etc. which are consumed among us: for by this mean,
so much cheaper as they are imported and restrained, so much more the Nations
Wealth and Stock is preserved. Before 1641, the Canary Trade was managed by a
Company, the Prices were set, and the Wines imported were in Barter of our
Commodities, so as the Nation was not considerably damnified by that Trade. But
aster that Trade by the Company was left, the Vintners in London, to get the
Flowers (as they call them) of those Wines, outbid one another so high, that
the prices became near double; and rather than lose them, they would pay in the
Canaries ready Money. And so we lost the Barter of our Commodities for them to
boor: but as well in the Beneficial as Hurtful Trades of the Nation, we invert
the means by which those may be more improved, and these rendered less hurtful:
For almost all the outward Trades of our Growths and Manufactures are managed
by Companies clogged with pre-emption of Freemen: But the inward Trades of
French, Italian and Spanish Wines and Fruits, and of fine Linen, Ribbons,
Lace, etc. and which are all consumed among us, are driven at large by any
English, or other people of those places who will import them.

And as by our Monopolizing Trade we restrain the Employment of our people, and
the Wealth and Strength of the Nation to what the Monopolists please; so we had
better charge Lands 40 per Cent. than the foreign Trade of our Manufactures
two: For Lands are only valuable as our Trades, especially Foreign, are
valuable: and therefore, in case we could doubly increase the foreign. Trade of
our Woollen and other Manufactures, our Lands would be of double the value;
whereas in case we charge the foreign Trade of our Woollen and other
Manufactures two per Cent. above another place, we endanger the whole, and fix
the Trade in that other place. See more in the Annot. upon the 26 Prop. of this
Discourse.

HOW THE NAVIGATION OF ENGLAND MAY BE INCREASED, AND THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE
British Seas More SECURED TO THE CROWN of ENGLAND.

TREATISE IV.

By ROGER COKE.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1675.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO Introduce a happy Reign, Queen Eliz. before she called a Parliament, fitted
up and repaired her Navy Royal, so as it was far superior to any other; this
gave her Reputation at home, and Fame abroad: And well knowing how highly the
safety of her Subjects did depend upon conserving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas, though afterward she protected the Infant Dutch States, to give
a check to the growing Austrian Greatness, yet would she never permit the Dutch
to build such Men of War, as thereby to be enabled to question her Dominion in
the Seas which beat upon the English Shores. And it is said, that when Henry
the great of France, after the Peace of Vervins, designed to enlarge the
Dominion of France as well by Sea as Land, she forhad his building great Ships,
or she would fire them in his Harbors; whereupon this great Monarch did desist.

King James, however he loved Peace, did rightly judge he could no way secure
it so well, as by fortifying the strength of his Navy Royal; and to that left
by Queen Elizabeth, he added the Prince Royal, the Old James, and several
others.

King Charles the first, (a Prince of Sacred memory) not knowing where the
swelling Dutch Navigation would end, and how much it might tend to the
diminution of his Honor, and endangering the safety of his Subjects, judged it
necessary for conservation of both, yet further to enlarge his Navy, yet was
unhappy, that his Subjects did not, or would not, rightly understand him in it.
This was a Navy so Invincible to any Humane Power, that though Sir William
Batten in 1648, carried a very considerable part of it to his now Majesty; yet
with the residue of it, and the Speaker and Warwick Frigates, (one of the third
rate, the other of the fourth rate) conjoined with some Hired Merchants-ships,
the Rump-Parliament in 1651, 1652, and 1653, without difficulty overcome the
Dutch in all Fights, and had without doubt subdued them, if Oliver had not
first turned them out, and after in 1654, made an unsettled and dishonorable
Peace with the Dutch. The Dutch secured by this Peace, to prevent the Ruin of
their State by another War with the English, immediately built much larger and
more Men of War than they had; which could not be concealed from Oliver, who
increased the English Fleot with many more and very considerable men of War.
And after the King's Restoration, before the next Dutch War in 1664, the King
added many more, so as the English Navy Royal was more than twice as formidable
as it was when the Rump Engaged the Dutch. But the Dutch having greater
quantities, and more choice of Timber, and many more Builders than could be
found in England, though the experience the English acquired in Naval fights
with the Dutch in the former War were much augmented, yet could not the English
obtain so easy a Victory as before: and at this time, it is said, the Dutch
have above 50 Men of War more than the King has, and of equal, if not greater
Bulk in the main; and above 2500 pieces of Cannon.

The Kings of Sweden and Denmark, and much more the French King, Alarmed by
this increase of the English and Dutch Fleets, in proportion enlarged theirs;
so that the French Fleet is in number, and bigness Superior to the English; but
by reason of want of Mariners, none of them is comparably so formidable. But
because Ships without Mariners, and Mariners without Ships, signify but little
in War, let us see from what Causes the Dutch are become so formidable to the
English by Sea, above the French, Dane, or Swede.

After Queen Elizabeth had fitted and repaired the Navy Royal (as has been
said) in the first Parliament of her Reign, chap. 13. she enlarged the Trade of
the Nation, by permitting the English to Trade in any Vessels, paying Strangers
Duties: as this increased the Trade of the Nation, so did it Mariners, whereby
her Navy might be more and better supplied by them.

This paying strangers Duties for Goods Imported into England, was the
principal cause the Dutch found an easy Foundation of their future great Trade
and increase of Mariners above what could be employed from the Ports of
England: For about fourteen years after the Dutch Government began to Bud int o
States; and being pressed in their Wars against the Spaniards, permitted all
Nations to Import and Export Goods, paying small Duties; whereby they became
enabled, not only to make profitable Returns of the Fishing Trade to many other
parts of the World, but of French Wines, Salt, Clothes from England, and many
other Commodities from Germany and other places, and established other Trades
upon the returns of these; whereas the payment of Strangers Duties upon Goods
Imported into England, necessitated a Consumption of them here; and so the
outward Trade and the Returns became impossible to us, and by consequence the
employment of all those Mariners who depended upon them.

This Liberty and smalness of Duties upon Goods Imported and Exported by the
Dutch in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, swelled the Dutch Trade out of the bounds of
Europe into the East and West Indies; which afterward in the Reigns of King
James and Charles the first became incredibly increased.

Whereas, notwithstanding the Liberty granted to the English by the 1 Eliz. 13.
the English being oppressed in the Fishing Trade, by reason of paying such
great Duties upon Goods imported for Fish vended in foreign Trade above the
Dutch; and toward the latter end of her Reign, the people upon the Coast
expecting to reap a greater benefit by the Newcastle-trade, deserted the
Fishing Trade in foreign parts for white Herring, Ling and Cod; which being
presently possessed by the Dutch, they thereby so much increased their Mariners
and Navigation, as the English became losers in both. And this was so much more
pernicious to the English, by how much the Fishing Trade was diffused generally
from the Eastern Ports of England, and all sorts of people employed in it;
whereas the Newcastle-trade is driven but by few, and none but younger men
employed in it.

The Loss of the foreign Trade for Fish from the Ports of England, was not
sensibly perceived in King James his Reign, by reason of the increase of the
Newcastle-trade, and of the Spanish Trade, whereof the English became upon the
matter Proprietors, by the Peace the King made with Spain; and also about the
middle of his Reign the Barbados and Virgina-Trade became considerable, and
the Trade of the English to the East Indies was much increased, whereby the
Nation became incredibly enriched, more than it was in Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
or in any other Prince's before her.

The Seeds of these Trades thus laid in King James his Reign, sprung up
exceedingly in King Charles his Reign; and the Plantations of Maryland and
New England were added to those of Virginia and Barbados: But in the mean time
the Dutch increased their Trades to Muscovy, into the Baltic, up the Elb, to
Turkey and Italy; so that I cannot tell whether we employed more Mariners by
increasing our Western Plantations, or lost the employment of more in the
Trades which the Dutch sought to supplant us in.

The War breaking out in 1641, between the King and Parliament, straightened the
English from fully supplying the East-Country and Germany with Woollen
Manufactures; whereupon the English upon the matter have lost the Trade into
the Sound, and the Mariners their Employment; and the Trade up the Elb is much
reduced. And the Murder of the King in 1648, extinguished that part of the
Trade to Muscovy, which the Dutch had left for the English share.

And as the Act of the 1 Eliz. 13. did so much preserve the English Timber, by
how many more foreign Vessels were employed and bought by the English; and the
35 of Eliz. 11. was purposely made for further preservation of it: so the
Terror of the Act of Navigation has made both these wholesome Laws ineffectual
to the Nation, and to the charge of Duties upon Goods imported into England,
added the dearness of Shipping to it of about; so that all those Trades which
could not overcome these Charges became lost to the Nation, and by consequence
the employment of those Mariners which depended upon them.

The last (I may say) fatal Acts to the English Navigation and Mariners, were
those of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. against Importation of Irish Cattle, whereby the
means of Intercourse between the two Nations being violated, all the Trades, as
well Foreign as Domestic, which depended thereon, became lost to this Nation;
and by consequence, the employment of all those Mariners which before sought
their Living in them. I say this, to show that it is the Dutch Navigation, and
multitude of Mariners, as well as greatness and numbers of men of War, which
makes them so formidable to the English above the French, Dane, or Swede: and
in case we take no care to increase our Navigation and Mariners, the English
Navy Royal may become as little formidable to them, as the French, Dane, and
Swede are to us: Especially now the Dutch can build twenty men of War, and of
equal Dimensions, to one the King of England can, and in less time; and have
above tenfold the Mariners the English have, whereof fivefold are Mariners
whose Interest purely depends upon the Dutch Government; whereas the Mariners
of England (now the Trade between England and Ireland is lost) have little or
no dependence upon the Nation, in all the foreign Trades of it, and to our
Plantations: but in case the Dutch, or any other Nation will give them better
pay, it is our Mariners Interest to serve them.

In a Book Printed by Authority of the Rump-Parliament 1652, with Mr. Selden's
Treatise of the Dominion of the British Seas, Entitled, The Riches and
Commodities of the British Seas, Fol. 488. it is affirmed the number of the
Dutch Ships Fishing upon the Coasts of England and Scotland to be 8400; and if
twenty men be allowed to each Ship, the Mariners and Fishers amount to 168000,
out of which Number they daily furnish their longer Voyages to all parts of the
World: for by this mean they are enabled to brook the Seas, and instructed in
Navigation and Pilotage; from whence their Greatest Navigators have had their
Education.

And Mr. Evelyn in his late Book Entitled, The Original and Progress of
Navigation and Commerce, mentions their Number of Mariners and Men sit for
Sea-Service in their Wars, to amount to 120000.

Of the Strength, Charge, and Number of the English Navy Royal in the times of
our late Princes, with their Designs, as also of the strength of the Navies of
our Neighbors the Dutch and French, Colonel Thompson, a quondam Commissioner
of the Navy, is said to have very good and large Historical Collections.

PETITIONS.
1. THe foreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a Principle to
the Navigation of them to and from the Ports of England. 2. The free premission
of Foreigners to make returns of our Woollen and other Manufactures into the
Ports of England, and export them, may increase trade to and from the Ports of
England. 3. Trade between England and Ireland, is a Principle to the English
Navigation between England and Ireland. 4. The Navigation of England is a mean
of preserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 5.
Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a Principle of Navigation to and
from the Ports of England. 6. The free admission of Foreigners to inhabit in
England, and in any Vessels to Fish and Trade into foreign parts for Fish
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, may increase the Trade of
England. 7. Fishing and Trading Vessels are Riches. 8. The free admission of
Foreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to fish upon the Coasts
of England and Scotland, and to trade into foreign parts, will add so many
Vessels to those in England, as they fish and trade in. 9. The free admission
of Foreigners to make returns of Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland, and to export them, may increase the trade of England to and from the
Ports of England. 10. Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas to the Crown of England. 11. The increase of the English
Navigation by Foreigners, will so much diminish the Navigation of others who
may be Enemies to the Crown of England. 12. So much less English Timber will be
expended in building ships for all other trades but the Newcastle, East-Indy
and Turkey, by how many foreign ships the English buy in those other Trades. 13.
The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other but the
East-Indie, Newcastle, and Turkey Trades may cause so many more foreign ships to
be bought, as the permission is more free. 14. The Newcastle, East-Indie and
Turkey Trades, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England,
^^^e more secured by Ships built of English Timber. 15. The free permission of
the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and
Turkey Trades, may increase Ships in England. 16. The free permission of the
English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and
Turkey Trades, may cheaper increase Ships in England. 17. Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp
and Flax, are principal means in the Manufactures of Cordage, Nets and Sails.
18. The free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and
Flax, may increase these cheaper, as the Importation is more free. 19. So much
less of the Treasure of the Nation will be expended in buying Pitch, Tar, Ruff
Hemp and Flax, as they are cheaper. 20. Ropes, Sails, and Timber, are means in
building and fitting up of Ships. 21. The free permission of Foreigners to
import Timber, may cheaper increase Timber in England. 22. The foreign Trade of
Newcastle-Coal, is a Principle to the Navigation of England. 23. The free
permission of the English in English-built Ships to export Newcastle-Coal, and
make returns into the Ports of England, may increase the foreign Trade of it.
Axioms.
1. Business may be so much increased, as the Principles are increased. 2.
Things may be so much more secured, as the means of preserving them are
increased. 3. Things may be so much increased, as the means are increased. 4.
Things may be so much cheaper increased, as the means are cheaper. 5. Things
may be so much more and cheaper increased, as the means of preserving them are
cheaper increased.
HOW THE NAVIGATION Of England May be INCREASED, etc.
Prop. 1. Theorem 1.
THe free Importation of Foreign Goods into England, may increase Navigation to
and from the Ports of England.

1 Ax. 4. For every business may be so much increased, as the Principles are
increased.

1 Pet. 4. But the foreign Trade of the Woollen and other Manufactures of
England, is a Principle of the Navigation of them to and from the Ports of
England.

21 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of foreign Goods, may increase a foreign
Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures.

Therefore it may increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

Annot.
Britain being an Island, and so as another World divided from the Continent,
the increase of Navigation and Mariners is more proper to it and desirable,
than where the Sea lies but on part of the bounds of the Country: and this
Increase is so much more desirable, by how much the Coast abounds with many
Excelling and Noble Ports, and the Country Naturally watered with Rivers more
apt for Navigation than any other, and which through those lose themselves in
the Ocean. But Navigation and Mariners cannot be otherwise increased, than
from such Principles as God and Nature has ordained. Trade therefore being a
Principle to Navigation, is superior and more excellent than it, and may
subsist without Navigation; but Navigation never without Trade. A Nation may be
rich and flourishing by Trade, yet upon the Navigation of other Countries. The
great Riches which France lately enjoyed, did arise chiefly from the English
and Dutch Trading into their Ports. So Legorne and Florence grow rich by the
Trade which the English French, and Dutch Navigation bring into Legorne. So it
is in the Turkey, East Indie, and Muscovy Trades, by the English, French,
Dutch, and Venetians, whereby those Countries grow vastly rich, yet employ no
Shipping or Navigation to procure it.

Trade being a principle to Navigation, Navigation may be infinitely increased,
as Trade is increased: I desire therefore Navigation to and from the Ports of
England might be increased by the foreign Trade of our Woollen and other
Manufactures, rather than by the Newcastle-trade, or the Trade to our
Plantations: For the home-vent of the Newcastle-trade employs few of the
Natives but Miners and Manners, and those but half the year, and is driven to
the loss of the Nation: for we consume the Coals; and besides the Consumption
of our Timber in the Shipping in this Trade, we generally buy the Pitch, Tar,
Cordage and Sails employed in it, of the French, Dutch, Swedes, and Norwegians.
Add hereto, that this Trade has caused, vast destruction of the
Wood-land-Grounds of the Eastern, Southern and Midland parts of England; which
by reason of the plenty and cheapness of Newcastle-Coals, can find no vent.
Whereas Navigation, which would arise from the foreign Trade of our Woollen and
other Manufacturers, would so much enrich the Nation, as the value of the
Manufactures is more than the Principles of them are in value. And I prefer the
Navigation which may arise from increasing our Manufactures at home, before
that Navigation which arises from our Trades to our Plantations; because the
Nation hereby would be more and better peopled, and the Lands of the Crown,
Church, Nobility, Gentry and others of England, would become so much more
valuable, as Trade and Navigation would be hereby increased: whereas the
Plantations rob us of our people, to the weakening the Nation, and diminishing
the value of the Lands of it; and that besides Mariners, few people in England
except Retailers, Sugar-Bakers, Porters, and Car-men, are employed in the
Trades of them. And the Riches which arise by the Trade of them, accrews to few
but the King, Merchant, Sugar-bakers, and Retailers. And I do not question, but
the value of the Consumption of the Commodities of the Plantations here in
England, is much more than the profit of them by foreign Trade: And yet we have
little else but the foreign Trade of our Woollen Manufactures, so Taxed, so
Restrained, and so Endangered, as has been in all the Three precedent
Treatises demonstrated, to sustain the Loss the Nation receives by the
Newcastle-trade, the Trade to our Plantations, and the Trades to Norway France,
the Canaries, and for Linen.

I desire as much as any man, that Navigation and Mariners may be increased by
the Natives of England, and English Ships, so far as the Natives of England in
such Shipping can maintain Navigation, yet both must be done in time, and by
such means as God and Nature have ordained, viz. by increasing Trade in
England: and if both Trade and Navigation cannot be carried on by the Natives
alone, I see no reason why (at least at present) Trade (which is more excellent
than Navigation) should not be increased, though upon the account of foreign
Navigation. And I say, it is impossible, as the case stands, that the foreign
vent of our English Manufactures, and the Fish caught upon the Coasts of
England, and Scotland, can be increased by English Mariners in English-built
Ships: For the Towns upon the Coast of England generally are become so decayed,
that they are not near half Inhabited; and so poor, that they have no Means to
build Ships, or to buy our Woollen or other Manufactures, or the Fish caught
upon our Coast; nor have Factories or Correspondence in foreign parts to
establish Trade and Commerce: yet if they had, it is impossible long to
continue the Navigation we now possess in English-built Ships, therefore less
possible to increase it.

It Is believed, the French Nation, before their War with the Dutch, gained
above 6000000 l. yearly by the English and Dutch trading into their Ports, for
Wine, Salt, Brandy, Linen, Paper, and other Commodities of France: Suppose the
French King upon the account of increasing the Navigation and Mariners of
France, should have excluded the English, and Dutch trading into his Ports, and
by Edict have Commanded, that all the Commodities of France vended in foreign
Trade, should first be brought to Paris, there none to buy them but Freemen
and Companies, (if they have any) and they only to vend them in French-built
Ships, and Sailed by French, whether they have Ships or Mariners or not; and
that the Returns of them should pay the King twenty times the Duties they
should in case they were imported into Holland or Hamburg: whether the
employment of the Shipping and Mariners of France would have countervailed the
loss France would have sustained thereby? Or Reader consider (chainging the
places) if this be not the Condition of England, in reference to the foreign
Trade of the Manufactures, and the Fish caught upon the Coast of it.

Coroll. 1.
By the same reason, the free Permission of Foreigners to make Returns of our
Woollen and other Manufactures into the Ports of England, and to export them,
may increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

1 Pet. 4. For Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of
Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

2. Pet. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to make Returns of our
Woollen and other Manufactures into the Ports of England, and export them, may
increase Trade to and from the Ports of England.

Annot.
As the free permission of Foreigners to work Manufactures in England and
export them, would increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England; so
would the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of them into our
Ports, and export them; and so would the Returns of these, and the exporting
them again, and so infinitely; whereby Navigation to and from our Ports may be
infinitely increased. The Dutch and Hamburger, we see, have no principles of
Trade or Navigation of their own; yet from the principles of the Fishery upon
the Coasts of England and Scotland, and the Groenland Fishery, and the Trades
and Navigation depending thereon, and the principles they acquire from other
places, by reason of their free Importation and Exportation, employ more
Shipping and Mariners than all the Christian Princes and States in all the
world besides. The seeming Objection against this Permission, we hope to avoid
in the Annot. upon the Coroll. of the 16 Proposition of this Treatise.

Corollary 2.
By the same reason, the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1.
against Importation of Irish Cattle, may increase the Navigation of England.

3 Pet. 4. For Trade is a principle of the English Navigation between England
and Ireland.

13 Prop. 3. And the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1.
against Importation of Irish Cattle, may increase the Trade between England and
Ireland.

Annot.
After the Navigation which may arise by the foreign vent of our Woollen and
other Manufactures, I desire the Navigation of England may be increased from
the Trade between England and Ireland* not only as the Crown of Ireland is
depending upon the Crown of England; but also, because the benefits and
Security of the English Nation are more interwoven between them, than can be
expected from any other Country.

The Navigation which the Trade between England and Ireland before these Acts
did maintain, was, First, about one hundred Sail, and a proportionable number
of Mariners were employed in bringing over Cattle. Secondly, A considerable
number of English Ships and Mariners (Mr. John De Boyse can better inform the
Reader the number than I) were employed in the Trade of the Returns for their
Lean Cattle, in Beer, Hops, Hats, Stockens, Cloth, and Stuffs of all sorts,
all sorts of Dying-stuffs, Hides, Fruit, Sugars, Tobaccoes, and many other
Commodities to Ireland. Thirdly, The Returns of these in Hides, Tallow, Wools,
Yarn, etc. from Ireland in foreign Trade, was generally in English Ships, and
sailed by English Mariners. But all this Navigation depending upon the first
Intercourse between England and Ireland for their Lean Cattle, the Cause of
Importing Cattle ceasing, the Navigation which depended upon it ceased: and the
Trade as well as the Navigation the Nation formerly enjoyed, is not only lost
to it, but established in foreign Nations, to the Endangering as well as
Impoverishing this: and of which you may more largely read in the Annot. upon
the 18, 19, and 20, Propositions of the Treatise of The Equal Danger of the
Church, State, and Trade of England.

Prop. 2. Theorem 2.
The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20. Car. 2. cap. 1. against Importation
of Irish Cattle, will so much more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas
to the Crown of England, as Navigation shall be thereby increased.

2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much secured, as the means of preserving them
are increased.

4 Pet. 3. But the Navigation of England is a mean of preserving the
Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.

Coroll. 2. Prop. 1. And the Repealing the Acts against Importation of Irish
Cattle, may increase the Navigation of England.

Therefore it will so much secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the
Crown of England.

Annot.
I say, the Repealing of these Laws may increase, or rather restore the
Navigation of England which it formerly enjoyed before them. And in truth I am
content this Trade and Navigation should, so far as it can, be carried on only
by English; yet in such Vessels, as the English can manage it to their best
benefit, whereby only this Nation might be the Storehouse of supplying the
Irish with all sorts of Commodities they want; and that the Nation might have
the home-benefit of working their Wools, and the foreign benefits of vending
their Hides, Tallow, and Yarn, etc. for it is as much our Interest the English
should enjoy these Trades and Navigation depending thereon, as that only the
English should have the benefit of the Trade and Navigation to our Plantations;
or the Dutch Interest alone to have the Spice-Trade and the Navigation which
depends thereon.

But since Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the British
Seas to the Crown of England, the loss of it is as much dangerous to it. It is
not the number and greatness of the French Navy Royal which makes the French
King near so formidable at Sea as either the English or Dutch, but their want
of such Trades as might increase their Navigation and Mariners.

Prop. 3. Theorem 3.
The free admission of Foreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to
Fish and Trade into foreign parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts of England
and Scotland, may increase the Navigation of England.

1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much increased, as the Principles are
increased.

5 Pet. 4. But Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of the
Navigation of England.

6 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to inhabit in England, and in
any Vessels to fish and trade into foreign parts with Fish, etc. may increase
the Trade of England.

Therefore it may so much increase the Navigation of England.

Annot.
After the Navigation which may arise from the Trade of our Manufactures, and
the free Intercourse between England and Ireland, I desire Navigation in
England may be increased by the Fishing Trade, especially of the Fish caught
upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, not only as the Fish may be more
conveniently caught by such as fish from the Ports of England, if the King
pleases to deny others to dry their Nets, or take in Fresh Water in any of his
Dominions; but also the Freighting of Vessels with Beer and Provisions may be
cheaper in the Fishery and foreign vent of Fish from the Ports of England;
besides, the employment of many thousands of our poor people, would be of
infinite benefit to the Lands of England, as the Fishery and foreign Trade of
them should be increased; and the Towns upon the Eastern Coast of England,
which are now even desolate, would become rich and populous. Moreover, it is a
Scandal and dishonor to the Crown of England, which contains the Sovereignty
of the British Seas, that the benefits which arise from these Seas should be
lost to this Nation, and established in others, to their enriching, and
increase of Navigation.

I say, this free admission of Foreigners to inhabit in England, and in any
Vessels to fish and Trade into foreign parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts
of England and Scotland, may increase the Navigation of England; for thereby
their Interest being planted in the Nation, it would enjoy the fruits of their
Trade and Navigation. Nor do I understand, how otherwise (at least at present)
this Nation can hope to enjoy the Fishery upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland, or the foreign Trade of it, or any part of it: For the Inhabitants
upon the Eastern Coast of England are so thin, that the Towns upon it (except
Great Yarmouth) are even desolate, and so poor, that they have no means to
build or buy Vessels for this Trade; nor have Factors or Agents in foreign
parts whereby to entertain Trade and Commerce: And also the Timber of England
is so destroyed by the niggardly Trades we now enjoy, (whereby we can do little
more than consume in England the Returns of our Manufactures, and the Product
of our Plantations) that it is not long possible by it to maintain these
Trades; therefore less possible by it to establish the Fishing Trade, which, it
may be, will require more Shipping than we now employ in all the Trades we
drive in the World. Or in case we had quantities of Timber sufficient for
carrying on the Fishing Trade, yet would it be of no benefit to us in this
Trade: for the Fish cost nothing but the catching, and the Hull of a Vessel for
the Fishing Trade or Fishery, may be built for of what one of equal dimensions
can be built in England; and those built of English Timber are so heavy, that
they require more Sails and Cordage to fit them up, and so more Hands to manage
them; whereby it becomes impossible to the English to Fish and Trade so cheap
as the Dutch and Hamburger. Nor is this Mischief (as the case stands) possible
to be remedied by Vessels built of foreign Timber in England; for by reason of
the high Duties upon it, and the Advantages the Norwegians have by imposing
their own Terms upon us, the English at this day pay 30 l. per Cent. more for
Timber imported, than the Dutch or Hamburgers do.

Prop. 4. Theorem 4.
The free Admission of Foreigners to Inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to
Fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to Trade into foreign parts,
will so much increase the Riches of England, as the Vessels they Fish and Trade
in are valuable.

1 Ax. 3. For things will be so much increased, as is added to them.

7 Pet. 4. But Fishing and Trading Vessels are Riches.

8 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to inhabit in England, and in
any Vessels to fish, etc. and Trade, etc. will add so many Vessels to those of
England, as they Fish and Trade in.

Therefore it will so much increase the Riches of England.

Annot.
This Admission of Foreigners to inhabit in England, etc. as it will so much
enrich the Nation as the Vessels they Fish and Trade in are in value, in case
they bring Vessels into England, so will it so much enrich the Nation, in case
they bought the Vessels here in England, and employed them from the Ports of
it: For then the Nation retains the Vessels still; and so much as is expended
therein, will be added to the Treasure of the Nation. Since therefore the
Nation will be so much enriched, as the Vessels wherein Foreigners Fish and
Trade from our Ports are in value; I say, that in case a Revenue for some time
were established, to pay every Forreigner who would inhabit in England, and
Fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland from any of the Ports of England,
or half the value of his Vessel, the Nation would be, or twice so much a
Gainer, more than if any Native bought such foreign Vessel: and for my part, as
poor as I am, I should most willingly Contribute to such a Tax.

Prop. 5. Theorem 5.
The free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of the Fish caught upon the
Coasts of England and Scotland into the Ports of England, and to export them,
may increase the Navigation of England.

1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much increased, as the principles are
increased.

5 Pet. 4. But Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle to the
Navigation of England.

9 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to make Returns of Fish caught
upon the Coasts of England and Scotland into the Ports of England, etc. may
increase the Trade of England to and from the Ports of England.

Therefore it may increase the Navigation of England.

Annot.
And this Navigation may be so much better, more conveniently and safely
increased, as our Ports are better, more convenient and safe than those of
Hamburg or the United Netherlands. Which being so, I see no reason but that the
Groenland Fishing, and the returns thereof, may be better, more conveniently
and safely carried on from the Ports of England, than from Hamburg or the
United Netherlands, in case the Fishing and Returns were as free here as there.

As the free Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scotland may increase the
Navigation of England, so will the foreign vent of Fish, and so will the
Returns, and Exporting them again from the Ports of England, etc. But as the
dearness of Navigation may strangle the foreign vent of our Fish, and fix the
Trade and Navigation to other places; so unless the Returns be as free and
cheap in England, as other places, whereby they may again find vent in foreign
Trade, though the outward Trade were as free and cheap as in other places, yet
it would be impossible to increase the fishing trade beyond the consumption of
the Returns in England, and the Moneys paid for them.

Prop. 6. Theorem 6.
The free admission of Foreigners to Inhabit in England, and to Fish and Trade
in any Vessels to Foreign parts for Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland, may more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of
England.

2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving
them are increased.

10 Pet. 4. But Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas to the Crown of England.

3 Prop. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to inhabit, Fish and Trade,
etc. may increase the Navigation of England.

Therefore it may more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown
of England.

Coroll.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of Fish
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to Export them, may more
secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.

10 Pet. 4. For Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas to the Crown of England.

5 Prop. 4. And the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of fish
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland into the Ports of England, and
export them, may increase the Navigation of England.

Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll.
Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the
Crown of England; which being so, the Navigation which arises from the
Fishing-trade, and the Returns into the Ports of England, and exporting them
again, etc. above all others, will more secure the Sovereignty of the British
Seas. For in the Navigation which arises from the foreign Trade of our
Manufactures, it may be, we employ not one Mariner to one thousand of those who
are employed in working the Manufactures; and it may be, not one Vessel to ten
thousand: whereas even in the catching and curing the Fish, we employ Vessels
in Navigation; and all the Men are Mariners, or such as by it become Mariners.
Besides, the Bulkiness of the Fish in foreign Trade, employ so many more
Vessels and Mariners, as they are more Bulky than other Goods: and the free
Importing and Exporting of the Returns, creates a new Trade, and by consequence
a new Navigation, to the further employment of Shipping and Mariners: so may
the free returns of these, and exporting them again, and so infinitely; whereby
the Sovereignty of the British Seas may be infinitely more secured to the Crown
of England.

Prop. 7. Theorem 7.
The free admission of Foreigners to Inhabit in England, and to Fish and Trade
into foreign parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland,
and freely to make returns into the Ports of England, and Export them, will so
much diminish the Navigation of those who may be Enemies to the Crown of
England, as the Navigation of England shall be thereby increased.

2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are.

11 Pet. 4. But the increase of the Navigation of England by Foreigners, will
so much diminish the Navigation of others who may be Enemies to the Crown of
England.

3 Prop. 4. And the free admission of Foreigners to Inhabit in England, and to
fish and trade into foreign parts, etc. will increase the Navigation of England.

5 Prop. 4. So will the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns into the
Ports of England, and Export them, etc.

Therefore it will so much diminish the Navigation of those who may be Enemies
to the Crown of England.

Annot.
It is said in a Treatise Licensed by the Authority of the Rump-Parliament, in
the additional Evidences, p. 488. after Mr. Selden's Mare Clausum, that the
Dutch in the Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scotland employed 8400
Vessels, and 168000 Mariners and Fishers; which however it may seem incredible,
yet if we consider the vast Fleets they yearly send into the Sound, to Muscovy,
France, Spain, and Italy, whose Freight is in a great measure made up of Fish
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, besides the Busses and Mariners
employed in the Fishery; and the multitudes of Shipwrights, Carpenters, Smiths,
and all sorts of people employed in making Ropes, Nets and Sails for the
Fishery, and Trades depending upon it: without doubt the employment of people
is very considerable, and the Navigation even incredible; it being the Basis of
all the Trades the Dutch drive in the world, all their other Trades and
Navigation being upon the Principles acquired from other places originally
derived from the Fishing-Trade.

It is a Shame and Scandal then (besides the danger of it to the English
Nation) that it was never in any well-weighed Counsel considered, from what
Causes the Dutch in numerous Fleets for four Months in the year follow the
Herring from Scotland to Yarmouth, whilst the wretched people upon our Coast
stand starving and looking on, and cannot employ one Vessel or Mariner in it.
Even in the Herring-fishing before Yarmouth, we fish little above one
fortnight, and in that fishing the Dutch employ above threefold the Vessels we
do, and above twofold the Mariners.

Consequences.
From whence the Dutch are able, without Pressing, to Man their Men of War
against us, and at the same time to drive incredible Trades abroad; when we by
Pressing, and Land-Souldiers to boot, though we drive no Trade if we had not
advantage by the goodness of our Men of War, find it difficult enough to
oppose them; whereas in case this Fishery, and the Trades and Navigation
depending thereon, were driven by these Dutchmen, or any numbers of them, from
the Ports of England, the Dutch would have so much less means to oppose the
English, and dispute the Sovereignty of the British Seas, and the English would
have so much more means to defend themselves, and bring the Dutch to Reason.

Prop. 8. Theorem 8.
The free permission of the English to buy foreign Ships in all other Trades
but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, will so much more preserve
the Timber of England, as the Ships so bought are more.

11 Ax. 3. For things will be so much preserved, as less of them is expended.

12 Pet. 4. But so much less English Timber will be expended in building
English Ships for all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey
Trades, by so many foreign Ships as the English buy in other Trades.

13 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy foreign Ships in all
other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, may cause so
many more foreign Ships to be bought, as the permission is more free.

Therefore it may so much preserve the Timber of England.

Annot.
And if it may preserve the Timber of England, I am sure it is more than time
the English were permitted to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle,
East-Indie, and Turkey Trades: for by reason the Act of Navigation confines the
English to Trade and make Returns into the Ports of England only in
English-built Ships; the English have not only not been able to build one ship
for the Norway-trade for Timber, or the foreign Trade of white Herring or Cod
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, since the Rump-Parliament
contrived the Act of Navigation, but to maintain the niggardly Trades we now
drive; wherein upon the matter we consume all the Returns of our Manufactures,
and the Product of our Plantations: The Timber of England is so wasted, that in
any convenient distances for building Ships, there is not of Timber left
standing, as was when the Rump-Parliament invented this Law. See more hereof,
in the Annot. upon the 10, 11, 12 and 13 Propositions of The equal Danger of
the Church, State, and Trade of England.

I have with as much Zeal endeavored, yet without success, to represent this
to the Parliament, and the dire Consequences of it, so far as I understood the
Timber of England to be wasted upon the Coasts of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex.
And being last Easter-Eve was twelvemonth at Bristol, some Gentleman and I went
to see the Oxford Frigate, then ready to be Lanched, and built by Captain Baily
(a very Civil person, and I believe an excellent Builder.) After some
discourse, I asked him if English Timber were plentiful in the West of England;
and he told me, he with great difficulty got Timber to build this Frigate; and
that in building the Edgar-frigat, he bought the Timber twelve miles beyond
Worcester, which is 50 miles from Bristol. I then asked him, what he thought of
the State of the Nation, as it now stands, in reference to the Navigation of
it, in English-built Ships, whenas the Ring with such difficulty built one Man
of War: he told me, it was impossible to be continued, and that he had more
reason than another to know it; for besides his long being accqstiomed to build
Ships, he had order from the King to survey his Western and Southern Forests,
and to return an Account of it to the King himself. I thanked him, and told him
I was equally sorry with him for the condition of the Nation, yet was glad a
man of his Knowledge and Experience had the same apprehensions as I had; though
with all the Solicitations I could use, I was so far from getting relief to
the Nation herein, as that I could not get the Apprehensions he had herein, to
be received by the Parliament.

Prop. 9. Theorem 9.
The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the
Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, will more secure them, and also the
Sovereignty of the British Seas, to the Crown of England.

2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving
them are more.

14 Pet. 4. But the Turkey, East-Indie, Newcastle-Trades, and the Sovereignty
of the British Seas to the Crown of England, are more secured by means of ships
built of English Timber.

8 Prop. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other
Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, will more preserve the
Timber of England.

Therefore it will so much more secure the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey
Trade, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.

Annot.
If we consider how much the Newcastle-trade increases, as does the
East-Indie-trade; and how much greater the Dutch War-fleet is than the King's
of England; And that, as the case stands, the Newcastle-trade is necessary, and
the East-Indie-trade very beneficial to the Nation; it may be a question if the
growth of these Trades, and the necessities of increasing the Navy Royal, will
not require greater quantities of Timber than for the future can be found in
convenient distances in England; however, to preserve these, it is very
reasonable the English be permitted to buy Ships in all their other Trades.

Prop. 10. Theorem 10.
The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all their other Trades but
the Turkey, East-Indie, and Newcastle-Trades, may increase the Navigation of
England.

3 Ax. 4. For things may be so much increased, as the means are increased.

22 Pet. 1. But Ships are means in Navigation.

15 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other
Trades but the Newcastle-trade, etc. may increase the ships of England.

Therefore it may increase the Navigation of England.

Annot.
So that this permission, as it will more secure the Sovereignty of the British
Seas, the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, so it may increase the
Navigation of England in our Trades to and from our foreign Plantations, the
Trades to Hamburg, into the Sound, Muscovy, France and Spain, but especially to
Norway for Timber, Pitch and Tar; in which Trade, as we never built one ship
since the Act of Navigation, nor, as the case stands, can ever hope to do: so
in time of War between the Dutch and French, the Newcastle-ships are so
employed in other Trades, as the home-vent of Coal is not only not thoroughly
supplied, but our Norway-Merchants cannot hire enough to furnish us as at other
times, especially in our Trades to Dromen Northward of Bergen; as Mr. Hammond a
Norway-Merchant, who affirms, that in this Trade he vends more of our English
Manufactures, than all our Norway Merchants do in all their other Trades to
Norway, has often complained to me. And though the King has been pleased to
permit our Norway Merchants to buy about 50 Flyboats, yet these, with the
addition of the Dutch Prizes taken in the late War, will not near supply the
defect. And I say moreover, in case the English be not permitted to buy Ships
in this Trade, and in our Trades to our Plantations, Hamburg, Muscovy, to
France, Spain, Guiny, and into the Sound, and other places, we shall endanger
the loss of these Trades, as well as the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey
Trades, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas: And that the Title of the Act
of Navigation is a contradiction, in affirming it to be for Increase and
Encouragement of Navigation and Mariners, yet confining them both to
English-built Ships, and sailed by English.

Prop. 11. Theorem 11.
The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the
Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, may cheaper increase the Navigation
of England.

4 Ax. 4. For things may be so much cheaper increased, as the means are cheaper.

22 Pet. 1. But Ships are means in Navigation.

16 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy ships in all other
Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, may cheaper increase
ships in England.

Therefore it may cheaper increase theNavigation of England.

Annot.
May cheaper increase Ships in England. I could rarely discourse this point;
but it would still be objected against me, that though foreign ships be cheaper
than English-built, yet English ships are more strong and durable: and this
contended with such heat, as would not admit of a comparison of the benefits
which might accrue by the strength and durableness of ours, and the cheapness
and convenience of foreign ships. I confess, for ought I know, the strength and
durableness of English-built ships may be a reason to have the King's Men of
War, and ships for the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, built of
English Timber, so long as the Timber of England can afford it. But in our
other Trades, though we had Timber sufficient, and it were my opinion it were
better to carry on these Trades in English built ships; yet I say, no man less
conversant in any business, understands so well, as a man more conversant in
it, by what means he can best carry on his business; and therefore if the
English Merchant finds he can better carry on his business in English-built
ships, no question but he will prefer them before foreign. But if the English
Merchant be confined to English built ships in his trades, and can get none; or
if they be so dear, or inconvenient (for we do not understand how to build
convenient ships for all Trades) as not to find profit; not only the Mariners
lose their employment, but, it may be, the employment of a thousand other
people, whose Labors depend upon that Trade, will be hereby lost.

Corollary.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar,
Ruff Hemp and Flax into England, may cheaper increase the Manufactures of
Ropes, Nets and Sails in England.

17 Pet. 4. For Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, are Principal means in the
Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails.

18 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff
Hemp and Flax, may so much increase these cheaper in England, as the
Importation is more free.

Annot.
After the establishing Religion and Justice, no greater happiness attends any
Nation, than the constant employment of people: And I say, both Religion and
Justice may much better be propagated upon people bred up in honest
Professions, than upon those who subsist by Pilfering, Cheating, Stealing,
Canting, and Begging; and therefore all those Laws, or other means, which take
away the employment of people in honest Professions, do not only make them
miserable, and a burden to the Nation, but hinder the growth of Religion and
Justice. And if the Importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax were
permitted to be as freely imported into England, as Hamburg or the United
Netherlands, I see no reason but many thousands of poor people in the Suburbs
of London, and in all the Towns upon the Eastern Ports of England, might better
and cheaper be employed in making Ropes, Nets and Sails, than in Hamburg or the
United Netherlands, by how much the Inhabitants may cheaper subsist, and be
maintained, than those in Hamburg or the United Netherlands.

Before the Act of Navigation, the English by the 1 Eliz. 13. might import
Pitch and Tar in any Vessels; and before the year 1640, the English by reason
of the goodness of their Trade into the Sound, returned such quantities of Ruff
Hemp and Flax, that the poor people upon the Eastern Coast of England did make
sufficient Ropes, Nets and Sails for the Fishery and Navigation of it. And
after the English had, for reasons before-said in the former Treatises and this
Preface, almost lost the Trade into the Sound; yet before the Act of
Navigation, having free liberty to import Pitch and Tar, and the Dutch
importing Ruff Hemp and Flax upon reasonable terms; this employment continued,
to the incredible support of the poor Inhabitants in the Towns upon the Coast:
But the Act of Navigation prohibiting the English to import Pitch and Tar,
unless in English-built ships, and the English not being able to build one ship
for the Trade of them, they were reduced to have it upon such terms as the
Norwegians pleased to impose upon them. And though Oliver permitted the Norway
Traders to import Timber in any Vessels, notwithstanding the Act of Navigation;
yet the Law still was in force against Importation of Pitch and Tar; and
theDutch not being permitted to import Ruff Hemp and Flax, and the English
Trade into the Sound every day decaying, few returns from Riga, Revel, Narve,
or Quinborough, of Ruff Hemp and Flax, was made into England, but in English
Vessels outward fraught with Ballast, and bought with ready Money; whereby Ruff
Hemp and Flax became so dear, that the poor English lost the employment. In the
Town of Yarmouth, before the Act of Navigation, the Inhabitants made yearly
2800 Tun of Cordage, besides Nets and Sails: now, for the Reasons aforesaid,
they make not ten, and neither Nets or Sails; for the Dutch importing Ruff Hemp
and Flax, and Pitch and Tar cheaper, can work these so cheap, as the English
cannot: and then the Act of Navigation permits the English to buy them, and the
Dutch to import them; but sure this is not made either for employment of our
people, or for increase of Religion or Justice in England.

Prop. 12. Theorem 12.
The free permission of Forreignes to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax,
will so much more preserve the Treasure of the Nation, as the Importation is
more free.

11 Ax. 3. For things will be so much more preserved, as less is expended of
them.

19 Pet. 4. But so much less of the Treasure of the Nation will be expended in
buying Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, as they are cheaper.

18 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff
Hemp and Flax, will make them so much cheaper, as the Importation is more free.

Therefore it will so much preserve the Treasure of the Nation.

Annot.
This permission will not only preserve so much of the Treasure of the Nation,
by how much Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax are cheaper sold; but by how much
the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails made of them, arise in value above
their Principles. Therefore, the not permitting this Importation, both ways
Exhausts the Treasure of the Nation, and that to such a degree, that I remember
before the Act of Navigation, I was a part-Builder in a Vessel for the
Newcastle-trade; and about four years after, the same Builder and Owners (when
the poor people upon the Coast had lost their employment in making Cordage and
Sails) paid above more in proportion for the fitting out this Vessel, than we
did for the former.

Prop. 13. Theorem 13.
The free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax,
and Timber into England, may cheaper increase the building and fitting up of
Ships in England.

4 Ax. 4. For business may be so much cheaper increased, as the means are
cheaper increased.

20 Pet. 4. But Ropes, Sails, and Timber are means in building and fitting up
of Ships.

Coroll. Prop. 11. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar,
Ruff Hemp and Flax into England, may cheaper increase the Manufactures of Ropes
and Sails in England.

21 Pet. 4. And so this permission may cheaper increase Timber in England.

Therefore it may cheaper increase the building of Ships in England.

Annot.
Though I desire the Trade and Navigation of the Nation should be increased by
permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle,
East-Indie, and Turkey Trades, yet I had rather all their Trades were carried
on by Ships built in the Ports of England: for if it be better for a Nation,
that in any profitable employment the Inhabitants earn 10000 l. or a greater or
lesser sum, than to have 10000 l. or a greater or lesser sum given them, and
the people not employed; then so much better it is for this Nation to have
ships built in the Ports of it, than to buy them, by how much the Labors of
the people in building and fitting up of ships are valuable.

But to attain to this in England, it will not be only necessary freely to
import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and Timber; but also to permit all
foreign Ship-wrights to inhabit, and have equal freedom to exercise their
Professions in all convenient places in England for building Ships; for no man
is born an Artificer, but it comes to pass by Education, Labor, and
Experience: and the English are unacquainted in building Busses for the Fishing
Trade, and in building ships for the Norway or Groenland Trades, and many
other. The Dutch build ships for all Trades according to the best convenience:
we only know how to build Men of War; and our ships for other Trades are of
like figure, whether it be convenient or not.

Consequences.
From hence it is, that the English are not able so to build one Buss or Vessel
for the Fishery and foreign Trade of White Herring caught upon the Coasts of
England and Scotland, as to turn to profit; or for the Groenland Fishery and
foreign Trade of it, or for the Norway Trade: But Trading in Newcastle-ships to
Norway, and the ships being dear and Inconvenient for that Trade, enables the
Norwegians to impose like Rates upon us for Pitch, Tar, and Timber, as the
English can import these in those dearer and more inconvenient Ships they are
restrained to.

The King's Duties, and employment of English Mariners, are opposed to this
free Importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber. For the Kings
Duties, upon an enquiry, about four years since, I found the King's Duties for
Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax imported, did amount to about 1600 l. per Annum:
and if the payment of Searchers and other Officers of the Custom-house were
deducted, perhaps not 1000 l. per Annum came clear to the King: So that if the
whole Duties hereof were taken away, the Revenue of the Crown would not be
hereby much diminished. It is true, the King's Duties for Timber imported since
the burning the City of London, are considerable; yet not so to the King, for
it is Farmed out, and the Farm to the King is (as I am informed) 6000 l. per
Annum; whereas, if the inward Freight of these were as cheap as into Holland or
Hamburg, besides the employment of our people, the King's Duties, by the
greatness of the Trade, might be so much more, as the Trade is greater; and the
King save more, by the cheapness of Timber, in building and repairing his Men
of War and Palaces, than now his Revenue for Timber amounts to.

In the employment of our Mariners to import Ruff Hemp and Flax, two
Considerations arise. First, The number of Ships and Mariners employed.
Secondly, The Employment. The number of ships employed (so well as I can learn)
are about nine, whereof two are fraught outward with Cony-skins and Woollen
Manufactures; the other seven take Bills of Exchange from Hamburg, and have no
outward Lading but Ballast: so that the number of Ships being nine, allowing
thirteen Men to every ship, and the Voyage to Dantzick, Queenborough, Riga,
Revel, and Narve to be four Months, the whole amounts to 117 Mariners, who
being employed but of the year, the constant employment of 39 Mariners is
equivalent to it. But if we consider the employment, the outward Voyage of
seven of these ships is lost time to the Mariners, and loss to the Nation in
the Ware and Tare of the Ships for want of a Freight, and so much more as the
Hemp and Flax is bought with ready Money, for want of Goods to exchange for
them. So I leave it to any to judge, whether the employment of 39 Mariners,
whereof above 30 are not only in half of their employment idly employed, but to
the loss and impoverishing the Nation, be comparable to the constant employment
of (it may be) above 100000 people, by the free importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff
Hemp, Flax and Timber, in building ships, and in the Manufactures of Ropes,
Nets and Sails.

Coroll.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar,
Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber, may cheaper increase the Navigation of England.

22 Pet. 1. For Shipping is a mean to increase Navigation.

13 Prop. 4. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff
Hemp and Flax, and Timber, may cheaper increase Shipping in England.

Annot.
It is said, the Dutch build Busses and Vessels for the Norway Trade, of little
other Timber but Fir; and that in the Fishery these Busses will weather a
Storm, when the Dutch Men of War cannot abide it. And if the Importation of
Ruff Hemp and Flax, Pitch, Tar and Timber were as free in England as the United
Netherlands, we might have the convenience of building and fitting up Busses
and Vessels for the Fishery and Norway-Trade as cheap as the Dutch, and also
have the convenience of our Ports, better, more safe and convenient than theirs
for the Fishery and Norway-Trade to boot; besides the benefit of fresh Water,
and drying our Nets in the Fishery; which the King, in case it were established
from our Ports, might deny to them; and also can cheaper freight Vessels for
the Fishery and Norway Trade, than can be from Hamburg or any Port in the
United Netherlands; whereas by restraining and charging the Importation of
Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber, we do not only lose all these
benefits, but establish them to the Dutch and Norwegians, who will never thank
us for it.

Prop. 14. Theorem 14.
The free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and
Timber, may more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the
Crown of England.

5 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more and cheaper secured, as the means of
preserving them are cheaper increased.

4 Pet. 4. But Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas to the Crown of England.

Coroll. And the free permission of Foreigners to import Pitch, Tar, etc. may
cheaper increase the Navigation of England.

Therefore it may more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas
to the Crown of England.

Annot.
This permission will not only more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the
British Seas, by how much more the King may draw out so many more Mariners to
man his Fleet, as Navigation shall be hereby cheaper increased; but it will
also so much more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, the Newcastle,
East-Indie, and Turkey Trade, by how much the plenty and cheapness of foreign
Timber may supply the building and repairing Houses, Ships, and Enclosures,
etc. in England, whereby our English Timber will be so much preserved, which
otherwise would be expended in them.

Prop. 15. Theorem 15.
The free permission of Foreigners to Import and Export all sorts of foreign
Commodities into the Ports of England, may cheaper increase Navigation to and
from the Ports of England.

1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much increased, as the Principles are
increased.

1 Pet. 4. But the foreign Trade of our Manufactures, is a principle of
Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

23 Prop. 3. And the free permission of Foreigners to Import and Export all
sorts of foreign Commodities, may cheaper increase the foreign Trade of our
Manufactures.

Therefore it may increase Navigation to and from the ^orts of England.

Annot.
This permission may increase Navigation, as the foreign Trade of our Growths
and Manufactures, and the fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland
is increased; and it will much more increase Navigation to and from the Ports
of England, upon the account of the Goods themselves which are imported and
exported. The free Importation and Exportation of French Wines, Brandies, Salt,
Spice, Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and the Woollen
Manufactures of the United Netherlands, is the general Composition of those
stupendous Fleets which the Dutch yearly send in times of Peace into the
Sound; whereas we, for want of these, send not above nine, and seven of these
outward laden only with Ballast. To Muscovy, by the benefit of these outward
fraught, they usually employ above forty, we not above three in two years.

But in case Foreigners were permitted to inhabit and trade for Fish caught
upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to import and export from the
Ports of England Salt, French Wines and Brandies, as free as from Hamburg or
the United Netherlands; let us see if these Trades into the Sound and Muscovy
might not be better, and more beneficially carried on from the Ports of
England, than either from Hamburg or Holland. Herein I know but of one
advantage the Dutch have over us, that is in the Spice-trade, which in this
respect is very considerable, that having the sole Trade of it, they can raise
or fall the Prices of it, so as to vend the rest of their Commodities cheaper
than another Nation which cannot Counterpoise this some other way. But in case
the outward vent of Fish, Salt, Wine, and Brandies were as free from the Ports
of England as those of the United Netherlands, we should First have the benefit
of our Ports, more, much better, more convenient and safe than theirs.
Secondly, We should have the benefit of vending our Manufactures at the best
terms, whereby we should have so much more benefit than the Dutch, as our Wools
and other Principles are better and cheaper than can be had in the United
Netherlands, and as men can fare and be maintained cheaper here than there.
Thirdly, We may Ballast all the Ships outward fraught with Coals, as occasion
serves, cheaper than the Dutch. Fourthly, We can supply the people within the
Sound better with Pepper, than the Dutch. Fifthly, We may be may have as much
benefit in vending our Sugars and Tobaccoes in this Trade above the Dutch, as
the Dutch have in the Spice-trade above us. Sixthly, We have the benefit of
Trading for Cony-skins, Lead and Tin, which the Dutch have not. So that in case
the other Trades into the Sound were as free from the Ports of England as
Holland, I see no reason, not withstanding the Dutch Monopoly of the
Spice-trade, but we might drive a much greater, and more considerable Trade and
Navigation from England: and the reasons are the same in the Trade and
Navigation to Muscovy.

And if the free permission may establish a better Trade and Navigation from
England to the North, and North-East, than can be from the United Netherlands,
so I see no reason but if we could vend the Fish caught upon the Coasts of
England and Scotland, so well as the Dutch, in France, Spain and Italy, and
were permitted to vend our Growths and Manufactures from the next Ports, but we
should have a much greater advantage above the Dutch in the South and
South-East Trades and Navigation, than in the North and North-East: For without
doubt we might under-sell the Dutch in all those Woollen Manufactures they vend
in Spain, Italy and Turkey: we have the benefit of compounding Freights with
Pepper and Callico's better than they; and if we please, may have as much
benefit above them in Ballasting Ships with Coals, and with compounding
Freights of Lead, Tin, Leather, Calve-skins, of Sugars, and Chocoletta,
Tobacco's and other products of our Plantations, as the Dutch have over us in
their Spice-trade, which takes up but little lading in these Trades and
Navigation.

Coroll.
By the same reason, the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of
Goods exported into the Ports of England, and to export them, may increase
Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

1 Pet. 4. For Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of
Navigation to and from the Ports of England.

2 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Foreigners to make Returns of Goods
exported into the Ports of England, and export them, may increase Trade to and
from the Ports of England.

Annot.
This permission will increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England; so
will the Returns of these, and exporting them again, and so infinitely. And in
all these Trades and Navigations, the foreign Trades of our Manufactures and
Growths, and Fish caught upon our Coasts, will receive this benefit, that if
any part of the World wants any of these Goods, and but in a little measure
stand in need of our Goods, these Goods of ours may find foreign vent, which
otherwise would not of themselves pay the charge of the Voyage. This permission
also would create a constant Trade and Navigation to and from the Ports of
England, whereby the people upon the Coast, and from all parts of England,
would find a constant employment, and infinite other benefits would accrue
hereby to the Country and Lands of England, in Victualling Ships, etc. which
can neither be foreseen or enumerated.

This King's Duties, and the employment of English Ships and Mariners, are
usually opposed to this Permission. But the Opposition is without consideration
of the nature of Trade, the King's Revenue, or Navigation: For Trade being a
principle to the King's Revenue, and Navigation which depends upon it; both the
King's Revenue and Navigation may be infinitely increased, as the foreign
Trades of the Nation, or the foreign Trade of other Commodities driven from the
Ports of England, are increased. But if men begin at the Consequences, viz. the
King's Revenue and Navigation, and Tax Trade higher than it can bear; or
restrain it only to such Ships, so that Trade hereby becomes lost, so does the
King's Revenue, and the Navigation.

But because of the Importance of it, we will therefore more intently compare
the Loss the King shall receive by this Permission, and what will be the damage
of our English Navigation and Mariners; and if any be to either, whether it may
not be otherways over-ballanced.

Herein I say, that this permission of Foreigners to inhabit and Fish from the
Ports of England, and to vend their white Herring in foreign Trade, and to
import and export all sorts of foreign Commodities, and make Returns into the
Ports of England, will not diminish the Kings Revenue, though they paid no
Duties; nor the employment of English Ships and Mariners, for we employ no
Shipping or Mariners in it, nor has the King any Revenue thereby: whereas by
it the King's Revenue would be hereby so much increased, as the consumption of
Beer, Ale, and all other Exciseable Commodities are more; and our English
Mariners, in all outward and inward Voyages, may find employment. I do not
believe (unless it be for French Wines imported and consumed in England) the
King's Duties imported and exported out of Harwich-Haven (from whence all the
Trade the Dutch drive in the East and North-East, might be better driven, than
from all the Ports of the United Netherlands) amount to 300 l. per Annum. Nor
do we employ one Vessel or Mariner to any part of the World from thence, upon
the foreign Trade of Goods imported: Even the Town of Tarmouth (which we so
much boast of) is so far from carrying on any Trade upon this account, that, I
am told, they cannot supply any part of the World with a piece of
Norwich-stuff, though the Navigation between Norwich and them be very
commodious. Is it not a shame then, that such prodigious Trades and Navigations
upon this account should from the other side of the Water be driven from worse
and more incommodious Harbors, whilst we employ not one Vessel or Mariner in
any of them? And what is affirmed of Yarmouth and Harwich, I believe, is as
true of all the other Ports of England, except London. As Harwich is of all
others the most opportune and excellent Harbor for the East and North-East
parts of Europe; so is Falmouth for the South, South-East, West and South-West
parts of the World. I cannot tell what the King's Duties for Goods imported
there yearly arise to; nor whether within the Harbor there be any good Towns
for reception of Merchants, and Storehouses for Goods: But I think I may safely
affirm, that in all Christendom is not so healthful and delicate a place for
Warehouses and reception of Merchants as Ipswich is: the Town so clean, though
an even Level, that after the greatest Rains in the depth of Winter, a man in
Slippers may walk the Town over without wetting his Feet: And though Ships of
200 Tun burden may come up to the Key, yet every Street is watered with the
purest and sweetest Water of any place I ever came in. To these may be added,
that standing in the Bosom of the most Fertile County of Suffolk, which
conjoyns with the no less Fertile County of Essex, it is, or, I am sure might
be supplied with all sorts of Provisions by Land equal to any other. And if
these two Ports were made free for Importation and Exportation of Goods by all
Nations, and the same Revenue continued to the King; and that it were free for
all people to inhabit in England, and to Fish, and Trade with Fish into foreign
parts, and make Returns into England; I should be content the rest of the Ports
of the Nation should enjoy their Privileges so long as they pleased. The King
of Sweden made Gottenburgh free but for seven years, which has made it the most
flourishing Town for Trade in the North-East: So did the Duke of Florence
Legorne, whereby it excels all other Ports in the Mediterranean; yet neither of
these any ways comparable in any respect to Falmouth or Ipswich. But if this
cannot be had, I must submit; yet I hope it will not be urged, it will be to
the detriment of the King's Revenue, or hinder the English Navigation, or
employment of our Mariners.

Another Objection made against the free permission of Foreigners to import
Goods, is, that the greatest Returns which the Dutch make from Dantzick, is in
Corn; whereby they supply their own necessities; which in case it were imported
into England, would make a glut here, and bring down the prices of our Lands.
To this I answer, First, That the Dutch do not only hereby supply themselves
plentifully, so as the prices of Corn are constant and reasonable, and so as
whatever happens in other places, they never fear a Famine; but also upon all
occasions supply other places with Corn, so as a Famine or scarcity of Corn
becomes their enriching: whereas we are never at any certainty in the prices of
our Corn; but if a plentiful year happens, whereby Nature has disburthened her
self of more than she can renew the future year, the Tenants are necessitated
to vend it abroad at low prices, to pay their Rent; and when the dear year
succeeds, it may be we pay double for the same Corn again. And I say also, it
is Plenty in all things which makes Cheapness; and therefore wherever Corn is
plentiful, in proportion to the people or Market, it will be cheaper. But in
case our Towns in the Mediterrane parts of England were replenished with all
sorts of Artificers, and the Ports of England abounded with the Dutch
Navigation, the prices of Corn would bear a proportion to the number of
Artificers and Mariners, and the means which by their Crafts and Traffic they
should be enabled to buy Corn withal: We then should not need to fear the
Importation of Corn or Irish Cattle. And I believe it would be a happiness
equal to any Temporal, both to the Landlord and Tenant, to have the prices of
Corn constant and reasonable; and that such stores were preserved in all great
and Navigable places, so as to prevent a Famine in England, and to supply other
places which labor under it. Queen Elizabeth in the first Parliament of her
Reign, permitted the English in any Vessels to import Corn, paying ordinary and
but reasonable Duties; which Law stands yet in force.

Corollary. 2.
By the same reason, the free permission of the English in English-built Ships
to export Newcastle-Coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may
increase the Navigation of England.

22 Pet. 4. For the foreign Trade of Newcastle-Coal by the English, is a
principle to the Navigation of England.

23 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English in English-built Ships to
export Newcastle-Coals, and make returns into the Ports of England, may
increase the foreign Trade of it.

Annot.
By free permission, here, I intend such Duties only, as that Newcastle Coal
may, with regard to the goodness of it, be cheaper vended in foreign parts,
than Scotch-Coal from the Ports of Scotland; for whilst the Duties of exporting
Newcastle-Coal continue so high, Foreigners paying above 16 s. per Chauldron,
and the English above 8 s. all Nations, unless it be in working Iron
Manufactures, generally take in lading of Coals from Scotland. We glory much,
that the Newcastle-Trade, in our home-vent of Coals, above all other Trades,
employs our Shipping and Mariners; yet, as has been said, this Employment is to
the loss of the Nation, by how much Pitch, Tar, Cordage and Sails are consumed
in it: whereas the foreign Trade of it, if free to the English, for ought I
know, might employ more Shipping and Mariners, and both the outward vent and
the Returns may be profitable to the Nation. I am sure the Coals under ground
are no benefit to the Nation; nor need we fear, in case the collieries were
drained, ever to want Coals to supply our selves or Foreigners. It is true,
Foreigners in France, Flanders, Holland, and other places, by this permission
might work Iron Manufactures cheaper, by how much cheaper the English should
import Newcastle-Coal. But to this I say, that all Nations (except the English,
in consuming Wines imported) design some benefit by Goods bought and sold; and
therefore in Traffic, men compare the benefits in buying and selling; and it
is great Wisdom in any Nation, so to establish Trade and Commerce, that the
Nations Traffic be improved: and therefore, in case the vending our Coals in
foreign Trade, and making Returns, besides the employment of our Shipping and
Mariners, be more beneficial to this Nation, than cheaper working Iron
Manufactures be prejudicial to it, this Exportation is to be preferred.

Another Objection against this permission is, The King's Revenue will be
hereby lessened, by how much the Duties are less. To this I answer, First, That
the King's Revenue upon Trade, is a Consequence to Trade; and therefore, if the
King's Revenue upon Trade be higher than it can bear, the Trade will be lost,
and then necessarily will be the King's Revenue: and that it is the height of
the Duties upon Coals exported, which establishes so great a Trade of Coals in
Scotland, and makes our foreign vent so inconsiderable. Secondly, This Revenue
upon Newcastle-Coals, in the foreign vent of it, is Farmed; so that though the
Duties be very high, yet it may be the King's Revenue is not considerable.
Whereas, Thirdly, in case the foreign Duties were reasonable, the greatness of
the Trade might much more increase the King's Revenue than as it stands, whenas
the greatness of the Duties causes so small a Trade.

To sum up this Discourse, and leave the Progress of so excellent a design to
others, whose insight and abilities are better able to improve the Trade and
Navigation of the Nation: I say, that in case we should reserve the East Indie,
the Turkey Trades, and the Trades to our Plantations, as also the home-vent and
foreign Trade of Newcastle-coals, to the Natives of England, and again
establish the Trade and Navigation to Ireland, as it was before the Act against
Importation of Irish Cattle, and permit all Nations to inhabit and Fish from
the Ports of England, and import and export freely French Wines, Brandies and
Salt from France, and Timber, Pitch and Tar from Norway, and Ruff Hemp and Flax
from the Ports within the Sound; I know not of any Trades or Navigation we
should be in danger to lose, so as not to employ our Shipping and Mariners, but
those to France, Muscovy, and into the Sound. For the Trade and Navigation to
Muscovy and into the Sound, by English ships and Mariners only, we have
examined it in the Annot. upon the 13th Prop. the Coroll. and 14th Prop. of
this Treatise, and find it not only prejudicial to the Trade and Navigation of
the Nation, but dangerous to the conserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas
to the Crown of England. In the French Trade for Wines and Brandies I observe,
that this Trade above all others impoverishes the Nation, not only as we
debauch and impoverish our selves in drinking all the Wines, good or bad,
imported; but also in the Ware and Tare of the Vessels wherein we import them;
and the outward freight is with little else than Ballast, and the Returns as
well as outward Voyage in the most perilous seasons of Navigation of all
others, wherein we lose more Shipping and Mariners than in all our other Trades
and Navigation besides. Whereas in case we should increase a foreign Trade of
Newcastle-coals, and restore the Trade we had to Ireland; both these Trades
would be profitable to the Nation in the outward freight, so might the Returns;
the Trades and Navigation might be constant, and in the seasonable Times of
Navigation: and for ought I know, we might constantly employ double the Seamen
and Mariners in these Trades, to the Mariners and Navigation we employ for
French Wines and Brandies in the Months of October, November, and December.
For the Importation of Salt, I say, it may be one Vessel of Salt may with that
Commodity supply a hundred Vessels for the Fishing Trade, etc. And in case
Foreigners import Salt cheaper than the English, all these hundred Vessels
will have the benefit of it. And whether we ought to prefer the English
Navigation for one Vessel of Salt, or the Fishery of a hundred Vessels, and the
Navigation which depends upon it, I leave to any one to judge. Besides, the
cheap Importation of Salt, has not only an Influence upon the foreign Trade of
it, but upon all the Vessels which take in Provisions of Salt-Beef and Pork,
etc.

Prop. 17. Theorem 17.
The free permission of the English in English-built ships to export
Newcastle-Coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may more secure
the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.

2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving
them are increased.

4 Pet. 4. But the Navigation of England, is a mean of preserving the
Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.

2 Coroll. And the free permission of the English in English-built ships to
export Newcastle-coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may
increase the Navigation of England.

Therefore it may so much more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to
the Crown of England.

Annot.
This permission will not only secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to
the Crown of England, by how many more Mariners are employed in it, whereby the
King upon all occasions may have them to help to man his Fleet; but even
Colliers ships make very good Men of War, as the Nation found in all the late
Wars with the Dutch. But if the increase of Mariners and English ships secure
the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, then by the Rule
of Contraries, the loss of English Shipping and Mariners in Trading for French
Wines by English, and in English-built ships in the dangerous seasons of
Navigation, so much more endangers the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the
Crown of England, by how many more Mariners and Ships we lose in so fruitless
and unnecessary a Navigation.

EPILOGUE.
THus have I, so well as I can, endeavored to describe the benefits which may
arise to my native Country, from those Natural Endowments wherewith God has
adorn^d it above any other. But as the Law against Naturalization restrains the
Improvement of our Native Commodities only to English, whereby infinite
benefits might accrue to the Nation; and the privileges of Corporations
restrains the improvement of very few, yet veryer poor Freemen; whereby both
ways the Navigation, as well as the Foreign and Domestic Trade of the Nation is
hindered: So the Act of Navigation restraining the foreign vent of our
Commodities, and making Returns into the Ports of England, not only by the
scarcity and dearness of Shipping endangers the Trade and Navigation of the
Nation, but prohibiting upon terms of Confiscation of Ships, Goods, Guns,
Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel, all Nations to import Goods into any of the
Ports of England, unless by the Natives, and Ships of the place; not only the
export of French Wines, Salt, Brandies and other Commodities, with the growths
and Manufactures of the Nation becomes impossible, to the infinite hindrance of
the foreign Trade of them; but also by reason of the dearness and scarcity of
Pitch, Tar, Timber, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and all sorts of Dying stuff, the
Domestic working of our Manufactures, as well as the foreign Trade and
Navigation which depends thereon, is forely damnified. Add hereto the
intolerable injuries all the Natives of England suffer (unless in the Turkey
and East-Indie-Companies) by the Masters of all ships, in almost all the Trades
they now drive in the World; nor is it possible to be remedied, as the case
stands: for if the Nation be not content herewith, they must have no foreign
Trade at all.

Whereas it has been always the practice of the Wisest Princes and States, by
all just means to enlarge the Trades and Navigation of their Countries; and
where Nature has not granted them convenient Ports, by Art to supply Natures
defects. With what wonder is the Mole of Genoua founded for reception of
Shipping, whereby to enlarge Trade to and from it! The Pen of Great Yarmouth is
a rarity equal to any the Nation can boast of; by the benefit whereof, this
Town (after London and Bristol) excels all others of England in Trade and
Navigation. Our King in his Princely Wisdom, at great expense, endeavors to
finish the Mole at Tangier, thereby reasonably hoping that that place may
become famous for Trade, and a secure Harbor for his Men of War and the
Merchants of England upon all occasions, both in Peace, but more in time of
War. With a diligence and industry equal to his power, the French King
endeavors to make the Port of Havre de Grace more deep and commodious for
Shipping, thereby to advance the Trade and Navigation of France, especially of
Normandy and Britain. Even the Act of Navigation with reason prohibits the
Trade of our Plantations to Foreigners, because thereby, though it would
enrich them by how much more their Trade would become greater, yet this would
be so much to the loss of the Nation: and permits a free Trade to Tangier,
because it may enrich the place, and make it more frequented. I am sure the
reason is the same by making the Ports of England free, which have no need of
the Mole of Genoua or Tangier; nor is Trade to and from them interrupted by any
Stoad, or Gluckstadt; the World by Trading to them, need not fear to encounter
the Rocks before Gottenburg, or the Sands before Zealand, or the Mouth of the
Maze. No danger of stranding ships in our Ports, as at Amsterdam, Harlem,
Enchuysen, and other Ports within the Zuyder-Sea. By a benignity peculiar to
our Country, no where else to be found in the same Climate, but in Ireland, so
gentle a Temper thaws the sharp Frosts, so as our Ports are always open, and
free for any Trade, especially to the Western, Southern, and South-East, and
South-West parts of the World; whereas those upon our opposite Shores are
commonly frozen three or four Months in the year:

And though all the Shipping and Goods thus imported by Foreigners, were no
longer ours than the Merchants and Owners pleased; yet by reason of the
Intercourse and Commerce, the Trade would so much more fix, as the Commerce is
more free: the World would find the benefit of Traffic, from the Excellency,
Convenience, and Openness of our Ports; which in time may invite them to
establish their Riches and Trade in our Country, and leave them to their
Posterities with us in England. In the mean time, the Country-Farn or would
find vent of his Commodities in V^ctualling the Vssels, and poor people
employment in mending the Ships and Rigging, and in lading and unlading Goods;
and many thousands of desolate Houses upon the Coast would let for good Rents,
which now decay, and fall down for want of Inhabitants.

By this free Importation of Goods into the Ports of England, we may infinitely
improve the benefits which will accure to a'l sorts of Artificers by the plenty
and cheapness of all things they need, and to the foreign Trades of our Woollen
and other Manufactures, by their Returns into the Ports of England: the
multitudes of Shipping and Traders, will excite them to seek employment for
their Shipping in all sorts of Commodities we can supply them with, and they
the World. This Freedom and Intercourse in our Ports would establish an
Interest with all those Nations which hold Trade and Traffic with us, so as
their Interest would become interwoven with ours in all discords and Wars
between us and other Nations. And I am not afraid to say, that the City of
London would equally, if not more than any other place, enjoy benefit by this
freedom of Trade and Navigation; for it is the Trade London now enjoys above
any other place in England, which makes it so eminent above all other places of
England; which might be so much more increased, as the Nation by this Freedom
may hold a greater Commerce with it. Whereas, in case we continue still to Tax
and restrain our foreign Trades, of all places London will suffer most: For the
Country of England may subsist, though poorly, without a foreign Trade, or
Trade with London: But in case the Nation loses the foreign Trade of our
Woollen and other Manufactures, and the Country becomes so poor as they cannot
hold Commerce with London, London cannot subsist.

But though all Humane Wisdom is Lame and imperfect, and, without a Blessing
by God's Providence upon it, cannot reasonably hope to attain the designed end;
yet no man can reasonably hope for God's Blessing upon business, where he
designs by forceable means, more than the Nature of it, to attain his Ends. We
have said the height of Duties upon Goods imported into England, was the Cause
the Dutch are become so powerful in Trade and Navigation above us; and that it
was the Imposition of 16 per Cent. upon Goods imported, which lost the Trade of
Genoua to Legorne; and at this time we enjoy most infinite advantages above the
Dutch, as well in our Country as Coast. And to these may be added the present
Calamities the Dutch now labor under, by the terrible Inundation of Waters,
which they can never securely prevent for the future. But as the Dutch in their
long Wars with the Spaniards built a Fort called Lillo upon the Scheld, to
interrupt the Traffic which many parts of the world held with Antwerp, thereby
to gain that Trade to themselves: So the Act of Navigation, Freedom of
Corporations, and the Law against Naturalization; are Lillo's upon all the
Ports of England, yet was there no War between the Ports and Nation to cause
them; and this not to gain a Trade to the Ports or Nation, but to establish it
in other places. And though the foreign Trade of our Manufactures, and the Fish
caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and the Navigation depending
thereon, be the Soul of the well-being and safety of the Nation; yet in it is
not so much as a Council of Trade, or any established Power, to Govern or
Regulate it.

THE END.

