AN ACCOUNT OF THE Court of Portugal, Under the Reign of the present King Dom
PEDRO II.

WITH Some Discourses on the Interests of PORTVGAL, with Regard to other
Sovereigns; CONTAINING A Relation of the most Considerable Transactions that
have passed of late between that Court, and those of Rome, Spain, France,
Vienna, England, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1700.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
OF the King of Portugal. Page 3 Of the Public Revenues, and the Forces of the
Crown, both by Land and Sea. 19 Of His Majesty's first Queen. 43 Of the late
Queen. 109 Of the Queen Dowager of England. 125 Of the late Infanta. 128 Of the
King's Issue by his second Marriage. 148 Of his Natural Daughter. 160 Of the
Ministry. 164 Of the Marquess of Alegrete. 165 Of the Duke of Cadaval. 171 Of
the Archbishop of Lisbon. 172 Of the Marquess of Aronches. 178 Of the Secretary
of State. 179
PART. II.
OF the Interests of Portugal with Relation to Rome. Page 1 To Spain. 44
France. 62 The Emperor, Holland, the Northern Crowns, etc. 114 England. 119
THE PREFACE
THE Contents of the following Papers, were intended to fill some few Chapters,
in a General Account of Portugal; but the Author in digesting his Materials,
found them like to swell into almost as great a Volume as he designed for the
whole, which made him resolve to venture them out by themselves, as despairing
of being read, should the Bulk become so great, as the taking in of the other
Parts of his Subject would make it. This is the true Reason why the Court of
Portugal appears thus unaccompanied with such other Matters as should have been
placed before and after it; which is what the Author was far from designing,
when he first began to write; It was then, for many Reasons, the least in his
Intention, to single out the Court, from that great Variety of Subjects which
Portugal affords to one that is not altogether an idle Spectator in it.

It is true, that he thought it convenient in describing the State of that
Kingdom, to be more full in this part of his Account, than they usually are,
who write of Foreign Countries: For to understand the Affairs of any Nation, it
is absolutely necessary to have some competent Knowledge of the Court; that is
to say, of such as preside themselves at the Helm, or have any great Influence
upon those that do; The Court, in this sense, being to a Politic Body, what
the Mind is to the Natural, communicating Life and Motion to all the Members;
and as that Vital Principle appears to be disposed, or affected, one may
soonest discover the Symptoms of a Vigorous, or a Weakly Constitution: And one
who is well acquainted with the State of That, may be enabled to give a good
Account of the Public Proceedings, by tracing them to their Original Causes
and Motives; and may, withal, make some probable Conjecture, what they are like
to be in any supposed Case, for the time to come.

It was likewise thought necessary, in order to understand the true State of
Portugal, to know in what Terms that Kingdom stands with its several
Neighbors; those more especially, in whose Will or Power it is to do any great
Good or Harm. Now the best way to know, how far Portugal is to expect either
the one or the other from them, is by considering what it has received
already; former Experience being the surest Evidence in this Case. It is
therefore the Design of those Discourses, that make the Second Part of this
Piece, to show how Portugal has been served by its real or pretended Friends,
as often as they have been put to the Trial, or had any occasion to discover
themselves; and it is conceived, that the Transactions that have passed between
this, and other Crowns, since the House of Braganca came to be in possession of
the Throne, are set in a just Light, so far at least, as that the Reader may
easily perceive, what the true Interests of Portugal are; and whether, or no,
they have been duly cultivated, by such as have the Management of Affairs in
that Kingdom.

But the chief Business of this Preface, is to justify the Author's Credit
with the Reader; which may possibly be called in question, in regard to several
Particulars, in the following Account. He is far from the Folly of thinking
himself exempt from Mistakes; it is very likely, that he may have been guilty
of many, in that great variety of Matters which he has had occasion to
mention. He does not remember, that he ever saw any Relation of our English
Affairs, made by Strangers, that had not many palpable Errors in it; which
makes him the less confident of his own Performance: And he expects the like
Allowances, that are usually made to those that write of Foreign Countries.
However, he must acknowledge at the same time, that those grosser Faults that
are commonly observed in ordinary Travelers, would be much more inexcusable in
him; he having lived for some Years in the Country he writes of, his
Acquaintance was amongst intelligent Persons, who had lived there much longer;
he has been somewhat conversant with the Portuguese Authors, and has brought
away with him a Collection of such of them as are most esteemed; and out of
these last, he is ready to produce his Evidence, for such Passages in this
Piece, as are most likely to be called in question.

In relating that great Transaction, wherein His present Majesty's first Queen
had so large a share, he has taken the principal Matters of Fact, from the
Catastrophe de Portugal, written in Defense of the Party which got the
Vpper-hand; the Substance whereof, as the Writer pretends, was read before the
Three Estates of the Kingdom. It is true, that Reflections very different from
his, are frequently made here upon the very same Facts; The Author, on many
Occasions, as little approving of that Writers Sentiments, as he does of his
Style throughout the Book; which is that of a most passionate and furious
Declaimer, rather than a just Historian. In speaking of the Portuguese Affairs;
with relation to Rome, he has likewise made great use of the Public Acts of
the King, and the Estates, as also of the Conde da Eryceiras Portugal
Restaurado. He has also followed the same Noble Author, in what he relates
concerning the Negotiations with the Court of France. The Conde had
Opportunities to inform himself of these Matters at the best Hand; that is,
from the Reports and Letters of Public Ministers: His Lordship has indeed
given us in England great occasion to complain of him; but that may have been
for Reasons, which will never make him suspected of being much prejudiced
against either Rome, or France. Cardinal Mazarine's Conduct, in the Cause of
Portugal, at the Pirenees, is described from his own Letters. The Information
received by the Author, concerning the great part which the English had, in the
Victories obtained over the Spaniards, and in concluding the Peace, and
consequently in establishing the Portuguese Throne, was such, that he could
desire no better. He has taken some Particulars about the intended Match
between the late Infanta, and the Duke of Savoy, as it was transacted at Turin,
from the famous Gregorio Leti: But he has spoken dubiously of them; though if
that Writer be of any Credit, he may be believed, as to things done at Turin,
he having lived so long as he did in the Neighborhood. There are some things
likewise in the Chapter of Spain, borrowed from him, Leti pretending to a
Personal Acquaintance with the Duke of Giovinazzo. In the Chapter concerning
the Ministry, and elsewhere, he has made some use, and but little, of a Memoir
in French, which was handed about in Manuscript, at Lisbon, written, as 'twas
said, by a German, that was Secretary to the late Queen; but he is too severe
in his Censures, to be much followed by one that would not be thought
satirical. He has cause to fear, that his Account of the Customs and Taxes, is
neither so exact, nor so full, as he could wish, he being little acquainted
with those Matters; however, he showed it to one whose Business it was to know
them better, who did not discover to him any Error in it. Some may think, that
the Portuguese Money, is set against our English, at too low a Rate, the
Exchange, of late Years, having run much higher on the Portuguese side; but he
is assured by those that are more skilful than himself, that he has justly
reckoned it, according to the intrinsic Value. There is nothing material said,
concerning the Croisade Bull, that is not taken out of the Bull it self, and
the Papers published by the Commissary, by Authority from the Pope; this, and
another Bull, with some more Authentic Papers, should have been placed at the
End of the Book, had there been room for them: But they shall be forthcoming,
whenever it is thought convenient. The Transactions between Xavier, and her
late Majesty, have been related upon the Credit of the Authors mentioned on
that occasion. The Jesuits Address is faithfully translated only it was forgot
to give necessary Directions to the Compositor, to put Breaches in several
places, the Orator making a great many more Flourishes, to the like purpose
with those set down, but they are past over, lest he should appear tedious;
however, this Omission has occasioned little or no alteration in the Sense;
great care was taken in the Translation, not to pervert his Meaning, by the
least Turn of Expression, though in one Passage it cost some Pains to make him
speak English in modest Terms. The Relation of the Deceased Prince's
Investiture in the Universal Monarchy, is wholly Padre Vieira's own: It is
indeed very much contracted; but it is hoped, that his Sense is not much
obscured; and it is given, for the most part, in a literal Translation of his
own Words. The Reader may wonder to see this Father brought in upon the Stage
so often as he is; which, in truth, is so very often, that his Name is
sometimes suppressed: And some may think it unfair, to insist so much upon the
Whimsies of one Man, since from Relations of this kind, People commonly form
their Notions of the general Character and Genius of a whole Nation. But the
Author is far from being Conscious to himself of any disingenuous Dealing in
this respect; one great Reason why he thought fit to single out Padre Vieira,
from amongst several other of the famous Preachers in Portugal, whose Works are
now by him, was, because he would give for a Specimen, the very best of the
kind, as Padre Vieira is generally acknowledged to be by his Countrymen;
insomuch, that perhaps there never was a Preacher so universally, or so highly
approved of in Portugal, by all Orders and Degrees of Men; and the Reason
commonly given for his being so much esteemed is, because he was one of the
least guilty of those prodigious Extravagancies which Strangers are so much
astonished at in the Sermons of other Preachers; though the Truth is, one would
take that particular Instance now mentioned, to be both an Original, and a
Nonsuch.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Court of PORTVGAL, UNDER THE REIGN Of the Present KING, Dom
Pedro II.
THIS present Account of the Portuguese Court, is confined to the Royal Family,
and such of the Ministers as are supposed to have a more than ordinary Share in
the Direction of Affairs: Other Matters being reserved for a more General
Account of the Kingdom and Government.

The Subject of this, is commonly the most taken notice of, in Relations from
Foreign Countries; and will therefore be more enlarged upon than has been
usual in Works of a like Nature: For which, as it is hoped, the Dignity of the
Persons to be spoken of, and the Importance, or at least the Novelty of the
Matters to be related, may serve for an Excuse.

There will perhaps be occasion for some such Apology, in several of the
following Chapters; but if it be any where needless, it is certainly in the
first. The KING, since his being settled in the Government, having obtained a
Character in the World, that is so Fair in it self, and stands in so little
need of Shading, that none can with Reason think amiss of an Endeavor to draw
it at full Length, and to set it in a just Light.

Of the KING.
HIS Title is, The High and Mighty Prince, Dom PEDRO the Second, by the Grace
of GOD, King of Portugal, and of the Algarves, on this, and on the other side
of the Sea, in Africa; Lord of Guine, and of the Conquest, Navigation,
Commerce, of Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia; and of India, with an etc.

He was born the 26th of April, 1648. He took upon him the Government, with the
Title of Prince-Regent, the 23d of November, 1667; when King Dom Alfonso the
Sixth, his elder Brother, was Dethroned; and he succeeded to the Crown at the
Death of that King, which happened on the 12th of December, 1683.

He is of a robust and vigorous Constitution, tall of Person, somewhat above
the ordinary size, and proportionably big; of wonderful Strength, and great
Activity of Body, as appears still by the Proof he makes of both, at his
ordinary Exercises and Diversions. He is of a grave and comely Aspect, has
nothing of Haughtiness in his Looks; but on the contrary, such an Air of
Modesty, as may be thought unusual in Persons of his Rank: He appears somewhat
uneasy, when gazed upon by a Multitude; and one may discern a little Disorder
in his Countenance, when he is Speaking in Public, to such as he is not used
to. He wears a long black Perruque; and when he appears in Public, is always
habited in Black, with a Cloak, and long Lace-Band, which is the common Wear,
among People of any Fashion, about the Town. At other times he goes without a
Cloak, and in colored Clothes, made after the French Mode; unless it be whilst
a Pragmatica, prescribing the Fashion, is in force, (as he has several times
published Edicts to that purpose); for then the King's Clothes are made after
the Pattern he would have followed by his Subjects. 'Till English black Cloth
was allowed of, His Majesty usually wore Colchester-Bays.

This Prince is of a quick Apprehension, and a piercing Judgment, sensible,
thoughtful, and inclinable to Melancholy, which of late Years has grown much
upon him; upon what occasion, I cannot pretend to determine.

He is a very Religious Prince, being constantly observant of the Set-Times and
Seasons of Devotion: Is often heard, by those that are near him, saying over
his Ave-Maries, and Pater-Nosters, to himself. He shows a great Zeal for the
Conversion of Infidels to Christianity, and is at great Charges in sending out
Missionaries, and sometimes Ships on purpose for that end. Nor does he think it
below him, to concern himself in bringing over to the Romish Religion, such as
he has been taught to call Heretics, be the Persons never so mean. But above
all, he is exceeding charitable; and, as I have it from good Hands, expends
large Sums that way.

He is very temperate in his Diet, eats commonly alone, and sometimes (as they
say) sitting on the Floor, according to the ancient Custom of the Country;
(which the Women observe to this Day) with a flat piece of Cork under him,
seldom more than one Attendant waiting on him while he eats. His Meals are
extremely moderate, and provided as for a single Person. His constant Drink is
Water; for he never uses any strong Liquors. He has so great an Aversion to
Wine, that he does not only refrain from it himself but obliges all about him
to a like Abstinence. Such of the Nobility, or others, that have drunk Wine,
must keep from Court that Day: For His Majesty would discover them by the
Smell, and not fail to signify his Displeasure. Nor does he find it difficult
to make himself obeyed in this Point; People of this Country, Persons of
Quality more especially, and, indeed, all that have the least regard to their
Credit, being very shy of drinking Wine: And, I believe, there is no People in
Europe, less addicted, to that most inexcusable Vice of Drunkenness, than they
are.

I can say nothing in Commendation of this King's Temperance of another sort;
there being certain forbidden Pleasures, that are too much allowed of in
Portugal: In which, if common Report, among his Subjects, be to be credited, he
has indulged himself very much: And they say, he has not been wholly free from
the Inconveniences consequent to such a Practice. I never heard, that he has
had any declared Favorite of the Sex, unless it were one French-Woman; who had
that Title, for some time, at least, among the People: But those he has had
this Commerce with, are said to be of the lowest Rank (the French-Woman
excepted), and very many, and not all of the same Color. He has not, as yet,
acknowledged any unlawful Issue, save one Daughter, whose Mother was a mean
Person.

He has not been brought up to Letters; some say, we may use the Term in the
strictest Sense: But it is certain, the Public Dispatches are neatly signed
with his own Hand. However, considering the manner of his Education, he can
have but little of what we generally call Learning, yet he speaks Spanish very
well; and uses that Language as often as he is addressed to in it by
Foreigners. And as for his Native Tongue, it is said, That there is scarce a
Person in the Kingdom that speaks it more Properly, or with greater Elegance:
And he has so well improved himself by Practice, that Foreign Ministers do
much admire his great Capacity for Business. They find in their Addresses to
him; which, in this Court, they have frequent occasion to make; that he
comprehends with much ease, the Matter they propose, whatsoever it be; and
will, upon the Spot, discourse with them readily about it: He speaks always to
the Purpose, and answers to the Point; and if need be, will manage the Matter
with as great Dexterity as any of them.

Among other Inconveniences that attend his being unacquainted with Books, this
is none of the least; that instead of those more pleasant Amusements, that
delight and recreate the Mind, his Diversions consist most in Bodily Exercises;
or if the Time does not serve for them, when the Business of the Day is over,
He, instead of such Conversation as may be thought more fit to entertain a
Prince, admits into his Presence, not only the younger Nobility, but Persons of
a much inferior Rank, who divert His Majesty with the News and Intrigues of
the Town: And they say, That when any thing remarkable happens, or is talked of
among the People, of any Sort, or Nation, His Majesty is sure to have the Story
brought him at Night. But at Times of more Leisure, his ordinary Recreations
are Hunting, Shooting, Riding, and this last commonly at the Bull. Going a
Hunting, or Shooting, he has used to take his Queen along with him, to partake
of the Sport; and the Time between Christmas and Lent, is always set-apart for
these Diversions; to which end, the Court removes, at that Season, to
Salvaterra, a Country House in Alemtejo, about ten Leagues from Lisbon. But
above all other Recreations, the King takes a singular Delight in Riding; he
manages a Horse so well, that there is scarce a Master in his Kingdom better
skilled in the Art; though here almost every Body that is able to keep a Horse,
learns to Ride. His Majesty has a Court on purpose for this Exercise,
belonging to his Palace at Lisbon; but he indulges himself most at Alcantara, a
House of Pleasure, a little way out of Town; where he often enjoys himself at
his beloved Exercise of Riding with his Lance at the Bull, Performing with
admirable Dexterity and Conduct. Nor is he content to deal with that fierce
Animal on Horseback, but he frequently engages him a Foot; to this end he has
a small piece of Ground, enclosed with void Spaces in the Wall on every side,
big enough for His Majesty to escape through, when the Bull proves too hard for
him, as he sometimes does, to the endangering of his Person; though upon the
least appearance of a Discomposure, the Company is ready to come in to his
Rescue: And on such Occasions, one shall see the main Body of the Nobility
engaged about the Bull, every one seizing him by that Part he can first lay
hold on, whether it be by the Horns, the Neck, or the Tail. It Is true, the King
of late has not used this Exercise so frequently as formerly; not that he
finds any failure of his former Strength or Vigor, but because of the Queen's
great Tenderness for his Person: For Her Majesty would sometimes, when she
heard the King was thus employed, take Coach presently, and drive to Alcantara;
and upon her arrival the Sport was at an end.

The King never fails to be present at the public Bull-runnings all the three
Days, which is the time this Feast usually lasts: Perhaps his Compliance in
this, as that of Augustus was on the like Occasions, may be as much to please
the People as Himself: For the Portugueses, from the highest to the lowest, are
strangely fond of the Sport. It has been an ancient Custom, which is still
kept up, for the Chamber of Lisbon to entertain the People with this Sight, in
Honor to St. Anthony, the Son and Patron of the City; and, in Gratitude, for
the Birth of an Infant, a Pretense which the King of late has furnished them
with almost every Year: Though it is thought one Reason may be the raising of a
considerable Sum of Money, which they make by the Scaffolds that are built
about a very large Square, before the Palace, which are all sure to be filled;
for at the News of a Bull-running, the People come flocking in from all parts
of the Country round about. The King has a fine Balcony built for him out of
one of the Palace-Windows, where he sits all the time with his Queen, and the
young Princes, attended by a Nobleman; who receives his Orders, and delivers
them out at another Window, for the Conduct of the Cavalier, and the Management
of the Bulls. His Majesty, though he sits composed all the while, yet is so
intent upon the Sport, that he is sometimes heard by those in the Seats under
him, applauding the Cavalier, when he has given a lucky Stroke; and one that
comes off with Credit, shall the next Day be received by him in the most kind
and obliging manner, and may depend afterward on his Favor.

But there lies a great Complaint against His Majesty on this occasion: That
he, for his own private Diversion, abates much of the Satisfaction the People
would otherwise take: For before the Bulls appear in Public, the King, on
pretense of trying what Metal they are made of, will have them to Alcantara,
where they are commonly so harrass'd out, that very few of them will make head
against the Cavalier; and when a sprightly Bull appears, that is likely to make
them Sport, and do Mischief, the King will sometimes order him to be taken in
again, and reserved for his own use: This sets the People a murmuring. A happy
People, were this the greatest Grievance they had to complain of! And, in
truth, it seems to be one of the greatest they can lay to their King's Charge,
or that appears to him to be in his Power to redress.

For though the Opinions of Men are various concerning the Cause and Manner of
his first taking upon him the Government, yet it is generally agreed, that in
the Administration thereof, he has all along shown himself to be most tenderly
careful of his Peoples Welfare, and in his whole Conduct, to have highly
deserved the Character that is given him, of a truly just and good Prince. I
confess, it would be somewhat difficult, to reconcile to this Character, some
former Transactions, wherein his Name was much made use of; but then it must be
considered, that while those things, which are most liable to Censure, were
transacted, he was very young, and in the hands of others. But in what relates
to the Administration of the Government, I find, upon the exactest Enquiry I
could make, People of all Parties to be generally agreed in their Opinions
concerning him; and in Portugal they take as great a Liberty in speaking their
Minds of their Superiors, as in any other Country whatsoever: But they have
here so high an Esteem for their King, that if they blame any thing in his
Conduct, it is his not making use of his great Power, so often as they could
wish; they think he pays too great a Deference to his Counselors, and to these
they impute all the Hardships they suffer. The same thing is taken Notice of by
Foreigners, and reckoned to be the Cause of any false Steps this Court may have
taken, inconsistent with the Honor and true Interests of the Crown. But it is
a Fault the wisest Men are guilty of, to have too great a distrust of
themselves. And this King, they say, is persuaded to do nothing of Importance,
without the Advice and Concurrence of his Ministers, as thinking it the safest
Course he can take for the Discharge of his Conscience.

He is a Religious Observer of Justice, and has thereby delivered his Kingdom
from many great Disorders, that it before labored under. Robberies on the
Highway are now seldom, or never heard of, notwithstanding the universal
Poverty that appears throughout the Country; and it is said, that before this
Reign, 'twas unsafe for any to be abroad in the Evening, about, and within the
City it self.

Murders are not near so frequent now as formerly, the King growing every Day
more and more severe against the Guilty: And in truth, there was great occasion
for it, Crimes of this Nature being very lightly made of in this Country, if
committed in a Fray, or upon the slightest Provocation: A former Grudge, though
of old standing, was used to be taken for a justifiable Excuse, even when the
Murder was committed in the most cowardly and treacherous manner; the Criminal
was acquitted, or sued out his Pardon of Course, or fled to Sanctuary; and
being once there, procured a Carta de Seguro, which is a Protection given by
the Government, for one that has the Privilege of Sanctuary, to appear abroad
and solicit his Cause; whereby he has an opportunity given him to compound
with his Prosecutors, or by other means to take off, or elude the Pursuit of
Justice. But now Cartas de Seguro are more rarely granted, and Criminals are
oftentimes forced from Sanctuary. Such Order is taken for preserving the Peace,
that a Man may pass through the City at any time of Night, without meeting with
the least Affront or Disturbance: Formerly the City was much infested, and
great Disorders committed by Night-Walkers of all Ranks and Orders, from those
of the first Quality, down to the very Friars. It is reported of an old Porter,
belonging to a certain Convent, that he uses to tell with Regret, how mightily
the Time are altered, from what they were in his Days; when a Dozen, or more,
Friars, of his Convent, would sally out in a Night upon Adventures: And there
must be something in it, that there goes a common Saying among the People, That
it is equally dangerous to deal with a Friar by Night, as with a Fidalgo by
Day. The Reason usually given for it is: That in a Night-Scuffle the Friar will
be sure to stand as stoutly to it, because he is not known, as a Fidalgo would
in the Daytime because he is. But now all things are still and quiet, the
Clatterings of Swords and Targets, which formerly used to be ever and anon
disturbing Peoples Rest, are seldom heard; except it be on such Nights, when
People of all Sorts and Sexes, are let loose to visit the Churches; but those
are Times of Indulgence, and they take a Liberty then to commit all manner of
Wickedness.

The Fidalgo's (a Title common to such as are of Noble Families) who used to
look upon themselves as above the Law, or beyond its reach, are now in a great
measure reduced to order, Justice has its Course among them, as well as the
meanest Subjects. Elderly People represent them as a sort of petty Tyrants,
exercising with great Barbarity, a kind of Despotick Power, over the Lives, and
all that belonged to those about them. But if there were any Grounds for such a
Character, this King's Government can never sufficiently be commended, who has
wrought so great a Reformation among them, that there may be found, at this
Day, as Noble Instances of Humanity, and Courtesy, in Portugal, as in any part
of Europe.

Three times a Week the King gives Audience to his Subjects, Tuesdays and
Thursdays to all in general, that desire it; Saturdays to his Nobility, and
Officers of State in particular: And this is the Morning's-work of each Day. On
the Days of general Audience, the meanest Subject may have free Access to the
King, whether it be to acquaint him of their Grievances, to beg his Charity, or
Requerer Servicos, as they call it; that is, to petition for a Pension on
pretense of Service; and Service is pretended, not only by those that have done
any thing for the Advantage of the Public, or the Crown; but likewise by such
as have been for any time in Employment; which they think entitles them to a
Pension, or a better Place. His Majesty hears all with great Attention and
Patience, will let the Petitioner perceive he understands his Case, and will
remember him when he comes again, and few part from his Presence dissatisfied.

The current Money of this Kingdom was so miserably clipped, that it was
diminished to near half the Value; as appears by an Order made by the
Government, That no Pieces of Eight should pass, that weighed less than four
Rials and a half: But now it is all reduced to a just Standard; to which end,
it being found necessary to Re-coin all the Money, both Gold and Silver, the
King, for the Ease of the poorer sort, took the Loss of the Silver upon himself.

The Public Revenues are managed to the best Advantage: The Accounts, which
were formerly all in Confusion, are said to be reduced into an exact Order, and
kept with great Regularity. The Customs, and Imposts, are let out to Farm to
Merchants; the Contracter is he that will bid most, Native, or Foreigner: The
King, it seems, thinking, that Merchants, who know best how to deal with one
another, can afford to give him more than he could make of them himself; and
his Customs are said to be much improved by this Method: For the King takes
Care to make his Advantage of the Farmer's Diligence. The Contract never
exceeds the Term of Three Years; which expired, an exact Account is taken from
the Entries in the Custom-House, of the Gains that have been made, and regard
had thereto at the next Auction; and the Price, through the Emulation of the
Bidders, is often raised much higher than was looked for.

A Course not unlike this is taken, when the King has occasion to furnish his
Magazines with Stores, or wants any Foreign Commodities; of which Public
Notice is given to the Merchants, and the Bargain is made with him that will
take care to procure them at the lowest Rate. The King is so punctual and
speedy in his Payments, that the Merchants are encouraged to deal with him for
little Profit; so that they are never wanting to under-bid each other: And I
have been told, that sometimes the King has generously put a stop to them, when
in the Heat of Contention they have been descending below a just Price; His
Majesty, it seems, thinking it uncoming him, to take Advantage at other Men's
Follies. By this means he has his Stores always at the best hand, and no
Underofficers being employed in buying them in, he never suffers by their
Knavery, nor can he be cheated by the Merchant who delivers them into his
Magazines; for it is always a Condition in the Bargain, That a fair Trial shall
be made of the Goods, and no more paid for, than will bear the Proof.

The Revenues of the Kingdom are so very great, that did they all come into the
King's Hands, he would be one of the richest Princes in Europe, as will appear
by the following Chapter. But so many Assignments are made upon almost every
Branch of them, (the King's private Patrimony, as Duke of Braganca, not
excepted) so many Pensions paid to particular Persons and Families, that they
seem almost wholly diverted from the Public Treasury. This extravagant
Alienation of the Revenues, was set on foot, it is thought, by the Spanish
Kings; and that in prosecution of their Design, to reduce Portugal into the
form of a Province; they supposing, that if the Rents of the Crown were
dissipated, Portugal could no longer subsist as an independent Kingdom; as not
having wherewithal to support the Government, or encourage any great Men to
head them, in case the People were disposed to a Revolt, while the Royal
Revenues being divided among private Families, might oblige all that shared in
the Spoils, to adhere to the Castilian Interest. It has been often laid to the
Charge of the Three Philips, That they did their utmost to weaken the Crown of
Portugal, while they had it in possession; they are accused of little less,
than consenting to the Hollanders seizing upon the Portuguese Conquests in the
East and West Indies; and all in pursuance of that Maxim of Philip the Second,
That it is much better to be Master of a ruined and quiet Kingdom, than one
that is rich, powerful, and turbulent. John the Fourth, this King's Father,
when from Duke of Braganca, he was made King of Portugal, by the Nobility and
People, thought fit to accept of the Crown with all its Encumbrances, and it
was not for his Interest to make himself so many Enemies as must have been
impoverished, had he reunited the alienated Revenues to the Crown: So that he
was fain to maintain his Government, and carry on the War, by extraordinary
Imposts upon the People; these have been since increased, and the Assignments
multiplied. And this King, though perhaps there never was a more frugal Prince in
his Domestic Management; (for, they say, he knows what every part of his
wearing Apparel costs him, and will strive as hard as the poorest Customer to
beat down the Price); yet by giving way to his generous Inclinations to do good
to others, he has so impoverished himself, that he is hard put to it to bear
the Charges of the Government; which, as it is thought, could scarce subsist,
were any other but himself at the Helm, especially at this Juncture, when he is
at such extraordinary Expenses in making new Levies, and equipping out his
Fleet. The People are already so charged with Imposts, that nothing further can
be expected from them: For though they have had great Advantages by a free Trade,
during the late War; yet the Money being conveyed out of the Kingdom, by such
ways as shall be mentioned in another place, their Condition is not much mended
thereby. That this is the present Case of the Kingdom, will appear from two
Instances of a very fresh Date: The King is, as all the World knows, at this
time, putting his Kingdom in a Posture of Defense; to this end, among other
things, it was thought convenient to secure St. Julian's Castle, which stands
upon the Bar of the Tagus, and guards the Entrance into the River, and is, in
effect, the main Bulwark of Lisbon; or rather, the Key to the whole Kingdom. It
is strongly built after the Modern Way, and well fortified with Guns; but has
this Disadvantage, that it may be commanded on one side from a Rising Ground
that is near it. It was therefore debated in Council, Whether it were cheapest
to level that Ground, or to raise a small Fort upon it? But after the Place had
been surveyed, it was at last concluded, That both Ways were too chargeable,
either of them requiring a greater Expense than the State could well bear, and
so neither way was taken. From this Instance, which came from a good Hand, it
appears, that the Exchequer must run very low at this time. And that the People
can afford but small Supplies, will appear from hence: The King, to enable
himself to augment and maintain his Army, summoned the Cortes, or Parliament,
to meet at Lisbon, the First of December, 97: All that he demanded of them, was
an Additional Revenue of 600000 Crowns; a Crown in Portugal, is scarce worth
Half a Crown English. The Parliament considering the Occasion, could not but
acknowledge the Request to be reasonable; but then, how to raise the Money, was
a matter of insuperable difficulty: In short, they sat down, as has been said,
the First of December 97, and were sitting in July 98, and were considering all
the while, of Ways and Means, and had made no Progress in the Affair; but, at
last, they referred it to the King, to lay the Tax as he should judge
convenient: For their parts, though none could be insensible of the King's great
want of a Supply, yet they found the People so burdened already, that they knew
not how to lay on them any further Weight, without danger of their sinking
under it. The King, as has been reported since, has laid the Tax upon Tobacco;
which, the Merchant thinks, is the ready way to destroy that Trade, and
consequently the best and clearest part of the Revenue.

The most considerable Transactions of this Reign, will fall under some of the
following Heads, and therefore I have nothing further to add in this Chapter;
but that the King of Portugal is an Absolute Prince, having the Legislative, as
well as the Executive Power in his hands: For the Royal Edicts have the Force
of Laws, and a Collection of these, is much the same thing there, as our
Satute-Book is in England; when these fail, the Civil Law takes place. There
are indeed certain Constitutions chiefly relating to the Succession, called the
Laws of Lamego, made by the Cortes at the first Institution of the Government,
which cannot be dispensed with, but by Consent of the Three Estates. It belongs
likewise to the Cortes, to lay Taxes upon the People, though certain Imposts that
are now upon Flesh and Wine, and were given for a limited time, have been
continued, by the King's Authority, and the Pope's together; the manner in
which this was done, shall be told in the following Chapter.

Of the Public Revenues, and the Forces of the Crown, by Land and Sea.
BEfore I speak of the Revenues, etc. it is requisite to give an Account of the
Money current in this Kingdom. All considerable Sums are here reckoned by
Millreis, i. e. Thousand of Reis; sometimes by Crusado's, or Crowns, which
consist of 400 Reis a piece. Though great Payments are commonly made in Spanish
Pieces of Eight, which are reckoned at 750 Reis. There is no such Piece as a
Millrei, nor indeed a Crown at present; for that which was last coined for a
Crown-piece, is now raised to 480 Reis. Lesser Coyns in Silver, are a Teston,
100 Reis; a half Teston, 50 Reis; a Vintain, 20 Reis. The Gold Coin called the
Moeda de Ouro, contains 4800 Reis, of which there are likewise Half and
Quarter-pieces.

The Portuguese Money, according to the intrinsic Value, answers to our
English Money thus: s. d. q. A Millrei, i. e. 1000 Reis, to 05 10 00 A Crown,
400 Reis, 02 04 00 A Teston, 100 Reis, 00 07 00 A half Teston, 50 Reis, 00 03
02 A Vintain, 20 Reis, 00 01 01 The Moeda of Gold, 4800 Reis, makes 28 s.

The Revenues arise chiefly from Customs, Taxes, Monopolies, Rents belonging to
the Orders of Knighthood, and Moneys raised purely by the Pope's Bulls.

The Customs paid here, are excessively great; all Foreign Commodities,
excepting some few sorts of small Bulk, and easy Conveyance, pay no less than
23 per Cent, 20 for the ordinary Custom, and 3 for a certain Duty called the
Consulado; which last is likewise paid for all Goods exported, whether by
Natives, or Foreigners. They are indeed set at a favorable Valuation, except
Fish from Newfoundland, which pays 22 per Cent in Specie. Goods brought hither,
in order only to be transported to other Countries, pay 4 per Cent. But it is
believed, that nothing of all this comes to the King, or indeed to the Public,
the Consulado excepted, which is appropriated to the building of Ships, and
buying in of Stores.

The Taxes are 7 Reis per Pound, upon all Flesh brought into the Market, and as
much per Canada upon Wine, sold in by Retail (few People here keep any in their
Houses): A Canada holds something less than Three Pints. Fresh Fish, which is
caught here in great abundance in the River, and on the Seacoasts, and is the
best part of the Peoples Food, pays no less than 47 per Cent; and that exacted
with great Rigor, and paid commonly in Specie. At the Sale of Lands, Houses,
Cattle of all sorts, and indeed of almost every thing that is known to be
bought and sold, 10 per Cent of the Price goes to the King.

A great part of these Taxes were granted by the Three Estates in Cortes, to
King John the Fourth, in 1641, and at other times, toward the Charges of the
War with Spain; but after the Peace was made; the Cortes, in the Year 1674,
raised them to what they are at present, by giving the Prince a Supply of a
Million of Crowns per Annum; one half whereof was to be raised by an Additional
Impost upon Flesh and Wine: But this was then given only for Six Years; yet it
has been paid ever since. The Court, in the Year 1675, thought convenient to
procure the Pope's Consent to this last Impost, that the Clergy might have
leave to pay their share; because (as it was given for a Reason) the last
Lateran Council, and other Canons of their Church, had made it unlawful for any
Prince to receive Tribute from the Clergy, without the Pope's leave, even though
it were voluntarily offered by themselves; as this had been by the
Ecclesiastical, as well as the two other Estates in Cortes. And since that
time, at the end of every Sixth Year, a Breve has been procured from Rome, for
continuing the Taxes for Six Years longer; therein the Pope impowers the Nuncio
residing at Lisbon, to use his Apostolical Authority, in obliging the Clergy to
pay them. This Breve is of course published in Portugal; and though it chiefly
regards the Clergy, yet it is not unlikely but it may be designed to induce the
People likewise to pay their Taxes quietly, without putting the King, and the
Three Estates of the Realm, to the trouble of meeting together in Cortes: For
it must needs be a great Argument among them, that the thing is but just and
reasonable, since the Holy Father consents to, and approves of it; and it
weighs much with them, no doubt, when they consider why his Holiness grants the
Breve; which, as it is declared in the Narrative of it, is, The Exchequers being
exhausted by the vast Expenses that the Crown has been continually at, for the
maintenance and propagation of the Catholic Faith, in the Dominions abroad,
especially in Brazil, and the East Indies, where the Dutch Heretics, and other
Infidels, were endeavoring to extirpate it: Which Reason is said to continue
still, or rather, to become more strongly urgent every time there is occasion
for a new Breve. The Pope gives Commission to his Nuncio, to enquire into the
Truth of this, and other Allegations; as that the Three Estates, the Clergy
more especially, have given their Consent; the Nuncio cites the King's
Procurator before him, and puts him upon the Proof: He shows, that the Nobility
and People have agreed to the continuance of the Taxes, because they still pay
them; and that the whole Body of the Clergy are likewise willing, because the
Bishops have given their Consent; which (as he pretends to prove withal)
comprehends that of all the rest. But it does not appear how he makes good the
Main Point, viz. The Danger that the Catholic Faith is in from the Dutch
Heretics, and other Infidels. As for the Dutch, they renewed their Peace with
Portugal in the Year 1669, and have kept it ever since. However, the Nuncio is
entirely satisfied with the Proofs, whatever they be; and thereupon gives order
for the Execution of the Breve, requiring Obedience thereto from all Persons,
Secular as well as Ecclesiastical, upon pain of the greater Excommunication,
and 500 Crowns, applicable to the Reverend Chamber Apostolic, as the Words of
the Order run.

Under the Title of Monopolies, we may reduce the other part of the Supply
granted at the same time; which was an Impost upon Tobacco, made into Snuff; by
which, 500000 Crowns per Annum, were designed to be raised. In order to make
this Sum, the King had the whole Trade of Snuff put into his own Hands; and it
became almost as great a Crime in Portugal, for any to Make Snuff for
themselves, as it is with us in England to Coin Money, though People almost
universally take it here. This Monopoly was let out to Farm to the Duke of
Cadaval, the principal Person in the Kingdom, next His Majesty; and it was so
managed, that it is said the King received much more than double the Value of
what it was given for: The Tobacco, as it come from Brazil, was bought up for
the King, at a Teston and half, or less, per Pound; and sold out in Snuff for
16 or 20, and sometimes more, the best, and 14 the more ordinary sort. But it is
said, that this Trade is now laid aside, and an Equivalent, with the Advantage
of 600 000, taxed upon Tobacco in Rolls. The King has likewise in his Hands, a
great part of the Trade from Foreign Plantations; as that of Elephants Teeth,
from Africa; of Wood, from Brazil: Besides, great Duties upon Sugar; and of all
Goods coming from the East Indies. This last Trade is indeed but of little
worth; for he has several times offered to make it over to a Company of
Merchants, but could never get a sufficient Number of Subscribers.

The King is likewise Grand Master of the Orders of Knighthood, in his Kingdom,
and has the disposal of all the Commenda's belonging to them, viz. of the Order
of Christ; which, in Portugal, succeeded to that of the Knights-Templers, and
is still in possession of their Lands, and has 454 Commenda's belonging to it.
2dly, The Order of St. Jago, which has 60 Commenda's, and those of
considerable Profit. 3dly, Of Avis, which has 43, and these esteemed very
rich. Besides, the King has the disposal of the Commenda's in his Kingdom,
that belong to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, commonly called, the
Knights of Malta; the chief of which, viz. the Priory of Crato, accounted one
of the richest in the World, is at present bestowed upon Dom Francisco, the
King's Second Son. I reckon these among the King's Revenues, because they are
put to the same use, as the greatest part, by much, of his other Incomes are,
viz. given away in Pensions, or Rewards, for Services.

But the Kings of Portugal, have, for this last Century, made use of one
extraordinary way to raise Money; which, among all Ways and Means, perhaps,
has never been thought of by any other Temporal Prince, the Kings of Spain
excepted, who first brought it up in this Kingdom; and this is, by selling
Indulgences to the People, for the Pardon of their Sins, and the Deliverance of
their own, or their Relations, Souls, out of Purgatory. The Popes having been,
for some time, shamed out of this Trade, by the Noise that Luther made in the
World, the Kings of Spain thought fit to take it up; and have made more Money
of it, with less Scandal. To this end, Philip the Second, after he had got
Possession of the Crown of Portugal, obtained Bulls of Pope Gregory the 14th,
in the Year 1591; which, since that time, have been published almost every Year
in Portugal: And the Profits arising from them, are become a part of the
Standing Revenues of the Crown: And, indeed, they may well be accounted a very
considerable part of them. The Substance of these three Bulls, are all
contained in one, which carries for Title, The Bull of the Holy Croisade: But
they are retailed out to the People, under the Names of, The Bull for the
Living: The Bull of Composition: And, The Bull for the Dead. They have their
general Name from the Croisade, as if they were granted for carrying on the
Holy War; and were we to judge of the Levies, I mean of Money, that are here
made, one would think that War was still prosecuted, with as great Vigor, as
it was 500 Years ago. It Is true indeed, that the Kings of Portugal, even since
that Expeditions to the Holy Land were no more talked of, have, for several
Ages, been engaged in continual Wars with the Infidels: They had the Mores, for
some time, in the Bowels of the Kingdom; and having driven them out, followed
them into Barbary, and conquered a great part of that Country, and have some
Footing there still; and the Popes would, sometimes, to help them out in the
Charges of the War, allow 'em the like Indulgences as were granted in the
famous Croisades. Yet, in those times, this was done very sparingly, and as an
extraordinary Favor. But since the Portugueses have had little or nothing to
do with the Mores, and have now only the single Fortress of Mazagam, to
maintain in Barbary, the Popes are become more profuse of their Graces. The
Croisade is published every Year, and Pardons, and Indulgences, more ample, by
far, than were ever granted before, are now offered to all that shall
contribute toward the Defense of the Places, which the King is supposed to
hold in Africa. It would be a tedious Task, and not proper for this place, to
give an Account of all the Privileges granted to the Purchasers of these
Bulls; I shall only therefore mention some few, that seem most conducive to the
End for which the Bulls were obtained. The Bull for the Living, grants to the
Purchaser, a most plenary (the word is Plenissima) Indulgence, and a complete
Remission of all his Sins, and of the Pains which he should have suffered for
them in Purgatory. These are the Words of the Absolution to be pronounced upon
him after Confession; and this Pardon is, in all respects, as full as if he had
gone to Rome for it, in the Year of Jubilee: And one that has bought this
Bull, may, if he pleases, after six Months, for a single Vintain, have all
renewed to him over again; so that as the Commissary deputed by his Holiness,
to inform the People of these Matters, says, Here are Two Jubilees granted in
One Year.

By Virtue of this Bull, any Man in Portugal, may have all the Benefits of the
Stations at Rome, the visiting a certain Church out of Devotion, at a Set-time,
is what they call a Station there. Stations are made at several Churches of
that City, within, and without the Walls in their Turns, almost all the Year
about; but chiefly in the time of Lent, a plenary Indulgence is gained at every
one of them; and there are eight Days in the Year, on every one of which a Soul
is to be drawn out of Purgatory.

Now one that has this Bull, if he will but visit any five Churches,
wherever they are; or if there are not so many in the place where he is, but
five Altars; or for want of them, the same Altar five times, shall gain the
same Indulgence, as if he had made the Stations at Rome: Or, if he please, he
may, Per modum suffragii, apply the Benefit of them to Souls in Purgatory. And
the Commissary says, That regularly this Bull is of more benefit than a Mass
said at a Priviledg'd Altar: And yet, they say, That shall draw a Soul out of
Purgatory at once.

Another great Convenience gained by this Bull, is, that a Man by Virtue
thereof may commute for any Vows that he shall make, except only the Vows of
Chastity, of Religious Orders, or Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. As for all other
Vows, let them be never so solemnly made, though they are confirmed with Oaths;
and even with additional Vows, that the Party will never commute, nor seek a
Dispensation for them, one that has the benefit of this Bull, may, for a small
Sum of Money, given toward maintaining the Garrisons in Africa, free himself
from the Obligation; nay, he may commute for what they call an imperfect Vow of
Chastity, such as not to marry; not to sin with a single Woman, or another
Man's Wife, or any particular Person, and some other things which the
Commissary has set down likewise, too long, or not fit to be repeated. He may
also commute for a previous Vow that he may have made to take that Vow of
Religious Orders, and the Circumstances of a Vow of going to Jerusalem, may be
commuted for likewise; such as making the Journey on foot, begging all the way,
or going without much Company.

But these excepted, there is hardly any Case to be imagined, wherein a Man
has occasion to make a solemn Promise; but if he will consult an Epitome of
the Privileges gained by the Bull, which the Commissary has set forth by
Authority Apostolic, he may know what he is to pay in Commutation of his Vow.
To mention some few Instances, as they are set down in that Piece: Suppose a
Person should vow, That he would hear two Masses in a Day, or maintain a poor
Man for a Day, remain chaste for a Day, or observe Conjugal Chastity for six
Days; not to Play, take Snuff, or drink Wine for a Month, or not speak to any
Body for two Days. Or, if a young Woman shall make a Vow to for bear eating
Chalk, Earth, or Red Clay (such as the Portuguese Earthen Ware is made of) for
a Week. In every one of these Cases, the Rich are to pay six Vintains, the
Middle-Sort four, the Poorer two, the Poorest one: And this Rate is to be
observed for the time the Vow was to last. As, put the Case, a Man had bound
himself to fast every Saturday in a Year; if he be taxed at the lowest Rate,
his Commutation-Money will come to 1040 Reis. But if he be unable to pay the
whole Sum, he may be admitted to compound after this manner: Suppose the Person
makes his Vow at fifteen Years of Age, this Vow, according to some Doctors,
would oblige him till he came to be of sixty, some say 'till seventy. The
Commissary takes the middle Number, viz. 65, whence take 15, and there remains
50 Years of Obligation to fast, and the Commutation-Money would come to 120
Millreis; for all which, according to the Rule of Composition, of which I shall
speak anon, he is to pay but 2 Mill, 800 Reis: And if he cannot afford this, he
may compound but for 10 Years; and then he will be obliged to pay but three
Testons: But it is the securest way, says the Commissary, to pay the whole
Sum, if the Person can afford it; at least, to pay for ten Years: But if he
cannot do that, his Composition will secure him in all Cases, wherein he cannot
conveniently fast.

One that has made a Vow of Chastity (supposing it to be commutable) if he
would be freed from the Obligation, is to pay a Vintaine a Day at the lowest
rate, which will amount to 7 Mill 300 Reis, if the Vow be for Life, according
to the rate of 10 Years purchase, it will amount to 73 Millreis. If he be
unable to pay this Sum, he must compound: Now, since People live sometimes to
fourscore, he (supposing the Vow made at 15) has 65 Years to account for, the
Commutation of which amounts to 474 Mill 500 Reis. According to the Rule of
Composition (to be explained presently), for the first 200 Millreis, he may
compound for 6 Mill, and for the remainder at 10 per Cent, which makes 27 Mill,
450 Reis; and in all it comes to 33 Mill 450: but in case the Man be poor, and
unable to pay, he may compound for 10 Years only, and come off for fifteen
Testons: But this easy Composition is allowed only in case of Conditional
Vows, and that before the Condition be fulfilled; as for instance: Suppose one
in a Fit of Sickness shall make a Vow, That if he recovers, he will turn Friar:
If he compounds before his Recovery, he shall be admitted to this easy
Composition; but if he delays 'till the Condition be fulfilled, that is, 'till
after his Recovery, his Commutation-Money shall be doubled. All that is
required of the Party, in this Business of Commutation, is, for him to come and
put his Money into a certain Cash Chest, which is called the Vow-Box; but he
must be sure to put it in with his own Hands, or take care that it be done by
some other Person, his Confessor excepted; for the Confessor is not to finger
the Money upon pain of Excommunication, though it be in order to put it into the
Vow-Box. All that he has to do in the Case, is to instruct his Penitent, when,
and how he is to make his Commutation; and he becomes guilty of mortal Sin,
says the Commissary, if he sets the Commutation at an Under-rate. These are
some of the Privileges granted by this Bull; and, as if they were not enough
to oblige People to buy it, it suspends and derogates from all other
Indulgences and Privileges whatsoever, making them of no validity to those
that shall neglect to take out this: And to make it more necessary, and which
may be a great Cause, why every Body buys it, it grants a License to eat Eggs,
Butter, Cheese, and all other Lacticinia, in time of Lent. There are some
Diocesses in Portugal, where, by ancient Custom, it was before lawful to eat
those things in Lent; but the Bull is nevertheless necessary there, than
elsewhere: For it suspends, as I have said, all such Privileges; so that the
Custom becomes unlawful, when the Bull is published. It likewise gives leave to
eat Flesh upon Fast-Days, all the Year about; in case the Spiritual and Bodily
Physician shall think it convenient. The Spiritual Physician is any licensed
Confessor, though he gives his Judgment out of Confession; and for the other, the
Opinion of an experienced old Woman, may, by Virtue of this Bull, be taken in
the case. But it is to be observed, that the Bull holds good only 'till the
next Publication, when another must be taken out; and it is published every
Year.

The Price of it, to those that are worth 400 Millreis a Year, which way soever
it arises, is three Testons: Such as are worth 200 per Ann. pay two Testons;
the Wife paying always as much as the Husband: All those that are above seven
Years old, pay 4 Vintains, excepting these that follow, who pay but two
Vintains: Young People that are maintained by their Parents, Laborers, and
Journey-men, that live only on their Wages, Beggars, Common Soldiers, Widows,
and single Women that live on Alms; Priests, that have nothing but their Masses
to maintain them; or such of them as are Foreigners, or go begging about the
Kingdom, all these pay but two Vintains. Under the same Class are reckoned such
as have Houses of their own, yet live miserably; Cobblers, or Botchers, that
cannot set up a Stall, but go about for Work; Jesuits professed, begging Friars,
unless they have somewhat allowed them by their Friends, Pilgrims, and
Prisoners: But then all Journey-men that can get two Testons a Day; Priests
that live with their Parents, Servants to Persons of Quality, whose Wages come
to 40 Millreis, must pay 4 Vintains.

So that the Tax we see is universal, and being constant, must amount to a
considerable Revenue; and the two other Bulls must mightily increase the King's
Profits: Supposing the People believe any thing of Popery, as certainly they do
in Portugal, as much, or more, than in any Country in the World The Bull, for
the Dead is sold to all People alike, at the same Price, viz. for half (...)
Teston: But then it is of no benefit, but to such as have taken out the former.
By this a Man may apply all the Indulgences and Remissions contained in the
other to any Soul in Purgatory, let him choose which he will; and shall, Per
modum suffragii, obtain a relaxation of the Pains, to which that Soul stands
exposed by the Divine Justice, (they are the Commissary's words). More than
this, he may make a conditional Application of the Bull to any Soul, with a
Reserve, That if that Soul shall have no occasion for it, the Benefit shall go
to another; and if that be got out already, to another, and so on as far as he
pleases; as for Instance: I take out a single Bull, for the Soul of my Friend
Francisco, with this Condition, That if he be gone to Heaven, I take it then
for Pedro; and, in case he does not want it, for Diego, etc. but he must always
determine the Application to some certain Person; or he may say, It shall go to
him that stands most, or to him that stands least in need of it that is, to him
whose Turn it would be to go first or last out of Purgatory. But if he shall
give it indefinitively to whomsoever God pleases, the Bull loses its Virtue,
for want of a determinate Application. And the Commissary declares, That one
and the same Person, may deliver as many Souls as he pleases, at the rate of
half a Teston per Soul; for each of them he is to receive an Extract of the
Bull, with this following Certificate at the end of it, subscribed by the
Commissary: For as much as you N. N. have given half a Teston, the Soul for
which your Intention was to give the said Alms, remains free from the Pains of
Purgatory. Lourenco Pires Caravalho. But then the said N. N. must see that the
Money be good: For if he, through mistake, should think it so, and it proves
naught, the Bull, as the Commissary declares, and the Casuists agree, will be
good for nothing. This Bull may be taken out several times for one and the same
Person; which, in my Opinion, should make a body question its Efficacy, and
doubt of the Infallibility of that Determination of Pope Leo the Tenth,
concerning Indulgences, that Tantum valent quantum sonant. But however, if it
be renewed often, it will increase the King's Incomes; and therefore the
Commissary thinks it advisable that a fresh one should be taken out once every
Year for the same Soul, and there can be no great loss in so doing, by reason
of the conditional application; and by this Means the King comes to have a
constant Revenue from the Dead, as well as from the Living, which goes
increasing every Year. It is wholesome advice, says the Commissary, for a
Person on his Deathbed to recommend to his Friends, the taking of it out for
him, and the best time is as soon as the Breath is gone out of his Body;
however, says he and the Casuists, it will have the same effect at one time as
another; And I believe they speak their Minds in this. It is Customary to give
the Bull to the dead Corpse to carry it with him to the Grave; and I have
frequently seen it tucked under his Girdle (for the Dead are buried here in the
Habit of St. Francis, without Coffins.) But the Learned I must own, do not
think this to be at all necessary, but rather condemn it as an Abuse.

The Bull of Composition seems to be no less profitable to the Exchequer, than
either of the former. By virtue of this, such as have made certain unlawful
Gains, upon paying down a small part of them, may, with a safe Conscience, keep
the rest to themselves. By it Ecclesiastics may compound for the Profits of
their Benefices, which they receive when they have fallen from their Rights to
them, either by neglect to say their Offices, or by lying under Censures: And
this Bull is so accommodated to all sorts of People, that it is of singular use
to Traders of what kind soever they be, Usurers, Lawyers, Officers of Justice,
Trustees, Gamesters, Rooks, Thieves, Prostitutes: These are all of them, in
express, or equivalent Terms, admitted to Composition in the Commissary's
Explication of the Bull, as in a word, are all such in general that have
occasion to make unlawful Gains; the Merchant who puts off Dammaged Goods,
without discovering the Fault to the Buyer, or to enhance the Price pretends
they are of one Country, when they come frem another; One that mixes good and
bad Wares together, as Corn, for instance, that has been putrified, with that
which is sound, or that puts his Corn into a moist place to make it swell; such
as sell by false Weights and Measures, Gold and Silver-Smiths that put too much
Alloy into their Works; Apothecaries, who, that they may not be known to want
any Druggs that are called for, put others in their stead; Extortioners,
whether by way of Usury, or that taking Advantage from their Neighbors
Necessity, use to buy things for less than a just Price. All these are admitted
to Composition for their ill-gotten Gains, in case they are uncertain as to the
particular Persons to whom Restitution ought to be made; the same is to be said
concerning Officers of Justice, Advocates, Witnesses, Notaries, who take more
than their just Fees, or who appear in bad Causes.

There is a very commendable Practice among Trading-People in Portugal, to set
aside some part of their Estates for Pious Uses, by way of Reparation for
Wrongs they may have done, through inadvertency in the Hurry of Business. But
that which is given this way, being commonly left by Will, the Executors may,
by virtue of this Bull, compound for one Moiety of all such Legacies, in case
the Legatees shall neglect to come and Claim them within a Year: Executors may
likewise compound for all manner of Legacies, in case the Persons concerned
cannot be found after a due Enquiry. They also that keep Gaming-Houses, where
Cheats are practiced, such as Rook others at Play, or Win Money from Boys,
Women, Friars, Slaves; They that have lost at Play and have no mind to pay,
Publick-Women that exact, or by their Artifices gain more from their Customers
than their lawful Hire (for their Hire, according to the Casuists, is their
due, if it be moderate, or no more than is customary, or than as it is rated by
the Magistrates.) Private Women that practice the same Trade are likewise
Compounders, and that (as some will have it) for all the Money they take; for
some Casuists reckon all their Gains unlawful, for that they do in a manner
practice without a License. Men are likewise to compound for the Money or
Jewels they take on such accounts from Married Women, supposing that what they
give be at their own disposal, or of their bona Paraphernalia, as the Lawyers
term it, otherwise it is to be restored to the Husband. Such as have gotten
Ship-wreck'd Goods into their hands, or Goods taken out of Houses in a Fire, if
the Owner be not known, may compound for them: Composition may likewise be made
for a Deposite left by one gone into a Far Country, in case He or his Heirs be
not heard of in some time; as also, for the surplusage of the value of a Pawn,
that is sold when the Party that has taken Money upon it, is not found, upon
due enquiry.

But it is a Question, What Diligence is required in seeking out the Party to
whom Restitution should be made in any of these Cases? The Commissary for his
part, is very reasonable, tho he speaks by Apostolical Authority, and declares
that Diligence to be sufficient which a Prudent Man, (the Quantity and Quality
of the Thing, the Time and the Place, etc. considered,) would use in his own
Concerns, and it is a received Maxim amongst the Spanish Casuists, That in this
Case, No es necessario hazer lo ultimo de potencia; which is as much as to say,
a Man need not do his utmost: But I have met with a single Portuguese, who very
honestly declares against them all, that since it is commonly for Goods stolen
or unjustly detained, that People compound, the most exact diligence is
required.

Composition once made, let the Owner then appear as soon as he will, the
Compounder is absolved from the Debt, and is no longer bound to Restitution,
either in Foro Conscientiae, or in Foro externo, so says the Commissary, whose
Declaration is a Law in these Matters, and my Portuguese Casuist, who was so
honest just now, seems to be of the same Opinion.

Another Question is, Whether a Man may be admitted to Compound, who makes his
unlawful Gains in confidence of having the benefit of the Bull? The Commissary
declares in express Terms that he cannot; however he mollifies the matter not a
little, by declaring, That one who has such a Confidence, may Compound for
what he has unjustly got through Frailty, and that at the worst, he may apply
himself to him (the Commissary) and make such a Composition as He shall think
fit; for in this Case, he says, there is no Rate set: He says the same thing
concerning such, as shall take that which is another Man's, knowing whose it is
at the same time, but hoping they shall forget him afterward, that by this
means they may have the Benefit of the Bull, and of such as will not pay
Legacies, till the time be expired, in hopes of Compounding; In all these
Cases, they must come to the Commissary, and Compound with him at his own Terms.

The Ordinary Rate of Composition is a Teston per Bull, for every 5 Millreis ie
one in 50 of the aforesaid unlawful Gains; and at this Rate one may Compound
for 100 Millreis, but when the Sum exceeds an hundred Millreis, he must pay for
the excess 2 Testons out of every Five Millreis, till he comes to 200, but
after that there is no Composition, till he applies himself to the Commissary,
or his Deputy, and he commonly exacts 10 per Cent, but does not so ty himself
up, but will require more or less, according to the Circumstances of the Case.

The Purchaser of this Bull must receive a Printed Copy of it, or else the
Commissary says it will do him no good; however, he says, it may be presently
torn in Pieces (as that for the Dead may too) and be of as much Benefit as
before, but such as will keep it by them, must have their Names Subscribed, or
if they are shy to do this, as being tender of their Credit, they must
themselves subscribe Foam, that is, Somebody.

None can have the Benefit of these two later Bulls, unless he has taken out
the former, They may be all Three had by any that reside in Portugal, whether
Natives or Strangers, and by Portugueses residing in Foreign Countries, in case
they design to return Home in any Time; Many other Matters, of as great
Importance as any thing yet mentioned, might be related concerning these Bulls:
The Reader, perhaps, will think I have trifled too long about them already, but
he may depend upon it, that nothing has been said on the Subject, but upon
sufficient Authority.

The Money raised by all these Contributions, goes I suppose, for the most
part, the same way as the rest of the Public Revenues do. The Pope indeed has
his Share out of it, but if it be no more than is pretended, it is but a very
inconsiderable one, since the King stands so much obliged to him for the whole;
for it is said to have been no more at first than 12000 Crowns a Year, as I
remember, I have been told that it is now 15000; but it has been of late, one
part of the Nuncio's business at Lisbon, to get it raised higher. However, if
his Holiness fails in this, he knows how to make it up out of the Kingdom of
Portugal by other ways.

Another small part of these Incomes goes to maintain the Portuguese Garrison in
Mazagam, consisting of about 1500 Men. Mazagam is a Rock in the Atlantic Ocean
in the Coast of Barbary, so contiguous to the Shore, that at Low Water it seems
to be joined to the Firm Land, and serves sometimes as a Refuge to Christian
Slaves from Mequenes, I know not what other use it may be of, unless it be to
keep them in countenance that are employed in Preaching up the Croisade; but
they fearing belike, that the Pretense may not be sufficient to bear them out,
take care to inform the People, that were there no such Place in being, and not
a Soldier Paid in Barbary, they shall have every thing made made good to them
to a Tittle that is promised in the Bulls, for whatever becomes of the Money
their Merit is the same; and that, they say, by the help of the Indulgences,
will be sure to carry them directly to Heaven; I have the Sermon of one of
these Preachers now before me, and he, among other Prodigious Extravagances, is
proving, That the Croisade Bull is of greater Benefit to his Auditors than
their Baptism it self, or than Martyrdom would be: I shall not repeat his
Profane Arguments; But the Conclusion he pretends to make out is, That these
Indulgences are able to purify them from the Guilt of all their Sins, and free
them from the Punishment due to them either in Hell or Purgatory.

The King of Portugal's Landforces, used in Times of Peace, to amount to about
12 or 13000 Men, Horse and Foot, but they have been increased of late Years,
and with the New Levies raised above a year ago, they made 25000 Men, and new
Commissions are still giving out. But the King's Pay is so poor a Subsistence,
that though there be Lazy Beggars enough in this Kingdom, and People live as
hardly here as in any Part of Europe, yet it would be impossible, even in times
of Peace, to get Soldiers to supply the Garrisons, were not Compulsion used.
The Pay of those that serve about Lisbon, which, as I have been told, is double
to what they receive in other Parts of the Kingdom, is half a Teston per diem,
out of which such Deductions are made, that besides a small Ammunition-Loaf,
there comes, scarce a Vintain to the Soldier; for which reason, the Officers,
whose business it is to raise Soldiers, are dreaded and courted by the People
in their several Districts, as Men in whose power it is to do the greatest
mischief in the World to their Neighbors; and when any Person is pitched upon
for the King's Service, lest he should run his Country, his Father or his
nearest Relations, are made responsible for his Forthcoming, and this in time
of Peace. But it is commonly reported, that during the War with the Spaniards,
It was a Customary Thing among the Poor People, to blind their Children when
they were young, lest when they grew up they should be taken from them for
Soldiers; and this is usually given for the reason why there are so many Blind
Beggars about the City, that gain their Livelihood by singing Prayers at the
Doors of the poorer sort, who Contract with them for their Attendance, each
Customer allowing them a Pension of about Ten Reis or Vintain per Month; and
there are many who think the Parents of these miserable Creatures have well
provided for them.

The King has about 25 Ships of War, great and small, most of them well built,
and they say after the best. English Models, according to His Majesty's
immediate Directions, who is said to have great Skill in these Matters, and to
delight much therein. It is thought that about Seventeen may be Fitted out for
Service. Nor has this King been less careful to provide himself with Seamen,
to which end he has taken care to have a certain Number Enrolled and ready
always upon Occasion; and for their Encouragement, he has bestowed several
considerable Privileges and Immunities, upon such as being found duly
qualified, shall enter their Names in the List. But the Number required is so
very small, as shows that there is a great Want of Seamen in the Kingdom; for
they are no more than 300, at least they were no more at their first
Institution in 1676, and I have not heard that they have been increased since:
Whence it appears, That the Portugueses, who were once so famous for Navigation
all over the World, are now much fallen from what they were 150 Years ago.
Another Proof of this great Change is this, Though they have every Summer, a
small Squadron out a Cruising upon the Algerines and Sallee-men, they have
never been able to take a Prize, at least in the Memory of the Oldest Men of my
Acquaintance, who have known the Country for these many Years. We had indeed a
Story in the English Gazette, I think it was in 1692, of their burning the
Admiral of Sallee, but at last it proved to be but a small Boat that was run
ashore. It might be expected that they should in some measure recover
themselves during the late War, in which other Seafaring Nations were
embroiled, whilst they enjoyed the Benefit of a Free-Trade, as in effect they
did, almost to the doubling of their Trading Vessels. But it does not appear
that they made any great Improvement in the Art of Navigation; for there was
hardly Skill enough among them to carry a Ship into the English Channel, very
few, if any of them, daring to venture upon that Voyage without an English
Pilot: I suppose it is for want of Seamen that the King's Ships are so much
crowded with Land-Souldiers; for these make the greatest part of the
Complement, That of the biggest Ships, as I have been told, consisting of 60
Mariners, 80 others not yet qualified for Able Seamen, and 250 Land-Souldiers.

Of His Majesty's First Queen.
MArie Francoise Elizabeth de Savoie, youngest Daughter to Charles Amadee de
Savoie, Duke of Nemours, by Elizabeth the Daughter of Caesar de Bourbon, Duke
of Vendome, Natural Son of Henry the Fourth, King of France, by Gabriele d'
Estrees Duchess of Beaufort, commonly called la Belle Gabriele.

She was Born the 21th of June 1646, Contracted to Dom Alfonso the VI. King of
Portugal, the 27th of June 1666, arrived at Lisbon the Second of August
following, and having cohabited with that King for the space of near Sixteen
Months, was Divorced from him, and Married afterward, viz. the 2d of April
1668 to his Brother the Infant Dom Pedro, now King of Portugal.

This Lady, who before her Marriage, went by the Title of the Mademoiselle d'
Aumalle, was at first designed for the Infant, whilst a Match was in Treaty
between the King his Brother, and her Elder Sister Mademoiselle de Nemours, the
present Duchess Dowager of Savoy; but that Match not taking effect, she was
Contracted, as I have said, to the King, and another Marriage was concluded
between the Infant and Mademoiselle de Bouvillon, Daughter to the Prince of
Turenne, and Niece to the Marshall of that Name: But this was Broke off,
because the Infant could not be prevailed with by any Persuasions or Menaces,
the King his Brother could use, or the Entreaties of the Ministers and his own
Servants to stand to what had been agreed upon in his Name and by his Order:
The reasons for his refusal I could never learn.

Soon after the New Queens Arrival at Lisbon, King Alfonso began to express an
extraordinary coldness toward her, and in a short time he estranged himself
very much from her Company, his Indifferency growing into an utter Aversion,
insomuch that he forbore not openly to Exclaim against the Authors of this
Match, who, as he has been heard to say, had advised him to that which he
should have cause to repent of all his lifetime; all this was said (by such as
were ill-affected to that Prince) to proceed from a certain un-fitness for
Marriage, which the Queen afterward laid to his Charge. Others are still of
Opinion, that it was occasioned by some secret cause of Dislike that rendered
her Person disagreeable to him. They that accuse the King of Inability, impute
the cause of that, and of his Incapacity for Government, which they accuse him
of likewise, to his Sickness in the time of his Infancy; for at Three Years Old
he had been seized with a Malignant Fever, and that was succeeded by a Palsy,
whereby, as it is said, all his Right Side became withered, from Head to Foot,
insomuch that he remained Lame ever after, on that Side; but they that tell
this, accuse him likewise of delighting to Ride the most fierce and
un-manageable Horses, and to encounter with Wild Bulls, and other Violent
Exercises, which one would think should suppose a vigorous Habit of Body; they
represent him also as guilty of many Extravagancies on the account of lewd
Women, as in truth, his vicious Inclinations to them were apparently the cause
of most of those Disorders they lay to his Charge. And this may make one
suspect their sincerity likewise, when they tell us, That the same Distemper
had so affected his Brain, that he was never in his right mind. It may, no
doubt, with reason enough, be said of this King, That some have taken the
Liberty (upon what grounds I know not) to say of his Father before him, that he
was none of the wisest Kings that ever reigned in Portugal, but then, the
Faults he was guilty of, may be as well imputed to his want of Education, as to
any Natural or Accidental Defect in his Understanding: For perhaps, there never
was one designed for a Crown more neglected in his Youth than this Prince had
been: He had been suffered to abandon himself to all the Extravagancies his
childish Inclinations led him to, and not only his own, but those of his
Companions; these were (not the Sons of the Nobility but) such as himself had
picked up out of the Streets, from among the Boys that he used to behold from
the Palace Windows, dividing themselves into Parties, and Pelting one another
with Stones, the usual Pastime of Portuguese Children. They that were of the
Party favored by the King, and signalized themselves most at this Exercise,
had the largest share in his Affections, and some of them, as they grew up with
him, became his Principal Favorites; these, from the very beginning of his
Reign, found entrance into the Court, and would, at times, entice the King down
into the Stable-Yard of the Palace, and there, together with a lewd Rabble of
Grooms, Blacks, and Moorish Slaves, entertain His Majesty with Wrestling,
Boxing, throwing the Bar, darting Knives, setting Dogs to Fight, the Young King
making One amongst them, and what he learnt from the Conversation of this vile
Crew, he afterward, on some occasions, put in practice.

Such Education was not, we may be sure, very likely to qualify him for the
Affairs of State. It Is true, the Chiefest of his Companions had been put from
him immediately before his taking the Government upon himself; and he having
had the happiness to fall into better hands, a great alteration was observed in
his Conduct; yet he was not so changed, but that he found himself obliged to
leave Affairs of Importance to the Care and Management of others.

This the new Queen soon perceived; and as it is very likely she was encouraged
to make her Advantage of the King's Unfitness for Business, and to endeavor to
get the Government of him, and his Kingdom, into her own hands. This is
certain, that notwithstanding the King's Neglect of Her, she was not wanting to
her self; but took all occasions to make her self considerable; She not only
procured from him a Grant for the Augmentation of the Revenue settled on her in
Marriage, but began to talk of calling to account such as were possessed of any
Lands belonging to former Queens, and more than this, to interpose in Affairs
of State, and Matters of Government, giving the Ministers to understand, that
she expected to know how things went, and she made her self to be obeyed so
far, that nothing of Moment was transacted in the King's Council, but Her
Majesty was consulted about it. Not content with all this, she seemed to have a
further Aim still, and to design no less than a Total Change of the Ministry,
in order to engross the whole Power to her self, or impart it to such as she
should engage in her Interests.

The Great Men of the Kingdom were at this time divided into Two
Irreconcilable Parties, neither of which could be safe, but by a Total
Overthrow of the other; the one consisting of those that had been in the
Government in the late Queen Mother's time, or had done their utmost to
continue her Regency, and were at this time wholly broken, driven from Court,
or deprived of their Charges, and the Principal of them Banished into several
remote parts of the Kingdom. The other was of them that were then in the
Ministry, or had been instrumental in placing King Alfonso on the Throne, in
opposition to the Queen his Mother, and obliging her to retire into a
Monastery. The new Queen, presently after her Arrival publicly declared for
the vanquished Party, at least, did that which in effect was the same thing;
for she openly solicited the return of the Duke of Cadaval, and his
re-establishment at Court. This Duke was the chief Person of the whole Party,
and had shown himself the most active of them all in the Queen Mothers Service,
and thereby had drawn upon himself the largest share of the King's Displeasure.
Besides, the Conde de Castelmelhor, who was then the Prime Minister, and the
Principal Man, next the King, at Court, had reason to look upon the Duke as his
most formidable Antagonist; and to apprehend his Return as a Step toward the
Ruin of himself and his whole Party, especially if it were obtained by the
Queens Solicitation, which would have engaged that Great Man to her Service;
and it might prove impossible for him to hold out against their united
Interests. There had that passed between the Duke and the Conde, that the Court
could not well hold them both, as it cannot to this day; for they are both
still alive; the Duke is now in the Ministry, and for that reason (some give it
for the only reason) the Court, for this last Reign, has remained shut to the
Conde.

But to put things in their due light, I find it will be necessary to look back
to the time of the late Queens Regency, and give a brief account of some former
Transactions, particularly those wherein either of these two great Men were
concerned.

Donna Luisa Francisca de Gusman, who by her Courage had animated Duke John of
Braganca, her Husband, to take upon him the Crown, which she is said to have
preserved likewise upon his Head by her Counsels; was left by that King at his
Death, which happened the Sixth of November 1656, Regent of the Kingdom, and
Tutress or Guardian to the Princes their Children; but her Regency was not like
to continue long, should the Young King, her Son, be reckoned to be of Age at
the usual time of Majority, it having been customary, for Kings of this, as
well as of other Nations, to be declared Majors at Fourteen, and Dom Alfonso
was near the end of his Thirteenth Year at the King his Father's Death, for he
was born the 21st of August 1643, so that should former Presidents be observed
in the present Case, she was like, in a short time, to be forced to let go the
Power out of her hands, and see a Kingdom which she had contributed so much to
procure and preserve for the Family, committed to the discretion of a Child; or
entrusted by him to she knew not whom, for he once declared, Major would be at
liberty to choose his own Ministers. The best-established Governments in such a
case must necessarily be exposed to many great Inconveniences; but that of
Portugal, which was then new and unsettled, and struggling as it were, for
life, in a War with the Spanish Monarchy, would be in danger of utter Ruin:
For these considerations, as we may well suppose, the Queen resolved to prolong
her Regency for some Years beyond the ordinary time; to this end she conferred
all Offices of Trust upon Creatures of her own, or such as she could conside
in, and took such ways to engage those in Power, as should make them more
apprehensive of a Change than her self; and in effect, she so managed Matters,
as to remain possessed of the Government till the King was within a Month of
Nineteen; and had not the Conde de Castelmelhor, by an unexpected Surprise,
broken all her Measures, she might, in all likelihood, have kept it in her
hands as long as she pleased; and her Enemies used to say, That by her good
will she had never parted with it while she lived.

And in truth, her Conduct in regard to the King her Son may have given some
color to this Aspersion; the Education of that Prince in his tender Age was
such as has been now described. Its true, the Queen Mother took notice, with
what Scandalous Companions he associated himself, and made grievous complaints
of it; but still they had access to him, even while he was of those Years when
one would think his Governors should be responsible for his Carriage.

As the King grew bigger he became guilty of such Excesses as might be expected
from a Youth so Bred, and left to his own Liberty, without a Curb; He took
great pleasure in walking the Streets a Nights in Company of his Braves, to
haunt the Houses of lewd Women, and sometimes he would order the Prostitutes to
be brought to him to the Palace; he is reported likewise to have committed
several Outrages upon those he met with in his Night-Walks; nor did he wholly
abstain from those Pranks in the Daytime; several Instances of this nature are
reckoned up by those that have made a strict enquiry into his Faults; but I do
not find, that he ever did any great mischief; He often endangered his Person
indeed, and began to loose himself much in the Peoples Opinion.

The Queen Mother made loud Complaints of these disorders; but then she took
such a course, as might make her Enemies suspect, she desired that the People
rather than her Son might become sensible of his Faults; she exposing them in
as Public Manner as was possible, in order, as some imagine, to make her self
thought more Necessary, and him less capable of the Government. One time she
contrived it so, that all the Counselors of State should wait upon him in a
Body, and let him understand how his Person and the Kingdom were in danger by
the Courses he took; The young Duke of Cadaval, Dom Nuno Alvarez Pereira, upon
the account of his Quality (he being then, as he is still, the only Duke in the
Kingdom) was chosen Spokesman, and he, at the Head of the rest, in the Name of
the Queen, the King's Brother and Sister, the Court, and the whole Kingdom,
admonished His Majesty to change the whole Course of his Life, and not to
expose, as he did, himself and the Nation to ruin. Another time she assembled
together the Officers of the Crown, the Courts of Justice, the Nobility and
Gentlemen about the Court, and the Magistrates of Lisbon; The Design of this
great Assembly was to make a more solemn Remonstrance to the King, and withal
to remove one Antonio Conti from about his Person; this Conti had been one of
those Boys that had had the good hap to get into the King's Favor, by
distinguishing himself at the Exercises aforementioned; and by this means, from
serving in a Pedling Shop in the Capella (a small Cloister within the Palace)
he grew to be a considerable Person at Court, becoming the King's constant
Companion in his Extravagancies; and he was thought to contribute more to the
corrupting of him than any other Person whatsoever.

The seizing of this Conti was the first thing to be put in Execution, and
therefore whilst the Queen Mother entertained the King in private, the Duke of
Cadaval, with some other Lords, took him violently out of the Palace it self,
where he had shut himself up in the King's own Apartment, which the Duke was
ready to force, and had done it, had not Conti opened to him, he having caused
instruments to be brought in order to break down the Doors, resolving to kill
Conti upon the Place, in case he refused to surrender himself. Conti taken, and
with some others of the like Stamp, conveyed on Board a Ship then under Sail
for Brazil, the whole Company came and presented themselves before the King,
and in the Name of them all, the Secretary of State read a Remonstrance to him
that had been drawn up by general Consent; it contained an account of the
Queens Complaints, the Grievances of the Nation, the King's ill Conduct, and
the Exorbitancies of his Favorites. The King was mightily surpised, to see
himself thus unexpectedly attacked, by so great a Crowd of People; for he had
not the least Warning given him of their coming; was so little prepared to
receive and answer their Address, that it was some time after the Company was
gone before he knew what Business brought them thither; and this makes it look
as if there was some further Design in hand than barely the King's Amendment.
It Is plain, that in case the Queen had a Design to create a mutual Distrust
between her Son and all the most Considerable Persons in the Kingdom, in order
to keep him out, and secure her self in the Government, she could not have
taken a more effectual Course to gain her Ends. She might be sure, that those
she employed in such ungrateful Offices, would be very unwilling to see Alfonso
in a condition to call them to account; the Portuguese Nation is as little
addicted to Forgiveness as any perhaps in Europe; and such as are apt to
revenge Injuries themselves, do of course expect the like Returns from those
they have offended. Alfonso was a Prince, violent of his Nature, had not been
bred to restrain or dissemble his Resentments; so that these, who had thus
violated the Palace of their King, and had laid open his Infirmities to the
World in so public and solemn a manner, as they had, wounded him in his most
sensible part, could never think themselves seeure while it was in his power to
revenge the Affronts. And this seems to me to have been the Rise of that
powerful Party which the New Queen found so ready to stand by her, to prosecute
her Quarrels, and which enabled her at last to finish what the Queen Mother,
contrary to her intentions, no doubt, had begun, that is the Ruin of the
Unfortunate Alfonso.

This great Assembly dissolved, the King coming to understand upon what account
they had been with him, and what they had been doing about his Palace, after he
had given way to the first Transports of his Passion, began to think it was
high time for him to assert his Authority, and to secure himself from the like
Insults; or rather to beware of a Third Admonition. His Mother, by using him so
like a Minor at the end of Five Years that had past since the time of his
Majority, did not a little confirm him in his suspicions, that he was never
like to come of Age while she lived; nor perhaps, enjoy the Crown at her Death;
for he had been for some time persuaded, that her intention was to set up the
Infant, his Brother, in his place, wherefore he resolved, once for all, to
withdraw himself from under her Jurisdiction, by wresting, if it were possible,
the power out of her hands; it is hard to tell whether these and the like
thoughts were suggested to him, or confirmed by Dom Luis de Vascomcellos and
Sousa Conde de Castelmelhor; but it is not doubted that the Project of putting
them in execution, was formed presently after the Queen Mother and her Party
were withdrawn; when the King shut himself up for some time with the Conde.

This Nobleman was of the First Quality, and one of the best Families in
Portugal, but of Fortunes not equal to his Birth, or at least, not to his
aspiring mind; for though he was then but young, yet he had, for some time, been
entertaining great Designs in his Head, which an occasion now offering it self,
he made appear, that he wanted neither Courage nor Abilities to go through
with: He had improved his natural Endowments by Travel, an advantage not common
to those of his Rank in Portugal, and he himself had been obliged to it by
Necessity, rather than Choice, he having had the Misfortune to be engaged with
several other Noblemen in a Quarrel, wherein one of them was killed. It is
reported of him, that while he was in Italy, in the time of his Flight. he took
occasion to declare, That he must needs go home, for his mind gave him, that it
would be his Fortune one day to become the greatest Man in Portugal. The late
King having granted him his Pardon, and upon his Deathbed reconciled the
Parties, he came again to Court, and when Alfonso's Household was settled, he by
means of his Countesses Relations, got in to be a Gentleman of the Bedchamber.
'Twas his Week when this great Stir was made about the Court; but the Queen had
not thought fit to make him of the Party; and his Enemies give the World to
understand, that it was for this, and no other reason, that he dis-approv'd of
the action. But he appeared a little too warm while the business was
transacting, to let one think he was so very indifferent; for meeting with the
Duke in a Gallery, while he was in pursuit of Conti, he took occasion to
reproach him for having lost his Respect to the King, by using this Violence in
a Place that ought to be accounted Sacred; upon which, such hard words passed
between them, that had not the Queen Mother made up the Quarrel afterward,
'twas feared that they would have come to Blows; this Discourse happened while
he was endeavoring to get in to the King to acquaint him of what they were
doing about his Court, and had he not found all the Passages Guarded, he might
have spoiled the Design. But in the Conference he had, presently afterward
with the King, it is said, he laid the Project of that entire Defeat which in a
few days he gave the whole Party. For the present, he prevailed with the King
to dissemble his Resentments, which, contrary to his Custom, he did, and
carried it fair with his Mother and her Creatures, so that all things seemed to
be well again. The Queen was highly applauded by the Courtiers for her prudent
Resolution and Conduct, and those vile Creatures that Conti had raised, took it
extremely ill that they were not thought fit to be employed in the Action. But
some wiser than the rest, were a little startled at the King's ordering the
Conde to wait another Week; though others were of Opinion that the Conde did not
think himself safe, unless about the King's Person: But the Alarm was more
general on the Monday after this Transaction (which had passed on Saturday the
16th of June 1662) when the King, taking occasion, according to his custom, to
go to Alcantara, but in greater State than ordinary, the Conde from thence
wrote to the Secretary of State in an imperious Style, that it was the King's
Pleasure to know what they had done with Conti, whether any Order had been
given to put him to Death; and whether Manoel Antunes (one of his Associates)
had been arrested, but at Evening the King returned, visited and caressed his
Mother, and on Tuesday all things were quiet again. On Wednesday, about Twelve
a Clock the Plot broke out; for the King, at that unseasonable Hour (when
People in this Country, at this time of the Year are going to sleep) taking the
Conde with him in his Litter, withdraws privately to Alcantara, and thence
sends to the Court for his Guards, and afterward for Necessaries to fit up his
Lodgings, Summons the Nobility to come and attend his Person, first those that
he thought best affected to him, and afterward all in general, dispatches away
Expresses to the Commanders of his Army and Garrisons, to give them notice,
That he had taken the Government into his own hands.

By this hardy Enterprise, the Conde in a few hours time entirely defeated the
Queens most numerous and powerful Party, and broke all the Measures which that
Princess, the most accomplished of her Sex in the Arts of Policy, had been
concerting for several Years. Not that her accustomed Prudence failed her on
this occasion, for she did all that could be expected from one of her
Character, to preserve her Authority; and the Conde, who got the better of the
day, was not a little obliged for his Success to his good Fortune: For at first
News of what was doing at Alcantara, the Queen placed a Guard at the Passage
from the City to that place, called her Confidents about her, and assembled the
Council, giving out Orders at the same time, that none should go near the King,
'till they had been first with her: And she was so well obeyed, that the
Fortune of the Day was for some time in Balance; and it was toward Evening,
when the Conde found his Design had taken so little effect, that he was
thinking to secure the King and himself in St. Julian's Castle: For
notwithstanding his sending out the Summons with such an Air of Authority,
there were no more than two Noblemen of the Secret, and it grew late before a
Man besides them appeared at Alcantara. But this was not known at Lisbon, nor
had the adverse Party so much time to recollect themselves, as to consult one
another's Sentiments, or be informed how People stood affected; it was hard for
them to think such Summons could have been sent, unless some underhand
Assurance had been given, that they would be obeyed; and no Man could know, how
far others were engaged, or might comply; but every one might be assured, that
his own Fortunes were spoiled, should he be found among the last that came in.
While things were thus in suspense at the Court, and at Alcantara, two Persons
gave the Turn to the King's side; the one was Antonio de Sousa de Macedo, a
faithful Servant of the King, and a true Friend of the Conde's, of whom I shall
afterward have occasion to speak; but he being not so considerable for his
Birth or Quality, his Example was the less likely to draw others after him. The
other was a great Lord, who proved afterward the most bitter Enemy the King
had in the World; but at this time, contrary to his Intentions, did him a most
important piece of Service: This was the Marquess of Cascaes, would needs be
going to Alcantara, contrary to the Queen's Order, that he might see what they
were doing there, and return to give Her Majesty an account: But other People
could not see upon what Design he went; so that he having thus broke the Ice,
several followed his Example, who drew many after 'em that were not sent for,
as well as of those that were. The King's Party growing apparently the
stronger, the Highway to Alcantara was filled with Herds of such as think the
strongest must surely be in the right, all Men striving to get foremost, to
assure his Majesty of the great Zeal, which they, for their parts, always had
for his Service. It Is not my Business to give the Particulars of this
Revolution: In short, the Queen, after foam struggle, found her self obliged to
make a formal Surrender of the Government into the King's Hands, the following
Friday.

The Conde having thus gotten possession of the Government, though he had
discovered much of the Young Man in the Attempt; yet, in the Management of
Affairs, he proceeded with all the Phlegm and Prudence of an old experienced
Statesman. It Is true, that in the beginning he found it necessary for the
King's Safety, and his own, to use some Rigor, in making great Alterations at
Court. The leading Men of the Queen's Party, as they had more or less incurred
the King's Displeasure, were either banished into remote Parts of the Kingdom,
removed from their Places, forbid the Court, or excused their Attendance; but
notwithstanding the Murmurs of the interessed Persons, and their Dependants, he
managed things so well, that in a short time he became exceeding popular: He
found the State at the Brink of Ruin, being in all appearance reduced to the
last Extremity, by a War of Two and twenty Years standing. The Spaniards, after
they had made Peace with the French, falling in upon Portugal, with the choice
of their Forces drawn from all parts of their Dominions; and Don John of
Austria was about that very time in the Bowels of the Kingdom, and expected
every Day at Lisbon, at the Head of a more numerous Army than had been on foot
since the beginning of the War: But, upon the Conde's coming to the Government,
a sudden Check was given to the Enemy, and Victory declared it self so
frequently in favor of the Portugueses, that this King, notwithstanding his
Deposition, is still, and perhaps ever will be, distinguished by the Title of,
Alfonso the Victorious. The People were much eased of their Taxes, and the
Soldiers better paid than before; Pretenders at Court, who used to be put off
with Delays, had all reasonable Satisfaction given them, and many worthy
Persons preferred to Employments; in a word, the Conde's Administration during
the five Years of his Government, gave so general a Satisfaction, that such as
converse with the Portugueses, will find, that though they have all the
Veneration for his present Majesty, that he justly deserves, yet they seldom
speak of the Conde's Times, without regretting the want of him in the Ministry
at present, they accounting him the only Person able to support the declining
State.

But of all other Alterations, none was more taken notice of than that which
People saw, or thought at least they saw, in the King; as they did not look on
him now with the same Eyes as formerly, so without doubt his change of
Condition and Company, must have had a like effect upon him, as it has on all
other Men. He was now attended and respected by his Nobility, and had Men of
Sense and Honor about him, whose Business it was to inform, and help him out,
upon Occasions, and to raise him in the Peoples Esteem; and so he must needs
make a very different Figure, from what he did in that vile Company he before
conversed with, and while he was kept under and discouraged by his Mother,
whose Creatures holding their Places by the Opinion People had of the King's
Incapacity, were ready enough, we may be sure, to catch at any thing that might
serve to expose his Weakness. But it was observed, that such of these as still
kept in at Court, and were used to be the most ready to cry out upon him, for
want of Common Sense, were generally the most forward to admire the vast
Improvements he had made in so short a time, which were such, that they could
hardly take him for the same Person; at least, they could think nothing less,
than that he was altered to a Miracle; they now thought he spoke Sentences like
one inspired, and they were seldom without some of his Sayings in their Mouths:
And that which astonished them the most, was, how it should enter into their
Thoughts, that this Prince was unfit to govern Portugal; for now they
discovered him to be of so exalted a Genius, as qualified him for the greatest
Empire in the Universe. And I make no question, but they that talked at this
rate, were the first to trample upon that poor Prince at his Fall. But there
were still about the Court some ill-natured People, that had been unhappily
engaged in the same Party, who could never be brought over by the Turn of the
Times to change their Sentiments, but affected rather the contrary Extreme to
these fawning Parasites, as thinking it perhaps scandalous, to be so much as in
the Right, with such Company. They had so often talked of the King's Lameness
in his Right-side, that notwithstanding all Demonstrations to the contrary,
they were resolved to believe it still, and to hold, that it must have weakened
him to that degree, as to make him unfit for Government: they agreed with the
Compliers so far, that in case the King of himself did, or said, any of those
Fine Things that were told of him, it must needs have been by virtue of some
very miraculous Change indeed; but they could not be persuaded that he acted of
his own Head: They thought indeed, that he was inspired; but that it was by the
Conde, and his Creatures, whom they make the Authors of every thing that was
well said, or done by him. And the Reason was, that though he began a Discourse
well enough, and spoke to the purpose, when any addressed themselves to him, in
case he was informed of their Business beforehand; yet if they answered him
again, these Malcontents pretended, that he was at a loss for a Reply, or
faultered, or grew mute. When Instances were given of his discreet Behavior on
Occasions, when he could have no Instructions given him, they would say, He
might perhaps have his lucid Intervals: Or they would put it off with a cold
Jest, then current among them, That they allowed one half of the King to be
still hale and sound; and when he spoke a good thing, they used to say, it came
from his Majesty's Left-side; but generally speaking, they thought all that he
did, or said, came from the Right. The Jesuit might think himself more witty,
when having occasion some Years since to mention Alfonso's Victories, he told
the People in his Sermon, That one half of a Portuguese King, was able to beat
the great Monarch of Spain.

But as great as this Change in the King really was, it was no thorough
Reformation: For though in the beginning he seemed to take up and apply himself
to the Business of State, being constantly present at Councils, Dispatches,
Audiences, etc. yet he was under some Constraint all the while; and
notwithstanding all that the Conde could do, he would have his Sallies, and
sometimes break out into as great, or greater Extravagances than before: And
that he might act with greater freedom, he longed to have his Conti near him
again. He had been advised, for Vindication of his Authority, to order this Man
back from Brazil; but withal, to save his Credit with the People, by the
Conde's Persuasion, he forbad him coming near the Court. His Inclinations
toward his old Favorite, were soon discovered by the adverse Party; who ready
to serve themselves of any Instruments, engaged Conti in their Interest; and a
Plot was laid to supplant the Conde, and restore the Queen; in order to which,
Conti was to persuade the King, to recall the Exiles. He had his Correspondents
at Court, who waiting their opportunity when the Conde was out of the way,
contrived it so, that the King had two Interviews with Conti, near Alcantara:
But the Conde, who had his Spies abroad, soon dived into the bottom of the
Plot, and laid it open to the King; who was so incensed thereat, that Conti was
banished to O Porto, and the Conde had no further trouble with so unequal a
Rival. One of those two Noblemen who had been of the Party at the Acclamation,
(as it was called) of Alcantara, was found to be in the Conspiracy, and was
banished likewise from Court: The other was dead, and had been in Disgrace some
time before, upon pretense that he had drawn his Sword in the Palace, and given
a Challenge, which is a Capital Crime by the Laws: These three, had, in the
beginning of this Government, constituted a kind of Triumvirate among
themselves, though the Conde always bore the greatest Sway; but he is accused of
having used those under Arts, that are so much practiced at Courts, to work the
other two out of Favor. And I have not heard what is said in his Defense, in
regard to the former; but as for this whom he found tampering with Conti, I
cannot see why he should be blamed for disarming an Enemy, whom he caught
contriving his own Destruction.

The Conde having now cleared the Court of his Enemies, both public, and
secret, saw his Prediction fully accomplished, and himself without a Rival, in
a manner sole Governor of Portugal; and he might have continued so, had he not
unhappily laid a Train for his Master's Ruin and his own, in the way that he
took more firmly to establish the Throne of that unfortunate Prince. Alfonso
had now no longer cause to apprehend any Designs of his Mother, she had before
been obliged to retire into a Monastery; and the Plot to restore her, by so
contemptible an Instrument as Conti, seemed to be the last Struggle of the
Party. However, she died soon afterward, and by the Conde's prudent
Management, and good Fortune, there seemed to be such an Union between the
Royal Brothers, that there was no cause to fear any thing from the Infant, the
only Person that could give Umbrage to the King; so that had it not been for
his unhappy Marriage, he might have died with his Scepter in his Hand.

But no sooner was this fatal Marriage contracted, than all things seemed to go
backward, and tend directly to the Ruin of them both; the Conde had been the
Contriver of the Match, as the King, when in an ill Humor, used to reproach
him, and he was the first that suffered by it. He had been persuaded, that
there was nothing wanting to the King's Security, but his Marriage, which might
possibly take him off from his wild Courses; but he thought it a sure way to
silence a Report, concerning a certain Weakness in him; which was whispered
about, in order to make People believe, that the Infant was alone capable of
securing the Succession, the Conde being himself fully satisfied, that this
Report was groundless; at least, he solemnly protested, that he looked upon it
as an Imposture, when asked about it by the Marquess De Sand, as he was going
to France to conclude the Marriage, he assuring the Marquess, That he had a
Natural Daughter of the King's, at that time in his own House. But the Match
concluded on, he soon found cause to repent of his Diligence; for the Faction
began to revive, and reassume new Vigor, and to prosecute the same Designs
under the Infante's Name, which they had before been carrying on in the
Queen-Mothers. The Queen Mother is reported by her Friends, as well as others,
to have endeavored what she could, to set up this young Prince in his
Brother's place: She had settled his Court, when he was but Fourteen Years old,
in almost as great Splendour as the King's, who was Sixteen before he had so
much as a separate Apartment in the Palace. This looked as if she was providing
a future Head for the Party, for their Encouragement to stick the closer by her
for the present: But after her Retreat, the Ministers with great Prudence and
Success, endeavored to endear the two Brothers to each other, having them
often together at the Palace, at Alcantara, and Salva terra, the Infant
partaking with the King in all his ordinary Recreations, and sometimes in his
less innocent Diversions. The Ministers did not a little value themselves on
this, to the great Regret of their Adversaries, thinking that they had brought
them to a perfect Agreement, and put an end to all those little Jealousies and
Animosities that had been between them.

But no sooner was the Princess d'Aumalle designed for the King, but a Breach
began that never could be closed: The Infante's Refusal to approve of the Match
that was made at the same time, by his own Consent, between him and
Mademoiselle de Bouillon, revived the King's Jealousies; insomuch, that he
began to accuse him of having still his Mother's Design in his Head, to make
himself King, and threatened to clap him into a Tower; but all in vain, for the
Infant persisted in his Refusal. I know not, but it may be about this time,
that he was highly exasperated by an Expression the Infant had let fall, That
he was sure, the King could have no Children by his Marriage.

When the new Queen's Arrival was expected, the Infant found himself destitute
of Persons of Quality to attend him; the Queen Mother, when she settled his
Household, had placed about him several Lords of her Party, not much inferior,
either in Rank or Number, to those in the King's Service; but these being
employed elsewhere, he had others given him, that were in the King, and the
Conde's Interest; and it fell out luckily, as it was then thought, for the
Conde, that the Infant took such a liking to his Brother, Simon de
Vasconcellos, that of his own accord he took him into his Service; and this
Favorite seemed to have no less share in his good Graces, than the Conde had
in the King's: But the preference of Vasconcellos, so disobliged the rest, that
they withdrew from the Infante's Service; they returned indeed again, at the
King's Request, but upon the Infante's making his Favorite Governor of his
Household, they retired a Second time, and the King thought it too great a
Condescension, to recall them. The Infant demanded to have others in their
room; the King gave him the Nomination of such he should think fit; he named
those that were disagreeable to the King, who refused to confirm them, and
offered to restore the old ones: But the Infant would not accept of them; and
so he was fain to be attended by the King's Servants, when he gave Audience to
the Marquess de Rouvigni, who conducted the Queen to Lisbon. After her arrival,
he desired leave of the King to retire from Court, since he could not continue
there in a State agreeable to his Quality: The King told him, He might go if he
pleased; but should have no Order from him: Yet he thinking fit to stay 'till
the Queen had made her Public Entry, the King would several times ask him in
Raillery, Why he was not gone? But otherwise treating him with great Kindness.
Upon which the Infant took occasion to declare, before Vasconcellos, That he
perceived some malicious Persons had done him ill Offices with the King, and
that the Conde de Castelmelhor, was not free from suspicion; but in case he
proved guilty, he would find a way to chastise him according to his Demerits.
Vasconcellos offended to hear his Brother so ill treated, would stay no longer
in the Infante's Service. The Conde finding all the great Men that were
disaffected at the Court, gathering about the Infant, and encouraging him in
his Design to retire, did his utmost with the King, to persuade him to satisfy
his Brother's Demands, but could not prevail: He waited himself upon the
Infant, to signify his readiness to serve him; but received from him a very
harsh Answer. The Infant at last retires to a Country House, about two Leagues
from Lisbon, orders another to be provided for him against Winter, at Almada,
on the other side of the Water: And it was given out, That he withdrew, because
the Court could not hold him and the Conde together.

During the Separation of the two Brothers, their common Enemies hoped they
would become irreconcilable, and that all things tended toward a Civil War.
The Infant never came to Court, unless it were to wait on the Queen; and she
being taken with a slight Indisposition, prevailed with him to stay in Town
during her Illness, to avoid the trouble of coming to visit her in the Night,
and returning at undue Hours. The Ministers laid hold on this Opportunity to
make up the Business so, that the Infant should choose what Gentleman he
pleased, those only excepted, whom he had before named. Yet this Difference was
not so made up, but the two Brothers continued disgusted at each other,
especially the King; and he had so little Command of himself, that he took all
Occasions to treat the Infant with the harshest Language, and to threaten him
with worse Usage; he grew every Day in a worse Humor, as those about the
Infant gave him Occasions to suspect they had Designs upon his Crown: As when
despairing to get him sworn Prince, as they once designed, they advised him to
request of the King, that he might Command the Armies with the Title of
Constable of the Kingdom; which, as the King was persuaded, was sought for only
in order to take the Sword, and by that means the Scepter out of his Hand. His
Jealousy thus increasing, his Anger against his Brother became more violent;
and upon pretense of other Employments, he took Occasions to remove from about
him, those he suspected to have put these Designs in his Head. While these
things passed between the King, and the Infant, the Queen, on her part, was
acting within the Court, in concert, as it were, with those without, in order
to bring about the Conde's Ruin. He soon perceived by her Pretensions, that
this must be her Design; and, that if her Demands were satisfied, his Power was
not like to be long-lived; and therefore, he either found, or made them so very
difficult to be complied with, that her Majesty grew highly dissatisfied, and
resolved entirely to break with him, taking a solemn Oath, That she would never
speak to him more about Business. And it was not long before she had occasion,
to make known her Resentments to the whole Court and Kingdom.

It happened that a certain Frenchman was murdered by a Carrier in the
unfrequented Roads of Alemtejo. The Murderer had fled to a Church, and though he
were forced from thence, yet before Justice could be done, it was first to be
determined, Whether he had any Right to Sanctuary? For which Cause, and for
want of sufficient Proof, the Trial was delayed. About the same time a
Difference arose between the High-Steward of the Queen's Household, a
Frenchman, and her Secretary, a Portuguese, about Matters relating to their
several Places, and the Queen gave Orders to the Secretary of State, that this
Business should be referred to two of the Judges; but the Secretary thought
convenient to lay it before all the Judges, and to communicate it likewise to
the Council of State: He waiting upon the Queen, about other Busisiness, she
took occasion to enquire, What had been done in these two Cases? The Secretary
gave the Reason, why the Criminal was not yet tried; and told her, That the
other Business lay before the Council, and that it was necessary the Conde de
Castelmelhor should be spoken to about it. The Queen, at naming of the Conde,
flew into a violent Passion; and after having severely reprimanded the
Secretary of State, for not having done his Duty, by punctually observing her
Orders; she told him, That she wondered he should tell her of the Conde, since
she had sworn, never to have more to do with him; who, by thwarting her in
every thing, had reduced her to a State of Beggary; he always wanting Power,
when her Occasions required it, though at no time else: That for these eight
Months, she had not so much as an Alms to give, by reason of his obstructing
the Consignment of 20000 Crowns granted her by the King: That a great deal of
Artifice was used in concealing Matters from her; as if she, next the King, was
not the most concerned in all Affairs. And knowing how much she laid to Heart,
the Duke of Cadaval's Return, they had not given her any Account of that
Business, notwithstanding her having so often interceeded for him, as intercede
she would, let them blame her for it as much as they pleased; that it was
enough to set them against any Person, to see her appear in his Favor, even
when she had Reason for it; and when she desired any thing, were it never so
feasible, it became impossible; and that for no other Reason, but because she
desired it That, it seems, they affected to let the World know, that she had no
share in the Government; and for her part, she was glad of it, as having no
share in the Blame. That she desired not to have Matters submitted to her
Determination; however, she thought it was but Manners in them, to make her
acquainted with what they did: But they had no regard to Decency. And some
People took a Pleasure in crossing her, and were so proud, that, it seems, they
thought she came to Portugal, not to be their Queen, but their Slave.

These, and other passionate Expressions of her Majesty, put the poor Secretary
into a Passion too; he, after having excused himself about the manner of his
executing her Orders, in Answer to her Complaints, told her: That the Conde,
and his Friends, had made it their Business to serve, and please her Majesty.
That it was none of his Fault, if she was in any Straits, that being no part of
his Business. That her Majesty had her Revenues; and it was hoped, she would
proportion her Expenses according to them. That the Consignment of 20000 Crowns
was a new thing, and not easily settled. That she had been made acquainted with
all Matters of Importance; and nothing of any Consequence had been kept from
her Knowledge, that the Court was full of unreasonable Pretenders; who, if
favored by her Majesty, might engage her in the prosecution of their unjust
Demands. That he could give her no account concerning the Duke's Return to
Court, the King having himself come to a Resolution in that matter, that for
their parts, they did not know how to please her, since she was not satisfied,
after they had done all they could to serve her, she having been treated with
so much Respect, that no Queen ever had so great an Authority. But coming to
that part of her Complaint, wherein she said, she had been treated like a
Slave, he changed his Note, and in Portuguese (for he had spoken French
before), he boldly told her, That her Majesty was abused by some about her, who
deserved to be chastis'd; had no Reason to complain of the Portugueses, since
the Respect they paid her, came little short of Adoration. The Queen, after a
warm Reply, wherein she said, She knew how to distinguish between the good and
the bad Portugueses: There being not above three or four that she complained
of; and signifying what she would do to those that had enriched themselves with
the Rents belonging to the Queens of Portugal; commanded the Secretary not to
speak so loud. He told her, That if he spoke loud, it was, that all the World
might hear what he said. The Queen bad him hold his Peace, and be gone. He not
departing presently, she rose from her Seat, and was going away; the Secretary
imprudently laid his Hand upon her Gown, either to kiss it, according to
Custom, at her departure, to signify his Desire, that she would hear him out;
but seeing her resolved to be gone, he cried out to the Noblemen and Ladies
present, That he was unworthily used, no King having ever treated a Vassal in
this manner.

The Person who had this Dispute with her Majesty, was Antonio de Souza de
Macedo, before mentioned, as one of the first that came in to the King at
Alcantara: I cannot tell what he was by Birth; but in himself he was a Person
of Noble Qualities, as appeared afterward by his Constancy in the Service of
his Master, and his Friend; he was a Man of Letters, and a Doctor in the Laws.
After the Revolt from the Spaniards, he had written with great Zeal and
Eloquence in defense of his Country's Cause, and went Secretary to the solemn
Embassy, which King John sent to our King Charles the First, to acquaint him,
of his having assumed the Crown of Portugal, and, upon King Charles's Demand,
to know on what Right his Master's Claim was founded; he drew up a Paper, which
entirely satisfied his Majesty. In England he continued Resident for several
Years, and was very serviceable to the King, in the time of his Troubles. From
hence he went Ambassador to Holland, and in a very difficult Negotiation, he
acquitted himself much to his Master's Satisfaction, and his own Credit; and at
his Return, he was highly esteemed at Court: And the Conde could not do a more
grateful thing to the Nobility, than prefer him, as he did, to the place of
Secretary of State, though perhaps he might have some regard to himself, as well
as to the Public, in advancing this Man: The Conde was young, and Antonio de
Sousa well practiced in Business, and by his Counsels may have been of as great
use to the Conde, as the Conde was to the King. It is certain, that he drew up
Instructions for him to observe, in the Administration of the Government; and
as the Conde was to be destroyed, before the King could be deposed, so it is
very probable, that this Quarrel was picked on purpose with Antonio de Sousa,
in order to make way for the Conde's Ruin.

The King coming to understand what had passed between the Queen and him, did
his endeavor to pacify her Majesty, promising, that the Secretary should be
severely punished; but the Queen would not be appeased. It unluckily fell out,
that this Broil happened at the time of Bull-feast: The first Day was over, and
her Majesty could not be prevailed upon to appear the second Day: So that to
conceal the Matter from the People, the Bull-running was put off for that Day,
upon pretense, that the King was indisposed; and she continuing out of Humor
still, the King was fain to be indisposed the next, and the following Days; and
by that time things were brought to such a pass, that an end was put to all
Sports and Pastimes for this King's Reign. The Queen took so little care to
conceal her Anger, that the People soon came to know the Cause, why the
Bull-running was put off, and began to murmur loudly against the Court, that
their new Queen should be so much abused; and, perhaps, their Disappointment
did not a little serve to raise their Clamours. The Queen would be satisfied
with nothing less, than the Secretary's being turned out of his Place, and
banished from the Court; which the Conde was very unwilling to consent to, as
thinking, that should he give way to her in this Case, he was like to be the
next Man that should fall a Sacrifice to her Resentments; however, the Court
perceiving a Storm ready to break upon them from another Quarter, it was
resolved in Council, that the Secretary should absent himself from Court for
ten or twelve Days; and that the King should communicate this Order to the
Queen, and acquaint her, That it was made only to content her Majesty; and that
it was hoped, she would engage her self no more in such Matters for the future,
to prevent the ill Consequences that might ensue to the State. Pursuant to this
Order, the Secretary, to please the Queen, departs from Court; but the King
forbore to communicate the Order to her, for fear of exasperating her further,
at a time when he had his Hands full of another more troublesome Business.

While these things were done above-board, a secret Plot was carrying on, among
the Heads of the discontented Party, to seize upon the Conde, and carry him off
in the same manner, as Conti had been served before. The Conde having
Information of their Design, may be supposed to have made the more have to
satisfy the Queen's Complaints: For the very next Day, he ordered the Guards
about the Palace to be doubled, the Cavalry to be mounted, and the Sentinels
placed at the Avenues; and, as it is said, Command was given to the Soldiers, to
fall upon certain Noblemen, in case they endeavored to get into the Court, it
being supposed that they were coming to execute the Design.

Hereupon several Messages past between the Infant, and the Court; the Infant
complaining, That the Conde, by arming the Palace, had insinuated, as if he was
designing to violate it; for which he requires Reparation of Honor; accusing
the Conde withal, of attempting upon his Life by Poison; and therefore desires,
that he might be removed from about the King's Person, in order to his
Punishment. The King takes upon himself the doubling of the Guards, and offers
to send the Conde to throw himself at the Infante's Feet: The Infant refuses
to take this for Satisfaction, and insists upon the Conde's removal. The King
offers to do him all Justice, and desires him to name the Conde's Accusers, in
order to his Trial: But this the Infant would not yield to, unless the Conde
left the Court first; threatening, that if he continued there, he himself would
depart the Kingdom. The King orders the Case to be drawn up, and laid before a
Consult of the Counselors of State, the Chancellor, Judges, etc. and it was
concluded among them, by the Majority of Votes, That the Infant not being a
Sovereign Prince, his bare Affirmation was not to be taken for Proof; that the
Suspension and Removal of the Conde, was in it self a Punishment, as it
reflected Dishonor upon him and his Family; but that he ought not to be
punished, 'till some Proof was made of his Crime. The Infant would not yield,
that the Case had been fairly stated, or the Votes free; and signifies the same
in a Letter to the King, wherein he expresses his Resentments of the whole
Proceeding with some heat.

While the Business was thus agitated by way of Letters and Messages, each side
was seeking by other ways to make his Party good, the Infant had written to
the Courts of Justice, the Chamber and Council of Lisbon, to acquaint them with
his Case, sending them Copies of his Letters to the King. He afterward called
together at his Palace, the Counselors of State, and the Nobility, to inform
them of what had past; among whom, besides those that had been all along
devoted to the Cause, the Conde had gained himself many new Enemies, by his
Advancement, and his over-haughty Carriage, (as it seemed to them) in the time
of his Greatness: And the Party was so strong against him, that 'twas now
evident his Ruin was at hand: For many of those fawning Wretches, on whom, by a
Fault common, as it is said, to great Men, he had misplaced his Favors, having
raised them by his Bounty, were now not only ready to abandon him, but they
would needs be employed in avenging the Infante's Quarrel upon their
Benefactor. The Infant, at the beginning of this Broil, was made to
remonstrate in his Letters, That if the King refused to do him Justice, he
should be forced to leave the Kingdom, and end his Days in a foreign Country.
But was now put upon another Resolution, which was to retire to the Province
Tras Os Montes, and join that part of the Army, which was commanded by the
Conde de St. John, one of his principal Confidents, many of the disaffected
Nobility proffering themselves to follow him, and share in his Fortunes.

The Conde, upon the Infante's first Complaint, petitioned the King for leave
to retire; but it appearing, that the Contrivers of all this Bustle, aimed not
so much at the Conde's removal from the Government, as the King's, who was not
like to stand long after the Fall of his Minister, he was oblig, d to continue
at Court; and they were not wanting about the King, that were putting him upon
vigorous Resolutions, which might, if followed, have recovered his expiring
Authority: Some advised him to go in Person to Corte Real (the Infante's
Palace) attended with his Counselors of State, the Nobility and Officers of
the Army, and Arrest the Infant, together with the Camarists (those he had
named for Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, supposed to be the Managers of all this
Disturbance); but this Counsel never took effect; some think, because it was
delayed so long, that the Infant being informed of the Design, had time enough
to put himself in a posture of Defense; it is certain, that he immediately
after declared, He would run the same Fortune with his Gentlemen, and never
suffer them to be Arrested. It is reported of a certain Person, and, as I
remember, I have been shown the Man, that he came and offered to the King, and
Conde, That with his Majesty's Leave, he would go to Corte Real, and give a
good Account of the Camarists; but this Proposal was rejected, as it well
deserved to be. The great Courage the King used to show on other Occasions, to
the loss of his Credit, now failed him when he had so much need of it, his
Authority and his Honor lying as they did, at stake. He seems to have been so
much sunk at this time, as to become incapable of conceiving, or entertaining a
Resolution befitting a King in his Circumstances.

The Conde, when he saw that he could do no good any other way, would have had
him retire to Alemtejo, and there put himself at the Head of his Army, there
being reason to believe, that the main Body would prove faithful to him, after
having gained so many signal Victories under his short Reign. Both sides were
endeavoring about this time, to make a Party among the Soldiery; the Infant
had wholly gaind the Conde de St. John; but he had received Orders from Court,
that neither himself, nor any Person under his Command, should stir out of his
Province 'till further order; and it could not be in his power to do any great
harm, supposing the rest continued in their Duty. The Commanders had been made
acquainted with the Differences at Court by the King's Order, who had signified
to them his Resolution to protect the Conde, representing the Infante's
Complaints as groundless. The Fleet likewise, which had been cruising on the
Coasts, was commanded into the River, and Order given, that none belonging to
it should come ashore without leave.

It does not appear, that they who were for setting up the Infant, durst as
yet openly solicit the Army. It Is true, the Queen had a very strong Party in
it, as appears by the strict Guard that was kept on the Frontiers this Year, to
prevent the coming of any Overtures of Peace from Castille; which the French
Faction, that was headed by the Queen, labored all they could to hinder; but
it was not as yet pretended, that the King and Queen had separate Interests.
However, her Majesty was working underhand to promote the Grand Design,
sounding the Inclinations of those in Command, against the time when it should
be ripe for Execution. Count Schomberg, who was General of the Strangers, and
had, in effect, at this time, the Direction of the whole Army, was obliged by
Orders from France, to hold Correspondence with the Queen, and to support her
Interest. The Queen took occasion to acquaint him, by Letters, how that all
things were like to run to Ruin through Alfonso's Extravagances, should he
continue in the Government, desiring to know of the Count, What Reckoning might
be made of the Officers in the Army, in case the Differences at Court came to
an open Rupture? It is not probable, for Reasons to be mentioned anon, that the
Count gave her any great Encouragement to proceed in the Design; however, he
did as he was ordered, and informed her Majesty, how the principal Commanders
stood affected, and what might be expected from each of them severally in the
Case proposed; he was so very particular in his Account, that it took up about
four Sheets of Paper; and this Packet had like to have preserved the King, and
ruined the adverse Party; for it narrowly escaped falling into his Majesty's
Hands: Had he been Master of it, it might not only have given him great Light
into the Plot, but directed him whom to secure, and whom he might trust in: The
Story is very remarkable, even in its minutest Circumstances, which show how
all things conspired to the Destruction of this unhappy Prince; and it will be
no Digression from our Subject to tell it; which I shall the rather do, because
I am assured, that the Substance of what follows, came from the late Duke
Schomberg's own Mouth.

It being somewhat late when this Packet was conveyed to the Queen, her
Majesty ordered those that attended to retire, after having set up a Light at
her Bed's-Head, for that she had some particular Devotions to perform that
Night. She took the Papers with her to Bed, and there they remained, when she
fell asleep. The next Morning before the Queen was up, News came, that the King
was gone to Chapel; and it being the Custom for them both to hear Mass, in the
Tribunal together, the Queen was obliged to get ready in all haste, and her
haste was so great, that she never minded her Papers; yet she could not get so
soon into the Chapel, but the Elevation, which is the essential part of the
Mass, was over before she came; so she was fain to stay for another Mass, the
King retiring when the first was ended. When the King was gone, the Queen
bethought her self of her Papers, and sent de Ville, the Jesuit, her Confessor,
(who was in the Secret, and is supposed to have instigated her Majesty to what
she was acting against her Husband) to secure them: de Ville coming to the
Chamber Door, found that the King was got there before him, and he having no
Privilege to enter, while the Queen was absent, stood there for some time, and
heard the King walking about the Room, and talking aloud, as if he were in some
heat, to the Condeca de Castelmelhor, the Conde's Mother, and chief Lady of the
Bedchamber to the Queen: With these doleful Tidings, the Jesuit returns to the
Queen. Her Majesty upon this, sends one of her Ladies to see, whether there
were any hopes of retrieving the Papers. The Lady, upon her coming, found that
the King had thrown himself upon the Bed. This being told her Majesty, she
found it absolutely necessary for her to go her self; but Mass was not near
done: And what Pretense could she have to leave it? Or how should she hinder
People from enquiring into the Cause of this sudden Motion? De Ville was at her
Elbow; he suggested to her, that she should be suddenly taken with a
Fainting-fit: His Counsel was put in Practice, her Majesty swooning away
immediately; and in this Condition she was carried from the Tribunal into her
Chamber. The King surpised, and concerned at his Queen's Illness, would have
had the Bed set in order for her to be put into it; had he been obeyed, her
Majesty might have had a Fit in earnest; for the Papers lay under some Clothes
that were upon the Bed: The Fright brought her Majesty to her self so far, as
that she desired them without more ado, to lay her upon the Bed immediately;
this done, she felt about for the Papers, found they were safe; and, in a
little time, all was well again.

But whatever were the Contents of these Papers, it seems, the Queen did not
think it advisable for the Infant to put himself upon the Army: For, in truth,
those that she had greatest Reason to depend upon, who were the French, were
like to give him but a cold Reception; it was not for their Interest, at that
time, to have the Portugueses embroiled in a Civil War, while they should be
finding Work for the Spaniards, in order to facilitate the French King's
Conquests in Flanders. As for the English, who together with the French, made a
good part of the Army, they had been sent into Portugal to serve King Alfonso;
and it was not to be thought, that they would, upon any account, draw their
Swords against him; nor is it credible, but the Conde, who had the disposal of
all Places for above five years together, must have bad Friends enough among
the Portugueses themselves, to make the King's Party good; so that of the two,
it was doubtless the best way for the King to betake himself to the Army: The
Conde, who was the best Judge in the Case, thought, that as things stood, it
was the safest, if not the only Course he could take, to secure himself; and he
had once brought in the Mind to follow this Advice, which was when he was just
upon leaving the Court himself; it being then resolved, that the King should
pass into Alemtejo in Disguise, attended by the Conde: But when this Project
was to be put in Execution, the King fell off, and all the Conde's
Remonstrances could not prevail with him to move from Lisbon. His Enemies say,
That he was so much in love with his Divertisements, that he could not bear the
Thoughts of discontinuing them: And, in order to keep his Brother at home too,
he wrote him a most loving Letter, inviting him to Court, and dissuading him
from his Resolution to retire, telling him, That he should choose rather to
come to him, who was ready to receive him with open Arms, and with all the Love
that was due to a Friend, a Brother, a Son, and (should he fail of Issue) the
Successor to his Kingdoms. But as these kind Words were not believed to come
from his Heart, they rendered him the more contemptible to his Enemies.

While these things were transacting, the Rabble of Lisbon was up, and in a
Fury against those that should occasion the Infante's Departure; but resolved
withal to put a stop to his Journey, for fear of seeing themselves involved in
a Civil War: For the poor People had been strangely confounded at a certain
Prophecy, which was then buzzed among them: That a Day was coming on, when the
Rua Nova (the chief Street in Lisbon) was to be overflown with Humane Blood, so
that the Horses should be bemired in Gore. And they were under terrible
Apprehensions, that their Eyes were now to see the sad Day. But however, the
Infante's Party had made so much Noise of his retiring, that he could not
handsomely draw back, without giving up the Cause; for now all that could be
done against the Court, next to offering downright Violence, had been done
already; and all would have been to no purpose, should this Design be laid
aside: For the Court, when let alone, might in a little time recover its
Authority. On the other side, should they persist to send away the Infant, the
Rage of the Multitude might have been turned upon themselves, (for the Court
had been tampring with the Ringleaders); and in case they got safe to the Army,
they were like, for the Reasons now mentioned, to find but little Welcome.

And now it was high time for the Queen to appear again: Her Majesty therefore
sends De Ville to the Infant, to know, whether her Mediation might be
acceptable to him? and if so, to desire he would defer his Journey, while she
endeavored to make up the Business. No sooner was the Queen named, but the
Infant, according to the Portuguese Gallantry, was ready to prostrate himself
at her Feet, and commit his Cause and all to her disposal.

It does not appear by what means the King was brought to agree to this
Arbitration; but agree to it he did, though the Conde's Removal, without any
mention made of his Return, was a kind of preliminary Article; whereas the
Infant had all along desired no more, than that he should be suspended from
his Charges for a limited time. While the Treaty was on foot, the Conde was
urgent with the King to betake himself to his Army; but not prevailing, he
desired of the Queen, that his Life and Honor might be secured to him under
the Infante's Hand: And this being presently granted, he, at the head of the
King's Horse-Guards, retired to the Arabida, a Convent of Capucins, Seven
Leagues from Lisbon, leaving the Court prepared for Ruin, which he had hitherto
supported, and might, as 'twas thought, have preserved still, had his Counsels
prevailed. It Is reported, that coming from the King, after his last Conference,
his Indignation burst forth so far, that he should say: He was going off; but
it was for want of a King to stand by him.

This Storm was scarce blown over, the King being yet disabled by it, when the
Queen, without giving him time to recollect himself, raised another more
violent upon him, by which he was overwhelmed at last; his Majesty now wanting
one on whose Counsels he might rely on in so difficult a Juncture, resolved to
call Antonio de Sousa de Macedo, to Court again, the time of his Banishment
being out, and made it his Request to the Queen, That by her Favor he might
have leave to return; but though he frequently renewed his Entreaties, she would
not hear him; and when he began to grow importunate, she flatly told him, That
he might restore him by his Absolute Power, if he thought fit; but for her
part, he should never have her Consent. The King, in hopes to prevail, by
showing that he desired nothing but what was reasonable, sent her a Copy of the
forementioned Order of Council; but this, instead of satisfying her, put her
Majesty into such a Passion, that after having expressed her Anger in a very
strange manner, by Letter to the King, she locked her self up, and would speak
to no Body. The King no less offended at her Carriage, is said to have
expressed his Sentiments of it in very blunt Terms: Upon this the Secretary,
who is supposed to have lain concealed at Court all the while, appeared there
publicly again, but came withal well armed, and well attended, to defend
himself from any Assault that should be made upon his Person; yet he was not
like to stand out long against them that had destroyed his Patron. He was soon
made a more dangerous Person about the King, than the Conde himself had been;
and the People were not a little confirmed in this Opinion of him, by Rumors
spread among them, That the King was at last determined to leave the Court, at
the Head of his Guards, and to summon the Fidalgo's about the Infant, to
attend him; and if they refused, to enter the City with his Troops, and put all
Things to Fire and Sword; and that a List was making of such whose Heads were
to be chopped off on this occasion.

The truth is, Antonio de Sousa, upon his coming into the Ministry (for he was
designed to supply the Conde's Place) had given the Alarm to the Camarists. By
his Advice care was taken to keep the three Regiments that were about the City
well affected to the King, and an Officer was appointed to Command them, that
should be ready on occasion to execute the King's Orders: It was observed
likewise, that this Officer, together with the three Colonels, were sometimes
called for to Court; and it is said, as they were made acquainted with a Design,
that de Sousa was putting the King upon, which was to seize upon the leading
Men of the Faction; and that they did not only approve of it, but engaged
themselves by a solemn Promise, to put it in execution: But it is said withal,
that this Project, as well as another, to secure the General of the Army, then
attending at Court, to serve the Infant, as 'twas thought, rather than the
King, came to nothing; the King being unwilling to come to a Resolution, 'till
he had imparted the Matter to the Conde de Val de Reys, who being a timorous
Man himself, was all for using fair means. However, the appearance of those
Officers about the Court, put the Cabal into a Fright; they easily persuaded
themselves, that no Good was meant toward them, and therefore they thought
themselves concerned, as they valued their own Safety, to get this evil
Counselor, Antonio de Sousa, removed out of the way. In order to bring this
about, it was first thought convenient to render him odious to the People; and
to effect that, was no hard matter, he being a Person of such a Character, that
his Enemies could not wish for a fitter Man to set the Mob upon. He was indeed
a Man of nice Honor, and unbiased Integrity, a passionate Lover of his
Country, and for his Insight into Affairs, and Capacity for Business, thoroughly
qualified for the Post he was in; and at his return into his Country, had been
esteemed accordingly by such as were in a higher Sphere, that had Opportunities
to know the Man: But his Merit was not like to gain him the Good Will of his
Equals, it must almost necessarily have enraged them against him, considering
how unpardonable a Crime it appears to most Peoples Eyes, for one that has
been of their Rank, to advance himself above their Level. It is certain, that
all his good Qualifications were not of themselves sufficient to make him
Popular; on the contrary, they were attended in him, as they sometimes may be,
with certain little Weaknesses, that rendered him disagreeable to the Many;
these were obvious to the common View, whereas it was not every one that could
understand his Worth; there was something in his Carriage, that made him appear
morose, sour, and peevish, whereby he became uneasy to such as had Business
with him, especially those of the meaner sort, who are always the most apt to
interpret every seeming Neglect, for a sign of Contempt; and here all manner of
People are continually addressing themselves to the Secretary of State, so that
it is almost impossible for any Person in that Place, to avoid disgusting great
Numbers of Pretenders, especially in such turbulent and factious Times as these
were, when the Fate of the Great Ones depends upon the good pleasure of the
People, and they expect to be caressed and courted accordingly. But Antonio de
Sousa, whether it was, that having his Head filled with other Business, he
could the less bear with the many Impertinences that one in his Station must be
perpetually plagued with; or that being strictly honest himself, he could have
no Complaisance for such Ill-meaning and Ill-designing Persons of all sorts, as
he must have had to deal with; either had not, or he did not make much use of
the Art of Managing a Multitude. He was so unhappy in this respect, that even
when he yielded to the Demands of those that applied themselves to him, he did
it with so ill a Grace, that he could hardly please them. This rough Behavior
was no doubt the worse taken in him, for that the People had been accustomed to
other Usage, and that by the Conde de Castelmelhor, whose greater Quality might
have made the same thing seem tolerable in him, which would have appeared
unsufferable in Antonio de Sousa. But the Conde used to carry himself after
quite another manner; for having the advantage of a more Court-like Education,
he had such easy and engaging Ways with him, that he could dismiss a
disappointed Pretender not dissatisfied. It is the Observation of a Gentleman,
that was a Public Minister at Lisbon about this time, and who in other
respects gives de Sousa his just Character: That People would sometimes go away
much better satisfied with the Conde' s graceful Denial, than the untoward
Grant of Antonio de Sousa.

One so little in Favor with the People already, might easily be traduced to
them, and made to pass for as ill a Man as Enemies were pleased to make him:
Accordingly, those dismal Stories, concerning his murderous Intentions against
the Nobility, and good People of the City that wished well to the Infant, were
greedily swallowed by the prepossest Multitude. And besides the Havoc he was
to make amongst them, it was found, that he, and his Servants, had their
Pistols, and their Carbines with them in the Secretary's Office, which was
called fortifying the Palace; and that could be done with no other intent, but
to kill the Infant, though he now seldom or never came there, and to destroy all
that should come to take his part. These Discoveries wrought so effectually in
the Peoples Heads, that they disposed them for another Mutiny, and brought 'em
flocking to Corte Real, fully resolved to stand by the Infant, against all the
wicked Plots of Antonio de Sousa.

Things being thus in a readiness, the Infant was carried to the Palace,
attended by a confused Multitude of disaffected Nobility and Rabble, and all to
demand Justice against the Secretary of State; and that, not so much for his
Cutthroat Designs, for those may be supposed to have been contrived only to
bring the People together, as for his want of Respect to the Queen, and the
horrid Outrage committed by him on her Majesty's Person, when he laid his Hand
upon her Gown. This was on the Fifth of October in the Morning, while the King
was yet in his Chamber; the Infant staid at the Door for some of the
Counselors of State to go in with him; when they entered the Chamber, the King
was so surpised at their appearance, that while the Infant was telling his
Story, he in a great Rage called for his Sword. The Infant presenting him with
the Guard of his own, said, as it is reported: Sir, If you want a Sword against
me, make use of mine; if against any other, this shall defend you. The Noise
brought the Queen into the Chamber; who presently fell a beseeching his
Majesty, not to be in such a Passion. The King would hearken to none of them,
being persuaded, as he said; that they had murdered the Secretary amongst them.
They assured him, that he was alive: But the King would not believe them 'till
he saw him; whereupon the Duke of Cadaval went and fetched him from a private
Room, where the poor Man had locked himself up, promising him Life if he would
go with him; and he very honorably kept his Word, though it was not without some
difficulty; for the Passage was crowded with Rabble, whose Fingers itch'd to be
at the Secretary; and had certainly fallen upon him, and torn him in pieces,
had not the Duke turned about, and with an Air of Authority said, Antonio de
Sousa goes along with me. The King was somewhat satisfied at the sight of him,
but not appeased; hereupon the Queen retired, and the Infant after her, into
the Antichamber. The Secretary being left alone with the King, gave him such
Advice as preserved him for that time, and defeated the Design of some that
were Ringleaders in the Tumult. Had the Violence of the King's Passion
continued, it had in all likelihood provoked the Rabble to some further
Outrage; but he became calm and easy, and thereby stilled the Fury of the
People, who when their first Heat was over, on a sudden began to relent. While
the King and the Secretary were yet together, a Voice was heard crying, All Is
well, All Is well; which whether it began in the King's Chamber, or was raised
by some Friend of his in the Crowd, the People fell a repeating. The Queen was
retired into her Apartment, but the Noise brought her out again; possibly she
was surpised, and not well pleased with it. The King coming out, found her and
the Infant together, in the Antichamber; and, by the Secretary's Advice, took
them with him to one of the Windows that looks into the Terreiro do Paco, a
large Square before the Palace, showing himself in their Company to the People
below; who seeing them all three together, thought that all Quarrels were now
at an end, and saluted the King with their loud Viva's, as the King was
retiring, either himself, or some about him cried out, The King pardons every
Body; the Mob took the Cry again. A certain Lord, vexed perhaps that the great
Bustle they had been making, was like to end in this, called one to the King,
and with an Heroical Boldness, as those engaged in the same Cause term it; the
Indifferent perhaps will give it another Name, told him, That they would have
none of his Pardon, but Thanks. The poor King answered, That he gave them his
Pardon and his Thanks too. The surly Man replied, They would have nothing but
Thanks. But some were still for deposing the King out of hand: One near the
Infant crying out, Let Us even clap him up at once, and make an end of the
Business: Which shows what they had been aiming at all the while; but the
Infant turning quick upon the Person that spoke this, put him to Silence with
so stern a Look, as showed that he himself had been abused by them, as well as
the King his Brother; and it is reported, that some of the King's Party should
confess, That the King had let fall the Crown this Day, which the Infant took
up, and put again upon his Head.

But the Faction had engaged that Prince so far, that it was now too late to
think of a Retreat, and something was to be done at this time, or all they had
been acting hitherto, was like to end in their own ruin. The King had still
his trusty Officers, with the Three Regiments, at Command, who were they to
receive Orders from Antonio de Sousa, might after all, enable him to call them
to account. As for the Mob, this Day's Transaction showed, that they were not
much to be depended on, their Rage dying away as it did, when the Business came
just to a Crisis, even whilst all those horrid Stories that had been spread
amongst them, with so much Indrustry, were fresh upon their Minds; and should
they now disperse, when nothing had been done, the same Artifice was not like
to serve again; they might Cool and come to themselves, and possibly, in time,
be entirely disabus'd, and then it would be a hard matter to bring them
together, when there should be further occasion for them. Such, and the like
considerations, went, no doubt, a great way to fix them in the Resolution they
then took; which was, to keep Possession of the Palace, 'till they had gained
the Point that had been the Pretense of their coming thither, which was the
Removal of Antonio de Sousa; this they knew the King would never content to: He
was by this time sensible of his Error, in parting so easily as he did, with
the Conde, and fully resolved to keep Antonio de Sousa near him, who was now
the only support he had left. He had shown in the Morning, how great a Value he
had for the Man; when thinking he was killed, he could not forbear to repeat
his Meanaces to the Company that came to him in his Chamber, as well attended
as they were, that he would see them severely punished whoever they should be
that had a hand in the Murder; And while he was passing to and fro through the
Rabble, he would always have him by his side, and not suffer him to be out of
his sight; as if he thought, that whatever Mischief was done to the Secretary,
was much the same as if it had befallen his own Person. But the Faction, on the
other side, were satisfied, that they could never be safe whilst this Man was
suffered to be at Court; and therefore, it was concluded amongst them, to keep
the Infant in the Palace 'till the Secretary was gone; they making him
declare, that now he was there, he would never stir 'till he had effected the
Business he come about; and Orders were given, that Necessaries should be got
ready for his Lodging. The Secretary being given to understand, that in case he
remained there that Night, he was like to sleep his last. This was the best
Course they could take, to hinder the Rabble from dispersing; who either in
expectation of some great Mischief to ensue, or for fear lest the Infante's
Person should be in danger, would be sure to keep about the Palace. In effect,
this Resolution did their Business, and ruined the King: For the Secretary,
though he was not to be frightened with either Threats or Dangers, while there was
any hopes left of his being serviceable to his distressed Master, as he showed
by his embarking himself in an almost desperate Cause; yet seeing now, that
should he persist any longer, all he could do was to get himself murdered;
which probably would but make the Faction the more desperate, and hasten their
Design upon the King; he promised to be gone as soon as 'twas dark, it not
being safe for him to appear in the Street before; and two Persons of Quality
undertaking, that he should keep his Word, the Infant returned in Triumph to
his own Palace, attended as before.

The next Morning the King finding the Secretary gone, as also Manoel Antunes,
who had made the same Conditions for himself, sends all about to look for them,
ordering all the Convents to be searched. Antunes was found in Alemtejo; but
the Infant took care he should come no more to Court.

The Infant, before this Business, had been very seldom at Court, ever since
the Conde's departure; the Queen, as it is like, afraid of a Reconciliation
between the two Brothers, which would defeat her Designs, sending him word,
That it would be dangerous for him to appear there; and now when all were gone,
that they had any Pretense of Complaint against, he had the same Messages sent
to him as before, which kept him still at a distance from the King; who, as I
have been assured by one that had good Reason to know, how things passed at
Court in those Days, had, during all these Broils, some Remains of Love or
Tenderness rather for his Brother; believing, that the young Prince was only
made the Instrument of other Peoples Malice. This, I confess, seemed to me
somewhat unlikely, considering what had past between them, 'till the same
Person told me; That Alfonso, afterward, when a Prisoner, hearing the Noise of
the Guns, and Ringing of Bells, for the Infante's Marriage with the Queen, when
he was told the Cause of this Joy, instead of expressing his Resentments of his
own hard Usage, fell a lamenting the Misfortunes of his poor Brother Pedro;
Who, as he said, would, in a short time, have enough of the French- Woman, and
as much cause as himself to repent, that he ever had any thing to do with her.
But to return:

Alfonso having now none near him that he could advise with, being himself
young, and unacquainted with Business, was for the short time that remained of
his Reign, on all occasions, at a loss how to comport himself; the Conde, for
some time after his removal, used to be ever and anon sending him Instructions,
but he had now none with him to carry on the Correspondence, and therefore was
wholly to seek what Measures he should take; sometimes he would refuse to be
present at the Council, as when he was there, to confirm their Decrees. The
Chamber of Lisbon was set on to Petition him for calling the Cortes, and he
being sensible that this was in order to lay him aside, sometimes would refuse
to hear them; or when they were admitted, to return them any Answer: Some there
were, and those perhaps none of his greatest Enemies, for having him to allow
the Queen, and the Infant, a Joint-share with him in the Government; but he
would hear no Talk of it: The Council, at last, after many Denials, obtained
his Consent for calling the Cortes; but when they had got the Writs ready, they
could not prevail with him to sign them. Whether he showed so much Irresolution
and Inconstancy out of Weakness or Design, is uncertain; his Enemies would have
the World believe, it proceeded from the former, and had the Barbarity to
publish several weak things, which they report him to have said, during the
time of these Broils; when, perhaps, a wiser Man in his Circumstances, might
have found himself at his Wit's-end. But it appeared, that he was preparing for
an Escape into Alemtejo, and that his Horses, as also several Barks, to
transport them over the River, had been getting ready for that purpose; so it is
not unlikely, but that he behaved himself in the manner he did, to keep his
Enemies in suspense, and from coming to a Resolution, 'till he could get out of
their Hands, and be at liberty to call his Friends about him; but they that
were then strongest, prevented this Design.

While things were thus at a stand, the Queen, who used frequently to visit the
Nunneries, especially that of the Esperanca, (of the Franciscan Order, where
several Ladies of Honor were professed) took occasion, Nov. 21st, in the
Evening, to go thither in her Coach with her usual Attendance; as soon as she
was within the Nunnery, she sent a Letter to the King to this purpose, That she
had left her Country, her Relations, and Friends, and sold her Estate, to come
and accompany his Majesty, in hopes that what she did, might be to his
Satisfaction; and was inconsolable, that she had not been able to attain to
what she so much desired; that, as obliged in Conscience, she was now resolved
to return into France, in the Ships that were then in the River, for which end
she desired his Majesty's Consent; and hoped, that he would order her Dower to
be returned her, since his Majesty knew very well that she was none of his
Wife, etc. The King, when this Letter was brought him, was making ready to ride
out into the Fields; but he no sooner understood the Contents of it, than
enraged at this the most sensible Affront he had ever yet received, he put
himself immediately into his Coach, and with great Fury drove to the Esperanca,
resolving to force the Nunnery; and for that end, as soon as he got thither, was
calling for Axes to hew down the Doors, when the Infant came to the place so
well attended, that he obliged him to return to the Palace.

The next Day the Queen sent for the Infant, and afterward for the
Counselors of State, and the Nobility about the Court. The Business that she
had in common with the one and the others, was to acquaint them of her
Resolution to return into France, and to desire that they would assist her in
it. And much about the same time, she dispatched away for France, Monsieur
Verjus, who served her Majesty in place of a Secretary, but bore the Character
of Agent for the House of Vendome; and his Business was to procure a
Dispensation, for her to marry with the Infant. The Queen gave Commission
likewise to the Infant, to signify to the King, in a more formal manner, her
Delcaration concerning the Nullity of their Marriage, and to desire his
Permission, for her Return into her own Country. When the Infant delivered his
Message, the King, in answer to the first part of it, pretended to refute the
Charge, and that, as his Enemies say, in very broad Terms: To the rest he
returned him but a slight Reply. However, he gave others that were about him to
understand, that as sensibly touched as he was at this, above all the
Misfortunes that had befallen him, his Trouble did not proceed from his Regret
for the loss of the Queen's Person; he was so far from having any great
Fondness for her Majesty, that he declared, That instead of putting a stop to
her Journey, he was ready, on Condition she would but be gone, to present her
with a much better Ship than that she came upon, and to double the Money that
she had brought along with her into the Bargain.

The Queen the same Day having made the Duke of Cadaval her Proctor, sent a
Letter to the Chapter of Lisbon, to acquaint the Canons, That she had withdrawn
her self from the King's Company, the Marriage they had agreed upon, not having
taken effect; and because the Scruples of her Conscience, would not suffer her
to endure any longer, what her Love to the Portuguese Nation had hitherto made
her dissemble; she hoped the King, who was a better Witness in her Cause, would
declare the same, that she might not be hindered from returning into France as
soon as possible: And for the Chapter of the Holy See of this City, to whom it
belonged to judge of the Cause by their Ministers, she earnestly desired them
to take order, that it may be dispatched with all speed; and to allow all just
Favor to a Stranger, afflicted with the Misfortune of not being able to live
in a Country, which she had come from a far to seek, with so much pleasure; and
they might assure themselves, that wheresoever she was, she should gratefully
acknowledge the Kindness they did her.

The Chapter, which consists most of young Gentlemen that never were in Orders,
and seldom design it, returned Answer to her Majesty, That they had read her
Letter, and were grieved at her Resolution of abandoning Portugal; telling her
withal, that what Justice allowed to particular Persons, could never be denied
to her Majesty; but there being many Circumstances in the Case that required
deliberation, they desired her Majesty to allow them convenient time to
consider of it.

The King, as much concerned as he was in what the Queen was doing, had
something else to do than to solicit his Cause with the Chapter; for the same
Day that she brought her Case before them, it was resolved upon, that he should
be Deposed without more ado; in order to which, the Magistrates of Lisbon went
to petition the Infant, That they might, the Day following, wait upon him to
the Palace, and that he would then take the Government into his own Hands: and
that, if this could not be done by fair means, they might use Violence. The
Infant ordered them to be ready on the Morrow, to accompany him, if it should
be thought convenient; and it was agreed, that the Council of State should,
before they proceeded any further, endeavor to prevail with the King, to
resign up the Crown.

Early the next Morning, the Marquess of Cascaes got to the Palace before the
other Counselors, and coming into the King's Antichamber, told those that
waited, That he had a Mind to speak with the King. They answering, That he was
yet a Bed. He knocked at the Door with so much Noise, that he wakened him, and
coming to his Bedside, told his Majesty, That this was not a time for him to
sleep; that if he did not awake, and shake off the Lethargy in which he had
lived, he must in a few Hours be deprived of the Kingdom, which he had already
ruined; and since he was unfit to Govern, and useless in Marriage, he advised
him to do that freely, and in a way consistent with his Honor, which otherwise
he must be forced to do with Disgrace; that is, to send for the Infant, his
Brother, and deliver up the Government to him; for by that means he might
secure his Crown, and preserve his Kingdom. The Council came afterward in a
Body, and endeavored to persuade the King to resign; but neither Menaces, nor
Arguments, could bring him to comply. He continuing resolute, the Duke of
Cadaval was sent to give the Infant an Account how things stood; and nothing
was further done till toward the Evening, which, as it is pretended, was to
give the King time to change his mind; but, as it is more likely, to persuade
the Infant to finish what they had begun; He, at last, Night drawing on,
accompanied by the Magistrates of Lisbon, the Nobility of the Party, and a
great Concourse of the People, went to the Palace, where he was received by the
Council of State; and at the Head of this Company, went and locked up the King
in his Chamber, securing all the Passages through which he might escape. A Form
of Resignation was then drawn up, read and approved of by the Council, which
before they broke up, was sent to the King for him to Sign, and accordingly it
was brought back signed by him; but it is not known by what Means he was
prevailed upon to do it: The Prince takes up his Lodgings that Night in the
Palace; he had no sooner thrown himself upon the Bed, it being very late, but a
Message came to him from Alfonso, to desire that John the Dog-Keeper might be
sent to keep him Company; the Message drew Tears from the Prince's Eyes, it is
pretended, that he wept in commiseration of his Brothers weakness, and little
sense of his Condition; though it is not improbable, but the Dethroned King took
this way to make his Brother sensible of the ill Usage he had met with, perhaps
from their hands, that had been sent to make him Sign the Resignation, which,
but the same Morning, as has been shown, the most Brutal Menaces could not
extort from him.

The King being thus Deposed, the Prince Signs the Writs that had been prepared
for Summoning the Cortes, before they assembled, it was debated, Whether it
might be convenient for him to take the Title of King, but it passed in the
Negative in a Committee of Judges, and other Ministers, to whom the Matter was
referred, and it was carried, that he should content himself with the Title he
then used, viz. that of Curator of the King's Person, and Governor of the
Kingdom; The same Question was afterward long debated in the Cortes, which met
on the 27th of January, 1668, but in the end it was concluded, That he should
have the Kingly Power, with the Title of Prince Regent.

In the mean time, the Queen having commenced her Process against Alfonso the
day before he was deposed, upon his Confinement was at liberty to prosecute the
same with the utmost vigor. There being no Bishops at this time in Portugal,
the Cause, as has been said, was brought before the Chapter of Lisbon: I
shall, for many reasons, forbear giving a particular account of the
Proceedings, though there be no want of Materials; but in short, Alfonso after a
few Days Confinement, was, as it is pretended, brought to sign an Acknowledgment
of what the Queen had declared, concerning the Nullity of their Marriage,
contrary to what he had asserted to the Infant, when he signified her
Declaration to him the Day after her Retreat, while he was yet at liberty.

It fell out happily for the Queen, as she thought at least, that her Uncle the
Duke of Vendome, lately made a Cardinal-Deacon, was at this very time
commissioned by the Pope, to represent the Person of his Holiness, as Godfather
to the Dauphin, then seven Years old, at that Formality of a Christning, which
is used for the Children of France: For this end the Cardinal-Duke had the
Title and Patent given him of Legate a Latere. To him, as invested with the
Plenitude of the Pope's Power, Monsieur Verjus, (who was sent as has been
said, into France, upon the Queen's first leaving her Husband) applied himself
for a Dispensation, that the Queen might marry with the Infant. The Cardinal
was, no doubt, willing enough to oblige his Niece, and to do for her whatever
was in his Power; but then he questioned much, whether it was in his Power to
help her out in this Case; as well he might: For who could think, that a Proxy
to be Godfather to a Child in France, should enable him to make it lawful for a
Woman in Portugal to marry with her living Husband's Brother? But Monsieur
Verjus having satisfied the French King about what the Queen of Portugal had
been doing, the Dispensation was obtained without much difficulty; for he and
Monsieur de Lionne reading the Cardinal's Bull of Legate, found out that it
contained some Clauses, that did, as it were, point to the very Case in Hand,
and to give the Cardinal as ample Powers as they could wish; and so the
Dispensation was granted without more a-do: And in truth, they in France were a
little too hasty in this Business, for the Dispensation was obtained there,
before they were ready for it in Portugal, it bears Date the 17 Calends of
April, i. e. the 16th Day of March, and in it it is supposed and affirmed, that
the former Marriage had been declared null by Course of Law. But the Chapter of
Lisbon were not so very hasty, for they did not pronounce Sentence 'till the
24th of March, though considering how long Causes of Divorce between Royal
Persons used to depend, which we in England have good Cause to remember, none
will accuse them of dilatory Proceedings. They at last by their Delegates
appointed to examine and determine the Matter, pronounced the former Marriage
to be null, by reason of Alfonso's incurable Inability to consummate it,
occasioned by his Sickness during the time of his Childhood; of which
Inability, as it is affirmed in the Sentence, there was more than sufficient
Proof, and at least a Moral Certainty; so that as they said, there was no need
of Inspection of Trial for 3 Years, or any other limited time.

The Queen was now talking of nothing but returning into France by the Fleet
that lay in the River, to carry off the French Troops that had been in the
Portuguese Service; with this Design she made the three Estates of the Kingdom
acquainted, desiring, that the Portion which she had brought with her, might be
returned her. The doleful News of her intended Departure, (says the Writer,
employed to give the World an account of these Transactions) was with great
Grief heard by the States, and they entering into politic Considerations in the
midst of their Affliction, find that this Princess, on account of all the
Conveniences of State, all the Endowments of Mind, and all the Perfections of
Nature, was the most ready, most convenient, most worthy, and most lovely
Spouse that a Prince could wish for; went all in a Body to the Nunnery, (says
another Writer of the same Stamp) to supplicate her Majesty with Tears in their
Eyes, That she would not abandon them, but stay and marry with the Prince,
because they were neither able nor willing to return her Portion. But the Queen
would give them no positive Answer; then they went in a Body to the Prince,
begging of him to save the Kingdom, by marrying the Queen; protesting, they
would never suffer him to marry any Body else, (for there was a Match about the
same time proposed between him and the Princess of Austria, with great
Advantages to the State); the Prince told them, That he for his part was
willing, provided they could but gain the Queen's Consent. Then they returned
again in a Body to the Queen, and with repeated Entreaties beseeched her to
Consent: Her Majesty at last preferring the Welfare of the Kingdom (says my
Author) to her own Satisfaction, put off her Return to her own Country, and by
a heavenly Inspiration gave Consent, that they should treat of the Marriage.
The Match was soon made up; for the Sentence of Divorce passed but on Saturday
the Eve of Palm Sunday, and on Wednesday in the Passion-Week, the Duke of
Cadaval, her Proxy, was married in a private Oratory of the Palace to the
Marquess of Marralva, who represented the Prince. On Easter-Monday, the Prince,
with a numerous Attendance fetched the Bride from the Nunnery, and carried her
to Alcantara, where the Marriage was consummated: Poor Alfonso sending his
Complements upon it, to wish Joy, as it is said, to the new-married Couple. They
will have it likewise, that he acquiesced all along to the Proceedings in the
Cause of his Divorce; and that by the Advice of two Dominicans, and a Jesuit,
he confessed the Inability objected to him by the Queen, and at last submitted
to the Sentence, declaring, that he would not appeal: But he was a Prisoner all
the while. This dethroned Prince, after he had been confined some time in the
Palace, was sent to the Terceira Island, one of the Azores; but having been
kept there for some Years, he was for greater Security brought back to
Portugal, and shut up in the Castle of Cintra, formerly a Royal Palace, where
he ended his Days the 12th of December 1683.

After Consummation of this Marriage between the Infant and the Queen, the
Pope was applied to to dispense with it; which he did by a Breve, dated the
10th of December, 1668, directed to the chief Inquisitor, and others, impowring
them in case they found the Allegations of the Petitioners true, to annul the
former Marriage, and confirm the Second; which was done accordingly the 18th of
Feb. following.

This Bull has some very extraordinary Clauses in it, inserted, I suppose, Ex
abundanti cautela; which yet it will not be amiss to mention here, if for no
other Reason, than to see how far the Plenitude of the Pope's Power reaches in
such Cases. By it the Commissioners are empowered and commanded, to cancel,
dissolve, and annul Alphonso's Marriage, even without his Consent; or in case
the said Marriage did appear, or should be found to have been valid; and
commands them to dispense with the Second Marriage, notwithstanding the
Impediment, Publicae honestatis, or any other Impediment of what nature soever,
that may arise or appear; decreeing, That although the said King Alfonso, or any
other Persons concerned, have neither given their consent, appeared, been
cited, or heard; and although the Causes for which these Letters were granted, be
neither sufficiently proved nor justified; that all this, notwithstanding the
said Letters, and the Contents of the same, shall never be called in question,
retracted, or violated for any lawful Cause, or any defect, how great or
substantial soever; that no Person shall obtain Relief against them, upon any
Plea of Right, Fact, or Favor; and in case Relief be obtained, it shall be of
no benefit, though granted de motu proprio, with full Power and Apostolical
Authority; but that they shall be for ever valid, in all respects, without
limitation to the said Prince, etc. So that the Pope had a great deal of reason
to tell the Prince, as he did afterward in his Letter, That in this Cause he
had certainly shown him all the Favor that the sacred Canons would permit,

Of this Marriage was born within the first Year, the late Infanta, of whom I
shall speak anon, but never any other Child, though the Queen lived with the
Prince for above 15 Years. She departed this Life the 17th Day of December, 1683,
after having languish'd in great Misery, for the space of six Months together,
under the Distemper that occasioned her Death.

After having mentioned so many Particulars, which seem to bear hard upon the
Memory of this Princess, common Equity requires, that I should enlarge a little
upon what is said in her Commendation: She was much celebrated for her great
Understanding and Insight into Affairs, of which I think there can be no better
Proof than this; the Prince her Husband (for he had not the Title of King 'till
a little before she died) had so high an Opinion of her Judgment, as to consult
her upon all occasions of moment, and never came to a Resolution in any
Business of Importance, before he had first taken her Advice; which may perhaps
be one Reason, why he regretted her loss so much, as that he remained
inconsolable for some time; and, as it is said, could not be persuaded to think
of a Second Marriage, 'till Pope Innocent XI. by his Paternal Admonitions, in a
manner, obliged him to it: They are not wanting, who make large Encomiums upon
her other Virtues; I have two Sermons now before me, preached in her
Commendation, by two of the most famous for Eloquence in Portugal, the one a
little after her Second Marriage, and the other upon her Death; and I have
consulted both these, in order to give her Character to the best advantage. The
former speaks in general Terms of many wonderful Things that might be said in
her Praise; but when he comes to Particulars, he falls a trifling: He highly
magnifies her Noble Birth, chiefly because she was descended from a Bastard-Son
of Henry IV. and reckons up the Titles that were related to the Family, and
among others, the Prinpalities of Anet, and Martignes, the Duchies of
Pontievre, and Tampis, the Marquisats of Sansorlem, and Sasors. He tells her
Majesty, (for he preached before her), That she was a very great Beauty; and he
hoped, would be as handsome when she came to be 90 Years old, as she was at 20.
He thinks it was discreetly done of her Parents, to Christen her with three
Names, since one was not enough to express her Merit: For Astrologers call the
finest Star in the Firmament Venus, Lucifer, and Vesper. Speaking of her
forsaking her Husband, which he calls leaving a Crown, to keep her Conscience
unblemished; he profanely compares it to Moses's refusing to be called the Son
of Pharaoh' s Daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. And hence he infers, That
this Princess ought to be excepted from that general Maxim of Tacitus, which
represents the Female Sex, as ambitious and greedy of Power.

The other is no less copious in her Praises, but speaks a little more to the
purpose, he highly extols her great Prudence, speaks much in commendation of
her Magnanimity and Patience, in bearing the Disgrace when the Match was broken
off between the Infanta, her Daughter, and the Duke of Savoy, which she had set
her Heart very much upon; and for her other Virtues, he would have her pass for
no less than a Saint; but he intimates, that her Piety was best known to her
Confessor, and compares it to the Sanctum Sanctorum, which was visible only to
the High Priest; and, indeed, I do not find, that it was much known to the
People, it being very little talked of amongst them: Certainly, if it was so
very great as this Orator represents it, her Majesty's Confessor had a great
deal of reason when he used to tell those he conversed with, That the
Portugueses did not know how good a Queen God had sent them.

Of the late QVEEN.
MAria Sophia Elizabeth, Daughter of Philip William late Duke of Nicubourg, and
Elector Palatine of the Rhine by Elizabeth Amelia, Daughter of George Lantgrave
of Hesse d'Armstadt, was born the 6th of August 1666, and Married to Dom Pedro
the II. King of Portugal, the 11th of August 1687, the day of her Arrival at
Lisbon, to which place she was conducted by a Squadron of English Men of War,
under the Command of the late Duke of Grafton.

This Princess was of a middle Stature, exceeding Fair, and a graceful Person.
I do not know whether they that are Judges in these Matters, will allow her to
have been a Perfect Beauty; but no doubt, all Strangers will agree, that she
appeared with great advantage among her Ladies, one cause of this, perhaps may
be, her neglect of those Arts which they have recourse to to set themselves
off, for the Portuguese Women of all Ranks, do so discolor their Faces with
Red Paint, that it renders them a very disagreeable Spectacle in the Eyes of
Strangers.

It was observed, That her Majesty did seldom or never concern her self with
the Affairs of State, contrary to the Practice of the former Queen. It is said,
that her Confessor, Father Leopold Fuess, a Jesuit, who came along with her
from Germany, advised her not to meddle with the Government. They tell indeed,
of one Design of hers, which I may speak of in another place, which she was put
upon by the same Jesuit, her Confessor, it being a Matter, wherein, as it is
said, the whole Society have concerned themselves for some time, and that was
to bring the Conde de Castelmelhor into the Ministry again; but if her Majesty
ever had any such Design, it is certain that nothing came of it, for the Conde
keeps from Court still, and the Duke of Cadaval is since more firmly
established there than before.

But the Principal Parts of her Majesty's Character, are her great Piety, and
singular Devotion, according to the Religion in which she had been educated;
she was a constant Hearer of the Fathers of the Cratory, an Order of Men, who
some Years ago were famous for Preaching of true Christian Morality, whereby
they became, and were it not for some very mean Compliances their prevailing
Adversaries have extorted from them, they had continued still the Glory of the
Roman Church; nor are they yet so far degenerated, but People still take
notice, that their Sermons are the least stuffed with those Fooleries wherewith
Preachers of other Orders affect to raise Mirth in the Audience. It is, I
suppose, for this cause, that notwithstanding the large Share the Jesuits have
in her Majesty's Favor, she honored them so often with her Presence; and that
the Street where their Church stands, was every Sunday in Lent, crowded with
Coaches, for her Majesty's Example seems to have had a mighty Influence over
the whole Court, especially among those of her own Sex. It is a usual thing to
see Ladys of Quality with their Prayer-Books open in their hands, as they are
carried along the Streets in their Litters, and I have observed some of the
younger sort as they were going to a Wedding of one of their Companious, very
hard at their Devotion in the midst all their Gayety.

I need not, I suppose, tell that her Majesty is zealously addicted to what is
now so commonly called the Catholic Religion; it is enough to make the Reader
sensible of that, to say, she is of the House of Nicubourg, The Princes of that
Family, by the very extraordinary Methods they take to promote their Religion,
have made their Zeal sufficiently remarkable to the World. But as well
instructed in Catholicism as she was in Germany, her Majesty seemed to be much
improved since her coming into Portugal, especially in those smaller Devotions,
as the French call them, of which good Catholics are so very shy in Countries
where Heretics are in sight, and so mightily addicted to, where they are at
their own Liberty. But it would be very difficult for one that is of another
Religion, to give an account of these Matters, without being suspected of
Misrepresentation, or in the present case of disregard to Majesty. I shall
therefore give but one Instance of the Queens Devotion; and concerning that I
shall say nothing but what I have from the Jesuits, who were her Majesty's
Directors, and are at this day reckoned among the most refined Courtiers in
Europe, and therefore may be supposed to understand best what is most fit for
the World to know.

From these good Fathers then, I learn, that above all the Saints in the Roman
Calendar, the Queen had a singular and most devout Affection for the famous St.
Francis Xavier, I need not, I suppose, at this time, tell who this Saint is,
since his Life has been written by the elegant Pen of Pere Bouhours, and
translated into English by our famous Laureat, or it is enough to let the
ordinary Reader know that he was one of the first Set of Jesuits that appeared
in the World; and that he is frequently addressed to by such as want Heirs to
their Familys, and is believed by his Devotes frequently to procure Relief in
such cases.

The first occasion taken notice of by my Authors, of the great Friendship
between this Saint and her Majesty, was this; Soon after her Marriage, the
Viceroy that came from Goa, brought along with him a certain Cap, that had
formerly belonged to Xavier, The greatest Treasure (says the Famous Jesuit
Vieira) that ever came from the Indies, since the Arm of the same Saint, that is
now at Rome, was brought from thence: This Cap her Majesty, possibly prevailed
upon to comply with the Bigotry of those about her, put upon her Head on the
21st of Nevember 1687, which in the Roman Calendar is the day of the
Presentation of the Virgin, and she happening to be with Child soon afterward,
they would needs have it that she received great Benefit by the Cap; but the
Jesuits have made strange work of the Matter, On which day (says the Jesuit
Duarte) Her Majesty amidst the sweetest transports of her Heart, received for
the first time the Sacred Cap upon her Royal Head, when suddenly (says Vieira
another Jesuit) the Tears flowed from her eyes in a copious manner, her
Countenance being all of a flame, and changed to that degree, that her
Confessor (a third Jesuit) being present, was astonished at the sight; and he
afterward asking the cause of this alteration; the Queen, (as he pretended)
revealed to him, how that she was certified at the very Instant, that the Saint
would obtain a Son for her, of which she hoped, through the Saint's
Intercession, she should never make the least doubt. The Confessor's Words
(says Vieira) are, Vt nihil amplius haesitaret de impetrando quod petebat.

The Jesuits, after this, brought the Saint's Image from their Church at St.
Roque, upon a Visit to the Queen at the Palace; and tell the World, That her
Majesty had learned so much Portuguese, as to say, Meu santo daime hum Filho se
Deos quizer. My Saint, give me a Son, if God pleases. Her Request was granted,
(says Vieira); and he very profanely applies these words, Visitavit Dominus
Annam and concepit, to this Visit that the Image made to her Majesty. After
this, she was made to believe, as the Jesuit's pretend at least, that the Child
she had conceived would infallibly prove a Son. Vieira proves, that it must
necessarily be a Son by this Instance: A certain Indian, upon the Coasts of
Comorin, prayed to St. Francis Xavier, That he would please to bestow upon him
a Son: And not many Days after, the Wife came to understand, that the Saint had
heard her Husband's Prayers; however, it was yet doubtful, what the Saint was
sending her; but when the time of her Reckoning was up, behold she was brought
to Bed of a Girl. The Father seeing it was a Girl, in a rage takes the little
Creature, and away he goes with it to the Saint's Altar, and there laying it
before him, Here, says he, my Saint, here is what you gave me; but it is not
what I asked for: Had it been a Boy, I intended it should have been mine; but
since it is a Girl, even take it for your self. The Great Miracle-worker (says
Vieira) was now much in the same Case, with a poor Tradesman, that has his
Work turned upon his Hands: And what, says he, should the Saint do in the
Case? As for the Indian, he was resolved never to own the Girl, but to carry
her away presently to the Hospital: But he going to take her off the Altar, he
saw, to his Astonishment, that she was become a Boy, a Boy! Upon this the
People came thronging about the Altar, to be Witness to the Miracle, and the
Church was presently filled with a confused Noise of Thanks and Praise to the
Saint, and Much Joy to the Indian; so that, says the Padre, if the Indian was
Father of the Girl, the Saint was Father of the Boy. From this Story he infers,
(how well I shall not examine) that the Queen, since she had conceived through
the Intercession of St. Xavier, must needs bring forth a Son. But to secure her
Hopes, and return the Saint's Civility, she entered, they say, into a new Course
of Devotion, which was to visit the Saint at the Jesuits Church, ten Fridays in
the Year. The Confessor kept a kind of Journal of the Accidents befalling the
Queen, during her Big-belly; and pretends, that in all Dangers she had so much
Confidence in her Saint, who had given her this Son, that she was sure of a
safe Delivery; as in effect, she was delivered much about the time of their
Reckoning of a Prince, who died about seventeen Days after his Birth. But they
pretend, that this was not the only Child that her Majesty was indebted to St.
Xavier for; they will have it, that all her Children have Francis, or Xavier,
among their Names, because she thought her self obliged for them all to the
Saint; and that among other Marks of her Gratitude, she wore the Saint's
Colors for some time; and in Token of her Affection, sent him a new Suit of
Clothes for his Body at Goa; of which they believe, (if we'll believe them) the
Saint was not a little Proud, but made his Braggs in the Court of Heaven of her
Majesty's Favors.

They that have been in Countries where pure Popery in still practiced; that
is, such as has not been blended with Heretical Doctrines, as it is in France
and Germany, would not perhaps think strange at all this, or any thing of the
like sort, had my Authors to deal only with the People: For wherever genuine
Popery is retained, it is a common thing for the Priests to amuse the gaping
Herd with such Stuff, as my Authors tell of their Saint; but it may deserve
one's Wonder, to see Men so securely impudent, as to abuse their Sovereigns at
this rate; as if they thought it not enough to have them at their Devotion, but
out of mere Wantonness they must needs let the World see, how they can divert
themselves at the Expense of Crowned Heads: and certainly, if there be any
thing of Truth in their Reports, it must move any Man's Indignation, to see
what use they make of the pious Inclinations of a well-dispos'd, but misguided
Princess. But by this time, I fear, the Reader may suspect me of
misrepresenting them as much, as, it is to be hoped, they have their Queen;
wherefore to vindicate my Credit, I shall here translate some Parts of an
Address made to the Queen by Padre Balthesar Duarte, Procurator-General at the
Court of Lisbon, for the Jesuits of Brazil, when he presented her Majesty with
the Life of Xavier, composed at her Request, by the famous Jesuit, Antonio
Vieira, one of the greatest Men, by the Confession of all, that ever the
Society produced in Portugal. Such of the foregoing Particulars as are not
mentioned in this Address, were taken from the Writings of Vieira himself.

MAY it please your Majesty then to accept of your Xavier, always wholly Yours,
because your Majesty is always wholly His; by such a new and admirable
Transmigration of Xavier' s Soul into your Majesty, and your Majesty's Soul
into Xavier, that your very Names are confounded; insomuch, that at the Name of
Xavier, People are in doubt, who is meant, whether it be the Apostle of the
East, or the Queen of Portugal; this is certain, that the same Species do
mutually excite the Memory of both Names with such a never-failing Connection,
that none can think of your Majesty, but must remember Xavier: Hence it was,
that some Months ago, a Public Notary being to write the most August Name of
your Majesty, by a happy and pleasing Mistake, instead of Isabel, put Xavier.
The Credit of that Public Instrument, would certainly be called in question in
After-Ages, were not all the World acquainted of your Majesty's amorous
Transmigration into Xavier, which at all times will put it out of doubt, that
Maria Sophia Isabel, and Maria Sophia Xavier, stand for one and the same
Person: And so your Majesty was pleased to have the Name settled upon you by a
Public Deed, which you were before possessed of, and lawfully entitled to by
Right of Prescription, and that not without Consent of its former Owner.

But your Majesty contents not your self with the Glory of so illustrious a
Name, you equal it by the Resemblance and Condignity of your Actions; witness
the Image of Xavier, which among the rest (all Sacred ones) like the Sun among
the Planets, guilds and enamels your Bracelets; for not satisfied to have him
engraven in your Heart, in imitation of a Spouse, you have his Impression in
your Arm, where it is as a Signature, or Love-mark, or as an indelible
Character, whence is derived a Celestial and Superior Force into all your
Majesty's Actions.

What shall I say to the great variety and multiplicity of Honors, that your
Majesty bestows on Xavier? Your Love never shows it self so ingenious, as in
contriving for him some new Methods of Veneration. The vast distance of Sea and
Land, will not permit that you present your self as a Royal Pilgrim at his
Sepulcher, though your Heart is so much set upon it, that you would do it, if
'twere possible, were it with the Peril of your Life. But your Royal Bounty has
reached where your Person cannot come, your Majesty having sent your Xavier, as
a Token of your Love, a most costly Suit of Sacerdotal Vestments; wherewith, he
being still alive after Death, may cloth himself in such a glorious manner, as
becomes one that triumphs over Mortality; Sacerdotal Vestments, I say, as to
one, that is free from Corruption, white, as to a Confessor, embroidered with
Red, as to a Martyr of Love; and that there should not want Symbols of your
Fervor, and pure Affection, shining with the Fire of Gold, and Snow of Pearls;
I believe, Xavier, on that Day when dressed up in all his Finery, showed
himself to the whole Court of Heaven, telling every Saint with a holy Vanity:
His me vestibus Cliens mea Lusitaniae Regina contexit. Nor were you content to
cloth your Saint in diverse Colors, but you wore your self the Colors of your
Saint: For we know that you made a Vow, That for the space of a Year you would
wear no Silks of any other Color, but that wherewith the Sun of the East,
(Xavier) while he suffered the Eclipse of a mortal Body, mortified and
concealed the Rays of his Virtue, to accommodate himself to the Miseries of
this Life; only you would admit a mixture of While, as a Signal of the Virginal
Soul of Xavier, and your Majesty.

Let Lisbon reckon up, if it can, the holy Pilgrimages, by which your Majesty,
in the Course, and Return of the Year, humbly and devoutly venerates the
Temples and Altars of your Saint; to adorn whose Image you cons^orate all your
Jewels, offering the best Eastern Spoils, to the Apostle of the East, the
Jewels themselves having the advantage to be placed and disposed by the Hands
of your Royal Majesty: I pass by the ten Fridays which your Majesty's Devotion
dedicates every Year to Xavier. And what shall I say of that most tender and
most amorous Affection which all discover in your Majesty, every time you speak
of Xavier? All know, that have the Sovereign Favor to be admitted to your more
intimate Conversation, how often, and with what sweetness and dexterity you
have hooked in the Discourse of your Xavier; at the naming of Him, not only
your Tongue by your Speech, but your Face by the Color in your Cheeks, your
Eyes by their Sparkling, your Breast by its Commotion, your Heart by its
Leaping, speak with so much warmth, that they seem to lay your Majesty open to
the Eyes, as well as to the Ears of them that hear; whom, by an admirable
Simpathy, and reciprocal Communication of Affections, you often melt into
copious Tears. At one of those Conferences, wherein two Religious bore a part,
Xavier being of course the Subject, your Majesty just having done Reading the
prodigious Cure that a few Years ago was wrought in a moment, by the Hand of
this Wonder-worker of the East, upon Anna Maria Zambrina, a Roman Matron, your
Majesty full of interior Delight and Consolation, being desirous to
communicate the Matter, began the Story again, and read it over from beginning
to end, though it took up a full Hour; and that not only without being cloyed and
tired, but without so much as pausing, unless it was when your Majesty from
time to time was interrupted by your amorous Sighs; and by these you enkindled
the like Flame in your Hearers, insomuch, that they could scarce refrain from
Weeping. I believe that this was the first time, that the Humble Xavier was
pleased with his own Praises; and that he was pleased with them now, because
they came from the Mouth of your Majesty.

Your Majesty, like a most pious Mother, has by the imposition of so beloved a
Name, instilled the same Love into each of your Sons, our most Serene Princes,
who both of them imitate you so happily therein, that scarce any Voice came
from them before they could Lisp out their Mothers Saint, meaning Xavier, and
even then they could distinguish his Image from among the rest, accustoming
themselves to the Veneration of it by a thousand innocent Kisses. I pass by the
Concern of the rest of your House and Family, who find that their Emulation and
Imitatioc of this your Royal Piety, is the only way to please their Mistress,
and gain her Favor; and indeed, it is commonly reported about the Court and
City, that in order to succeed in any Business with Your Majesty, there is no
Intercessor like Xavier.

A love so great could not well be contained in one City: It has already passed
the Tagus, your Majesty having chosen Beja for the Theater of your Liberality,
where moved partly by your Zeal, partly by the pious desires of the
Inhabitants, you have raised a magnificent House to the Honor of your Saint,
built and endowed at your own Charges. But why should I say, that one City is
too narrow for your Love to Xavier, when it cannot be confined within the
limits of a whole Kingdom? What Court is there among the greatest of
Christendom, wherein your Majesty (I speak your own Words) has not introduced
the sweet and powerful Patronage of this lovely Saint? Witness Vienna in
Austria, Madrid in Spain, Warsaw in Poland, Parma in Italy; and lastly, all
Germany, a Country that is proud that it can boast of your Majesty's Cradle, and
is enriched with the numerous Offspring of your most Serene House; in all which
places your Majesty has enkindled the Love of Xavier, into such a Flame, that
few Letters come from thence but are full of his Encomiums, written by such as
gratefully recount the Favors received from his beneficent Hand.

Your Majesty is the first, by your own Confession, that is able and bound
after repeated Trials, to bear witness that Xavier's Love for your Majesty is
no less than your Majesty's Love for Xavier; and if Benefits are a sure proof
of love, Xavier has conferred so many upon You, that to reckon them all, would
take up a Volume; but your Majesty, no less grateful than devout, will not
permit me to pass them all over in silence, especially since it is for the
glory of Xavier to have it known, that he shows himself to be the Benefactor of
them that serve him, and recompenses the Regards they have for him with
reciprocal Kindnesses. It is then, through the kindness of Xavier that your
Majesty has most happily brought forth Three Sons one after another: This is
acknowledged, not by me only, and the whole Kingdom, but by your Majesty
likewise. For you remember mighty well, what your Prophetic Mind foresaw, when
full of Faith, amidst the sweetest Joys of your heart, you first received upon
your Royal Head the Sacred Cap of Xavier, brought a little before from Goa; for
according to the exactest Reckoning, just Nine Months after your Masty brought
to light the first and wished for Heir of the Crown, the Infallibility of the
Success confirming the truth of the Prediction. Its true, Heaven did of right
take to it self the First Fruit of your Majesty's Royal Blood, but it was in
order to recompense that tender Plant, cut off in the Flower, with new Fruits.

So it was; there succeeded a Second Son given by Xavier, there followed a
Third, whom you owe likewise to Xavier, upon several accounts; A Saying of your
Majesty makes us believe that your Saint had made you a Promise of him, and had
given you his Word upon it in Private; for a great while before, you had
affirmed without the least sign of Doubt, that ever the Ten Weeks were ended,
the Fridays whereof you had consecrated to Xavier, you should conceive a Son
the Third time, the Event proved the Truth of this Prediction likewise.

But the Reader, I suppose, may by this time, be as weary as my self, of this
High-flown Courtier, I shall therefore pass over a great many of his
Compliments, and come to his Conclusion.

To conclude, for it is now time, I shall end where I began. May your Majesty
receive your Xavier, wholly yours, because as your Majesty has entirely devoted
your self to the service of Xavier, so he makes it his whole business to become
serviceable to your Majesty. There is an amorous Combat between Xavier and your
Majesty. Your Majesty strives to overcome him by your Obsequiousness, and he
fights with your Majesty by his Kindnesses; But the Event is always to the
advantage both of the one and the other Party; the conquering as well as the
conquered; for Love is always triumphant on both sides. That Laureat Combatant
does foment the War in such sort, and alternate the Battles between Xavier and
your Majesty, that he fastens your Majesty to Xavier, and Xavier to your
Majesty, like fortunate Prisoners by indissoluble Bonds in the Center of Divine
Love. I think I have translated this Period right, and so it is the Reader's
business to make sense of it.

This Panegyric ends with a small Request, as the Orator calls it, That her
Majesty would please to continue her Favors to the Jesuits of the Province of
Brazil, and take them into her Maternal Care and Protection, for the obtaining
of which Request he thinks no solicitation can prove so effectual as that of
the same Xavier.

The World has been so much prejudiced in Favor of the Jesuits, on account of
the great Parts and Learning for which some Leading Men among them have always
been eminent since the Foundation of the Society, that People will hardly be
persuaded, that all these Fooleries can come Naturally and Innocently from
them. Yet it may be said in their Favor on the other side, that they are not
observed to smile in one another Faces when they meet in the Streets; were all
this designed for mere Banter, one would think it were impossible for them to
hold their Countenances: But were we to judge of them by their Looks, which are
the most demure that I ever saw, they must be thought to be in Earnest. But
whatever it be that puts them upon treating their Queen in so extravagant a
manner, whether it be their Folly or their Knavery, or perhaps a Mixture of
both; for these two go frequently in Conjunction; this is certain, that their
Libels have failed of the effect which they might have had in regard to any
other Person; for the great Esteem which this Princess had gained by her many
signal Virtues, is so deeply rooted in Peoples Minds, that it is not in the
power of any Jesuit to lessen it. This appeared by the great Consternation her
Subjects were in upon her Sickness, and the general Lamentation that was every
where heard among them at her Death. And these Testimonies of the Great Value
that all had for her, were no where so remarkable as in the Palace where her
Majesty was best known. Letters come lately from Lisbon say, That one of her
Ladies died in two or three days after her for mere Grief; That the Queen
Dowager of England was inconsolable; That the King never went to Bed during the
time of her Sickness, but lay on a Piece of Cork in the same Chamber; That his
Majesty, while the Corpse was carried away, expressed his Passion in such a
manner, as is not to be described, it being so violent, that neither the
Nuncio, nor any other Person could pacific him. It is said likewise, That the
Cardinal Archbishop did many Penances in her Majesty's behalf, but none surely
so severe as those performed by the King himself: The Public has had an
account already, how that his Majesty went one Night Barefoot quite up to
Nossra Senhora da Graca, which stands upon a steep Hill at the furthest end of
the Town; but these Letters add, That he went in the same manner no less than
Nine times to the Cathedral Church, that is at a considerable Distance from the
Palace, and some part of the way very Rugged; and that all the little Princes
were carried in a Coach, without their Shoes and Stockins to St. Roques the
Jesuits Church where Xavier stands, and when they came near the Church, went a
little way upon their bare Feet; and having said their Prayers for their
Mother, returned upon their bare Feet to the Coach again.

Some of these Passages may perhaps, seem a little odd to such as are
unacquainted with the Portuguese Customs; but then all must acknowledge that
they set forth the Praises of the deceased Princess, in a manner, by much, more
affecting and lively than the Jesuits could have done by all their forced
strains of Eloquence, supposing they had set themselves in earnest to make her
Panegyric; for this so great and universal a Concern for her, so variously
expressed, as it was, demonstrates how well she had acquitted her self toward
all People, according to the several relations she had to them; it shows how
good a Queen, a Friend and Mistress she was, and proves her to have been a most
Endearing Wife, and a Tender Mother.

Of the Queen Dowager of England.
HER Majesty being now, to the great Regret of our Nation, become a most
considerable Part of the Portuguese Court, this Account would appear but lame,
and be more defective than it is, should I forbear to mention her: I have great
Reason to believe, that my Countrymen would think the Omission unpardonable,
finding them so very inquisitive as they are, concerning her; the first
Question they put to such as come from Portugal, and to which Satisfaction is
most earnestly desired, being commonly concerning their Queen-Dowager. But her
Majesty's Character is so well known to the World already, that I shall not
attempt it here. To tell of her most exemplary Piety, would be no News in any
part of Europe, much less in England; and it is needless to say, that it is now
the most distinguishing part of her Character: For it was so, while she Reigned
in one of the first Courts of Christendom; and none will suppose her Majesty to
be altered in this respect now, in the time of her Retirement. It did then, as
it does still, give forth so bright a Luster, as to outshine, by far, all the
rest of her great Perfections; which yet, as those who are competent Judges,
and have the Honor to be near her Person, affirm, are such as would be highly
admired in any other Person.

But though her Majesty be her self the same, her outward Circumstances are
somewhat altered, since her leaving England; her Court is lessened almost to a
private Family, those few Persons that waited on her from hence, being, for the
most part, either dismissed with their Salaries continued to them, or excused
their Attendance; there is now no Noise, nor Ostentation of Grandeur about her
House, but all things are quiet and still, except it be on Days of Ceremony,
when Persons of Quality Will be coming to express the great Veneration they
have for her; then, indeed, her Court is as great, and full, as the Nobility of
the Country can make it.

At all other times she convinces the World, that the Formalities of Pomp and
State are not inseparable from Majesty; and that true Greatness, instead of
being set off by such Helps, appears to the best Advantage without them. But
the Queen had, doubtless, a Nobler End still, in getting Rid of those
Encumbrances; there being great cause to believe, that it has been all along
the chief Desire of her Heart, to be at Ease and Liberty, that nothing might
divert her from enjoying her self, as she now does, at her Devotions.

Some speak of it as a considerable Alteration about her Majesty, that the
Jesuits are become her Directors; whereas before, she conferred that Trust on
those of the Franciscan Order: But her Majesty is not of a Character to be used
by those Fathers, as others may have been. It Is said, indeed, that they have
tasted of her Liberality in a most plentiful manner; but as great as their
Profits are, the Credit they have got, by being favored by so discerning a
Princess, is certainly much greater, since she cannot be supposed to have any
Worldly Designs to employ them in: For my part, I take this Honor to be the
greatest that ever was conferred on the Society; and that by this mention of
it, I have more than made Amends for any thing I have said, or may say, to
their Disadvantage.

Of the Late INFANTA.
DOna Isabel Luisa, Infanta of Portugal, was born the Sixth of January, 1669;
sworn Princess, or Heiress to the Crown, in 1680; died the Twenty-first of
October, 1690. This Princess was accounted one of the most Beautiful and
Accomplished Persons, of her Sex and Rank, in Christendom; and that not only by
the Portugueses, who admired her almost to Adoration, but by more impartial
Strangers, such especially as bore a Public Character, who had frequent
Opportunities to satisfy themselves, that the favorable Esteem the World had
for her, was not without ground: For which Reason, and for the Prospect there
was of her succeeding to the Crown ('till after the King's Second Marriage) she
was sought for in Marriage by most of the Princes, and among the rest, by some
of the most considerable Monarchs in Europe; as indeed there is none so great,
but might have accounted it a very advantageous Match.

The first that pretended to this Princess, at least with any success, was
Victor Amedee, the present Duke of Savoy, Cousin-German to the Infanta Madame
Royale his Mother; Marie Jeane Baptist de Savoie, Princess of Nemours, being
Sister to the Queen of Portugal: His Pretensions succeeded so well, that in the
Year 1680, a Marriage was treated, and soon agreed upon, and nothing seemed
wanting to the final Conclusion, but the coming of the Duke to Lisbon,
according to Agreement.

It will not be amiss to give what Account I can of this Match, as how it came
on, and was unexpectedly broke off, it being no inconsiderable Part of the
History of this Age.

It may easily be supposed, that it was at first contrived between the two
Mothers; for howsoever it might have proved to others, it afforded a very
advantageous Prospect to each of them.

Madame Royale had been left sole Regent of Savoy, during her Son's Minority,
by her Husband Charles Emanuel, at his Death in 1675: But the young Duke
entering at this time upon his 15th Year, had a little before been declared
Major; and therefore, should he have taken upon himself the Government, her
Authority was like to suffer no small diminution; nor was there any so likely
an Expedient to continue the Power in her Hands, as the Duke's being sent away
into Portugal; the Desire of Rule, together with the Ambition of becoming
Mother of a King, might make this Princess give a listening Ear to her Sister's
Proposals. The Queen of Portugal, for her part, as she had a great hand in the
setting up of his present Majesty, so she had a great share with him in the
Government; but her Power was not like to continue so great, should a strange
Prince be admitted into Court, especially in case any thing should befall the
King; but by this Marriage between her Nephew and her Daughter, she secured her
Authority, and took the best Measures to establish it, both for the present,
and against the time to come.

These may be supposed to have been sufficient Inducements on both sides, for
the two Princesses to desire a Match between their Children; and considering
the great Power that each of them were possessed of in their respective
Dominions, one would think there was no need of the Intervention of any others
to bring the same about: But some will needs bring the French in upon the
Stage; for in this latter Age, there must nothing of moment be done in any
Court of Christendom, but what they have a hand in. The Match, indeed, was for
the Interest of France, and that seems to be a great Argument why they should
not be wholly unconcerned in the Matter.

It Is pretended, that it was concerted by the Cardinal d'Estrees, who passed
the Mountains that Year, on pretense of accommodating Differences between the
Courts of Rome and France; but in reality, to negotiate the Affairs of his King
with the Italian Princes, having a particular Command to call at Turin, in
order, as'tis said, to propose this Marriage, he being thought the fittest
Person to serve his Master in this Affair, as he was a Relation to the Parties,
and highly esteemed by the Duchess of Savoy, and obliged for the Purple to the
Queen of Portugal; so that whatever came from him, might be looked upon as
designed only for the Good of the Family. To make the Proposal more acceptable
to the Duchess, it is said he was Commissioned, to assure her of the Protection
of France, to maintain her in the Regency.

It Is pretended, that the French had before labored all they could, to get the
Infanta for the Dauphin; the Crown of Portugal, which they expected with her,
being considerable in it self, and might be a means to promote their further
Designs; for ever since their King's Marriage, they have all along had an Eye
to the now so much talked of, Succession of Spain; but being frustrated of their
first Design, by the prevailing Interests of other Princes, that were concerned
to obstruct them in it, their next Business was to defeat the hopes which the
Spaniards might entertain in favor of their King, or the Pretensions of any
other Prince, in dependence on that Crown: To bring this about, they thought it
the best way to set up one, that should either be dependant on themselves, or
whom they might easily deal with as they pleased; and none was found so fit for
their purpose, as his Royal Highness of Savoy. It is said likewise, that there
was a further Reason for their setting up the Duke, he having Pretensions next
to the German Branch, to the Succession of Spain, both as being descended from
Donna Catharina, Daughter to Philip the Second; and also, by Virtue of Philip
the Fourth's last Will. If the Duke were once settled in Portugal, they thought
they might serve themselves of him, to hinder the Crown of Spain from falling
to the Austrians, hoping to get him preferred before them, partly by their
Intrigues at Madrid, and partly by Force of Arms; and the Duke, on this
Condition, might easily be brought to put France again in possession of
Navarre; and, perhaps, be outed of Spain it self, whenever King Louis should
please to dispossess him; or, at least, be obliged by some Treaty, to yield up
Savoy and Piedmont.

But these Designs seem to have been somewhat remote; there are others ascribed
to the French on this occasion, that had a nearer regard to their present
Interest.

It was thought, that the sending away of the Duke would cause such Discontent
among his Subjects, that the Duchess-Regent must necessarily seek Protection
from France, and consequently her Country lie exposed to their Discretion. The
French, during the preceding War, had found it much to their Prejudice, that
none of their Artifices could prevail with her to declare for their Party; or
in any point to recede from that exact Neutrality, which from her first coming
to the Government she had firmly resolved to observe; by this means the Duke's
Dominions became a kind of Barrier to the State of Milan, which otherwise had
lain continually exposed to their Insults; and that which nettled them the
more, was, the Princess-Regent was born their Subject, and as they had
flattered themselves, was French, as well by Inclination as Birth; but
notwithstanding all this, by her constant adherence to the true Interests of
the Duke her Son, and by the admirable Dexterity and Conduct of the Duke of
Giovinazzo, the Spanish Ambassador, residing at Turin, they found all their
Attempts to be vain, and their Measures broken. But the Difficulties they had
met with, seemed to animate them more in the Prosecution of their Design;
wherefore at the Conclusion of the Peace, they were resolved at any rate, to
secure to themselves an Inroad into Italy, against the next War, to get, if it
were possible, the possession of Casai, and bring Savoy into their dependency.
How they succeeded in the former Attempt, it is not my Business to enquire; but
it seems, they found at last the true Forible of the Parties they had to deal
with; the Love of Money being that poor Prince, the Duke of Mantua's reigning
Passion, as Desire of Rule was Madame Royale's. For after all other Attempts
had proved ineffectual, the Continuance of her Regency seemed an irresistible
Temptation; though at the same time, there was little likelihood of her being
able to maintain her self therein, without the Protection of France; and it is
supposed, that both these were offered her, when Cardinal d'Estrees came to
propose to her the Marriage.

But whosoever were the Contrivers of this Match, or whatsoever were the
Motives it was made on, it was once in that great forwardness, that none
doubted of its taking effect; great Preparations were made at Lisbon and Turin,
against the time when it was to be celebrated, and all things were in
readiness; the Cortes of Portugal were called, to acknowledge the Infanta
Heiress of the Crown, and to dispense with the Laws of Lamego in her favor;
these Laws are the Fundamental Constitutions of the Government, and have the
same force in Portugal, as the pretended Salique Laws have in France; by one of
them a Daughter of Portugal is deprived of all Right of succeeding to the
Crown, in case she marries with a Foreigner. The Duke had sent his Equipage to
Lisbon, to be ready for him against his Arrival; where a Squadron of Men of War
were equipped out, on purpose to fetch his Royal Highness; the Ships were the
most finely rigged, and adorned, of any perhaps that have appeared in the Ocean
for some Ages: The Admiral, on which his Royal Highness was to imbark, besides
the immense Treasures that were laid out on the inside, was, above Water, all
over doubly guilt on the outside, and from thence had the Name given her of
the Monte de Ouro. I am afraid to tell how vast a Sum was said to have been
expended in the bare Guilding; but I know, that after the Ship had lain rotting
in the River for many Years, a certain Chemist had the Assurance to engage
himself to the Court, to make a very considerable quantity of Gold of the very
outside Scrapings; and the Court was persuaded to employ him when the Ship was
broken up; for she never made but that one Voyage. The Portuguese Nobility
were, or seemed at least to be, so overjoyed at the Match, and impatient to be
making their Court to their new Prince, that most of them would needs be of the
Voyage. The Duke of Cadaval, at their Head, was declared Admiral of the Fleet,
all of them striving who should be most profuse in enriching the several Ships
they went upon; insomuch, that as I have heard, some have scarce recovered
their Estates to this Day.

While these Preparations were making at Lisbon, and the Fleet ready to set
Sail, things began to have another Face at Turin: For the Nobility of Savoy,
and Piedmont, were not so well satisfied as those of Portugal; they saw, or
thought at least they saw more clearly into the French Designs: For presently
upon Declaration of the Marriage, there arose a vehement Presumption among
them, that this sending away of the Duke out of the Country, accompanied, as he
was to be, by his principal Ministers, was merely a Contrivance of France;
partly, to impoverish them, by the vast Expenses they should be at on this
occasion; but chiefly to take their Advantage from the Absence of the Prince
and his Council, in order to get his Dominions into their Power. Upon this they
began to Cabal among themselves, and give the Duchess to understand, how
prejudicial they thought this Marriage, made without their Knowledge, might
prove to their Prince, and the State; the Duke, as they pretended, being to be
conveyed away on Design only, that they should be exposed to the Mercy of the
French. The Duchess was a Princess of that Penetration, that she foresaw well
enough, that this would in some measure be the consequence of the Match; but
then should it be broken off, her Reign was in all likelihood drawing toward
an end; and this melancholy Consideration, made her give a listening Ear to the
French Offers of Assistance; for they seemed to be no less alarmed than her
Highness, at this Commotion of the Nobility; whereupon their Troops were set a
marching toward the Frontiers; the Duchess in the mean time getting together
what Forces she could, on pretense of preventing any Design they might have
upon Casal; for the Duke of Mantua had by this time, struck up an underhand
Bargain, though it was some time after, that the French were put in possession.

But at Lisbon all things went smoothly on, where a Public Procession was made
about the City, by way of Thanksgiving, for the Conclusion of the Marriage, and
to obtain a good Voyage of the Fleet: But an unlucky Accident fell out at this
Procession, that put some of the wiser Heads a considering, for they did not
well know what to think on it, In these Festival Solemnities, our English St.
George makes a very considerable Figure, being a fat burly Image, dressed up,
as I take it, in the Habit worn by the English at the time of the Saint's first
coming into the Country. He was brought into Request here, as some think, by
John of Gaunt; others are of Opinion, that Edmund de Langley, then Earl of
Cambridge, brought him in a little before; but about their time it was, that
the Portuguese began to call upon St. George in their Battles, instead of St.
Jago; and ever since he has been the Patron of the Kingdom, and has had his
place in the Processions accordingly; wherein He, whilst other Saints are
carried upon Pageants, rides on a Horse that is kept on purpose for him, a Boy
for his Page following on another Horse to carry his Lance: As the Procession
was entering the Rocio, the largest Square in the City, St. George's Horse
chanced to stumble, and down fell the Saint in the Presence of all the People;
a Disaster, which as the Inquisitive into these Matters have since found, had
never happened before that Day. Upon the Fall of the Saint, an observing Person
made this Remark, and for it stands recorded by a very grave and learned
Author: This Procession is no Procession, but a Funeral Pomp rather; the
mistaken Portugueses, with Festivity and Dancings, going to bury the Male-Line
of our Native Kings. And when our Fleet (says my Author) so bedaub'd with Gold
without, and laden with Diamonds and Jewels within, was ready to Sail, the
same Person declared, That though it went so rich over the Bar of Lisbon, it
would come home richer at its return: And being asked the Reason, he replied,
Because it will never bring hither what it goes to fetch. It has been since
demonstrated likewise from certain Prophecies, which I may speak something of
in their due place, that 'twas impossible this Marriage should ever take
effect. But these were then the private Sentiments of contemplative Persons,
who were not much heeded at that time, when nothing else was minded but Public
Rejoicings, and Preparations for the Bridegroom's Reception, and Congratulatory
Complements to the Bride.

But at Turin, a little before the Portuguese Fleet arrived at Nizza, the
Savoyard Nobility, instead of being frighted into a Compliance by the Motions
of the French Troops on the Frontiers, were but made thereby more sensible of
their Danger, and therefore they impatiently waited for an Opportunity to
impart their Minds to the Duke himself; and this, by good Fortune, the Duchess
gave 'em, by her retiring to a Country House near the Town; they taking the
advantage of her Absence, represent to his Royal Highness, how much it imported
him to consider, That he was little better than a Prisoner, whilst his
Dominions were surrounded with the French Troops on every side: That the
Duchess had so concerted Matters with King Louis, that his Highness's best
places were to be put in that King's Hands, as soon as he should embark for
Portugal: That she was sending him to Lisbon, not that he might Reign there,
but that she might Reign in Savoy: That he must not think to act as a Sovereign
in Portugal, whilst the Prince and the Queen lived; and consequently, it was
not for his Interest, to be kept in Subjection there, when he might stay at
Home and Command them, as his most Dutiful Subjects: That the Portugueses bore
a mortal Hatred to Strangers, and had not consented to this Marriage but by
Compulsion; and would show themselves to be of another Mind, at the Death of
the Prince-Regent, and might serve him as they had done the King of Spain; that
is, deprive him of the Crown; in which Case he was like to be turned out of
all: For the French, during his Absence, would be sure to make themselves
Masters of Savoy; and it would be a hard Matter to get them into the Humor to
restore it.

This Language we may be sure sounded very harsh in the Ears of the young Duke,
who had hitherto been bred up among the Women, whose Grand Concern it was, to
take care that nothing should put him out of Humor. When his Fright was a
little over, he began to ask them, What Help there was to prevent all these
Mischiefs? They told him roundly, That there was no other Remedy, but to sign
an Order to Arrest his Mother. This Proposal went to the very Heart of him; but
they assuring him, that he must resolve upon it, and that presently, if he ever
hoped to live happily, or prevent his own Ruin; he at last, though with Tears in
his Eyes, signed the Order they desired. While they were getting all things
ready for putting the same in execution, the Duchess, who as yet had heard
nothing of the Matter, returns from the Country; but it was not long before she
discovered the whole Intrigue: For as soon as she alighted from her Coach, she
went directly to the Duke's Apartment, where she found the poor Prince pensive
and melancholy, and scarce able to look his Mother in the Face; she, surpised
at this alteration, began to caress the Child, and enquire what the Matter was:
He, for some time, instead of answering her, fell a crying; but she, resolved
to know the Business, caressed him so long, 'till she got it out of him; so, at
last, he told her all, both what he had done, and who they were that had put
him upon it. The Duchess, though in no small Astonishment at this News, had yet
her Wits about her, and with an extraordinary Presence of Mind, ordered the
Guards about the Court to be doubled, got the principal of them that had
plotted her Imprisonment to be Arrested, and to bring over the People on her
side, gave out, That the Prisoners, and their Accomplices, had conspired to
seize upon the Duke's Person, in order to deliver him up to the Spaniards. In
the mean while, the Portuguese Fleet, under Command of the Duke of Cadaval,
arrives at Nizza; but it seems, the Duchess, though she had provided for her
present Security, began to gather from this Mutiny of the Nobility, that she
was like to have but an uneasy Government of it; and that she should be forced
to a greater Dependence upon France, and be more at their Discretion, than she
had at first imagined; which might render her Authority much more precarious,
than if the Duke her Son remained in the Country; wherefore she found it
necessary, that his Highness should be very much indisposed, during the stay of
the Portugueses, and not in a Condition to go on Board: So that the Duke of
Cadaval, with the rest of the Fidalgo's, were forced to return as they came;
how well pleased at their Disappointment, let the Reader imagine. Presently
upon their Departure, the Duke recovered of his Indisposition, and the
Prisoners were never prosecuted for their pretended Plot; which makes some
People to be of Opinion, that this Commotion of the Nobility was from the very
beginning contrived by the Duchess her self, who presently after the Conclusion
of the Match, might begin to consider the ill Consequences likely to ensue upon
it, which may have made her resolve to break it; but wanting a plausible Excuse
to stop the Mouths of the Portugueses, and French, by her secret Intrigues
caused all this Bustle, in order only to cast Dust in their Eyes. But howsoever
this was, the Portugueses, when they came to themselves, especially after their
King's Second Marriage, were as well satisfied with the breaking off of the
Match, as the Savoyards could be, so that in Conclusion the French remained the
only Duppes, who thought to have imposed upon them both. This is the most
tolerable Account that is given of this mysterious Affair; for such it is still
confessed to be, by those that have penetrated the deepest into it. The World,
though most of the foregoing Particulars were publicly discoursed of at the
time, continuing still to wonder, how it came to pass, that the court of Savoy
should thus unexpectedly depart from a most solemn Engagement; for his Royal
Highness was then so very young, that he did nothing of his own Head, he was
merely passive all the while; indeed had this Affair been of a later Date, and
transacted some Years after the Duke came of Age, and had appeared upon the
Public Stage to act for himself, the Wonder in all probability would not have
been so great.

2dly, Louis the Fourteenth, King of France, his Pretensions to the Infanta,
were the Public Talk, and not without some Grounds, after the Death of his
Queen, Donna Maria Theresa de Austria, who departed this Life in 1683. This
Match must have been very advantageous to that King, if for no other Reason
than that it would give him Footing in Portugal; by which means it would be
more easy for him to seize upon the rest of Spain, upon the Catholic King's
Decease; and it is not doubted, but there were some Overtures made by the French
Ministers at Lisbon, though not in so vigorous a manner as to give occasion to
the Report that went current amongst the Portugueses, it being commonly
believed by that People, that his Most Christian Majesty had so violent a
Passion for their Infanta, that he was coming to fetch her away by force of
Arms: For, on the contrary, it was observed at the Court of Lisbon, that the
French were not so warm in this Negotiation, as to oblige them to come to a
Resolution, or give any positive Answer; which perhaps proceeded from that
King's prudent Consideration, that this was an Affair wherein he was like to be
opposed, either openly or underhand, by all Princes in Europe, and perhaps
most of all by the Portugueses themselves, who do not seem over-desirous to
come under the French Government; this might make him loath to run the hazard of
being denied: For which Reason perhaps it was, that his Ministers and Partisans
at Lisbon, seemed to do little more than feel the Pulse of that Court, without
directly putting the Question; or if they went so far, they suffered themselves
to be put off with very slender Excuses; if it be true, as it is reported, that
the Court of Portugal desired time to consider, 'till France had fully
concluded the Peace with Germany and Spain, and deferred giving their Answer,
on account of the Death of King of Alfonso, happening about the same time: But
the Death of that poor Prisoner, made little or no alteration in the Public
Affairs, especially in what related to the Infanta; so that these Excuses only
showed, that the Court of Portugal was wholly averse to the Match, and the
Negotiation, as it was but coldly carried on, so in a short time it came to
nothing.

3dly, The Prince of Tuscany was another Pretender, and the Match with him
seemed once to be in great forwardness; but it was broke off at last, as it is
said, by the Grand Duke's insisting, That in case his Eldest Son had Issue by
the Infanta of Portugal, the Children of this Marriage should succeeed only to
that Crown, and his Estates in Italy should be settled upon his Second Son,
Prince John Gaston; but this the Portuguese Court could not be brought to agree
to.

4thly, Charles the Second King of Spain; presently after that King became a
Widdower, the Princess of Portugal had a great Party in his Council, who were
for having her to supply the place of the deceased Queen; and for some time
there appeared but one Rival in competition with her, viz. the Princess of
Tuscany, against whom she carried it clearly: For Spain could propose to it
self no greater Advantage from the Marriage of that Princess, than a small Sum
of Money; small, I mean, in respect to the Necessities of that Crown; which are
such, that all the Great Duke, Rich as he is, could give with his Daughter,
would go but a little way to supply them: Whereas the Infanta of Portugal,
besides the hopes that a Marriage with her might prove an Engagement upon the
King her Father to enter into the Alliance, that was then forming against the
French, was like to bring along with her a further Prospect of Re-uniting
Portugal to the Spanish Monarchy: For though the King her Father was now married
again, and the Queen big with Child a Second-time; yet it was the general
Opinion then, that none of King Peter's future Issue would be long-lived. But
the great Concern at Madrid, being to procure for his Catholic Majesty, a
Princess that might secure the Succession, and so prevent the Dissipation of
the whole Monarchy; and there being none in Europe so promising in that
respect, as the House of Nieuburg, the Princess Mariana was for that Reason
preferred to the Infanta of Portugal.

5thly, The Electoral Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who succeeded so well in
his Pretensions, that a Marriage was in a manner concluded on; insomuch, that
it was once thought, the same Fleet which carried his Sister to Spain, would
return with his intended Spouse. But this Match likewise was broken off on a
sudden, I know not how; but the Blame is laid wholly on the Portuguese
Ministers: And such as pretend to be well acquainted with the Affairs of this
Court, reckon the Miscarriage among the greatest Bevues they are charged with.

6thly, The Dauphin of France: This Prince is said to have been the first that
was proposed to the Infanta; and that France did its utmost in his behalf,
before either his Marriage with the Princess of Bavaria, or the Infanta's with
the Duke of Savoy was ever thought on; that is to say, before the Infanta was
yet marriageable: So that it seems, they resolved to secure her, if possible,
to themselves, she being at that time looked upon by all, as the undoubted
Heiress of the Crown, her Mother being then living, and in no hopes of any
other Issue: But for the same reason, there was such opposition made to all
Overtures in the Dauphin's behalf, that it was impossible their Pretensions
should take effect; but howsoever this was, it is agreed, that he was the last
Pretender; and as his Pretensions were prosecuted with more warmth, so they
were more readily hearkened to than the King his Father's: For now the Case was
altered in Portugal, as well as in France; the Portugueses began to conceive
great hopes of the King's Issue by his Second Marriage, as knowing perhaps the
sinister Opinion of the World in that respect to be without ground. Nor was the
Dauphin's having three Sons at this time, any Exception against him, for he was
still an advantageous Match for an Infanta of Portugal, that was now losing all
hopes of succeeding in the Throne, and much to be preferred to an Elector of
the Empire, especially one outed of his Dominions, and reduced to so low an
Estate as the Palatine was at that time; wherefore this Match was said to be in
as great a forwardness as any of the former. I have been credibly informed,
that the King used to console the Infanta, during her Illness, with the Hopes
of its happy Conclusion. But it was then too late, this Princess having been so
often frustrated in her Expectations, was not, as we may well suppose, over
forward to entertain hopes of this kind; this Match could not be more sincerely
designed than some of the former had been, and therefore was as liable to be
broken off as the rest were; but what the Success of it would have been is
uncertain, Death preventing the Infanta's being ever disappointed again. She
departed this Life October the 21st, 1690, just a Year after the Birth of
Prince John, the surviving eldest Son of the late Queen; the promising hopes of
whose Life, together with the Queen's being great of another, put an end to her
Expectations of ever ascending to the Portuguese Throne; and consequently, she
who had for several Years been the Idol of that Nation, must of course have had
the Mortification to see their Zeal cooled on a sudden, and their Devotion
directed another way, and her self, no doubt, forced to go along with the
Stream, and bear a part in the Public Rejoicings, and Congratulations, for the
cause of her Exclusion. Portugal, which from her very Infancy she had been
taught to call her own, being now become another's, was but an uneasy place
for her; and the rather, because she began to think herself confined to it, and
to lose all hopes of Reigning elsewhere, there being now scarce one Throne left
vacant for her, who had been so much contended for by almost all the unmarried
Sovereigns in Christendom; so that at last she began to think of taking up with
a Cell, expressing her Apprehensions to those that freely conversed with her,
of her being like to end her Days in a Monastery, thinking, perhaps, that after
so many Miscarriages, the Treaty then on foot was not much to be depended on.

These things may be supposed to have gone to the Heart of this Princess, so as
to add to that Grief and Melancholy, which, as it is believed, contributed to
the hastening of her end. There were malicious Reports spread throughout Europe,
soon after her Death, which would needs have it, that she was hurried out of
the World in a more violent manner. I shall not relate them, being well
satisfied of their Untruth, after the exactest Enquiry I could make concerning
them, they are supposed to have been first raised by the Partisans of France,
who are not wanting in their turn, to lay hold on all Occasions to blacken
their Enemies: It was for the Austrian Interest, say they, that the Succession
should be secured to the King's Children by his Second Marriage; and therefore,
as they will needs have it, some extraordinary Means must have been used to
remove the Infanta out of the way; as if the Sister could upon any pretense
dispute the Succession with her Brother: But fearing belike, that this was not
Ground sufficient to support their Calumny, they have themselves endeavored to
give a mortal Wound to the Honor of the deceased Princess, and thereby far
exceeded the Cruelty they suppose to have been shown her by others. But it is a
sufficient Answer to all their Slanders, that such impartial Persons as are
well acquainted at the Court of Lisbon, do affirm, That they never heard any
call the Virtue of that Princess in question; that his Majesty had ever shown
himself a most tender Father, but more especially as she drew toward the
latter End; that the Extreme Unction was administered to her on the Day of her
Death, in the presence of Cardinal Dom Verissimo de Alemcastro, one had in
great Veneration by the Portugueses, for his great Probity and Innocence of
Life, by that Great and Noble Prelate, Dom Lewis de Sousa (now Cardinal),
Archbishop of Lisbon. The hardest thing that had any probability in it, was
reported by the French People, that had been in the Service of her Mother; who
pretended, that a Coffin was brought into her Chamber, some Days before she
expired: Which, supposing the thing to be true, might be done only to put the
Princess in mind of her approaching Death, and therefore well designed, among
People that are Religious in good earnest. As for the Conde de Atouguia, whose
Death, perhaps, was the cause why these Reports were entertained in the World,
he was advanced in Years, and was a married Man, and so that formal Story of a
Marriage, of Conscience, must necessarily be false. It is not denied, but that
he was found dead one Morning in the Court of the Palace; but the Government
did not think fit to make any strict Enquiry by what Hand, or for what Reason
this Nobleman fell, and therefore it becomes not private Persons to take that
Liberty.

Of the KING's Issue, by his Second Marriage.
DOM JOHN, etc. I have not seen a List of the rest of his Names, if he had any
more than one: But Father Leopold Fuess, the Queen's Confessor, in a Letter to
Padre Vieira, assured this later, that her Majesty, while she was big of him,
promised to give this Son of hers, (she not doubting but it would be a Son) the
Sur-name of Xavier. He was born in the Year 1688, on the 30th Day of August;
whence Vieira proves him to be the Gift of Xavier: For counting backwards from
the Day of his Birth, he finds, that he must have been conceived upon the Eve,
or the Day of St. Francis Xavier, which is the First or Second of December; so
that it seems there was a double Reckoning among the Jesuits: For Padre
Balthesar Duarte, counts from the Twenty-first of November, which was the Day
when her Majesty first made use of Xavier's Cap.

One would think, that so short-lived a Prince (for he lived not above
Seventeen Days) should give no further Trouble to a Writer, than barely to tell
of his coming into the World, and going out again; and doubtless we should have
heard no more of him, had not the great Vieira designed him for the Universal
Empire, and resolved that he might not lose the many good things he had written
on that Subject, to continue him in the Government in spite of Death it self.
But as the Case stands, whiles that Father shall have Credit with Posterity, as
if any regard be to be had to the Judgment of the present Age, his Authority
will go on increasing, while Portugal is a Nation, this Prince will have a fair
Chance, to make a greater Figure in the Chronicles than any of his
Predecessors. If I should undertake his History, according to the Account this
Father gives of him, I must be forced to go back for 500 Years; and to continue
his Reign, I must look I know not how many Ages forward. I should not give my
self that trouble, were this the Revery of one single Writer; but he grounds
his Doctrine upon a certain Revelation, that for this last Age has been
received almost for Gospel, by the whole Nation, but more especially among the
Learned; there having been scarce a Writer, whether Historian or Divine, that
has appeared of late Years, but has either spoken of it at large, or referred
to it as an unquestionable Truth; and since it contains a Prediction that must,
if ever, be accomplished in our time, some Account of it is necessary to them
that would be acquainted with the present State of Portugal.

This Revelation is pretended to have been made to Alfonso Henriquez, the first
King, the Evening before he received that Title, upon the Vigil of St. James,
in the Year 1139; this Prince being then encamped in the Plains of Ourique, at
the Head of a handful of Portugueses, against five Kings, commanding an Army of
400000 Mores, according to them that speak modestly, most Writers make the
Number to be much greater; as he was musing on the Business of the next Day,
when the Battle was to be given, he chanced to fall into a Slumber, and dreamed
he saw an Old Man coming to him, and bidding him, Be of good Courage, for that
he should obtain an entire Victory over the Infidels. And while he was yet in
his Dream, one awakening him, told him, That there was an Old Man without the
Tent to speak with him: Who being introduced, was known by the Prince for the
same he had just before seen in his Sleep; and proved to be a Hermit that lived
in a Cell hard by. The Hermit gave him the same Encouragement as before; but
told him withal, That God had fixed the Eyes of his Mercy upon Him, and his
Seed, until the Sixteenth Generation, wherein his Offspring should be
diminished, (in qua attenuabitur Proles tua); but when it was so diminished, he
would have regard and see to it, (in qua attenuata ipse respiciet and videbit).
Ordered him, when he heard the Hermitage-Bell that Night, to come without the
Camp, and Alone. Alfonso doing as he was bid, saw a shining Ray toward the
East, increasing more and more; and while he was attentively looking on it, he
saw within it a Cross more resplendent than the Sun, with our Savior upon it,
attended by a multitude of young Men in white, whom he took to be Angels.
Alfonso expostulated with our Lord, for appearing to him rather than to the
Infidels, as if he came to increase the Faith of one that believed already.
Christ told him, That he did not come to increase his Faith, but to encourage
him against the Battle; commanding him, to accept the Title of King, which his
People should give him next Day: And continued, For I am He that build up, and
scatter Empires and Kingdoms; and I will establish to my self an Empire in
thee, and thy Seed after thee, that my Name may be made known to Nations that
are afar off, etc.

This Account, though more at large, and with other Particulars in it, that are
not to our present purpose, is contained in a Paper with Alfonso Henriquez's
Name to it, and those of several Lords and Prelates for Witnesses: It is said
to have been sworn to by Alfonso, thirteen Years after he had seen the Vision;
but it lay hid, and no mention was made of it for above 400 Years, though it has
since been pretended, that some obscure Intimations of the Story are to be
found in old Writers, particularly the famous Poet Camoens; who indeed has
something like it, with almost the very Words of Alfonso's Expostulation; and
it seems, that he either took it from the Paper, or the Composer of the Paper
took it from him. It was found out at last in the Year 1596, in the Cartorium
of the famous Monastery of Alcobaca, founded by this King, and a Copy of it was
sent to the Court at Madrid; for Philip the Second was then possessed of
Portugal. It was received by the Spaniards with great Satisfaction, for in
truth it seemed to give them a Divine Right to the Crown of Portugal: For who
could think otherwise, but that Philip was the Person designed in the Promise,
that it was he who had been pitched upon by Providence so many Ages before, to
supply the Default of Alfonso Henriquez's Offspring, which in his time had
suffered so great a Diminution, that Sebastian the 16th was the last of the
Male-Line; he was survived indeed, and succeeded by his old decrepid great
Uncle, Henry the Cardinal, who was the 16th King, excluding Alfonso Henriquez;
but he did nothing else in his short Reign, than secure the Crown to Philip.
And this diminution of the Royal Family was the more remarkable, for that of
the nine Sons of King Emanuel, whereof six lived to be Men, there was no lawful
Issue of the Male-Line remaining at Henry's Death: So that this Paper made so
much for Philip's Purpose, that none questioned its Authority among the
Spaniards, their Writers, whereof a considerable Number might be cited, looked
upon it as unquestionable, and great use was made of it, in the great
Controversy about Precedence between the Catholic and the French Kings;
insomuch, that Valdes, who by Command from the former, wrote the Treatise, De
Dignitate Regum, which was presented to the Pope, lays a mighty stress upon his
Master's being King of Portugal, which in his Opinion ought to give him the
Right of Precedence, since that Kingdom was, as he asserts, of a Divine
Foundation; proving his Assertion from the Authority of this Paper, whereof he
produces a Copy. But when the Portugueses, in the Year 1640, revolted from the
Spaniards, and began to turn the Prediction against them, finding that John
Duke of Braganca was the Person designed by it, they then changed their Note,
and questioned the Authority of the Piece; yet having so often allowed of its
Antiquity, they did not flatly deny, but it might be as ancient as the Date;
but thought it was a Device of Alfonso Henriquez, upon whose bare Word, or
Oath, the Credit of the Vision relies, (for it is not pretended that any saw it
but himself,) and that this Prince might feign the Story to establish his
Authority, and make himself more reverenced by the People.

Should I pursue this Matter ae far as it would go, it would engage me in a
long History of the Sebastianists, and Fifth Monarchists of Portugal, for which
I have now neither time nor room. But my present Business is with the great
Vieira.

Upon the Revolution in 1640, the Portugueses, almost to a Man, the
Sebastianists excepted, saw clearly, that the Duke of Braganca was the Person,
in whom the new Empire should have its Rise: For though Sebastian was the 16th
King, yet this Duke was of the 16th Generation, and therefore his Pretensions
were more agreeable to the Letter of the Prediction; but yet to make him of the
16th Generation, they were fain to include Alfonso Henriquez for one; which the
Spaniards thought a very material Objection. However, Vieira shows, how that it
was ordained by Providence, that the Dukes of Braganca should supply the defect
of the Male Line: For he proves, that a like Method was followed in the Kingdom
of Judah, the only Kingdom of Divine Foundation besides that of Portugal; his
Argument is drawn from these Words of Jacob, Non auferetur Sceptrum de Judah,
and Dux de femore ejus, donec veniat qui mittendus est. Here he would have us
mark well, that the word Sceptrum signifies Kings, and the word Dux Dukes, and
so the Text declares, that there should be no Failure of Kings and Dukes of the
Descendants of Judah; and accordingly, after the Kings had failed in the time
of the Captivity, the Dukes succeeded; such were Zerubbabel, and the Maccabees:
And in the same manner, when the direct Line of Portugal failed, the Kingdom
was to be supplied by the Dukes, viz. the Dukes of Braganca. But he thinks,
that what was said concerning the Diminution, or Attenuation of the Royal
Offspring, was to be accomplished in the Sons of John the Fourth. As First, By
the Death of Dom Theodosio the Eldest, and next in Alfonso; and that partly by
the Sickness he had in his Childhood, (for the Father had been a great Stickler
for the Party, which held Alfonso to be lame and maimed all over his
Right-side; and was one of the first that were banished at that Prince's taking
upon him the Government, being suspected to have drawn up the Remonstrance read
to him by the Secretaty of State) and yet he tells his Auditors by the way,
That one half of a Portuguese King, should be able to beat the greatest Monarch
in the World. But the Diminution was completed at Alfonso's Death, for then
the Royal Family was reduced to one single Male, viz. his present Majesty, Dom
Pedro, whom he makes to be the Proles attenuata, of the 16th Generation, upon
whom the words, Ipse respiciet and videbit, were to be fulfilled. Now he
asserts, that Respicere and videre, in the Prediction, signifies to give a Son;
because Hannah says, 1 Reg. 1 Cap. Si respicieNs videris afflictionem famulae
tuae dederisque sexum virilem: Adding, that it is not to give one, but many
Male-Children: For we read in the same Chapter, Donec sterilis peperit
plurimos. But during the time of the King's Marriage with his first Queen, this
Prophecy was like to come to nothing, since in all that time he had but one
Daughter; whereas Respicere and videre, plainly signifies, to give a great many
Sons; and the King's want of Male-Issue, could not be supplied by the Infanta's
Marriage with the Duke of Savoy: For the King being the Offspring of the 16th
Generation, was himself the 17th Generation, and the Infanta the 18th; so that
the Promise could not reach to her Issue: And if the Crown had been settled, as
'twas intended, upon her, the Prophecy could never be fulfilled. Hence, as the
Father thinks it was, that the Match with Savoy was broken off in so surprising
a manner; and that his Majesty's first Queen died to make way for his Second
Marriage, by which he had this Son, to whom we are now to return:

Upon the Birth of this Child, the Father mounts the Chair, and takes for his
Text these words, Respexit and vidit, proves by Arguments not worth repeating,
That Xavier was the shining Ray that was seen by Alfonso Henriquez, before the
Crucifix appeared to him, shows how Xavier procured the Kingdom for John the
Fourth, and this Son for the present King. He demonstrates, that since King
Peter is the diminished Offspring of the 16th Generation, This must be the
Child promised by Ipse respiciet and videbit. He then goes on to show, how that
the Child was to be an Emperor; because the Crucifix, in the beginning of his
Discourse, spoke only of a Kingdom, and the Title of a King; but after mention
made of the 16th Generation, he changes his Language, and speaks of Empires,
Ego enim aeidficator sum Regnorum and Imperiorum; and Volo in Te and in semine
tuo Imperium mihi stabilire. Now this Empire, he says, is not to be the Empire
of Germany, but one greater than any that has been before, and Universal, over
all the World; that is to say, it must be the Fifth Monarchy. That there shall
be such an Universal Monarchy, he brings the Commonplace Proofs: He allows
that this Fifth Monarchy is to be the Kingdom of Christ; but shows, that it
shall be this young Prince's nevertheless: For it is said, I will establish to
my self an Empire in Thee, and in thy Seed, Volo enim in Te and in semine Tuo
Imperium Mihi stabilire: So that the Empire was to belong to Christ, and the
Prince of Portugal, at the same time. He thinks this Promise is much alike to
that made to St. Peter, Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petrum aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam: And that as the Universal Church, though it be Christ's, is yet St. Peter's
too; and by being St. Peter's, is nevertheless the Church of Christ: In the
like manner this Empire shall be of Christ, and of the Prince of Portugal at
the same time; and in effect, the Jesuit had so ordered it, that this young
Prince was to be Christ's Vicar, and have a Sovereign Power over the whole
World, in Temporals, in the same manner as the Pope, Christ's Vicar in
Spirituals, has an Universal Jurisdiction over the Church; this Monarch being
the Person spoken of in that place of Daniel, Ecce quasi filius hominis
veniebat and ad Antiquum dierum pervenit, and dedit ei potestatem and honorem
and regnum, and omnes populi, Tribus, and Linguae, ipsi servient: For since
Christ is called, Filius hominis, this Quasi filius hominis, must be Quasi
Christus, i. e. Christ's Vicar, his Vicar in Temporals, as the Pope is in
Spirituals. That this Emperor must be a King of Portugal, is plain, because
Hannah concludes her Song with these words, Dominus judicabit fines terrae, and
dabit Imperium Regi suo, i. e. to the King of Portugal: For though all Kings may
in some sense be said to be from God, yet other Kings are made by Men, whereas
He of Portugal is made immediately by God himself, and so is more properly
called His King, Et dabit Imperium Regi suo; and he makes it plain, that his
Imperial Majesty must be the Newborn Infant; for that he was given to the
diminished Offspring of the 16th Generation from Alfonso Henriquez.

When the Father had thus provided for the young Prince, he soon after received
an Account of his Death, which doubtless would have put any other Teller of
Fortunes into no small Confusion; but it had no such effect upon Padre Vieira,
for he was a Jesuit, and was so little apprehensive of the Raillery of his
Auditors, that he published his Sermon, joining thereto an Apology; wherein he
proves, after his manner, that this Quasi filius hominis, or Christ's Vicar in
Temporals, was to die, as the Prince did, in order to take possession of the
Universal Monarchy, which he could not do any where else but in Heaven: For
does not the Text expressly say, Ecce cum nubibus Coeli quasi filius hominis
veniebat, and usque ad Antiquum dierum pervenit, and in conspectu ejus
obtulerunt eum, and dedit ei Potestatem and Honorem, etc. He supposes, that
Christ's first Vicar in Temporals, should go to Heaven, in order to take
Possession of his Government over the Earth, for the same Reason that the first
Vicar in Spirituals had the Keys of Heaven delivered to him here on Earth: For
when St. Peter had the Keys of the Church given him on Earth, Christ was
himself then on Earth; but he being now in Heaven, it was convenient that his
Vicar in Temporals should go to Heaven, in order to be instated in the
Government of the Earth, and this after the Example of Viceroys, and
Governors, who when they pay Homage for the Kingdoms and Provinces, where they
are to exercise the Power, and represent the Person of the King, do not perform
this Ceremony within the Kingdoms and Provinces committed to their Charge, but
in the place where the King then is, whether he be at Court, or whether he be
absent from it: Now Heaven is Christ's Court, and because he was in the World,
and absent from Court, when his first Vicar did Homage for the first Universal
Empire, which is that of his Church. It was done on Earth in like manner, when
this his second Vicar was to pay Homage for the second Empire, which is that of
the World, he was to do it in Heaven, because Christ is now at his Court in
Heaven: And this he concludes to be the Reason, why the Prince was to die so
soon after he was born.

But since the Prince is gone to Heaven to take Possession of the Universal
Empire, who shall have the Administration of the Government here on Earth?
Shall the Prince, who has taken his leave of us with so much haste, return
again to take it upon himself? No, he has taken Possession, and the Prince
that is to be born after him, shall have the Benefit of Primogeniture, and
succeed him in the Empire; insomuch, that the same Empire shall be common to
both the Brothers; the Eldest, that is dead, is gone to take Possession of it
in Heaven; and the Second, who is to live, shall administer it on Earth. I
confess, says the Father, this looks new and admirable, to make one only Heir
of two Brothers; that the first Brother shall take Possession, and the other
come after him, and be the Possessor: But to him, although it was wonderful, yet
it was no novelty; he thinks he has a like Instance at the Birth of Pharez and
Zarah, Sons of Judah, the Father and Founder of the Royal Tribe: Zarah put
forth his Arm, and when he had a Purple Thread tied thereto, he drew it in
again, and let Pharez be born before him, and so yielded to him the Right of
Primogeniture; by which means Zarah took Possession of the Purple, that Pharez
afterward put on and enjoyed. Thus, says the Father, was the Succession to
the Kingdom of Judah founded, and thus was the first Foundation laid of the
Empire of Portugal: The Prince that was born, and presently after withdrew into
Heaven, was like Zarah, who only took Possession of the Purple, and then drew
back his Arm; the Prince that is to be born, shall be like Pharez, and
succeeding in the Place yielded to him by his Brother, shall enjoy the same
Possession, cloth himself with the same Royal Purple, and stretch forth his
Arm to grasp the Scepter. He bestows some other Thoughts upon the Parallel, to
make it more exact, which I do not think convenient to Translate.

Dom Joaon Francisco Antonio Bento Bernardo, the King's eldest Son living, born
the 22d of October, 1689; and sworn Heir to the Crown by the Three Estates of
the Kingdom, assembled in Cortes held at Lishon, December. 1. 1697; a Prince, as
they who frequent the Court report, of a sweet and mild Disposition, and likely
to inherit the King his Father's Virtues, as well as his Throne.

Dom Francisco --, born the 25th of May, 1691; a Prince of great Vivacity and
Spirit, as appears by many pretty Stories of him, which the Portugueses
entertain themselves withal. He is designed for a Knight of Malta, at least to
hold the Grand Priory of Crato, the richest Commenda in Portugal, or perhaps in
all Spain, of which he is at present in Possession.

Dom Antonio --, born the 15th of March, 1695: He was clothed in a Jesuit's
Habit upon his first coming into the World, which he still wears, or did, at
least, not long ago; her Majesty having devoted him to her St. Xavier; and, if
the Jesuits are to be believed, he is designed to be of their Order.

Dona Theresa Francisca Josepha, born the 24th of Feb. 1696.

Dom Emanuel --, born the of 1697.

Another Princess, born in the beginning of this Year 1699. If I remember
a-right, her Name is Dona Maria Xavier Josepha.

Besides these, his Majesty has acknowledged one Natural Daughter, whose
Mother is reported to have been employed about the Palace, to sweep the lower
Rooms. This young Lady has been bred up in a Monastery, 'till the Year 1695,
when the King bestowed her in Marriage, upon the Eldest Son of the Duke of
Cadaval, to the great Dissatisfaction of the Nobility; insomuch, that few or
none of them would appear at the Public Reception of the Bride. I never heard
that their Discontent proceeded from an Opinion, that this Marriage of the
principal Person among them, was a Disgrace to the Fidalguia: In other
Countries, perhaps, and in former Times, so Illustrious a Body might think
their Blood debased by such a Match: But their Dissatisfaction was said to
proceed from another Cause, they thought the Honor was too great for any
Subject, the Duke of Cadaval not excepted; and that he was raised thereby too
much above their Level; though it be confessed by all at the same time, that next
his Majesty, his Excellency has the greatest Authority, and the greatest
Estate, and is of the Noblest Blood in the Kingdom. Yet he is not of equal
Quality, to them on whom the French King has bestowed his Bastards; for they
to whom his Most Christian Majesty has done so very great an Honor, are such
Princes as are the nearest to his Blood, much nearer than the Duke is to the
King of Portugal; no wonder then, if so great a Value is put upon the like
Honor in smaller Courts; the Authority of the French being, in this Age,
sufficient to alter, if not the Nature, at least the Appearance of Things, and
make Things look glorious in our Days, which in former Times had another
Aspect. In one Particular the Portuguese Court seems to have outdone the
French on this occasion; that is, in the Title given to this Lady, upon her
being first owned: For as I was informed, at the time it was ordered, that she
should be treated with Altesa Real; whereas, I do not find, that the French
King's Natural Children, have, as yet, got above Altesse Serenissime; and this
may possibly be the Reason, why Monsieur L'Abbe d'Estrees, the French
Ambassador, forbore to visit her, 'till he had express Orders for it from
France. For his Master having been for some time used to prescribe Rules for
the Ceremonial, he might, perhaps, think it a kind of Usurpation, for any
others to take upon them to alter it: But the Portugueses did not altogether
innovate on this occasion, for they had a Precedent at the Court of Madrid,
where the late Don John of Austria took Royal Highness upon him; which,
perhaps, may have been the cause why the Court of Portugal, which is resolved,
in all things, to swell up to the Grandeur of Spain, gave the same Title to
this Lady.

It is now commonly said in Portugal, that the King's Natural Children have a
Right to succeed him in the Throne, in default of his lawful Issue: But I
believe this Opinion to be as ill grounded, as it is derogatory to the Honor of
that Nation. Had Royal Bastards a Right to the Succession, John the Second, who
ruled with a more Absolute Power than any King of this Nation, either before,
or since, would doubtless have left the Crown to his Natural Son, Dom Jorge,
Duke of Coimbra, Progenitor of the Dukes of Aveiro, (now in Spain) he having
labored all he could, to obtain the Succession for him; but all in vain: For
he was forced, before his Death, to acknowledge for his Successor, Dom Emanuel,
then Duke of Beja, whose Brother that King had slain with his own Hands. When
Dom Antonio pretended to the Crown, after the Death of Henry the Cardinal, he
had put an end to the great Controversy at that time on foot, about the
Succession, had Bastards a Right thereto: But he himself was far from thinking
they had, and therefore he grounded his Claim upon a supposed Marriage between
Dom Luis, Son of Emanuel, with his Mother: It was a Prejudice to him indeed,
that some suspected Judaism to lie lurking in his Mother's Blood: However, the
Judges constituted by Henry to determine this Controversy, alleged his
Illegitimacy as a sufficient, and the only Cause of his Exclusion.

The only Bastard that ever Reigned in this Kingdom, was John the First; yet he
never pretended a Right of Succession to the Crown, but came in by Election of
the Estates assembled in Cortes, at a time when the Throne was declared vacant,
the other Pretenders being at that time Prisoners in Castille; and what is
more, declared Illegitimate by the Cortes, (whether justly, or not, is another
Question), so that Bastard for Bastard, it was thought fit in this Case of
Necessity, to Elect Dom John before any other.

Of the MINISTRY.
ALL Public Affairs of Importance, and such as immediately concern the King,
are here managed by a Set of Ministers, as many, or as few as the King pleases
to appoint, who together are called the Council of State; and as Members of
this Body, they are all treated with Excellency: The Reason, I suppose, is,
because that Title is given to the Counselors of State at Madrid; though another
Reason was given by one of their Number, who said, It was their due, because
they had all of them been Ambassadors.

To this Council the King refers all Matters of Moment, seldom, or never,
resolving upon any thing before the Affair has been considered and debated
among them. It Is said, the Reason why the King pays so great a Deference to
this Council, is, partly because it consists of those who had a great hand in
advancing him to his Brother's Throne; He, for this Cause, thinking it but
reasonable, that they should share in the Power they had given him; partly
moved thereto, by the frequent Remonstrances of the Jesuits, who are in great
Credit with his Majesty, and as some ill-natured People give out, are set on by
the Ministers, to be ever and anon suggesting to him, that he is obliged in
Conscience to take this Course. But most People are so well satisfied of his
Majesty's Prudence, and Justice, as to think that Things would go much better
than they do, if he would take a greater part of the Government upon himself.

This Council, as it imitates that of Madrid in other things, so it is seldom
guilty of any great Precipitation in its Proceedings; but People complain
rather of its Slowness, and want of Dispatch; and some, who love to make the
worst of things, say, That when a Business is brought before Them, they shall
sit upon it four or five Times, each Session lasting five or six Hours, and
after all, the Matter be oftentimes more perplexed and intricate than before;
and the King, who loses all this time, waiting for their Resolution, be as much
to seek as ever. But such as talk after this rate, seem to have that Opinion of
the Chapter, which is very different from what the World has entertained of the
Canons; as will appear from the Characters of some of those excellent Persons
that compose this Council: As first of,

Dom Manoel Tells de Silva, Conde de Villar Mayor, and Marchese de Alegrete. I
name him first, not because of his Quality, (for though he be most Nobly
descended, yet he gives place to others, whom I shall mention afterward), but
because He is in effect the Prime Minister of State, Affairs of the greatest
Concern being chiefly entrusted to his Management. This Lord having born Arms,
for some time, in his Youth, applied himself afterward with extraordinary
Diligence to the Study of Letters, and made a very considerable Progress
therein; insomuch, that he is esteemed for one of the most Learned Men in the
Nation. It is said, that he was much admired in Germany, for his Readiness in
speaking Latin; and, I suppose, it was to exercise himself in the same Tongue,
that in the time of his Embassy into that Country, he set himself to write in
elegant Latin, the Life of John the Second, Sir-nam'd, The Perfect Prince,
which has been published since. In this Piece, the Noble Author has attempted
to follow the Style and Method of the Ancients: How far he has attained to
either, I will not pretend to judge; but, I believe, most candid Readers will
think, he has succeeded to admiration, considering at how low an Ebb Learning
has been in Portugal for this last Age; But by this Application to his
Studies, he qualified himself for much Greater, and more Honorable
Employments, than that of an Author. At Twenty-four Years of Age, he was made
one of the Infante's Camarists, and is supposed to have had a great hand in the
last Revolution, and he has been ever since one of the nearest to the Person
of that Prince.

After some Overtures had been made of a Marriage between the King his Master,
and the Princess of Nieubourg, this Lord was pitched upon as the fittest Person
to carry on so important a Negotiation; which he brought to a happy Conclusion,
and conducted the Royal Bride with him into Portugal. Nor was that the only
Service the Conde did on this occasion, he gained an Honor for his Master,
which (the Emperor excepted) no Crowned Head in Christendom had ever attained
to before: For before he made his Public Entry into Heidelberg, he so adjusted
Matters in a Preliminary Treaty, that he was to have the Precedence of the
Elector, and the Place of Honor on all Occasions. This, say the Portugueses,
had never before been granted by an Elector, the Ambassador Extraordinary of
any King, though some of the greatest had been seeking it with much Earnestness.
But the Reputation of his Majesty's Grandeur, say they, so worthily represented
by this Great Minister, together with his Excellency's great Prudence and
Dexterity, gained for this Crown that singular Prerogative. When his Excellency
made his Public Entry, the two Princes, Frederick and Philip, waited to
receive him in the Court of the Castle, and the Elector himself went down some
of the Steps that are open to the Court, to meet the Ambassador, as he came out
of his Coach; his Electoral Highness desiring his Excellency to be covered,
gave him the Righthand, let his Excellency go before him through every Door;
and when he had conducted him to the Place of Audience, gave him the most
Honorable Seat.

This was so very great an Honor, that it had been denied, not only to
Ambassadors, but to a King in Person: For when Henry, Elect of Poland,
afterward the Third of that Name in France, called at Heidelberg, in his way
to his new Kingdom, there was not a Man to be seen in this very Court, where
the Conde de Villar Mayor, had Princes to wait upon him at his Portiere; and
the poor King was so out of Countenance, that he was fain to step aside, on
pretense of making Water, 'till some Body might come to show him up Stairs; at
last, the Rhinegrave, accompanied with two Gentlemen that had escaped from the
Butchery of Saint Barthlemi, met him half way on the Steps, excusing the
Elector his Father, Frederick the Third, that he came not to do this Office, by
reason of a certain Pain that he had in his Leg; but the old Elector invited
King Henry, the next Morning, to take a Walk with him, and by no less than
Thirty Turns in his Great Hall, like that at Westminster; he so breathed the
young King, as fully to convince him, that what his Son had said, was but a
mere Excuse. But Henry came then just reeking from shedding the Blood of
Innocents; and the old Elector, who otherwise entertained him like a Royal
Guest, had a mind to let the young King see how much a Prince falls from his
Dignity, by becoming guilty of such Barbarities. So that, I confess, this
Precedent ought not to be much insisted upon, in the Case of our Ambassador
Extraordinary.

As for the late Elector, Philip William, he, it seems, was resolved not to
stand upon Ceremonies with his Excellency; he not only gave him the Upper-hand
at his first Reception, but likewise at Meals: The Lord Ambassador always
washed first, sat in the best Place, was served first; nay, the very Electoress
her self, and the Princesses her Daughters, would needs have his Excellency
take the Precedence of them too; but he was more a Gentleman than to insist
upon his Punctilio's with Ladies: And so it was contrived, that at Conferences
with them, there should be no Canopy in the Room, and consequently no
Distinction between the Right, and the Left Hand; and that of two Rows of
Chairs, opposite to each other, the Ambassador should take the uppermost on the
one side, and the Electoress on the other, with the Princesses her Daughters
after her in their Order; his Excellency satisfying himself with this Equality
with her Highness, thinking that he had gained his Point, while he kept the
Elector below him. The old Elector, for his part, contented himself with having
got a good Match for his Daughter, while the Portugueses had all the Advantage
in the Ceremonial on their side, and were not a little elevated with the Honor
their Ambassador gained to the Crown, though it was no more than was lost by
the Father of their Queen. Nor need we wonder, that this Court should be so
highly pleased with his Excellency's Dexterity and Success herein, since the
Ceremonial is become the Grand Concern of Europe, and the Subject of the most
important Negotiations now on foot: For what is there that does perplex, and
embroil most Courts in Christendom, so much as the additional Sound of two or
three Syllables in some Princes Titles? Have we not lately seen the Force of
Blood it self suspended in the most endearing Relations? And is not
Infallibility it self at a stand, and all for want of one to determine the
several Degrees that are between an Armed Chair, and a Folding Stool?

This Nobleman, at his Return, had the Title of Marquess de Alegrete bestowed
upon him, as a Mark of Honor, in Reward for his Service. But his Dexterity in
Negotiations of this sort, make but a small part of his Character: He is
represented by all that pretend to know him, as a most accomplished Statesman,
even by those who are so ill-natured as to allow that Title to no other
Minister about the Court. He is supposed to be well acquainted with the present
Posture of Affairs in Europe, and thoroughly to understand his Master's
Interest; and above all, is accounted a Person of unbiased Integrity; his
Countrymen generally esteem him a true Portuguese, disinteressed in his
Counsels, and espousing no Party; as having no other Designs in view, but such
as he thinks may make for his Master's Service, and his Country's Good. This is
the Character that is commonly given of the Marquess; the worst that is said of
him, that I could ever hear, is, that his Tenderness for a numerous Family, and
Care in providing for them, may have a little slackned his Vigor, in opposing
the Counsels of such as are thought to have something else in view, than the
Good of the State. He is said to be very zealously addicted to the Religion of
his Country: He ascribed the happy Issue of his Negotiation at Heidelberg, to
the Prayers of two Sisters, and a Daughter of his, that are Nuns in the Convent
of Madre de Deos, a little without the City: At least the King was of this
Opinion, when Cardinal de Alemcastro was commending him for his prudent
Management, his Majesty replied, That this Lord had no part in the Success, but
that all was done to his Hand by the Madre de Deos. I have been told of another
remarkable Instance of his Lordship's Devotion, but know not what Credit it
deserves, having no other ground for it than the common Talk of the People,
among whom it was reported, That when St. Antoninho, (a small diminutive Image
of St. Antonio, that has been in great Credit for these three last Years at
Lisbon) was hired out to go Sargente Mor, to the Fleet that went last Year
(98), with the Viceroy to the East Indies, among other Perquisites promised to
the Saint, over and above his Standing-Wages of 10 Millr. per Month, the
Marquess de Algrete bargained to give him a fine new Chapel, in case he
conducted a Relation of his Lordship's safe home from Goa.

Dom Nuno Alvarez Pereira, Duke of Cadaval, Marquess of Ferreira, Earl of
Tentugal, etc. mentioned on several Occasions before, descended of the House of
Braganca, from Ferdinand the Second Duke of that Title, and consequently the
King's Kinsman. This Noble Person, notwithstanding his high Birth, and vast
Riches, has qualified himself for all manner of Employments, having commanded
both by Sea and Land, and all along made a most considerable Figure in the
State, wherein he has at present the greatest Power and Authority next the
King, having a hand in all Affairs relating to his Majesty, his Domestic
Concerns not excepted. If any part of the Public Business be more than other
his peculiar Province, I take it to be the Revenue of the Crown, whereof he is
a great Farmer, as the Foreign Affairs seems to be that of the Marquess de
Alegrete. It is agreed, that the Authority of the Council of State, does in a
manner wholly reside in these two Great Men. It is said, they have been
formerly in competition about the King's Ear, and Favor; wherein the Marquess
was upheld by the Opinion his Majesty has of his Prudence and Integrity. The
King, no doubt, has a like Opinion concerning the Duke too; but he, they say,
by the Pleasantness of his Conversation, contributes likewise to his Majesty's
Diversion, the Marquess consulting only his Country's Good, and his Master's
Service; the Duke, as it is supposed, does not wholly neglect his own Interest.
Some will have it, that he is biased in favor of France; but, perhaps, the
only Reason may be, because both his Wives have been French-Women, the present
Duchess being Daughter of the Marquess of Harcourt.

The Duke being, as I have said, the greatest Subject in the Kingdom, takes a
particular Method to make People sensible of his Grandeur; he is not of
Opinion, that he stands in any need of a pompous Equipage, or a numerous
Attendance, to make himself appear considerable; but like those famous
Statesmen, that have made the greatest Figures in the Modern, as well as the
Ancient Commonwealths, thinks the Authority of his Person sufficient to
Command those Respects that are due to his Quality. When his Excellency appears
abroad in his Litter, which certainly is not made for show, he is followed only
by a Trooper; and by him, because he is General of the Cavalry. Dukes in
Portugal had formerly their Guards allowed them; but I have not heard, that his
Excellency chooses to be attended by a Soldier, to keep up his Pretensions to
that Privilege. He is a Familiar of the Inquisition, as, I suppose, all other
Noblemen are, it being a Mark of Honor in this County; but at an Auto da Fe,
other Noblemen serve as Guards to those poor Wretches that come out to hear
their Sentence, whereas his Excellency supplies the Place of a Doorkeeper.

Many other things are told of his Excellency, by such as pretend to give his
Character; but they are Matters which the Public is not concerned to know.

Dom Luis (now Cardinal) de Sousa, Archbishop of Lisbon, and Capellaon Mor to
the King; which, I suppose, I may translate, Dean of his Majesty's Chapel; a
Prelate, who as he is of a Noble Extraction, seems to have a Mind suitable to
his Birth and Quality, and a Capacity sufficient to carry on his Designs, which
have been always great, and always successful at long run, notwithstanding the
mighty Opposition he has met with; he having been heard to say, soon after his
having received the Cap from Rome, That he never set his Heart upon any thing,
but in the End he found ways to accomplish his Desire: And in effect, he has
raised himself to the highest Dignities that either Portugal or Rome could
bestow upon him; for his being a National Cardinal, excludes him from all
Pretensions to the Pontificate.

In Alphonso's Reign he became suspected to the Court, by his associating
himself with the disaffected Party, and was therefore ordered by the King to
his Residence at O Porto, of which place he was Dean: When Bishops were
restored to Portugal, he was advanced to that See; and from thence he was
afterward translated to the Archbishopric of Lisbon; and at last, viz. in
97, received the Cardinal's Cap from Rome.

Though the two forementioned Ministers have the principal Management of
State Affairs, yet they say, this great Prelate will take care, that his Vote
shall have its due Weight in the Council, especially when he has occasion to
promote the Grandeur of his Brother's House. I cannot pretend to tell how far
he is concerned in Foreign Affairs; but we may suppose, considering his
Profession, that those relating to Rome, may, if any, be his Province: But
notwithstanding the great Favors he has received from thence, his Public
Conduct has not made him suspected of any mean Compliance with that Court; on
the contrary, he has endeavored, so far as the Genius of his Country will
permit, to reform many of those Abuses it has introduced; particularly, he
has on several Occasions shown himself a great Enemy to Exemptions, by which
that Court has established its Tyranny in the World, and ruined the Discipline
of the Church. He has had many Clashings with the Nuncio's, whose Legantine
Courts, he thinks, incroach too much upon his Episcopal Jurisdiction. In short,
he seems to have much of the same Spirit and Character with the late
Archbishop Harlai of Paris; nor has he, any more than that other great
Prelate, escaped the Lash of malicious Tongues.

I have never heard, that he has shown so little Complaisance to the Court of
Rome, in order to gain the Purple, though as all agree, he has been aiming at it
for these many Years, and considering the servile Temper of those at Rome, no
way seems more likely to succeed; but Dom Verissimo de Alemcastro, the late
Inquisitor-General, had put more signal Affronts upon the Holy See, than ever
the Archbishop either did, or could; and was (possibly for that Reason)
promoted before him: When the Pope attempted, as several of his Predecessors
had done before him, to break the present Constitution of the Holy Office,
whereof the Holy See bears all the Scandal, and reaps none of the Profit: The
Inquisitor, supported, I suppose, by the Court, (whose Creature the Inquisition
was) set them of Rome at Defiance, stood all the Fire of the Vatican, and
remained unmoved at their Censures, though they proceeded so far as to interdict
him, Ab ingressu Ecclesiae; insomuch, that his Holiness was obliged at last,
upon a slight Composition, to desist from the Enterprise; and at the next
Promotion, the Rebel-Inquisitor was rewarded with the Cap; the same Cap, which
as the Archbishop pretended, had been promised to himself. Had this been under
any other Pontificate than that of Innocent the Eleventh, the World would not
have been to seek for the Reason of the Inquisitor's Promotion; but there being
something more generous in this Pope's Nature, than in theirs that usually fill
the Holy Chair, it is not unlikely, but he had some regard to the Merit of the
Man; for all give Dom Verissimo the Character of an extraordinary good Man;
though they say withal, that he was none of the wisest; and he may therefore be
supposed to have been but an Instrument in the hands of others, when that
vigorous Opposition was made to the Pope's Design of reforming the Inquisition.

It is said, that this Promotion of the Inquisitor did not a little disgust the
Archbishop; and that he spared not to make most grievous Complaints against
those that had deceived him; and that it was not on the Court of Rome only that
he laid the Blame of his Disappointment.

By this Promotion, the Court of Rome gained some very considerable Advantages;
for thereby they took off one great Adversary, gained him over to their side,
and by his Means disarmed another, putting it out of his Power to do them any
great harm: For after this, the Cardinal, and the Archbishop were never in
good Terms together; and the Nuncio's found the Cardinal the fittest Man on all
Occasions to make head against the other, whenever he was about to give them
any Trouble: For though there was no Comparison between the Abilities of the one
and the other, yet the Cardinal was so highly esteemed for his Innocence and
Probity, by the King, Nobility, and People, that as weak as he was, he was able
to make his Party good against the Archbishop; who is far from being so much,
or so generally beloved.

But the Nuncio's have not been wanting on other Occasions, to raise up Enemies
against this Adversary of theirs, Monsignor Nicolini was so happy in the time
of his Residence, as to set the main Body of the Fidalgo's upon him: The manner
in which he effected it, does not indeed make much for the Honor of the Holy
See; however, he did not a little gratify a certain Passion, which they of
Rome are no less ready to indulge, when a fair Opportunity offers, than they
are to Court an Enemy that is too mighty for them. The Fidalgo's were much set
upon it, to have leave for a Company of Spanish Strolers to Act in the Town,
and were as much opposed by the Archbishop; who, perhaps, might think, that
the Licensing of a Public Stage, was, in effect, to Authorize the Corruption
of Manners, that it is apt to cause: Not that his Lordship was apprehensive,
least the Players should expose Religion, or turn it into Ridicule, to make
Sport for the hair-brained unthinking Youth of the Town: For, possibly, there
may not be two Nations in the World, where the Audience it self, to say nothing
of the Government, would be very patient at so horrible an Abuse; should any
thing like it be seen upon the Stage at Lisbon by these very Fidalgo's, who
were so earnest for a Playhouse, their Religion would put 'em upon chastising
the Offenders upon the Spot, in such a manner as ours will not justify. It is
not long since they gave a terrible Instance of their Zeal upon a Servant of
the French Ambassadors, who being but a French Papist, could not be persuaded
to pay the like Reverence as others did, to an Image brought upon the Stage;
which made the People fall upon him with so much Fury, that he was carried off
the place for Dead. And there is this to be said in behalf of the Spanish
Poets, that their Plays have very little of that Leudness in them, which
abounds in so scandalous a manner in those of another Country. But though
Crimes of this sort are not taught in the Playhouse there, yet it is much
suspected, that they are practiced amongst them, the Women that tread the
Stage, having no better Character there than in other Places. And this, I
presume, might be the Reason why their Admittance into Lisbon was so vigorously
opposed by the Archbishop, who to put a stop to all Importunities in their
behalf, published an Excommunication against the Players, in case they should
Act, and against all that went to see them. It was in vain for the Fidalgo's to
desire his Lordship to recall the Sentence; but at last they applied themselves
to Nicolini, the Nuncio, who had now a fair Opportunity presented him to engage
a powerful Party against the Archbishop; nor did he let slip his Advantage: It
is true, Religion and Virtue were like to suffer by what he was about; but
those of Rome think these are things to be minded, when they prove subservient
to their Designs; he, therefore, without more ado, takes off the
Excommunication by Virtue of his Legantine Power. The Playhouse hereupon
opens, and fills; the Fidalgo's flocking to it like so many Schoolboys, let
loose from under the Discipline of their Master; and, perhaps, the more
eagerly, that they might a little mortify the rigid Archbishop. His Lordship
withdraws for a time to his Country House, that he might not be a Witness to so
great a Slur put upon him, and to suppress his just Indignation against the
Nuncio. But this was only a short Mortification, which considering the
Occasion, must doubtless have turned to his Lordship's Credit, even among those
that were pleased with it at that time. The Court of Rome has since thought
convenient to present him with a Cap, viz. in the Year 1697, at a Promotion
wherein his Lordship, and Monsignor Cornaro, the then Nuncio at Lisbon, were
the only Persons advanced to the Purple.

Dom Anrique de Sousa de Tavares da Silva, Conde de Miranda, and Marquis de
Aronches, Brother to the Archbishop, and acting in concert with him; a
Minister of great Sufficiency, but too much, as it is thought, addicted to his
Pleasures: He has served in several Embassies, as to England, Spain, Holland,
and remains well affected to the People among whom he has resided: Insomuch,
that during the late War, such as would needs have the Ministers of State to
take Parties, have always given the Marquess of Aronches, together with his
Family, to the Allies; and we may suppose them to be much in the right, if we
judge how the Noble Families stand affected to other Nations, from the
Alliances they contract with Foreigners: This Lord having given his Daughter to
the Prince of Ligne, a Fleming, Subject of Spain, and Prince of the Empire, who
succeeds him in his Estate and Title; the same Person, who, by Procurement of
the Family, was sent Ambassador Extraordinary from his Portuguese Majesty to
the Emperor, and made that splendid Entry into Vienna; of which the Public had
so large an Account in the Gazettes, etc.

If I do not mention the rest that are of this Honorable Body, it is because I
am not so well instructed, as to be able to give a particular Account of them:
But I must not omit to mention the Secretary of State; who, though he has
neither a Deliberative, nor a Decisive Voice in any of the Councils, is yet, as
some term him, the Primum Mobile of the whole Kingdom: His Office is compounded
of that of Clerk of the Council, and another long since abolished, but revived
for a small time by the Conde de Castelmelhor; he that executed it, was called
the Escrivam de Puridade: Puridade, in old Portuguese, signifies Secrecy, or
Privacy; but is now out of use in that Sense: The Office seems to have been
much the same as that of Privado in Spain, or Prime Minister in France; but
nothing remains of it, now, at least in the Secretary of State, but what is
purely Ministerial. The Office of Secretary, at present, as it is a Place of
Great Trust, so it is in a manner a Place of infinite Business; he gives an
Account to the King, of whatsoever is done in the Council of State; he is
addressed to by all sorts of People that have any thing to do at Court, of what
Nature soever their Business is, he proposes the Matter to the King, and
returns his Answer; and is apyly'd to by Foreign Ministers on all occasions.
This Place is at present executed by Mendo Foyos Pereira, one raised by the
House of Aronches, and, as some say, greatly devoted to the Family: He is a
Person not so considerable for his Birth, as for his indefatigable Diligence in
his Employment; of which he acquits himself so well, that it seems to be
without Reason, that some represent him of a narrow Capacity. Foreign Ministers
find it to be much for their Convenience, to Manage the Secretary, and hold a
good Understanding with him, if they desire to have quick Dispatches; or when
Matters relating to the Ceremonial are in Question: For if he be ill used, they
may chance to meet with more Rubs in their way, than they looked for. The
Nuncio's that have been on ill Terms with him, have not been insensible of his
Resentments: However, it is thought advisable by those that have to deal with
this Minister, that in the Measures they keep with him, they beware, lest he
perceives they are in any Awe of him; since an overgreat Complaisance, may be
of worse Consequence, than a Conduct that is quite contrary.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Bennet.
FOLIO.
THucydides, Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire Manuscript Copies, and
all the Editions extant: Also illustrated with Maps, large Annotations and
Indexes. By J. Hudson, M. A. and Fellow of Vniversity-College, Oxon. To which
is added, an exact Chronology, by the Learned Henry Dodwell; never before
Published. Printed at the Theater, Oxon.

Athenae Oxoniensis: Or, an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from 1480, to the end of
the Year 1690; giving an Account of the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death
of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives, with the
Fate and Character of their Writings. The Work so complete, that no Writer of
Note of this Nation, for Two hundred Years, is omitted. In Two Volumes.

A new Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam. By Monsieur de la Loubiere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King to the King of Siam, in 1687, and
1688; wherein a full and exact Account is given of their Natural History; as
also of their Music, Arithmetic, and other Mathematick Learning: Illustrated
with Sculptures. Done out of French by Dr. P. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Father Malbranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth. The whole Work
complete; to which is added, his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a
Consequence of the Author's Principles contained in the Search; together with
F. Malbranch's Defense against Mr. de la Ville, and several other Adversaries.
All Englished by J. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen-College, Oxon, and Printed there.
The Second Edition, with some Additions, communicated by the Author.

QVARTO.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament. In two
Parts. By Father Simon, of the Oratory.

A Discourse sent to the late King James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion. By Sam. Parker, late Bishop of Oxon. To which are prefixed
two Letters, the first from Sir Lionel Jenkins, on the same Subject; the second
from the Bishop, sent with the Discourse. All Printed from the Original
Manuscripts.

A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England. By Mr. Milbourn.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. In Three Vol. By Robert South,
D. D.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. By G. Strading, D. D. and late
Dean of Chichester.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. By R. Meggot, D. D.

Of the Reverence due to God in his Public Worship. In a Sermon before the
King and Queen, at White Hall. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Nicholas,
Lord Bishop of Chester.

Three Sermons upon several Occasions. By the Right Reverend Father in God,
William, Lord Bishop of Oxford.

Two Sermons, one before the House of Commons, the other before the Queen. By
W. Jane, D. D. and Dean of Gloucester.

Three Sermons before the Queen. By Nath. Resbury, D. D.

Five Sermons upon several Occasions. By Mr. Francis Atterbury.

Two Visitation-Sermons, and one before the Societies for the Reformation of
Manners. By Mr. William Whitfield.

The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in General, or the first Grounds and
Principles of Humane Duty Established. In Eight Sermons, Preached at St.
Martins in the Field. At the Lecture for the Year 1697. Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire;

The Certainty of the Christian Revelation, and the Necessity of Believing it,
established in opposition to all the Cavils, and Insinuations, of such as
pretend to allow Natural Religion, and reject the Gospel. Both by Francis
Gastril, B. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn.

A Conference with a Theist. In Four Parts complete. By W. Nichols, D. D.

Mr. Luzancy, against the Socinians. In Two Parts.

A Discourse of Religious Assemblies, for the Use of the Members of the Church
of England. By G. Burghorpe, Rector of Little Gaddesden, in Hertford-shire.

A Discourse of Schism, addressed to those Dissenters who conformed before the
Toleration, and have since withdrawn themselves from the Communion of the
Church of England. By R. Burscough, M. A.

The Inspiration of the New Testament, Asserted and Explained; in Answer to Mr.
Le Clerc, and other Modern Writers. By G. Lamothe.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces. Translated from the French, by Mr. Tho.
Brown.

Monsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing many curious
Reflections, very useful and necessary for the right understanding of the
Excellency of Homer and Virgil.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, concerning
himself; treating of a Natural Man's Happiness, wherein it consists, and of
the Means to attain it. Translated out of the Original Greek, with Notes, by M.
Casabon, D. D. To which is added, The Life of Antoninus, with some select
Reflections upon the Whole. By Monsieur and Madam Daceir. Never before in
English.

The Art of Glass: Showing how to make all sorts of Glass, Crystal, and Enamel;
likewise the making of Pearls, Precious Stones, China, and Looking Glasses. To
which is added, The Method of Painting on Glass and Enameling; also how to
extract the Colors from Minerals, Metals, Herbs, and Flowers. A Work
containing many Secrets and Curiosities never before discovered: Illustrated
with Sculptures. Written originally in French, by Mr. H. Blancourt; and now
translated into English: With an Appendix, contaning Exact Instructions for
making Glass Eyes of all Colors.

Jacobi Patriarchae de Shiloh Vaticinium, a depravatione Johannis Clerici, in
Pentateuchum Commentatoris, Assertum Opera and Studio Sebastini Edzardi.
Accedit Ejudem Dissertatio de nomine Elohim, Aurocti Judicii de R. Simonii
Historia V. Test. Critica opposita.

An Essay concerning Self, Murder: Wherein is endeavored to prove, That it is
unlawful, according to Natural Principles. With some Considerations upon what
is pretended from the said Principles, by the Author of a Treatise, entitled,
Biathaenatos; and others. By J. Adams, Rector of St. Alban's Wood street, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

The Pretensions of the several Candidates for the Crown of Spain, discussed;
and the Necessity of the King of Portugal's being declared Successor to his
Catholic Majesty, proved: In a Letter from a Spanish Nobleman to a Counselor
of State at Madrid.

OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to other SOVEREIGNS: CONTAINING,
An Account of the most Considerable Transactions that have passed of late
between that Court, and those of Rome, Spain, France, Vienna, England, etc.
PART. II.
Of the Interests of Portugal, with Relation to Rome.

OF all the Courts with which this of Portugal has any Intercourse, that of
Rome challenges the Pre-eminence, and not without Reason, considering what
great Interest and Power the Pope has within the Kingdom; for however, He may
be slighted in other Countries, accounted Catholic, he has hitherto made
shift to maintain his Authority in this, by virtue of the extraordinary
Devotion of the Portuguese Kings toward the Holy See, which his present
Majesty has inherited from his Ancestors, together with the Title of The most
Obedient Son of the Church.

It is well known what Power Popes have had in former Ages in other parts of
Christendom, and by what means they procured and maintained it; notwithstanding
the Opposition they almost every where met with, from Princes who were
perpetually struggling to preserve or recover their Liberty. But the Case of
Portugal seems peculiar in this respect; That as it has brought its self into
a greater subjection to the Sea of Rome, than any other Kingdom, so it can
plead the Merit of a voluntary Obedience. Other Nations have shown that they
were in a State of Violence, while the Sovereign Pontiffs were exercising the
Plenitude of their Power over them, since all of them have in some measure,
more or less, eased themselves of the Oppression; while the Portugueses, who
doubtless might have gone as far as any toward the recovery of their Liberty,
do to this day bear the Yoke: It is indeed with some Impatience, for they are
not insensible of its weight and smart, and see plainly that its like to lie
heavier upon them still.

Alfonso Henriquez, their first King, refused to accept of the Crown till it
was made Tributary to his Holiness; John the 2d. who in other Cases, knew as
well as ever any Prince did, how to assert the Royal Authority, exceeded his
first Predecessor in his Respect and Deference to the Holy See; for he gave the
Pope an uncontrollable kind of Sovereignty within his Dominions, granting that
his Bulls should be Published for the future, without being examined by the
Chancellor, or any other of the King's Ministers, which was the former practice
of this, and is still observed with great exactness in other Kingdoms, to
prevent encroachments upon the Civil Power. When that Magnanimous Prince, John
the 3d. had been treated with the utmost Indignities by those of Rome, and they
conscious to themselves of their Offenses, were apprehensive of his
Resentments; Inigo Loyola Founder of the Jesuits could assure them, that he
knew the King of Portugal to be so good a Catholic, that he would suffer his
very Beard to be trampled under feet by his Holiness, without showing the least
sign of Disobedience. The Brave Sebastian, when the Pope to flatter his desire
of Glory, bid him choose what Title he pleased, answered, That he was ambitious
of no other, but that which his Ancestors had so well deserved, viz. That of
The most obedient Son of the Church.

This great Devotion of the Portuguese Kings toward the Romish See, has given
the Pope the advantage to establish an Absolute Dominion within their Kingdom.
Its true, his Holiness has the Title of Sovereign only in Spirituals, but he
so manages the matter, that Temporals fall in of course in Ordine ad
Spiritualia; he is not indeed at the trouble nor the charge of maintaining the
Civil Government, but then he has the Power and the Emoluments of a Temporal
Sovereignty. He has his Nuncio always residing at Lisbon with a Legantine
Power, and wanting only the Title of Viceroy, exercising his Jurisdiction in
his own Courts, whence there is no appeal but to Rome, over the whole Body of
the Clergy, who with their Dependents may well be reckoned one half of the
Kingdom. They are commonly supposed to have much above two thirds of the
Wealth; the secular Clergy who are more exempt than the rest from his Dominion,
are yet his Tributarys, great sums are extorted from them for Collations, to
Benefices and Bulls for Bishops: There goes to Rome, as I have been informed,
no less than 90 Thousand Crowns before an Archbishop of Evora can be settled in
his Chair, and all the rest may be supposed to pay in their Proportion. As for
the Regulars, they are his more immediate Vassals or Soldiers rather, its true
they are not in his Pay, for they live upon free Quarter, and keep the Country
under Contribution, and his Holiness comes in for a share of the Spoils, by
continually draining them of what they scrape from the People, every Monastery
having always some Business or other depending before the Nuncio; or their
Agents at Rome to procure Privileges or Indulgencies, or Composition for unsaid
Masses that have been paid for, (of which they will sometimes be behind hand
for many thousands, but upon Composition made at Rome, one high Mass said at a
privileged Altar will serve for all) or to make the Ministers of that Court
acquainted with their Squabbles among themselves. And on all these occasions,
the Money of the Kingdom is carried to Rome, to be disposed of there by
underhand Conveyances, as well as open Practices; for when a Friar is to pass
the Mountains, he is furnished with Bills for Secret, as well as Public
Service, and it is not impossible that the Holy See, may by this means undergo
greater Scandal than it deserves, for the Friars Account is allowed of upon his
own word; so that should he convert a considerable sum to his own use, he
cannot be discovered unless it be by a very rare Accident indeed, and yet it is
no unheard of thing at Lisbon, for one to be found out in reckoning some
Thousands of Crowns for Bribes, which never were expended in the Service.

But these are not the only ways by which the Riches of Portugal are drawn to
Rome; his Holiness has his Apostolical Collectors (for so they are called) to
raise Tribute from the King's Subjects as well as his own, and to receive his
share of the Taxes which the King levys in his own Dominions by his Holiness's
Permission. Dispensations for Marriages, must necessarily bring him in a very
considerable and constant Revenue, the forbidden Degrees being so very many in
the Roman Church, whether upon the account of Consanguinity, or Spiritual
Relation, that one would think there could scarce be a Wedding among Neighbors
or People, that have for any time been acquainted, without a Dispensation, and
it rarely, if ever happens, that a Match is broken off for want of one,
supposing the Parties will come up to the price of it; if they apprehend any
difficulty in it, it is but beginning the Marriage at the wrong End, and then
the Dispensation is granted of course; and the Price being raised according to
the Quality of the Persons, and nearness of the Relation, great sums are
continually drawn from Families of the better sort, who commonly marry within
themselves, and some of them entrench so far upon the Laws of Nature, that the
House of Austria in the last Age, was not more confounded by the various
Relations of its several Branches to each other, than some Noble Families in
Portugal are at this day. In fine, Portugal is so beneficial a Province to his
Holiness, that could a just Computation be made, there is no doubt but his
Revenues from thence would be found to exceed the Kings by far, the necessary
Charges of the Government deducted. They are so great, that if some sudden stop
be not put to them, the Kingdom is like to be exhausted in a very short time,
which gives thinking People here a sad prospect of the approaching Ruin of
their Country; This may appear strange to the rest of Europe, considering the
vast advantages that must necessarily have accrued to this Kingdom, from an
undisturbed Peace of above Thirty Years continuance, during which time, all
other parts of Christendom have been more than once engaged in Expensive Wars;
one would think that during the last War at least, which among many other
advantages, brought hither so great and gainful a Trade with England, as took
off all the Commodities the Country could vent, and that too, at prodigious
Rates: I believe, I may safely say, above double to what they formerly sold
for; one would think, I say, by this time that Riches and Plenty should have
abounded every where. But they that have traveled the Country of late, beheld
another Face of Things, and at the late Assembly of the Cortes, the Mouths of
the Deputies were full of complaints of an Universal Desolation and Poverty,
and I have been told, that some of them were sensible enough of the cause of
their Misery, but I have not heard that any Motion was made in their Public
Meetings for a Redress to this their greatest Grievance.

Having given some Account of the State of Portugal, with respect to Rome, it
may be expected that I should say something of the reciprocal Benefits, derived
from the Holy See, upon a People that has done, and suffers so much for its
sake, or at least, of that Fatherly Tenderness which the Pope must needs have
for a King of Portugal, who purchases the favor of his Holiness by so constant
and meritorious an Obedience. His Holiness must by some very distinguishing
marks of Affection, put a Difference between this his Benjamin, from whom he
has received so much comfort, and those other Sons of his, who by their
untoward Behavior, have been always a crossing and tormenting him, He that
has been so often worried by the headstrong Emperors in former Ages, braved
in Italy by the Spaniards in the last Age, and more than once in his own
Capital by the French in our Days, and received so many Mortifications from the
Italian Princes, from whom he might expect, that they should upon the Account
of their Natural, as well as their Spiritual Relation, behave themselves more
as becomes the Children of the Holy See, He one would think should have
reserved the greatest and best of his Blessings for this his most Obedient Son.
But the Holy Father seems to be affected with quite contrary Passions to other
Men, to have cast away his most endearing Favors where the utmost Rigor
should be expected, and where a Blessing was most looked for to have entailed
his Curse. The Royal House of Portugal has certainly had great cause for
Complaints of this kind, as often as it has been in distress, and stood in
need of his Protection. When Philip the 2d. while the Question concerning the
Succession to Henry the Cardinal was depending, was preparing by force of Arms,
to deprive the true Heiress of her Birthright; Pope Gregory the 13th. did his
utmost indeed to divert him from the enterprise, but it was to the end, that he
might seize upon the Crown for his own use, as a Chattel of the Cardinals,
alleging that his Spoils (among which he reckoned the Kingdom) were
forfeitable to the Holy See; and least this ridiculous Claim should be thought
insufficient, he added another; Alphonso Henriquez, the first King as has been
said, would needs make his Kingdom Tributary to St. Peter, and charged with the
annual Payment of four Ounces of Gold, and this was made a pretense by Pope
Gregory, for depriving the Posterity of that King of their Inheritance, he
pretending that Portugal was by this means become a Feif to St. Peter's Chair,
and as such, by default of the Male-line, was devolved to himself; but his
pretensions meeting with that contempt they deserved, he still resolved to
deprive the right Heiress at any rate, and of all the Pretenders made Interest
for him that had the worst Title, that is, for Dom Antonio the Bastard, as if
he had a mind to embroil a Kingdom that had deserved so well at his hands in
perpetual Wars. But it was for his convenience that King Philip should be
diverted from troubling him in Italy, and convenience at Rome is a just Excuse
for the worst Actions. However, when Philip by force of Arms had baffled his
Holiness, as well as all the other Pretenders, and had reduced the Kingdom to
his Obedience, the Pope made no scruple to acknowledge his Title, and treat him
as rightful King of Portugal. Nor did he in this deviate from the practice of
those that went before him, the Popes having on many occasions found it Turn to
account to approve the Titles of the most Illegal Usurpers, ever since the
extraordinary complaisance of Boniface the 3d. to the Emperor Phocas, which
gave Rise to the present Grandeur of the Holy See.

But John the 4th. the present King's Father, who had an undoubted Right to the
Crown, met with other usage at Rome, of which I shall here give a short
Account, it being a most signal proof of the Portuguese Devotion to the Holy
See; but withal it has so far opened the eyes of this Court, that the Ministers
seem to be convinced at last of this truth, that none are so hardly used by
those of Rome, as they that deserve best at their hands: This is certain, that
the Memory of it is still fresh in their minds, as the Nuncio's to their great
Regret are frequently given to understand, and is supposed to be in a great
measure the cause why their Conduct in regard to Rome, begins to vary so much
as it does from that of their Predecessors. After King John had been settled in
the Throne of his Ancestors, by the Universal Acclamation of his People, and
was possessed of all the Dominions belonging to the Crown, the little Town of
Ceuta excepted, he began to think of sending a Solemn Embassy to pay his
Obedience to the Pope, which is a custom observed by all Princes of that
Communion, and was thought necessary by this King, as well to satisfy his own
Devotion, as to establish his Authority among the People; and he thought he had
great reason to expect, that this Embassy would be very kindly received; for to
say nothing of the merits of his Ancestors, he relied much upon the Pope's
great Partiality to the French, who out of enmity to the Spaniards, had
espoused the Portuguese Interest, and solicited their cause at Rome. To render
this Embassy the more acceptable, he made choice of a Person that was of the
first Quality, and withal a Bishop Dom Miguel de Portugal, Brother to the Conde
de Vimioso. But this Ambassador arriving at Rome, found that he had been sent
upon a fruitless Errand. For the Pope as little as he cared for the Spaniards
on all other occasions, had so much respect for them at this time, that for
fear of displeasing them, he was content to put the greatest Indignity in the
World upon a King of Portugal. This was Urban the 8th. from whom better things
might been expected than from those that usually fill the Holy Chair. But his
Holiness without having the least regard to the Ambassador's Character or
Quality, or the obliging Message he came upon, refused to admit him into his
Presence, or suffer his Ministers to acknowledge him for an Ambassador, so that
after a whole years Solicitation for Audience, he was fain to return as he
came. This the Portugueses thought to be an Indignity that could not have been
put upon the Representative of any Idolatrous or Mohammedan Prince, without
violating the Laws of Nations. All the Favor that could be obtained at that
time, was, That a Congregation should be appoinned on pretense of consulting
what was fit to be done in the Case. The Congregation consisted of the two
Barbarini Cayetan, and Pamphilio; Cardinal Francisco, the elder of the
Barbarini was made Chairman, to take care that the result should be according
to his Uncle's mind. He obliged the Secretary of the Embassy to give him an
account of the King his Master's Title, and when nothing could be objected
against that, he began to pick Quarrels upon pretense that the Ecclesiastical
Immunities had been violated in Portugal, and some very great affront given to
the Apostolical Collector; and when Reparation was offered to these Grievances,
his Eminence gave the Secretary to understand, that he grew troublesome: But
Pamphilio, who it seems, was not of the secret, was clearly of Opinion, that
that the Ambassadors of King John ought to be admitted, at least after he had
been four years in Possession (supposing him to be an Usurper) and to justify
his Opinion, he wrote, as it is said, a large and learned Discourse, but when
Cardinal Pamphilio came to be Pope Innocent the 10th. he was quite of another
mind, and would not be persuaded that fourteen years Possession were sufficient
to qualify this King, to send an Ambassador to Rome.

Upon the Exaltation of this Cardinal to the Papacy, King John resolves to make
another Tender of his Obedience to the Holy See, but for fear of meeting with
the like affront as before, he signified his intention by the French Minister
then residing at Rome, and received for answer, That his Ambassador, in case he
sent any thither, should not be suffered to come within the Gates of the City.
However, his Holiness either pricked with remorse for his barbarous Usage of
this Prince, or perhaps willing to make his Injustice known to the World, in
order to inhance his merit with the Spaniards, appointed another Congregation
to consider of the matter. In this Congregation the case was again Examined and
Debated, and it plainly appeared, that according to the Civil and Canon-Laws,
the Portuguese Ambassador ought to be admitted, even supposing his Master's
Title were disputable, so that it were granted with the Reserve, sine
Praejudicio Tertij. This Result, as little favorable as it was, to one whom
they at Rome could not but know to be a Rightful King, instead of being
notified to the Party most concerned, was sent to Madrid to be communicated by
the Nuncio, there to the Ministers of that Court, his Holiness not having the
Courage to do any thing that had the least appearance of Justice, without leave
first had from them. It was indeed for his Interest to keep in if it were
possible with both Parties, but if that could not be done, the weaker was to be
Sacrifi'd to him that could do his Holiness most mischief. However, before so
beneficial a Province as Portugal was utterly abandoned, the Nuncio at a
Conference with the Spanish Ministers, made use of all his Cunning to draw them
in to consent, that his Master might act in this Case according as Justice, and
what is more as his Interest obliged him, and to make the thing go down the
more easy with them, he avoided as much as was possible coming to the merits
of the Cause, or giving the least intimation that his Master approved of the
King of Portugal's Right to the Crown. He allowed that Prince to deserve all
the ill names that the Spaniards were pleased to give him, and after all,
showed that his Master thought himself obliged in Conscience to admit of his
Ambassador, stating the Case in these most obliging Terms: That the Pope as
Christ's Vicar is under an indispensable Obligation, to use all means for
preserving the Purity of the Catholic Faith throughout the World; the first
foundation whereof is Obedience paid by a public Act to the Apostolic See,
and sworn by Princes in their own, and their Subjects behalf; and since the
Habit of Faith is consistent with sinful Acts in the same Subject, the Pope
might, and was bound to receive from a Robber and a perjured Person, a solemn
promise of Perseverance in the Catholic Faith; so that though the Castillians
held the Duke of Braganca for a Robber that had usurped the Crown of Portugal,
and for a perjured Person that had violated his Oath of Fealty to King Philip,
yet the Vicar of Christ was nevertheless under an indispensable obligation to
receive him as a faithful Son of the Church, by that Solmn Act which his
Ambassador should perform in his Name, at the feet of his Holiness.

The Spanish Ministers, who by their frequent practice with those of Rome, were
as ready at their Quirks, as the Nuncio himself answered him in his own way:
That his Holiness might as in duty bound, receive the Duke of Braganza as a
private Person, but it would be a manifest Justice to admit of him as King of
Portugal; besides, it had never been customary for those Dukes to send public
Embassys to the Sovereign Pontiffs, nor did they ever in that manner pay their
Obedience to the Apostolic See. This being a Duty incumbent only upon true and
lawful Kings, and Obedience having been already paid by King Philip, as
rightful King of Portugal, no Embassy could be received from the Duke of
Braganca. That a Robbery, as the Law teaches, did not deprive the Owner of the
Possession of a thing stolen; for though in fact he be no longer in Possession,
yet he retains it still in his mind, and for that reason, all Contracts made
with the Thief are invalid for want of a lawful Possession, from whence it
followed that the Duke of Braganca, having no lawful Possession, could not do
any Act that supposes it.

The Nuncio replies, That a Person may be said to be Master of a thing two
ways, First, by Possession, Secondly, by Detention, that allowing the Duke of
Braganca had not the Possession of Portugal, King Philip still possessing it in
his mind, as his own by right, yet it could not be denied, but that the Duke of
Braganca did detain the Kingdom, by reason of which Detention, the Pope was
obliged, not only to receive, but encourage his Devotion to the Apostolic See,
least during this Detention, the respect due to the Holy See might be lost, and
a whole Kingdom be in danger of wavering in the Faith: The Castilians return,
That these were Metaphysical Speculations, that the Law says, an unjust
Pretension cannot be a ground for any Act of Justice, especially in this case
when the acceptance of Obedience in the Form proposed, was to the end, that the
Pope should give all Princes to understand, that a wrongful Detention was
lawful Possession of a Kingdom that had been so unjustly seized upon; since the
public Actions of the Popes were taken for Authentic and drawn into
Precedent. Wherefore his Holiness should take care, least by this Action he
authorized Injustice, and made Contumacy and Rebellion a pattern of Christian
Virtue.

The Nuncio would by no means admit that these Inconveniences were to be
charged upon the most holy mind of the Pope; for, First, the Clause, sine
praejudicio Tertij, left all claims of right good and valid; Secondly, his
Holiness was ready to receive the Obedience of Philip himself as King of
Portugal, whenever he should be in actual Possession; whereby his Holiness
would manifest to the World, that he intended only Edification in Spirituals,
and not the Destruction of Temporals. But the Castillians told him, That the
Pope might as he was bound, both edify in Spirituals, and preserve the Kingdom
of Portugal to its lawful Sovereign at the same time. That in the present state
of things, there were three sorts of People of the Portuguese Nation, and that
the receiving of an Ambassador from Portugal, would manifestly turn to the
prejudice of them all; First, the Rebellious and Obstinate, who would believe
him to be their lawful King, whom Christ's Vicar should declare for such, and
thereby be confirmed in their Rebellion; Secondly, the Timorous and Wavering,
who would go over to their sentiments, whom before they took for Rebels,
arguing that a King received and approved of by the Pope, ought not to be
rejected by any Christian; Thirdly, the Constant and Loyal that were now at
King Philip's Court, who either drawn by their Love to their Country, or
wearied out by the inconvenicies they were under, might come to some desperate
Resolution, so that by this Action of his Holiness, the Kingdom of Portugal
might be put out of a possibility of being conquered by King Philip; wherefore
to obviate these Inconveniences, they thought it to be the duty of his
Holiness, to thunder out his censures against the Duke of Braganca, to the end
that the Rebels might be reclaimed, the Timorous take courage, and the good
Subjects confirmed in their duty. The Nuncio thought, That Censures in this
case would do no good, but turn to the prejudice both of the Pope and the King
of Spain; of the Pope, because his Apostolical Authority might be slighted, for
the Duke of Breganca took himself to be either the lawful King, or the Usurper
of Portugal; if the former, he could never value an unjust Excommunication, for
what he had justified to his own Conscience, and it would have less effect upon
him in case he took himself for an Usurper, it being plain that he would never
renounce the Kingdom to the loss of his Life, and the ruin of his Family. Than
an Excommunication would be of no benefit to the King of Spain, for if the
Duke, and the People of Portugal should despise and take no notice of it, as it
was likely they would, the probable and almost necessary consequence, would be
the introduction of Calvinism, or of some other Heresy, by reason of the
Neighborhood and Correspondence of that Kingdom with the Northern Nations, in
which case the conquest of Portugal would become the most difficult, for all
Sectaries being to be chastised not with ordinary Punishments, but according to
the Rigor of the Canons, the Portutugueses seeing themselves branded with a
perpetual mark of Ignominy, would grow desperate, and choose rather to die than
in any case put themselves into the Power of King Philip. But here the Spanish
Ministers took him up short, and told him, that these were Sophistical
Subtilities, and not fair Arguments, without vouchsafeing them any further
answer.

The Nuncio seeing that this way of arguing would not serve the turn, betook
himself to another, quoting Precedents from the proceedings of former Popes in
the Cases of Princes, whose Titles were disputable, and thereby demonstrated it
to have been constant practice of the Holy See, to acknowledge such as were
Kings de facto without any regard to right; alleging to this purpose a saying
of Pope Pius the 2d. Moris est sedis Apostolicae eum Regem appellare qui Regnum
tenet, and the practice of the same Pope, both in the Case of Matthias
Corvinus, and the Emperor Frederick the 3d. contending about the Kingdom of
Hungary, and of Ferdinand and Rene, about the Kingdom of Sicily, to which Rene
pretending while Ferdinand was in Possession, was put off by the Pope with this
Answer; Siquid juris competit ablatum est Ferdinando Regni Principes, Duces
Comites, and Populares omnes obediunt, eumque sibi Regem constitui
expetiverunt. But the Nuncio not content with one Example, brings in that of
Pope Zachary, who being consulted what account was to be made of the Kings of
France (the later Kings of the Merovignian Race) they having the Name and
Dignity, but others (the Mayres of the Palace) the Power; determined the
Question with this Answer; That he ought to be styled King, and held for such
who was found Reigning, and who as King had the supreme Authority of the
Commonwealth in his hands. Of John the 22d. who received the Ambassadors of
Robert Bruce, he being in Possession of the Kingdom of Scotland. Of Innocent
the 8th. who received in public Consistory the Ambassadors of Richard the 3d.
of England, as he did likewise those of Henry the 7th. when they came to pay
Obedience to the Holy See; He showed likewise that the same thing had been
done, for Alfonso Henriquez and John the 1st. Kings of Portugal,
notwithstanding the great Opposition and Power of the Kings of Leon and
Castille, for Henry of Castille the Murderer of his King and Brother Don
Pedro, against the consent and right of Constanca Pedro's Daughter, and for
Ferdinand and Isabella to the Prejudice of D. Joanna the only Daughter of Henry
the 4th.

These Instances were all home to the Point, supposing the King of Portugal's
Title to be as bad as his Enemies would have it; for let him be a Traitor,
Usurper, Tyrant, or what the Spaniards pleased, there had been as bad or worse
acknowledged for lawful Kings, and highly caressed by the Holy See. But the
Spaniards had another way to deal with the Nuncio than disputing; they offered
indeed at something of an answer to all these Instances, affirming without the
least grounds, that the greatest part of the Princes now mentioned, sent their
Ambassadors, not to pay their Obedience, but to plead their Cause, and justify
their Pretensions, and in that case granted it to be lawful for the Popes to
receive them. But to admit of an Ambassador from Dom John, as King of Portugal,
after that the Kings of Castille have been in Possession of that Kingdom for
the space of 60 Years, and sworn to as lawful Sovereigns was, they said, a
manifest injury to their cause. They thought that there was no account to be
made of any thing done or said by Pius the 2d. because that Pope was guided
only by his Interest, and varied in his Sentiments every day; and as for the
Kings of France that were acknowledged by Pope Zachary, they must needs, say
the Spaniards have been Rightful and Lawful Kings, since the Oracle of the Holy
See had pronounced them for such, for otherwise this grand Absurdity would
follow, that Popes were no better than Incendiaries, Instigators of Rebellion
and Usurpation, and instead of promoting Equity and Virtue, gave encouragment
to the most abominable Practices; and in conclusion, they told the Nuncio that
the Pope had best consider well what was just and convenient, for otherwise
they should take such Resolutions as might not be well pleasing to his
Holiness, but to sweeten the menace a little; they added that however, they
should always retain that most humble Devotion, which the Catholic Kings above
all other Princes have ever born in mind, and testified by their Actions
toward the Apostolical See.

Their meaning was understood well enough at Rome, and this Intimation of what
they should do, gave a strange force to their Arguments, and so confirmed the
wavering Pope, that he remained ever after steady to their Interest. The
Portugueses had apparently all the Right on their side, but the Spaniards were
Masters of Milan, Naples and Sicily.

From this time forward Pope Innocent turned a deaf Ear to all that could be
said in Favor of King John of Portugal, and could never be brought to grant
him that which was never denied to an Usurper. That Prince had his Agents
continually soliciting for him at Rome, in his own Name, and in behalf of the
Clergy, and of the three Estates of the Kingdom, but all to no purpose: The
French made the most pressing Instances in his behalf, but the Pope did not
mind them at that time; for France being embroiled with intestine Dissentions,
He was sure they could do him no harm. Great Court and Application was made to
Donna Olympia, as we are told by the Conde da Ericeyra, who observes that she
seldom used to fail in any Temporal Business that she undertook, alluding I
suppose to a Saying to that purpose, which was current at that time in the
Courts of Popish Princes, where upon any Disappointment of their Affairs at
Rome, the Nuncio's were sure to be told, That, if the Business had been
solicited by Donna Olympia, it had never miscarried: But on this occasion,
Donna Olympia her self could do no good, for either she did not heartily
espouse the King of Portugal's cause, or if she did, all her Artifices were
ineffectual upon the obdurate Pontiff. All the answer that could be got from
this and the former Pope, besides those frivolous Complaints before mentioned,
(for which satisfaction was still offered) was, that the Pope as the common
Father of Christendom, thought himself bound to carry it equally between
Castille and Portugal, and not acknowledge or oblige one Son when it could not
be done without offense to the other; but the Portugueses could not persuade
themselves that in this case, He in any sort acted the part of a common Father,
whilst to gratify the unreasonable Ambition of the one, he did not stick wholly
to cast off the other, and to use him in a more barbarous manner than he could
have done an Infidel. But in short the Spaniards were very rugged in their
Threats, and that stood them in stead of Right and Merit; the Portugueses
valuing themselves upon their blind Obedience to the Holy See kept within the
terms of Respect, which instead of gaining ought upon those of Rome, gave
encouragement to their Insolence.

Had King John but followed the Spaniards Example, or come to any vigorous
Resolution, he had doubtless soon brought his Holiness to a compliance, or he
might have had a fair opportunity to vindicate his Country's Liberty, in a yet
more glorious manner, than he had done already by shaking off the Spanish Yoke.
For we must know, that all these Applications to the Court of Rome, were not
made to the end only that his Title might be acknowledged there, but in order
to have the vacant Sees in his Dominions supplied with Bishops; for in a few
years after the Revolution, there was but one Bishop remaining in Portugal, and
he not Resident upon his Diocese, being obliged to attend the Court, and there
was a like want of them in the East and West Indies, in the Madera and Cap
Verde Islands, and upon the Coasts of Africa; the Portugueses therefore
labored all they could to make his Holiness sensible of the miserable state of
their Churches thus destitute of Pastors, petitioning for a supply, the King
according to the Practice of his Ancestors, proposing the Persons for that end,
and to remove all Objections, he agreed that his Nomination of the Bishops
should be admitted with the Clause, sine Praejudicio Tertij; notwithstanding
its being a clear Maxim in the Rota, and confirmed by the practice of the Roman
Church, That the simple possession of an Inheritance, City or Territory, that
has Jus Patronatus annexed to it, gives the right of Presentation to the
Possessor; but neither the reason of the thing, nor the desolate condition of
the Orphan Churches, could have any weight upon the obstinate Pope: He was more
apprehensive of the Spanish Threats, than the loss of Millions of Souls, all
that could be got from him was, that He would appoint Bishops for Portugal, on
condition, that he might name them de motu proprio; he offered indeed another
very strange Concession, which was, that the Bishops he chose of his own mere
motion, should be the very same Persons that the King had named. But the
Portugueses could not agree to this Proposal, for this among other Reasons,
that the Popes might make it a Precedent, for assuming to themselves a Right of
nominating Bishops in after times, which would prove a great grievance to the
Nation, since the Benefices that were already at his Disposal, were generally
the worst supplied.

Things being thus at a stand, the Gallicane Church undertook the cause of her
Sister of Portugal, and took the liberty to mind the Holy Father of his Duty in
a Letter, written by the Prelates assembled in a Synod, which was presented in
their Name by Cardinal Francisco Barbarini, but the Pope at that time had as
little regard to the French Church, as he had to the French Coutt: The Clergy
of that Kingdom sent their Agent to Rome, to take care of the concerns of the
Portuguese Church as well as their own; the Bishops whom King John had
nominated, sent their humble Petition to his Holiness, that they might be
admitted to the Exercise of their Charge, and their Petition was rejected with
scorn; the Cardinals of the French Faction did all the good Offices they could,
but to no purpose: Este signalized himself in a very particular manner on this
occasion, the Pope taking notice that he loytered about the City more than
became him, ordered him one day to his Diocese, saying, That it went against
his Conscience to see him absent from it so long, the Cardinal who was Young
and Resolute answered, That his Holiness had a great deal of reason to be thus
scrupulous, but being so much concerned as he was for one single Church, he
ought not wholly to neglect so many as there were in Portugal unprovided of
Bishops, and therefore he conjured him before God, and in the Name of the King
of France, from whom he had Commission so to do, that he would speedily grant
Bishops to that Kingdom. The Pope not a little surpised at so brisk an Attack,
was going away without making any other reply than, saying, I shall pluck the
Cap from off that Boy's Head; Este turns to him again, and cries, If you do, I
shall put on another of Iron, and thereupon retires to his House, fills it with
Armed Men, plants Guns at the Windows. But this being the Act of a young Man,
was of no Consequence.

But had the Portugueses been so resolute in their own cause, there is no doubt
but they had soon put an end to this trouble; nor did they want being set in a
way to free themselves from all fear of ever having the like again. For seeing
themselves cast off by the Pope in so unworthy a manner, they had recourse (as
it is affirmed in a Letter, or Remonstrance of the three Estates to the Pope) to
the most celebrated Universities and Doctors in Europe, to know their Opinions
concerning that course which was fittest for them to take in this Case, the
answers they received as they are set down in that Letter, are as follow.

Some were of Opinion, that the best way to bring the Pope to Reason, was to
take care that no Money should go out of the Kingdom to Rome upon any account
whatsoever, whether for Matrimonial Dispensations, or Renunciations of
Benefices; that all beneficed Portugueses abroad, should be called home upon
pain of having their Profits sequestered; that no Pensions be paid to any
Persons residing at Rome, whether Subjects or Strangers, with other things
which the Estates out of their great Respect to the Holy See conceal. Of this
Advice, as they say, were some belonging to the Court of Rome it self.

Others would have had the King call a National Council, wherein the Clergy
might elect a Patriarch, who should govern the Kingdom in Spirituals, with the
Power to Institute and Consecrate Bishops, which belonged to Patriarchs
according to the Ancient Canons.

Others thought that the Bishops nominated by the King, and proposed to the
Pope, who had not rejected them by any express Act of denial, might immediately
enter upon their Charge, and exercise the same, since the Pope neglected to
confirm them in the ordinary way, and yet had no objection against them, for he
had offered to confirm them de motu proprio.

A fourth was the opinion of a learned Friar, who thought that in this case of
necessity, they were obliged to have recourse to the way of choosing Bishops
anciently practiced and approved of by the Canons, and used in the Church as he
asserted for a much longer time than any other Method, viz. For the Chapter of
each Diocese to choose their own Bishop, and that the Elect being approved of
by the Clergy, People and King, and consecrated by other Bishops, the most
ancient of the Order, in case of want supplying the place of a Metropolitan,
might immediately enter upon his Charge without waiting for the Pope's
confirmation, which in this case was not necessary, it being, says the Author
of this Advice, the truest and most certain Opinion, and followed by most
Authors, that Bishops upon their Consecration receive their Authority
immediately from God. This he affirmed to be grounded upon the words of St.
Paul in the 1st. Gal. where the Apostle says, that he had received his
Apostleship from God alone, and not from the other Apostles, no not from St.
Peter the chief of them: Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus neque per hominem,
sed per Jesum Christum, and in the 2 Chap. Mihi nihil contulerunt unt aliquid
esse, nihil i. e. nullam Jurisdictionem, nullam Dignitatem, nullam Potestatem.
They that were of this Opinion said further, That it is clearly proved from
Christ's words to the Apostles, sicut me misit Pater in mundum and Ego vos
mitto in illum; whence say they, St. Cyprian and St. Cyril, gather that our
Lord gave as much Power and Authority to his Apostles, when he sent them into
the World to Preach, as he did to St. Peter when he said, Quodcunque ligaveris
super Terram erit ligatum and in caelis, and quodcunque solveris super Terram
erit solutum and in caelis (it should be ligaveritis and solveritis, the words
being spoken to all the Apostles in the Plural (...) and (...), Mat. 18. 18.)
the reason is because the words are absolute, and will admit of no
interpretation: from whence it was inferred, that Bishops succeeding the
Apostles in their ordinary Office, succeed them likewise in the ordinary
Jurisdiction annexed to that Office; and since it cannot be denied, but that the
Apostles received their Authority immediately from Christ, it must be
acknowledged that Bishops upon their Consecration do so receive it likewise,
and therefore have no need that any other should invest them with the Authority
they are possessed of already.

Two other Opinions were Printed and sent into Portugal upon this occasion,
both concurring in one conclusion, though different ways were taken to it; that
which both agreed in was, that Portugal might and was in duty bound, to proceed
to the Consecration of the Bishops nominated by the King. One of the Authors of
this Conclusion asserted, that according to the Divine appointment, the Right
of Election was in the Clergy and People, after the same manner as it was
practiced in the Primitive Church, and a long time after; which Right, he said,
was afterward transferred to the Emperors and Princes, who had Authority in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, in order to the good Government of the Commonwealth,
Ecclesiastical and Civil matters, having that mutual Dependence upon each
other, that they are inseparable: That the Popes have acquired the Right of
naming Bishops, by the Tacit consent and liberality of Princes, and this was
permitted the rather, because, Ecclesiastical Discipline was much slack'ned,
partly by the remisness of Seculars, partly by their being taken up in Military
Affairs. But in case the Pope should become guilty of the like failure, the
same Right devolved again to the Princes, as given up and abandoned by the
Pope. It was affirmed likewise, that this Right had actually been put in
practice on some occasions, even in these later times, particularly in
Castille, where in the Year 1399. Bishops were chosen and Consecrated without
any Confirmation from the Pope; King Henry the 3d. during the great Schism,
having renounced the Authority of Benedict the 13th. and committed the
Administration of Ecclesiastical Affairs to the Archbishops and Bishops,
willing them to make the same Provisions as had been used to come from the Pope.

Others who were for the same things in effect, asserted, That according to the
ancient Canons, it belonged to the Prelates of each Kingdom to institute and
consecrate Bishops, before the Popes had reserved that Power to themselves, and
undertook to prove that the same thing ought de Jure Divino, to be done in the
present Case: To have Bishops in the Church was, they said, de Jure Divino and
Naturali, since they are Shepherds of the Souls which cannot all be taken care
of by the Pope, but their being to be confirmed by the Pope before their
Consecration, is only de Jure Humano, the Obligation whereof ceases, not only
in cases of extreme necessity, but in that which is called Gravissima. That it
could not be denied, but the Necessity of the Churches of Portugal for Bishops
at that time was Gravissima, and that of the Dominions thereof in other parts
of the World Extreme.

This grand Arcanum of the Papal Empire, that Bishops may be made out of Rome,
and without the Pope's concurrence, being thus happily discovered, the
Portugueses were now put in a fair way to restore the Ancient Discipline to
their Church, and with it prosperity to their Nation, it being evident that the
Miseries they labor under, as well as the horrible Corruptions in their
Religion, are no other than the necessary Effects of the Papal Usurpation and
Tyranny; and it appears that King John did for some time, approve of the good
Advice that had been given him, at least that he would have it thought so at
Rome, for he ordered his Agent there, to get a Remonstrance to be put into the
Pope's hands, wherein among other things he declares; That he had been assured
by very learned Men, that when access and recourse to the Holy See could not be
had, it belonged to the Chapters to choose their Bishops upon his Nomination,
according as it had formerly been practiced in Spain, and was still observed in
some places, that his Holiness had no reason to be dissatisfied, if he took up
with this Resolution, after he had suffered himself to be so much slighted,
while he had the Remedy in his own hands; that if his Holiness were finally
resolved to prefer the Interests of Castille to his just Rights, he for his
part would justify himself before all Christian Princes, so that the blame of
what followed should never be laid on him.

Had the King proceeded so far as to convince the Pope that he was in earnest,
he had brought him no doubt to his own terms, or else might have done that, for
which his Posterity and Country would have the greatest cause to bless his
Memory, that is, have shaken off that intolerable Yoke, under which they are
now sinking. The very mention of having Bishops chosen by the Chapters upon the
King's Nomination, put Innocent into a terrible Fright; he had nothing to say
against the practice, or the necessity of it in the present case. But here the
Inquisition of Portugal interposed its Authority, and delivered the Pope from
the Agony he was in, by condemning the two last Opinions, and that for a reason
which comprehends the rest; they declaring the Pope as Universal Head of the
Roman Church, to have all Monarchical Power, and to be the Fountain of all
Spiritual Jurisdiction, which cannot be derived to Ecclesiastical Ministers
without his express Concession and Will. This peremptory sentence of the
Inquisition, put a stop to all further Proceedings in this Affair: The Pope
reassumed new Courage, and continued as Insolent as ever, after the King's
Declaration had brought him to his Wits-end; for as the Conde da Ericeyra in
his Portugal Restaurado tells the World, his Holiness did not stick to declare,
That the Holy Office had delivered him out of the greatest Perplexity, by
cutting a knot, which of himself he durst not meddle with: The same noble
Author tell us, That the King desisted from his Resolution, for no other
reason, but because the Inquisition did not approve of it, while there were, as
he says, a great number of learned Men, both within and without the Kingdom,
ready to justify and maintain it; so that according to the Conde, it is to the
Inquisitors, that the Portugueses owe the continuance of their Bondage, and
there is no question, but they did their utmost to obstruct the King's Design
(supposing that he had a real intention to shake off the Roman Yoke;) for
should the Church of Portugal recover her Liberty, and have her Bishops
restored to their just Authority, the Holy Office must fall of course, were the
design of that Office no other than is pretended, it is at best but an
encroachment upon the Episcopal Jurisdiction; for to the Bishops it belongs of
right to give Judgment in matters of Religion, and superintend the Discipline
of the Church, and they all along exercised this Jurisdiction which they derive
through the Apostles from Christ with that Gentleness, Tenderness and Charity,
as became the true Fathers of the Church, till the Popes began to usurp the
whole Power to themselves, or impart it to Creatures of their own; and among
the rest, to these Wolves of Inquisitors, whom in the height of their Tyranny,
they let loose upon the Church to dispossess the Shepherds and ravage the
Flock; but should an end be put to the Papal Usurpations, there would be no
further occasion for Inquisitors, and therefore it had been no wonder, if of
their own heads they made this desperate Effort to preserve their Master and
themselves. But in Truth, had King John been fully bent to break with Rome, it
is much to be questioned, whether all the Power of the Inquisition, as great as
it is supposed to be, could have frustrated his design; for in reality, this
Tribunal since its last establishment in Portugal, has had its chief support
from the Kings, who on several occasions have maintained it in spite of the
Court of Rome it self. Had the King withdrawn his Protection, it is not
unlikely but the Bishops of themselves, might have made their Party good: For
the People doubtless would prefer their Government to that of the Inquisitors,
as choosing rather to be under the Discipline of a Father, than in the hands of
those barbarous Executioners. Besides it was an easy matter for the King to
hinder the Inquisitors from giving him any trouble, some of the chief of them
owed their lives to his Mercy; the Inquisitor General for one, who stood
convicted as a Principal of the most horrible Treason that ever Traitor was
charged with, it was for no less a Crime, than a design to murder the King,
fire the City, and betray his Country to the Spaniards. It is said, that in
order to the Execution of this Treason, the Holy House had been filled with
Arms, and that which made the Plot the more remarkable, the undermanagers of it
were some of the leading Men among the New Christians, against whom the
Inquisition was erected, and upon whom the Inquisitors for the most part
exercise their Barbarities, and thereby gain what favor they have with the
People; for the rest of the Portuguses bear a mortal hatred against those among
them that go by the Name of New Christians, whom these Impostors represent as
Jews in their hearts, pretending that their Jewish blood makes them such
whether they will or no. But on this occasion it was observed, That the
Inquisition and the Synagogue were of accord together to destroy their Country,
and it is very likely that the King, had he pleased, might have rendered the
one as odious to the people as the other was. But he took other measures, and
though several Noble Men of the first Quality were Executed for this Plot, yet
the Inquisitor General was spared for fear of violating the Ecclesiastical
Immunities; yet it was as much as His Majesty could do to preserve him, and
some others of the Conspirators from being torn to pieces by the Rabble.

For these reasons I am persuaded; that some other considerations might concur
with the authority of the Inquisition, to with hold the King from with drawing
his Obedience from the Pope, what they were I shall not pretend to guess at. It
is certain that this Prince was so ill advised, that neglecting the Counsels of
Wise and Learned Men, he would never make use of any other remedy but
Supplications, and most humble submissions to his Holiness, and he was ever
after despised and slighted at Rome accordingly. For this great Deference of
his to the Holy See, made those he had to deal with there, presume the more
upon his Patience, and reject with the greater contempt all the Petitions that
were offered up in his behalf.

The Portugueses do not use to grow tame under Indignities, one would think
therefore that Nation should begin to resent this barbarous Usage, of their
King and themselves: And its true, they showed themselves to be not altogether
insensible on this occasion; for in the Year 1653. six years after the King's
Remonstrance had been given to the Pope, the three Estates of the Realm publish
a kind of Manifest, Entitled, The Bleatings [Balidos] of the Churches of
Portugal, after the Sovereign Pastor the Pope; wherein they give a most
lamentable account of their Grievances, and how rigorously the Holy Father had
dealt with them, and to make their Patience appear the more meritorious, they
let his Holiness understand, that they might have remedied themselves if they
had a mind to it, setting forth at large the opinions of the Learned on their
Case, and the reasons they were grounded on, which yet instead of making a
right use of them, they set themselves after their manner to confute, and
afterward entered a solemn Protest, which since it contains the substance of
their answers to the advice their Friends had given them; I shall here set
down, that the World may see, upon what solid grounds the three Estates of a
Kingdom thought fit to intail the most intolerable Yoke of Bondage upon
themselves and their Posterity.

They declare, That they hold it for an infallible Truth, that the Pope as he
is Christ's Vicar on Earth, Universal Pastor of the Church, and the lawful
Successor of St. Peter, is the Sovereign Monarch of the Church; all the
Authority and Power of other Ministers being derived wholly from him, which he
may suspend and limit in what form and manner he thinks convenient, it being
unlawful for any other Potentate to intermeddle with his Government, secular
Princes having nothing to do in the Affairs belonging to the Church, any
further than contributing to her Defense and Prosperity.

That though various methods have been used for the Election and Confirmation
of Bishops, yet it is an undoubted Truth, that it has always been with the
express, or at least the Tacit Approbation of the Pope, who has appointed and
consented to those several ways, according to the different circumstances of
the Times, nor has it been ever proved, say they, that there were Bishops at
any time without this confirmation. Particularly they confess, and hold for
certain, that in the Primitive Church, after the Apostles times, this Power
returned to and remained in the Pope: That if Bishops were afterward chosen by
the Clergy and People, it was by the Pope's Permission; if secular Princes in
those times intermeddled in these Elections, either by concession from the
Pope, or by their own Authority with an Usurpative Right; yet they had never
any true Right of their own to do it, and for this reason, the Apostles in the
very beginning of the Church, forbad them to concern themselves in these
matters, and if any Princes pretended to it, the Popes severely censured and
checked them for it, and they coming to understand from whence they had this
Right, were brought at last to lay it aside, and by this means it came to pass
that no Respect was had to Princes, or the consent of the People, but the Power
of Elections remained by the Pope's Authority in the Clergy and Friars of the
Diocese, and at last in the Chapters alone: And thus it continued to the
Pontificate of Boniface the 8th. and Clement the 5th. who began to reserve the
Power of instituting Bishops to themselves in some Cases, and after that,
Innocent the 4th. by a Rule in Chancery reserved it wholly to the Apostolical
See.

So that, say they, This Prerogative and Right to create Bishops was always in
the Pope as it is at present; they acknowledge indeed that even after the Rule
in Chancery came to be in force, many Princes continued to nominate Bishops for
their own Kingdoms and Dominions; but this was by Concession from the Pope, or
upon Presumption of a Privilege arising by Custom approved of by the
Apostolical See. But that it was in the Pope's breast to receive or reject
their Nomination, which did no more than capacitate the Person named to procure
the Pope's Confirmation, and sue out the Apostolical Bulls.

It is likewise, say they, An undoubted Truth, that the Power of Election which
has formerly been in the Chapter, is now wholly extinguished by means of the
Reservation made by the Rule in Chancery; so that at this time, the Pope's
Creation or Institution of Bishops, cannot properly be called a Confirmation,
because Confirmation supposes a preceding Election, but Elections are now
wholly abolished, by reason and virtue of the aforesaid Rule in Chancery; and
lastly, they hold for certain, that notwithstanding there was a time when
Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and National Councils had power to confirm Bishops,
they have now no such Power, nor can they exercise it in any case, since they
enjoyed it only by the Pope's permission, and while there was place for
Confirmation, before Elections were abolished, when the Power to appoint
Bishops had not been yet reserved by the Pope to himself, viz. by the aforesaid
Rule in Chancery.

Had an Agent from Rome, or an Inquisitor argued after this manner, it had been
no wonder, since daily experience shows how far Interest and Passion will blind
a Man's Reason, and what silly Arguments shall serve the turn for want of
better, when one is prepossest with hopes of some vast Advantage by gaining the
cause; but for the three Estates of a Nation, after what had been demonstrated
to them from Scripture and Fathers, from the constant Tradition and uniform
practice of the Catholic Church, thus to renounce their Sense and Reason, in
order only to enslave themselves when Liberty was offered them, is such a
Prodigy, that I believe no History can furnish us with a like Instance. Here we
have People exposing their Church and Nation to ruin, because a Negative was
never proved, it having never been demonstrated to them, that Popes did not
Tacitly consent to the Election of Bishops, in which for so many Ages together,
they had nothing at all to do, no more than a King of France has to do in the
choice of a King of Poland; and would the Poles think we be content to abandon
their Country to the mischiefs of an Interregnum, and submit their Necks to the
Yoke of a Foreign Tyrant, because it can never be made out, that their Kings
have not been made by his Tacit Consent, but when I see People laying so much
stress upon the Tacit Consent of the Popes, for my part, I do not at all wonder
that they ascribe so much virtue to a Rule in the Pope's Chancery, that it
shall be able to destroy the whole Hierarchy, and turn into an Arbitrary
lawless Tyranny, that most Regular and Beautiful frame of Government, which
has obtained in the Church ever since the Apostles days. However, these
Reasons, such as they were, satisfied the three Estates of Portugal, so that
instead of helping themselves as they might and ought, they took up with a
Resolution to throw themselves wholly at the Holy Father's Mercy, and in
conclusion of their Bleatings, declared, That they would wrestle with Christ's
Vicar, the Roman Angel, the Figure of God on Earth, exerting all the vigor
that their love and necessity inspired them with, till they got from him his
Blessing, and would never let go their hold till his Apostolical Hand was upon
them, and till he offered his most Holy Feet to their Mouths. The Pope finding
them to be thus resolved, thought he was sure enough of them, and therefore let
'em Bleat and Bray too as they pleased for him; for his part he would trouble
his Head no more about them, all his concern was how to oblige and humor the
boisterous Spaniards, who by their rugged behavior, were ever and anon,
threatening him into a Compliance, with their unjust and unreasonable
Pretensions, He knew not what mischief they might do him. While the Portugueses
took care to satisfy Him that he had nothing to fear from them, and I do not
find, but that they sent in their Money in the usual course, so that he lost
but little excepting what was to be got by the Bishop's Bulls, which yet as the
Spaniards would persuade him, was like to come speedily in all in a lump, they
feeding him all along with hopes, that they should make a quick dispatch of the
War. In this state did the Affairs of Portugal at Rome, continue for part of
Urban the 8th's Pontificat, all Innocent the 10th's, and Alexander the 7th's,
and till the latter end of Clement the 9th's, and during the whole Reigns of
this King's Father and Brother; but upon Dom Pedro's coming to the Government,
the Spaniards having made Peace with Portugal, and acknowledged the King's
Title, left his Holiness at Liberty to do so likewise.

And now Portugal having no such need as before of the Pope's Protection or
Favor, and being more at Liberty to make Returns of the ill usage it had
received; the Blessings of Rome began to shour down upon that favorite Kingdom
without measure. Clement the 9th. had a happy Opportunity before he died, to
signalize his Fatherly Tenderness, or rather indulgence toward his present
Majesty, and make full amends for all the Rigor used by former Popes toward
his Father and Brother; for a little before the conclusion of the Peace,
Alfonso was deposed in the manner as has been related, and Dom Pedro possessed
of his Throne, and a little after of his Bed, by marrying the Queen, the King
his Brother still living, and here was a large Field for the Apostolical
Graces: For now it was not only the King's Title that was to be acknowledged,
but the Prince his Right to his Brother's Wife and Kingdom, and his Highness
found in the Pope all the easiness he could desire. This Prince did but mention
in a Letter written on another occasion, his design of sending an Ambassador to
pay his Obedience, and his Holiness returns answer, That his Ambassador upon
his coming to Rome, should as he thought, but just meet with a kind and
honorable Reception; no scruple was made about the Prince's Right of sending
one, no enquiry into the manner of his taking upon him the Government, nor so
much as mention made of the Clause, sine Praejudicio Tertij: How different was
this usage from what his Father met with? King John had an undoubted Right to
the Crown, and the same was manifest to the World; yet his Ministers were
called to account at Rome, to show the grounds of their Master's Title, whereas
the Reasons for deposing King Alfonso, and placing Dom Pedro in the Throne,
whatever they were, were not as yet well known to the Public; and yet after
all, King John was treated like a Traitor and a Robber, and it was but just,
that Dom Pedro's Ambassador upon the first intimation of his coming, should
meet with a kind and honorable Reception at Rome. The World is not to be
informed now, what work they used to make at Rome, in Causes of Divorce,
especially, between Royal Parties; and one would think his Holiness might have
taken some time to consider of it, before he gave way to a Marriage, which I
believe never had a Precedent in the Christian World. But here we have an
instance of a Queens casting off her Husband without the least Difficulty, and
both that, and her Marriage, with her living Husband's Brother, confirmed by
his Holiness, with as much Facility, as if these were things done every day of
course; so that it cannot be denied, but the submissive Compliance of this
Pope, with the Will and Pleasure of the Portuguese Court now in the time of its
Prosperity, did equal at least, if not exceed the insolence of his Predecessors
toward that Nation in its distress. It is certain, that Clement did not a
little value himself upon his having thus far stretched the plenitude of his
Power in Dom Pedro's Favor, he thought he had done enough to atone for all
Offenses, and to inspire this Prince with as great Devotion toward the Holy
See, as any of his Predecessors have had before him, Certainly (says he to him
in his Letter on this occasion) Certainly we have labored to do you all the
Favor in the present Cause that the sacred Canons will permit, and we receive
the greatest content upon finding You so well pleased with this Pontificial
Kindness. But in Truth, the thanks you give with so much Piety and Affection,
are no more than are due, the thing it self considered; so that we with
Justice, require that you acknowledge your self indebted for it to the Goodness
of the Holy See, and you will perfectly comply with this Obligation, if you go
on to show (as truly you do) on all occasions a greater concern and affection
for whatsoever has Relation to the Holy See, and the Catholic Religion,
imitating herein the Ancient Devotion of the Portuguese Princes, who placed
their Glory in their Obedience to the same See.

But Clement the 9th's Pontificate lasted not long enough to give him time to
bestow all the Favors that were designed for Portugal, the Confirmation of the
Bishops being reserved for his Successor Clement the 10th. for that was not
done till 1670. In 1671. to oblige the new Princess (before Queen) of Portugal,
the Purple was bestowed upon the Bishop of Laon her Kinsman, better known since
by the Title of Cardinal d'Estrees, He being advanced at the Nomination of the
Crown of Portugal, and to enhance the Favor by making it particular; the Great
Sobieski had the like denied him, when he interceded for the Bishop of
Marseilles, though he pretended to the disposal of a Cap, as a Right enjoyed by
his Predecessors upon their coming to the Crown, but he was denied upon
pretense, that the Person named was none of his Subject, so that Cardinal
d'Estrees owed his Promotion purely to his being a Kinsman to the Princess of
Portugal. Innocent the 11th. Successor to Clement the 10th. after having been
baffled in the Business of the Inquisition, at his grand Promotion could not
forget the Merits of the Portuguese Court, and a Cap was bestowed upon Dom
Verissimo de Alemcastro, the Person that had been set on by the Court to put
his Holiness at Defiance; and after that Cardinal's Death, another was sent by
Innocent the 12th. to the Archbishop of Lisbon, in consideration, I suppose, of
the many Contrasts he has had with the Nuncio's; so that his Portuguese
Majesty seems now to be in Possession of a Right to dispose of a Cap, as well
as his Catholic or his most Christian Majesty, and the Ministers here having
resented it, that the Nunciature at this Court has not been an immediate step
to the Cardinalat, as it is in those of France and Spain; his present Holiness
has equaled the King of Portugal to them in this particular, likewise by
advancing the late Nuncio Cornaro to the Purple at the same time, as he did the
Archbishop at the Promotion which was made for them two only.

So that by this time the Court of Portugal seems to have discovered the secret
of gaining Favors at Rome, and indeed they appear to be somewhat sensible,
that it must be a quite different method from that formerly used, that will
procure the Holy Fathers Esteem, and work him into a Compliance: They begin to
taste and relish much the French Maxims, thinking belike that there can be no
better Pattern for the most Obedient Son of the Church to follow, than that of
his Eldest Brother; insomuch, that I find it in a Memoir said to have been
drawn up for the Instruction of a Nuncio, laid down as not the least necessary,
if not one of the hardest parts of his Task to beat out of the Ministers heads,
their fond admiration of the French King, and the opinion they have taken up of
his infallible Maxims with respect to Rome.

But the Ministers at present do not content themselves with admiring that
Great Monarch, they have made several attempts to copy after him; its true,
they follow him as yet at a very great Distance, but they may mend their Pace
in time. I have not heard that they have formally annulled the grant of John
the 2d. by which the Pope's Bulls are free from a Revision in Portugal, and
which seems to be the very Basis of his absolute Power in the Kingdom, yet by
what the Marquess of Alegrete says in his History of that King, it appears
that they are not wanting who call in Question the validity of the Grant,
though his Lordship speaking there in Quality of an Historian, leaves the
matter to be disputed by the Lawyers; but as a Minister of State, he does that
which in effect amounts almost to as much, for upon a Nuncio's arrival, his
Patent of Legate is called for in order to be Examined by the King's Council,
and it has been detained for above six Weeks to gether, and at the restoring
of it, the Nuncio has been told with an Air of Authority, That the King is not
well pleased with the Ample Powers contained in that Patent, and expects that
the Nuncio do not exercise it to the full, but keep himself within Bounds, and
the Nuncio's under this Reign have had the Discretion not to exert the utmost
of their Authority, but it mortifies them that the Court would have it thought,
that they oblige them to this Moderation, whereas they would fain seem to use
it of themselves.

But there is one thing in difference between the two Courts, which his
Holiness lays much to Heart, and by his Good Will is never like to desist from
his Pretentions, it being an affair which, as all the World agrees by this
time, is of the last Importance at Rome, for in truth it is a Money Business:
His Majesty has at several times thought fit to raise the value of the Coin,
so that the same Pieces are now reckoned at a third, more than they were at the
beginning of his Reign. Now his Holiness thinks it but reasonable, that the
sums payable to his Bankers at Lisbon, should be augmented in the same
Proportion, but the Ministers of this Court are of another Opinion, and seem
resolved never to be convinced of their Error; the Nuncio's for some years have
been laboring with all their might to undeceive them. Cardinal Cornaro when he
was just upon his departure, pressed the matter home to them, but all to no
purpose; he left them as obstinate to Conviction as he found them, and it seems
they will not be brought to understand otherwise, but that the same Piece that
before went but for two Testons, is now worth three in the Payments made to his
Holiness. Now since it is not imaginable, that the Court of Rome can be easily
brought to desist from a pretension of this kind, this Business may its feared
sometime or other, disconcert the good Harmony that is between the two Courts.

But there are other instances to show, that the Portuguese Ministers do not
make it their Business to manage his Holiness; they are grown so hardy of late
years, that they will not stick upon occasion to break in upon the
Ecclesiastical Immunities, insomuch, that in this Reign, a Convent is not near
so safe a shelter for Villains as it was formerly; the Civil Powers assuming to
themselves a liberty to judge what Crimes have the benefit of Sanctuary, and in
case they think the Crimes to be very heinous indeed, the King's Officers shall
make nothing to break into a Monastery and fetch the Criminal out by force, in
order to the Execution of Justice. I confess they are still somewhat tender in
this Point, and if it shall be made appear, that they are mistaken in the
nature of the offense, the Offender shall be returned again. Being once at a
certain place that has the Privilege of an Asylum, one of my acquaintance
there coming home told me, that he had been to wait on the late Cardinal de
Alemcastro, to engage him as Protector of the Society, to solicit the restoring
of a Person whom the Officers had violently taken out of the House, I asked
what the Man's Crime was, and he told me, it was only for killing his Wife, and
upon further enquiry, I was informed that he had not done it out of Jealousy,
for in that case he had been acquitted of course; but having married an old
Woman, he grew weary of her, and enticing her one day to a Country House, he
took occasion to cut her Throat, and going about his Business, he heard a
Servant, who by chance found the Woman weltring in her Blood, crying out that
her Mistress was a dying, he hearing that she was only a dying, whom he had
left for dead, returned and dispatched her outright, and then betook himself to
Sanctuary, and it was found upon second thoughts, that his Crime was not of so
deep a dye, as to deprive him of the benefit thereof, and so he was returned
again, and after some time, he sued out his Carta de Seguro.

But the violation of their Sanctuary is not the only Grievance that the
Friars, and consequently the Nuncio have to complain of, their Immunities have
been attempted in a yet more sensible part, it being pretended that their
Estates shall be liable to the King's Duties; several advances have been made
toward bringing this about, and great violence used as it is pretended in the
now mentioned Memoir, where I find this reckoned among other things, wherein
the Court is resolved to Copy after his most Christian Majesty.

This change of Conduct has as experience demonstrates, contributed not a
little to raise the credit of Portugal with the Court of Rome; but the Treasure
of the Nation is still flowing thither in so many Currents, that it will be
soon exhausted, if a speedy stop be not put thereto, so that the King must of
necessity come to a more vigorous Resolution, than has been yet taken; there is
no doubt but that whenever he shall attempt to save his Country, he will meet
with all the opposition that Rome and its Creatures can raise against him. But
he may turn a deaf Ear to their Clamours, the Nation by this time is
sufficiently sensible of its approaching Ruin, and begins to see from what
Quarter it is coming upon them, and there is all reason to hope that His
Majesty, if he be not wanting to himself may carry his Point, and in the end,
see himself as much respected and revered at Rome, as any Crowned Head in
Christendom.

OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to SPAIN.
NExt to the Court of Rome, that of Madrid seems at present to be in greatest
consideration at Lisbon, on account both of the near Neighborhood of the two
Kingdoms, and of his Portuguese Majesty's Pretentions to the Succession of
Spain. All former Animosities seem now to be utterly forgotten, and a sincere
Friendship and close Correspondence is maintained between the two Courts, which
as we may well suppose, the Sister Queens have not been wanting to preserve and
cultivate; the King of Portugal no doubt leaves nothing unattempted on his
part, to procure the good will of the Spanish Court, considering the melancholy
Prospect he has before him in the manifest Ruin of his numerous Family, should
the Succession be disposed of to his disadvantage, and possibly there may not
be wanting among the Spanish Grandees, who think is to be for their Countries
Interests and their own that his Pretensions should succeed. But the good
Correspondence that is now between the two Courts, seems to be of a latter date
than the conclusion of the Peace in 1668. they who then labored all they could
to hinder them from coming to an Agreement, have not been wanting in their
Endeavors to embroil them since; and it was certainly none of their fault,
that these two Kings have never come to a Rupture, their Artifices having so
far prevailed, that in the year 1681. a day was fixed on the Portuguese side
for the Declaration of a War, the Difference arose upon this Occasion.

The Governor of the Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, had in the year 1680. Peopled
and Fortified a Colony of Portugueses on the North-side of the Rio da Prata,
over against the Isle of St. Gabriel, supposing it to be within the bounds of
the Portuguese Dominions, according to the famous Repartition of the whole
World made by Pope Alexander the 6th. and his Successors between the two
Crowns; but the Governor of Buenos Aires not liking the Neighborhood of the
Portugueses, and pretending that both sides of the River, with the Isles
therein, and parts adjacent, had fallen to the share of the Spanish Crown; got
together a body of Indians, as well as Spaniards, and upon the 6th. of August
the same year, fell upon the new Planters, killing several of them, and taking
Prisoners the Governor with all that were in Arms, seizing likewise upon the
Artillery, Ammunitions, etc. When the news of this Action came to Europe, they
whose Interest it was to have the two Nations go together by the ears, made
their advantage of it, and blew the Coals into such a flame, that the Prince
Regent of Portugal ordered home his Ambassador from Madrid, commanding him to
make this Protest at his Departure; That if within the space of twenty days
reckoning, that for one on which the Protest was made, the Spaniards did not
make full Reparation for this Insult, it should be understood that a War was
declared, without any other Formality. Such Language as this having been
unusual till of late years between Crowned Heads, and not heard of even in our
times, but from one single Court, we may well guess from whence it came, and
that the Prince Regent did not of himself put it into his Ambassador's Mouth;
for Portugal being at that time as little perhaps in a condition to bear the
Expenses of a War as Spain its self, it is not likely that the Prince would
talk at that rate, unless he were made believe that he had some other Power
besides his own to back his Threats withal. They at Madrid at least seemed to
be of this Opinion, for they presently took the Alarm, insomuch, that in stead
of losing time in Consultation, according to their ordinary Custom, they with
all the have imaginable, sent the Duke of Giovinazzo away post to Lisbon, with
full power to give the Regent satisfaction.

But had they spent never so much time in deliberation, they could not have
pitched upon a fitter Person, either for spoiling a French Design, or managing
the Portuguese Court, for matters of this sort had been the Dukes business for
many years; he had served the Crown of Spain with great Dexterity, and success
in affairs of the greatest Importance, while he was Ambassador Resident at
Turin, where he broke all the measures the French had taken to engage Madam
Royal then Regent of Savoy in their Interests, and by his secret Practices so
countermined their designs upon Casal; that he kept the Place from being
delivered up to them for some years, after the bargain had been made with the
Duke of Mantua, the preservation of which place was so entirely ascribed to
him, that when he left Turin, it became the common talk of Europe, that Casal
was infallibly lost: His Conduct at Turin made him esteemed at Madrid for the
ablest Person to deal with the French Ministers, and for that reason he was in
the beginning of the year 1680. sent Ambassador into France, but for the same
Reason, King Louis thought him the most improper for that Court; his Ministers
had it seems such a dread of the Man, that they put their Master upon an Action
that will not be reckoned among the Glories of his Reign; for after the Duke
had arrived at Paris, and continued there for five Months, he was obliged to
return as he came, without having been admitted to Audience, the King
declaring, That if he did not leave the Kingdom, he would force him away by
Violence, an Indignity never before put upon the Representative of a Crowned
Head; yet such as Spain in its low condition was forced to digest, but the Duke
had now a fair opportunity to mortify the French in his turn, by defeating
their defign upon Spain and Portugal.

Upon his Arrival at Lisbon, Prince Peter more generous than to insult over an
yielding Adversary, showed by his Proceedings, that his own inclinations had
not prompted him to make his advantage of his Neighbor's weakness; for instead
of prescribing Laws to the Spaniards, who it is thought would at this juncture
have submitted to any terms of Accommodation, he was content to treat with them
upon the Square, and appointed the Duke of Cadaval, and other Commissioners, to
confer with the Duke of Giovinazzo, who soon brought them to his own terms by
an Address peculiar to himself, which was by turning things into Ridicule and
Rallying them into an Agreement; the Prince though sufficiently sensible that
what they had concluded upon was much to his disadvantage, yet suffered himself
to be persuaded by the Duke to confirm the Treaty; it may be supposed that he
began by this time to Relent, and that he showed himself more easy to make some
amends to the Spaniards for their hard usage. It is said indeed that the Duke
had a particular Talent to accommodate himself to the Humors of those he had
to deal with, and by that means to gain upon the affections of this Prince, who
was not to be imposed upon as his Ministers were, for the Duke's Jests were not
like to take with him, and therefore in his addresses to his Highness, he gave
another turn to his Discourse, Haranguing him on all occasions upon his
admirable Prudence, and greatness of Mind, and Praises, having this common with
Reproaches, that they seldom fail of their effect when there is ground for
them; the Prince Regent is reported to have told those about him, after an
Audience given to the Duke, That he knew very well that the fine things this
Man had said, tended only to deceive him, who however had got the secret to
please him, and therefore he did know how to deny him any thing.

The Agreement made at this time, had the Title of a Provisional Treaty,
because it did not determine the Right on either side, for that was to be done
at a more convenient Season. It was so contrived, that by the Articles one
would think it was designed, to give the Portugueses some satisfaction in
appearance, and all the real advantage to the Spaniards. It was agreed, that by
Order from the King of Spain, the Governor of Buenos Aires should be punished
according as the manner of his Proceedings had deserved; which Order the Duke
of Giovinazzo delivered afterward to the Prince Regent, who sent it to his
Minister at Madrid, with a Command to intercede in his Name with the Catholic
King, that the Execution of it might be suspended. All Arms, Artillery, etc.
with whatever else had been taken from the Colony were to be restored, and the
Planters suffered to return, and if any were wanting, as many others to settle
there in their room. But then they were not to fortify themselves, nor so much
as build Houses of any durable Matter, nor were they to be supplied with fresh
Men, though in never so small a Number, nor have any sort of Intercourse or
Commerce with the Indians, under Obedience to the Spaniards. Whereas the
Spaniards were to have the same use of the River, the Isles thereof, and
Territories adjacent as they had before, so that had this Provisional Treaty
continued in force, the Portuguese Colony must necessarily in a very short time
have fallen away to nothing, and the Spaniards remain confirmed in the
Possession of a Country, to which their Title was at best but Dubious. It was
indeed agreed at the same time, that Commissioners on both sides should meet
finally to determine this Affair, and that in case Matters could not be
adjusted by them, it should be referred to the Pope's Arbitration; but
considering how seldom Conferences of this kind come to any Issue, and how easy
it is for the Spaniards to make proceedings at Rome to go heavily on, one would
think they had small cause to fear that any thing in this Article should
deprive them of the Advantage they had got by the rest; and if things succeeded
not afterward to their minds, it was perhaps, because, they could not have a
Duke of Giovinazzo always at Lisbon.

The Composure of this Difference made way for a more solid and lasting
Friendship then has been usual between these, or perhaps any other bordering
Nations; that hostile Disposition which in former Ages, was always observed in
these toward each other, and had been exasperated by a late War of 27 years
continuance, seemed now to be worn away on a sudden, and they began to
familiarise themselves with each other; for the Duke of Giovinazzo, while he so
happily acquitted himself to his Master's satisfaction in a Negotiation, that
was thought to be attended with insuperable Difficulties, managed Matters, so
that he was no less pleasing to the Portuguese Court, then to that of Madrid,
rendering himself acceptable to all, and gaining the Universal Esteem of the
Prince, Nobility and People; and as he was highly carress'd during his stay at
Lisbon, he was as much regretted at his Departure.

There is no doubt but the Marriage of the Q. of Portugal's Sister to the King
of Spain, contributed not a little to perfect the Harmony that is at present
between the two Crowns, and perhaps her want of Children much more, for it
being now apparent to the World, that King Peter has entered his Name among
the Candidates for the Spanish Crown, it is natural to suppose that his
endeavors are not wanting to keep up the good Correspondence; yet were we to
judge of the inclinations of the Spanish Court, from the most obliging Carriage
of the Marquis de Castle dos Rios, their late Minister at Lisbon, one would
think that Spain expected to reap all the advantage from the good amity; little
would one guess from the Conduct of this Minister, that the King of Portugal
was not many years ago looked upon as his Master's Rebel, there being scarce a
Gentleman in Portugal more intent than he in making his Court, or more careful
to render himself acceptable. He to gain their Majesty's Favor, has during
the whole time of his Residence, that is, for about seven years together on
every Birth-night of the Eldest Prince, entertained the Nobility and Foreign
Ministers with a new Opera of his own Composure, and acted by his own Family,
and all to Celebrate the future Glorys of his Highness. It would perhaps seem
trifling in any other times but ours, to draw Consequences from any thing of
this kind, but in our Age, Persons of his Excellencies Character do every thing
by Prescription, and the lightest matters of Ceremony are exactly weighed.

It does not yet appear what advances the King of Portugal has made at Madrid,
toward the making good his Pretensions to the Succession, the public
Relations of the Proceedings at that Court, do as yet give but a slender
Account of his Success; however, the frequent Couriers that pass, and repass,
between the two Courts upon every alarm of the King of Spain's Indisposition,
show that his Agents there are busy in carrying on his Interests, and his late
Levies raised and maintained at an expense which his Kingdom is so little in a
condition to bear, are an Argument that he is resolved to make One among the
Competitors, as indeed it concerns him much to be, considering the apparent
danger of his own Crown, in case he miscarries in his design upon that of
Spain; for whether a Prince of the House of Austria, or of France, shall
inherit that Crown, he will be Heir at the same time to Philip the 2d's Title to
Portugal, which as unjust as it was, was strengthened by sixty years
Possession, and the Approbation of several Popes; and whosoever reflects upon
the Conduct of the House of Austria in the last Age, or of the French King in
this, will find that very slender Pretenses have served the turn, when either
of them has had a fair opportunity to invade his Neighbor, and see cause
enough to be afraid; for the House of Braganca, should it ever have the
misfortune to ly at their Mercy, as it almost infallibly will do, when either
of them shall be in quiet Possession of the Spanish Monarchy; for Spain upon
any change of Government, will almost necessarily recover so much of its
ancient Vigor, as to be overmatch for Portugal. This small Kingdom may perhaps
have some cause to hope, that its destruction will come on more slowly, in case
it has to deal with an Austrian Prince, but whether it will be therefore the
less, sure is a question soon decided, when we consider what a close Union
there has always been between the two Branches of that House, each espousing
the Interest and Quarrels of the other, and making them its own; how great a
part the Spaniards had in the German Usurpations, in the business of the
Palatinate, and the Catholic League; and how far the German Line interessed it
self in behalf of the Spaniards upon the Revolt of Portugal; when to revenge
their Quarrel, the Imperialists contrary to all Faith, and Honor, the Right of
Nations, and the Laws of Hospitality seized upon Prince Duarte, the King of
Portugal's Brother, and made him end his days in a Prison. Now when a Prince of
the same House, less Religious than his present Imperial Majesty (and one of
his Character does not arise in every Age) shall come to have Portugal in his
power, can we think it likely, that he will so far forget the Maxims of his
Ancestors, as to cherish a Race, that has occasioned so many disgraces to a
Family? But if the King of Portugal has little cause to expect security from
that House, he would have less reason to think himself safe, should he fall
under the Power of France; it is true indeed, if words of Friendship could
insure him, he would be freest from danger, while the French are putting
themselves in a Condition to destroy him, who till they are ready to give the
Blow, are always lavish of their kind Promises, which such as have trusted in
them, have found to be the forerunners or the means rather of their Ruin.
Should a French Prince become possessed of the Spanish Monarchy, if Philip the
2d's Title will not do, there are a great many others now dormant, that will
quickly be started up, the Kingdom of Portugal will soon be found to have been
a Dependence of Castille, and it is but erecting a Chamber of Reunion to annex
it thereto again, or a Right of Devolution may be pretended by the forfeitures
which the Kings have incurred, they having been formerly Feudatorys to those of
Leon, or the Great Monarch may think it will be for his Glory or his
Convenience, to order his Generals to take Possession of this small Kingdom,
and that, as appears from some Presidents, may be thought right sufficient.

It is not to be imagined, that the Court of Portugal is at this time of the
Day insensible of the Dangers they are threatened with, the Agonies that the
Ministers were in not long ago during his Catholic Majesty's Sickness, could
scarce be thought to proceed from any other Cause, and a Paper lately published
in English, shows that they have been setting their Wits at Work to find out
means for their Preservation, that is, to make good their Master's Claim to the
Succession (which as they seem to be persuaded, is) the only visible way to
secure themselves at this Juncture. The Author of that Paper seems to have left
nothing unsaid that may make for his Master's Cause, and he has gone a great
way to prove him to have a much better Right than any other Pretender, if it be
true, as he intimates, that there is such a Fundamental Law in Spain, as
excludes Foreigners from the Succession, and I believe there can be no
Instance given of any such, that have succeeded in a regular Way, except it be
Charles the 5th, who was yet Son to the immmediate Heiress, and possessed of
the Crown in his Mother's lifetime: As for his Son Philip the 2d. and the rest
that came after him, they were all natural born Spaniards, which Privilege must
be granted to the Kings of Portugal, while Portugal is allowed to be a part of
Spain, and it is certain that they are descended from Donna Maria, Daughter to
Ferdinand and Isabella, and Sister to her who brought the Crown into the
Austrian Family; so that if there be any such Law, as the aforesaid Author
hints at, the King of Portugal may have a very fair Title, the Dauphin as it is
asserted by his Competitors, being excluded by virtue of the Renunciation which
was the necessary Condition of his Mothers Marriage, and the German line with
the House of Savoy for their being Foreigners. This appears to be the best
Title the King of Portugal can pretend to by Descent; it is true, the
forementioned Writer sets up another, which he says, His Master derives from
his Predecessor Dom Ferdinand King of Portugal, but upon what Grounds I shall
not examine. It were much to be wished for the sake, both of the common Repose
of Europe, and the Preservation of the Spanish Monarchy in particular; that his
Majesty's Right was unquestionable since Spain by the Reunion of Portugal,
might be enabled even at present to do something toward its own Defense, and
in time gather strength, so as to subsist of it self, and ease its Allys of the
great Charge and Trouble they are at, in keeping it from falling into Ruin.

There is one Advantage on the King of Portugal's side, that must not be
omitted, which is, That it will be very difficult for any other Prince to gain
this Crown without his Consent, he being ready upon the place to oppose any
other Pretender; his Forces indeed are but very small, when compared to those
of other Princes, yet they are such, as with a little assistance from his
Allies, may be able to make head against an Invader, and perhaps prove more
numerous than any Army that can march into the heart of Spain, though furnished
out by the great Monarch himself: Spain having this advantage from her present
Desolation and Misery, that though she can make little Resistance against any
powerful Enemies, yet she will go near starve them, if they come upon her in any
considerable Numbers. An Army that passes the Pirenees, must not look for such
Entertainment as is to be met with in other parts of Europe; it was no
difficult matter for the French King, possessed as he was of the strong Holds
on both sides him, to maintain his hundreds of thousands in the fruitful
Countries of Flanders, and on the Banks of the Rhine, but he may find it a
harder task to subsist a third part of that Number in Spain, than it was for
him to do the same in Piedmont during the last War. A Traveller that passes
through such Parts of this Country, as Nature has been most indulgent to, is
like to fare but ill, unless he carries Provision with him, and that for Beast
as well as Man; but whether an Army like any of those that have been on foot of
late Years, can come thus provided for so long a March as it is over the
Pirenees into the midst of Spain, let others more skillful in these matters
judge, but if it brings not along with it all things necessary for life, it is
like to be ill supplied, and that not only in those bare and cragged Mountains,
over which it must climb, but in the flat Country likewise; ill watered for the
most part, dispeopled, and uncultivated, and so parcht up, that scarce any
thing Green appears in the Season, when Armies usually take the Field. In
effect, the impossibility for a more numerous Army than their own to subsist in
Spain, is generally what the Portugueses answer, when they are told of the
great Forces which his Most Christian Majesty has in readiness, and it is very
probable, that in case they be assisted with a competent number of well
disciplined Troops from abroad, their being beforehand with him upon the Place,
and having their Magazins on the Frontiers, will give them a great Advantage,
especially if they can but bring the Spaniards heartily to join with them in
defense of their common Liberty; and one would think they should readily accept
the Party, at least in opposition to the French, whose Government they must
necessarily have in greater abhorrence, than the Portugueses themselves,
considering the Antipathy that has been always between them and the French,
which has been kept alive by the continual Wars they have had with them, and of
late Years seems to have been heightened to the utmost Extremity of Hatred by
the many intolerable and ungenerous insults they have received from them, with
which the French have on all occasions been very careful to refresh their
Memories; so that there is all reason to believe, they will be much sooner
inclined to forget their former Animosities with their Portuguese Neighbors.
Their Enmity to these never was so great as to make them banish all thoughts of
uniting under one head, a thing often declared impracticable in regard to the
French, in several Public and Solemn Treaties; whereas in the very heat of the
last War with Portugal, there was a Negotiation carrying on, and some advances
made on both sides, to have a Portuguese Prince placed on the Throne of Spain.

For in the Year 1650. when Philip the 4th. having no other Child to inherit
his Crown but the Infanta Donna Teresa Maria, the great Men in Spain were all
for having that Princess married within the Kingdom, it being a common saying
among them at that time, That it was a very hard thing that they could never
have a King with Black Whiskers; upon this, the King of Portugal was encouraged
by the secret Intelligence he had at that Court, to think of a Marriage between
the Infanta and his Eldest Son Dom Theodosio, and thereupon sent Antonio Vieira
the Jesuit to Rome upon other Pretenses, but with Instructions and Powers to
propose the Match to the Spanish Ministers there, and he pretends that he
wrought so effectually with some of the Principal Persons of that Nation and
Faction, that he brought them to a great liking of his Proposal, insomuch that
they seemed desirous it should take effect, though the Match could not be
approved of by the Court of Madrid. The Arguments by which Vieira prevailed
with the Ministers at Rome, were drawn from the high Birth of the Prince, his
being descended from the same Ancestors with the Infanta, and his Extraordinary
Qualifications, all which were such that had things continued in the same state
they had been in before the War; there was no question but that Dom Theodosio
would have been the only Person pitched upon, but the Jesuit urged, that as the
case then stood, there were much stronger Arguments in his Favor; he being to
bring along with him the Kingdom of Portugal, with all the Dominions belonging
thereto in the one half of the World; that Portugal it self was a part and
member of Spain, and by its Reunion would make the Monarchy entire again,
which would thereby become more Powerful and Flourishing, than before the
Separation: for the several Armies which at that time were employed on both
sides upon the Frontiers, might then be all united together in one Body under
the same Head, and Spain be so strengthened thereby, as to be able to give
Protection to their Friends, be revered by Neutrals, and become a Terror to
their Enemies. These Arguments if we can believe Vieira, were well tasted by
those of the Spanish Party at Rome, at a time when the Enmity between the two
Nations was at the highest; but now all Animosities being laid aside, perhaps
the same, or others of a like nature may be hearkened to at Madrid, and incline
those of that Court to distinguish the King of Portugal from among the rest
that are Candidates for the Succession. There was one Scruple that the
Portugueses made themselves at that time, they were unwilling to consent to a
Reunion, unless Lisbon was to be the Capital of the Spanish Monarchy; but
certainly the Spaniards, if they knew their own Interests, in case they agreed
in other things, would readily gratify them in this Point. Lisbon by its
Situation so near the Sea, and upon the noblest River in the World, seems
designed by Nature for the great Emporium of Europe, and were it in the hands
of a People that knew how to improve their Advantage, it would go near to draw
to it self the Trade and Riches of the World. Philip the 2d. was sensible of
this, and therefore when he came to take Possession of the Kingdom, he
promised, and as it was thought, designed, that instead of keeping his Court at
Madrid, a 100 Leagues within the Land, Lisbon should be thence forward the
place of his Residence, and in order thereto, he began the Structure of a most
magnificent Palace, but it was well for Christendom that he continued not in
this Resolution, and that his Son Philip the 3d. took it not up after him, for
perhaps nothing could have contributed more to bring about the design they had
laid of an Universal Monarchy.

I shall conclude this Chapter with this one Remark, that it seems fatal to the
Spanish Monarchy to owe her Preservation from utter Ruin, to those who have
brought her to a Condition, in which she is unable to help her self; they were
the English that first humbled the Spaniards, when in the very height of their
Pride, and from them do they now expect Relief in this their Extremity. By that
expensive War in the Low Countries, carried on successively by the three
Philips, this Monarchy was brought into a languishing State, and the Dutch have
since stood in the gap between it and destruction; the Portugueses at last gave
that Monarchy its mortal. Wound, since which it has never been able to hold up
its Head; the French indeed had endeavored to do the the same in that long War
which preceded the Peace of the Pirenees, but did not effect it, for the
Spaniards stood upon the level with them at that Treaty; it is true, some
thought their Ruin might have been then completed, had that War according to
Mr. Turenne's Advice been continued a little longer, and Don Luis de Haro, if
it be true what is reported of him, was much of the same Opinion, but Cardinal
Mazarin was ambitious to have that Spanish Minister, and all the World sensible
of the Superiority of his Genius, and so interrupted the course of Turenne's
Victories, and would needs meet Don Luis on the Frontiers, that they might have
a public Trial of each others Politics; Don Luis met the Cardinal, and gave
his Eminence occasion to make as great a flourish as he pleased of all his rare
Talents, but when the Peace came to be Signed, he could hold out no longer, nor
forbear crying to his Friends, Spain was lost, but is now safe. So that the
French left to their abandoned Friends of Portugal, the Honor of working out
the destruction of the Spanish Monarchy, which by the help of their Allies,
they did effectually, at the two decisive Battles of Ameixial and Montesclaros,
the Spaniards having never after been able to stand upon their own legs, but as
they were crutch'd up by the English and Dutch, who ever since have had them
lying on their hands, as a Punishment for what they did toward bringing them
into this deplorable Condition; and now it seems that the Portuguses have their
turn come, to contribute on their parts to the Relief of this distressed
Nation, and who knows but the Spanish Monarchy may at last receive its Cure
from the Hand that gave it the last and deepest Wound, and recover new Life and
Vigor by means of the Portugueses, who have been the immediate occasion of its
fall.

OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to FRANCE.
SInce the Revolt of Portugal from the Spaniards, there has been till now of
late, an Appearance of a very close Union between This and the Crown of France,
which seemed to be so well cemented, as if nothing were able to separate them;
and indeed, were the common Opinion of the World true, concerning the
Obligations of the Portuguese Nation to the French, it would be no wonder if
their Friendship was in Effect so great as it appeared. For they would then
stand engaged to each other by the most endearing Ties in the World, France
would have cause to account of Portugal as a Creature of its own raising, and
the House of Braganca would owe its establishment upon the Throne to his most
Christian Majesty. What greater Testimony of a sincere and cordial Affection
can there be expected from one Ally to another, than that which France gave to
Portugal in the Preamble to the 60th. Article in the Pirenean Treaty, that very
Article whereby Portugal was abandoned to the mercy of the Spaniards, for
therein his most Christian Majesty declares himself to be so passionately
concerned for the good of this Kingdom, that on condition he could but procure
for it the Benefits of Peace, he was willing among other things to yield up all
the Conquests he had gained in the course of a tedious War of twenty five years
continuance, and all this out of pure Generosity. He being as it is there
declared, under no other sort of Engagement, than that of his own Good Will.

But upon a Review of the Transactions that have passed between the two Crowns,
it will perhaps be found that the obligations of Portugal to France, have not
been so very great as the World is apt to imagine. It cannot be denied, but
that the French have all along exceeded other People by far in their
Professions of Kindness to this Nation, but it will appear that those
Professions, have not always been accompanied with suitable Effects, and it
must have been some other means besides real Acts of Friendship, whereby they
have supported their Interest and Party in this Kingdom. I shall in conclusion
of this Chapter, show as well as I am able what those means were.

When the Portuguses had shaken off the Spanish Yoke, they found the French
engaged in a War against the same Nation, and they looked for mighty assistance
from them, considering the Diversion they were like to give to the common
Enemy, and in effect, the Ambassadors sent by King John to that Court, were
received by Cardinal Richelieu, with all the Demonstrations of kindness
imaginable, his Promises out running all that they could desire or wish for,
insomuch, that the Messineses in our days did not think themselves more happy
in the French Friendship at the first Engagement, than the Portugueses did at
that time. A perpetual Peace was presently concluded between the two Crowns,
each obliging himself to distress the Common Enemy by all possible means; to
this end, the King of France was to send twenty Men of War to join so many of
the King of Portugals. But I do not find that any great matter came of this
Agreement, unless it were the taking of Port Longone for the French in 1646.
when they persuaded the Portugueses to join them with a Squadron of their
Ships, for it does not appear, that the Portugueses, for the space of almost
twenty years, received the least assistance from France, but they were left to
shift for themselves unexperienced as they were, and unprovided of all Military
Preparations. They were all that time exposed to the first fury of the
Spaniards at their own home, while in all other Parts of their Dominions, the
French were possessing themselves of their Frontier Towns: It Is true, the
Portugueses were encouraged all along with very large Promises of intended
succors, but these Promises were turned into Excuses, as often as they had
occasion to make trial of what their Friends would do for them; when they
desired a supply of Money toward the Charges of the War, the French were in
want themselves; when they asked for Auxiliary Troops, the French on their Part
would have Money for them, and required such excessive Sums, that the
Portugueses, though they were brought in their necessity to bid high, could
never come up to their Price. Once indeed, Mazarin was for sending them a far
greater supply of Men than they desired, for when the treaty of Munster was on
foot, while the French were thinking of making their Peace, the Cardinal was
very desirous to have the War transferred into Portugal, and to discharge into
that Kingdom the Soldiery that might prove burthensom to France. But the
Portugueses had no mind to have more French among them, than they knew how to
deal with, and gave his Eminence to understand, that they were afraid in case
they should accept his offer, of being more oppressed by their Friends, than
they were already by their Enemies; so that after almost twenty years spent in
Negotiations, I do not find that there was so much as one Company of French
Soldiers in the Portuguese Service.

Being thus left to themselves to bear the Brunt of the War, they were still
encouraged with hopes, that their Allies whenever they made Peace, would not
fail to procure very advantageous Terms for them, who contributed so much as
they did to divert and weaken the Enemy. At their first making an Alliance with
France, they found the Ministers of that Court so extremely obliging, and ready
to do more for them than they demanded, that they did not then think it
necessary to press them upon this Point. But coming afterward to perceive
their Error, they obtained a Promise of Louis the 13th. to make with them a
League offensive and Defensive; and in order thereto, a Treaty was entered upon
with Richelieu, but when they were in a fair way to bring it to a Conclusion,
that Cardinal died to their great Misfortune. For he being of a far more
generous Temper than his Successor, they had doubtless received better Usage
from him, than they afterward met with at the French Court. Mazarin indeed who
succeeded him in the Ministry, was used on all occasions to go beyond him in
fair Promises, but to come very short in Performances: He when the Portugueses
proposed the League to him, finding them already embarkt so far, that there was
no drawing back for them, would by no means hearken to their Proposal, telling
them, that the Alliance already made was sufficient; to enter into new
Engagements, would argue a Distrust between the two Kings, whereas his most
Christian Majesty had so tender a concern for his Friends, that nothing should
be wanting on his part for their Preservation; however, he did not put them out
of Hopes, but that such a League as they desired, should be concluded some time
or other, but when they afterward grew urgent with him, he fed them still with
Promises, or put them off with Delays, and sometimes he would keep them in
Play, by amusing them with all the Formalities of a Treaty which went forwards,
or was broken off according to the several occasions he had for them. While
there was any Prospect of concluding a Peace or Truce between the French and
Spaniards at Munster, the Cardinal was thinking to dispose the French Troops in
the manner now mentioned, for which, and other Reasons, he judged it convenient
to have Portugal excluded out of the Peace. But the Portugueses at the same
time were the more importunate with him to get themselves comprehended, and to
that end solicited with greater earnestness than ever the Ratification of the
so long promised League, and they pressed so very hard upon him, that his
Eminence was at a loss how to put by their importunities; his Excuses were now
spent, or by being often used had lost their force, and he was reduced to his
last shifts for a new one. The King of Portugal at last furnished him with one,
it was indeed such a one as a Body would think was very remote and odd, however
it served the Cardinal's Turn for that time.

There stands at Villa Vicosa the ancient seat of the Dukes of Braganca, an old
Lady of the Conception, the most ancient of all the Ladies bearing that Title
throughout Spain; to whom the Dukes have all along had a most singular
Devotion, and as they thought not without Reason, she having served them in
place of a Lar to the Family. For as I remember, I have been told by one that
had reason to know the concerns of that House, there have no considerable
Alterations happened in the Family, but this Image, as it has been believed
since, has some way or other given them notice of it before hand. King John
after he had been pretty well settled in the Throne, began to remember his old
Penates, and thought he could do no less in gratitude for the Favors received
from this Lady, than devote himself and all his Dominions to the Immaculate
Conception; declaring the Lady of that Appellation Protectress and Guardian of
the Kingdom, obliging himself and his Successors to pay her at her House at
Villa Vicosa, the annual Tribute of fifty Crowns of Gold, as an acknowledgment
of their Homage; and withal according to the Custom of ancient Chivalry, he
made a solemn. Vow to defend her Immaculate Conception with his Arms. Not
content to do this himself, he obliged the three Estates of the Kingdom
assembled in Cortes to enter into an Association to the same purpose, every
Member engaging himself by Oath to hold and maintain that Important Article. At
the same time it was Declared and Enacted by his Majesty, That whosoever should
attempt any thing against it in case he were a Subject, he should be
unnaturalized, and cast out of the Kingdom; if he were a King, he desired that
God's Curse and his own might light upon him, that he might not be reckoned
among his Descendents, hoping through the Divine Favor, that he would be
thrown down from the Throne and dispoiled of the Royal Dignity. This Act passed
the 5th. of March in the year 1646. Hitherto all things went smoothly on, there
being nothing in the Association, but what the generality of the Portugueses
were willing to assent to, and maintain with their Lives and Fortunes. But the
King would needs have the Dominican Friars swear to it, Men that are Thomists
upon Oath, and whose Order had all along asserted a contrary Doctrine to that
which the King would now force upon them. This Business was in Agitation while
the Portugueses were adjusting all things in order to conclude the League with
France. But Mazarin had now what he looked for, a Pretext to break off the
Treaty; for his Eminence sent the King word, that he thought it a very strange
thing for him to put such a hardship upon the Dominicans. But the King
continued in his Resolution, which the Cardinal took very ill at his hands; but
the King in this case made no Account of his Anger, for as the Conde da
Ericeyra says, his Devotion to our Lady was such, that no Politic
Consideration could make him desist from his Purpose, and doubtless the
Cardinal foresaw as much, or else he had put his Invention to the rack to find
out some other occasion for a Quarrel.

But the Congress at Munster being upon the point to break up, and things
remaining in the same state as before between France and Spain; the Cardinal
was for bringing on again the Treaty of a League with Portugal, but still he
insisted upon unreasonable Conditions, and among others would have cautionary
Towns put into the French hands, with two Harbors that were capable of the
greatest Fleets. He was encouraged to make this Demand by the famous Jesuit
Antonio Vieira, who had been sent to Paris to assist at the Conferences with
the French Ministers, with Power to make what Proposals he in his own
Discretion thought fit, and the Father was so very forward in making large
Promises, that the Cardinal thought he could not be too exorbitant in his
Demands, and they made such a bargin of it between them, that the Ambassador
was fain to interpose and put a stop to their Proceedings, by declaring that he
would sooner have his hands cut off, than sign what the Jesuit was agreeing to.

After this manner did his Eminence play fast and loose with his Friends till
the year 1655. when the Spaniards had like to have done their Enemies of
Portugal a kindness, which they found it impossible to do for themselves; for
if the Portugueses had made use of the advantage which the Spaniards had put
into their hands, they might have managed the Cardinal as they pleased, and
brought him to Terms of their own prescribing. The Spaniards in order to make
mischief in Portugal, and incense the People against the Court, gave out that
they had made an offer of Peace to the King, and found him of himself willing
enough to hearken thereto, but that he was imposed upon by his Ministers, who
for their own Interests were still putting him upon continuing the War. This
Report coming to the Cardinal's Ears gave him the Alarm, and raised a suspicion
in him, that there might be some underhand Negotiation carrying on between
Spain and Portugal, which, if such a thing there was, might spoil all his
designs: He therefore dispatches away the Chevalier de Saint Foy, to adjust
the League, on Condition, that the King of Portugal would engage himself to a
vigorous Prosecution of the War, to which end he should be furnished with Money
for the Expense of the next Campaign, but withal the Envoy was ordered to
complain how little Portugal minded the Interests of France, and of the several
infractions of the Capitulations already made between the two Crowns; and to
let fall some hints of the King's being suspected of having an Understanding
with the common Enemy. The good King took care to vindicate himself from this
unjust Aspersion, which the Castillians by their Calumnies had cast upon him,
and cleared himself so well, that St. Foy began to perceive that there was no
occasion for a League, and so found out Pretenses to defer the Conclusion of
it. Hereupon King John dispatches away an Irish Friar with the Character of his
Envoy, I suppose to satisfy the Court of France of his Innocence, but with
express orders to hasten the Conclusion of the League; and it seems the Irish
Politician acquitted himself of the first part of his Commission so much to the
Cardinal's satisfaction, that his Eminence would hear no talk of what he had to
say further, and so Frey Domingos do Rosario (for that was his Friars name, I
think his true one was O Dally) was sent back again, and ordered to tell his
Master, that he should make his Peace with Spain himself if he would, and think
no more of a League with France. This was the last Negotiation between France
and Portugal, in the Reign of King John the 4th. the first King of the House of
Braganca, and let the Reader judge how far he was obliged to France for his
Establimment upon the Throne.

After his death, there was little intercourse between the two Courts, the
French leaving the Widow and the Orphan to shift for themselves, till the
Treaty of the Pirenees was drawing on, and then the Cardinal had a further
occasion for Portugal. During the course of this long War, Spain had lost
several important places to the French, which they expected to have restored to
them at the Peace, or some Compensation for them at least: For the Spaniards
had not yet been accustomed to make Peace on such Terms as they have since been
used to; they stood likewise obliged by Treaty made with the Prince of Conde at
his first putting himself into their service, never to lay down their Arms till
he was restored to all the Places and Governments possessed by him in France,
when he first came over to them. The French on the other side were as unwilling
to part with the places in Question, as the Spaniards were to yield them up;
and as for the Prince of Conde, neither the King, nor the Cardinal could be
prevailed with to put him in a condition to give them the like trouble again,
as he had done formerly; for they were not without some jealousy, that he had a
mind to be playing over his old Game again; and should he come off so well
after all the Bustle he had made in the Kingdom, others might in after times be
tempted to follow his Example: So that unless some Expedient could be found out
to satisfy both Parties, here were insuperable Difficulties to obstruct the
Peace, and a Peace the Cardinal was resolved to have as well for his own
private Conveniences, as to settle the state of the Nation, that was then as
he thought or pretended, breaking out into new Disorders. The Spaniards on
their side were as willing to end the War as the French could be, so as it
might be done with their Honor safe; they were sensible enough of their own
feeble Condition; they saw that two or three Campagnes more were like to prove
the total Ruin of their Monarchy. Besides, they were impatiently eager to be
turning the whole force of their Arms against Portugal, which they made sure of
over running with ease, could they be once at liberty from the French, and they
were the more hasty to come to an Accommodation with them, for that the Pope
began to be troublesome. The Ears of Alexander the 7th. were a little more open
than those of his Predecessors to the Bleatings of Portugal, and he gave notice
to the Cardinals of the Spanish Faction, that something must be done to end the
Dispute, or he should be forced to acknowledge that King, who succeeding a
Father that had reigned sixteen years, could not be made to pass with the World
for an Usurper. Thus were the minds of both Parties disposed for a Peace, but
how should they come by it? Who could remove the Obstacles that lay in the way,
and satisfy those irreconcilable Pretensions, from which neither Party would
recede?

To bring all this about, the Cardinal had his Wits at work; he now began on a
sudden to be mighty Zealous for the poor King of Portugal, whose Ruin was
thought infallible, should the French forsake him, and therefore his Eminence
would seem for some time to be as earnest for his Preservation as the Spaniards
were bent upon his Destruction; both Parties agreeing in this, that should
Portugal be excluded from the Peace, it would of course fall into the Hands of
the Spaniards, so that in effect this Orphan Prince, and all that belonged to
him seemed to be now wholly at the Cardinal's Disposal, since to exclude them
from the Peace, was then thought to be the same thing in effect, as to give
them up to the Spaniards, and these he had to set against the Prince of Conde,
and the places demanded by the Spaniards, and he made his Advantage of them:
For in all the Negotiations in Order to a Peace, when the Spaniards thought
much of yielding up their Towns and Provinces, the French sometimes would mind
them of a whole Kingdom, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, which they were
ready to give in Exchange for their Conquests. When the Spaniards interceded
for the Prince of Conde, the French when other Arguments failed, would speak
for the King of Portugal: But there was this Difference between them, the
Spaniards always began with the Prince of Conde, the French answered Portugal
in their own Defense, the Spaniards got conditions for the Prince, not such as
they pretended to, but very Honorable, considering how ill the Prince had
deserved at the hands of his King. The Cardinal engaged his Master's Word, his
Faith, and his Honor that Portugal should be utterly abandoned for him. The
Spaniards to the very last were passionately Urgent to get something more still
for their Friend, the French surrendered us theirs at the first Overtures of a
Treaty; the Spaniards were in earnest, the French had only a Turn of their own
to serve.

The first Advance that appears to have been made to any purpose on either side
toward a Peace, was in 1658. when the Marquis de Lionne was sent to Madrid, to
treat with the Ministers of that Court; what Monsieur de Lionne's Instructions
were, Mazarin best knew, who in a Letter to the Pope concerning this Affair,
told his Holiness, That if Spain by his Authority could be brought to abate of
their Pretensions in favor of the Prince of Conde, the Peace was upon
concluding; since all other points were adjusted, Monsieur de Lionne having
orders to abandon Portugal, in case Spain would not be so obstinate in behalf
of the Prince: but Spain could not not be prevailed upon, and so that Treaty
was broke off. I have seen no particular account how this Business was managed
at the Treaty of Madrid, perhaps it was then that the Offer was made by the
French to restore their Conquests, and re-establish the Prince in his
Governments, on Condition that the King of Portugal should remain in peaceable
Possession of his Dominions, for that such an Offer was made some time or other
we must believe, because it is so affirmed in the 60th. Article of the Pirenean
Treaty; but whenever it was made, the French were assured it would not be
accepted, as I believe I shall presently make appear.

The Treaty of Madrid broken off by the Spaniards, persisting to Espouse the
Prince of Conde's Interests, the French on their side were for sticking close
to their Allies, and gave out that they were resolved never to abandon them.
For the Marquis de Lionne, a little after declared publicly at the Diet of
Francfort, that the King of France neither could nor would make any Peace
without the Intervention of his Allies, viz. of England, Portugal, Savoy, and
Modena, and in effect, they were about renewing their League with the Rump
Parliament of England, then restored to their Seats after Cromwell's Death.
They were likewise treating about a Match between their King and Madam Margaret
Prince (...) and seemed to be so much in earnest, (...)an interview between the
two Cou(...) the King appeared to be so much taken with the Lady, that many
thought a Marriage was like to ensue. About the same time the Count de Cominges
Ambassador Extraordinary from France, at Lisbon was Negotiating another Match
between the same King, and the Infanta of Portugal, and that was likewise in
such great forwardness, that Preparations were making for the Wedding, and
several things got ready, which served afterward when that Princess was
Married into another Country; and all this to bring on a third Match between
the same King and the Infanta of Spain, which had been in. Treaty ever since
the first Overtures of Peace were made, and both these Treaties with Spain,
viz. of Marriage and Peace, had such a mutual Dependence on each other, that
they were necessarily to proceed or break off together. The Advances that the
French made toward a conclusion of the Match with Savoy, startled the Court of
Madrid, for should they go on, there could be no hopes of a Peace; and France
in all probability would in that case enter into new Engagements with Portugal,
wherefore Don Antonio Pimentel was sent Post to Lions, whose presence there
presently broke off all other Treaties, and revived those with Spain. The
Spaniards yielding at last to the necessity of their Affairs, and accepting of
the French Proposals in relation to the Prince of Conde, which were, that he
should be permitted to return into France, and be restored to the King's
Favor, but remain deprived of his Governments: The Court hereupon removing to
Paris, the principal Articles were there adjusted, that were afterward
confirmed by the two great Ministers at the Pirenees. But the Allies of France
seem to have been quite forgot at this Treaty of Paris, as it was called, at
least no mention made of Portugal, unless it were in that Article whereby the
French obliged themselves to abandon it; but that Article had then none of the
fine Preamble before it, which now sets it off so much to advantage, in the
printed Copys of the Pirenean Treaty.

While these things were transacted, the Conde de Sour was coming Ambassador
extraordinary from Portugal, with such Instructions as showed, that the Queen
Regent was entirely satisfied of the sincere Affection of her intended
Son-in-law, for he was ordered to demand no less then 4000 Foot, formed into
six Regiments and 1000 Horse, and all to be paid by his most Christian Majesty,
even while they were in the Portuguese service; or if France could not spare so
much Money, he was at least to raise the Men in that Kingdom. He was likewise
to choose out two General Officers, and engage them in his Master's service,
Cardinal Mazarin undertaking for their Fidelity and Ability; he was also to put
the last hand to the League that had been so long in Agitation, there being
little Cause to doubt but that it would now be soon brought to happy Conclusion.

But the Ambassador upon his arrival at Havre de Grace was surprised with the
News, that a Truce had been Proclaimed between the Crowns of France and Spain,
and a day fixed for a Conferences between the Cardinal, and Don Luis de Haro, in
order to conclude the Peace. When he was got to Roan, he received a Message
from the Portuguese Agent, more mortifying than what he had heard before; for
the Agent having acquainted the Cardinal of the Ambassador's arrival, was bid
to advise him to come Incognito to Paris, his Eminence doubting whether it was
convenient to receive a Public Embassy from Portugal, whose Interests France
was obliged to abandon by the Peace to be made with Spain. Upon his coming to
Paris, the Cardinal entirely disabus'd him, and put an end to all the hopes
they had hitherto been feeding themselves with in Portugal; for now there was
no more talk of the League with France, nor of any conditions to be made with
Spain, but such as the Cardinal might be assured that the Portugueses would
never be brought to accept of; so far was the Ambassador from obtaining the
5000 Men he came to Demand, that he could not prevail to have two General
Officers of that Nation: The Cardinal having so much Honor left as to tell the
Ambassador, that should he recommend French Men to him, in case the Peace with
Spain ensued, the Portugueses might well question their Fidelity, and the
Spaniards his Sincerity. However, he named to him two that were of other
Nations, whom he advised him to Treat with, they being Persons of known Valor
and Conduct, and in all respects qualified to Command in the Posts they were
designed for. The Ambassador took his advise after having consulted with Marsh.
Turenne, who knew the Men, and highly approved of the choice; the first, That
the Ambassador treated with, was the Earl of Inchiquin, who presently embarked
for Portugal, but had the misfortune to be taken in his Passage by the
Algerines, and after having regained his Liberty, he had been but a little
while at Lisbon, when the News came of King Charles his Restoration, which
occasioned his Return home. He was designed afterward to Command the Forces
which that King sent to the assistance of Portugal, but he did not continue
long there. The other was the Famous Count, afterward Marshal and late Duke of
Schonberg, who when he came to have the Command of Men that were worthy of such
a Leader, soon changed the face of things in Portugal, and restored the most
desperate Affairs of that Nation to such a state, that the Spaniards who now
made sure of over running it, were glad to sue for a Peace, and the French who
at this time were casting off the Portugueses with so much contempt, thought
fit to court their Alliance: but those by whom the Count effected all this,
were not French men, and the Cardinal was no Prophet. At present he had so
little consideration for Portugal, that when he was presented with a Memorial
containing twenty seven Reasons why France ought not to make Peace with Spain
without including Portugal, his Eminence having now gained his ends could not
find so much as one Reason among all the seven and twenty that was conclusive,
though the Portugueses pretended to a Promise under the Hand and Seal of King
Louis 13th. After this came on the Conferences between the Cardinal and Don
Luis de Haro, at the Pirenees; there indeed the Cardinal would sometimes put in
a word for the King of Portugal, but it was only in order to keep Don Luis
quiet, when he had nothing else to defend himself withal from the Persecutions
of that Minister, who notwithstanding what had been agreed upon at Paris, and
consented to in Spain, could not help making some motion or other in almost
every Conference for the Prince of Conde; and sometimes he would do it with so
much Vehemence, that the Treaty was several times like to be broken off purely
on this Account, even when all other Matters were adjusted. For Don Luis was so
very tender of his Master's Honor, which seemed to him to ly at stake on this
single point, that he thought he could never do enough to retrieve it; one
would think were we to judge of the Conduct of these two great Men, as it is
represented in Mazarin's Letters, that on this occasion he had changed
Characters with the Cardinal; Don Luis is represented at other times, as having
all the distinguishing qualities of a Spaniard, and the Cardinal on all other
occasions complains of him for being stiff, slow, and cold, but when he makes
him Pleading for the Prince of Conde, he represents him as transformed into
another Man. He would then become supple on a sudden, using all the most
Insinuating and Engaging ways of Address, to gain upon the Cardinal, he would
Caress, Court and Flatter him, enduring his Repulses without the least
Resentment, as long as he thought it possible to bring him to a Compliance, and
as he found all would not do, he would then begin to take Fire, grow Impatient,
and break out into the most passionate Complaints, as unable to bear the
Reproach that his Master must be forced to abandon his Allie. The Cardinal did
not show himself so very passionate for the honor of his Master, or the safety
of his Allie, had the Affair of Portugal gone as much to his Heart, it is not
unlikely but the Italian would have fawned and cringed as much, and winded
himself into as many shapes to gain his ends as the Spaniard. They that know
any thing of Cardinal Mazarin's former Conduct, would surely have expected a
great deal more of this from him, than from a Person of Don Luis de Haro's
Character and Quality. Its true, his Eminence was at this time at the very
height of his Greatness and Glory, and might think it beneath him to be
playing over his old tricks, he would now be thought to have put off the
Italian, and pretended much to the Promptitude and Vivacity of a Frenchman; but
then had he any concern for his Allie, he would surely have received some
warmth from all that heat He observed in Don Luis, at least that natural Vanity
of his, which was at this time increased to as great a height, as the station
he was in could raise it, should have put him upon doing something for a
Prince, who had no other Dependence but upon him; and what could there have
been more Glorious for this proud Great Man, who had a Crowned Head for his
Client, being so sensible as he was, that the Eyes of all Christendom were upon
him, Princes and Nations expecting their Fate in the Issue of his Proceedings,
than instead of wrangling and squabbling about the exchange of every little
Bicocque, to be pleading the Cause of a Distressed and Orphan King? But alas!
he did not lay the Cause of Portugal to heart at all, nor concern himself for
its Preservation. He had used that People before so basely, that he seemed to
desire their Destruction no less than the Spaniards themselves; He contented
himself sometimes to repel the most lively instances of Don Luis for the
Prince of Conde, by telling with all the Coldness and Phleme imaginable, That
his Master was so desirous of Peace, that he had no such Considerations for the
King of Portugal, as he expressed for the Prince, and that his Master might in
Justice use the Prince of Conde in the same manner as the Spaniards intended to
serve the King of Portugal. Its true, that in one of the first Conferences,
when he had no other way to put by the Importunities of Don Luis, he told him,
(knowing very well as he says himself in his Letter to Mr. Le Tellier, that he
should not be taken at his Word) that since he was so very Passionate for the
Interests of the Prince, he himself had one Proposal to make, and would desire
the King his Master's Consent, which should be more advantageous to the Prince,
than any thing Don Luis had yet desired: The Spaniard over joy'd at this News,
was impatient to know what the Proposal might be; the Cardinal told him, He
would desire the King of France to restore the Prince and his Son the Duke of
Anguien, to all their Charges and Governments, on Condition that the Catholic
King would leave Portugal in the state it was then in. The Offer was rejected
with all the Indignation that the Cardinal looked for, and had he not thought
as much, it never had been made; for as his Eminence says to Mr. Le Tellier,
when he made this bold or hardy Proposal, as he calls it, he knew it would not
be accepted. Now if the French did not think it worth their while to rescue the
Kingdom of Portugal from apparent Ruin at so small an Expense, as giving the
Prince of Conde his Employments again, it is more unlikely still that they
should be wiling both to do that, and yield up the many strong Towns and some
entire Provinces, that they had possessed themselves of in a five and twenty
years War; and this it is that tempts me to believe, that the Proposal
mentioned in the 60th. Article of this Treaty, was never made in earnest; the
Cardinal in the same Letter gives a little more light into this Mystery; he
says there, That he made these offers to let Don Luis see what vast Advances
his Master had made toward a Peace, and of what consequence his yielding in
the point of Portugal was; since rather than do that, he would be content to
restore the Prince to his Governments, and give up all his Conquests, and it is
a great Ease to me, continues he, that when Don Luis is reckoning up the great
Advantages the King gets by this Peace, counting the Places and Provinces that
remain to his Majesty, that I can answer him again, that all he said was
nothing in Comparison to the Concession we make in the Article of Portugal,
though he gives a hint to Mr. Le Tellier by the by, that for certain Reasons
unknown to the Spaniards, all this was no such great matter neither, as he
endeavored to make them believe. I do not find by his Letters that he made
this Hardy Proposal as he calls it, any more during the whole time of the
Treaty, but I find him afterward directing Mr. De Lionne to word the Preamble
of the Article in the same manner as it now stands; the Body it seems was
adjusted before at the Treaties of Madrid and Paris, so that possibly the
Preamble had no better grounds for it than the occasional Discourse of which I
have now given an account, let the Reader then judge what we are to make of
this formal Declaration, (vid. the 60th. Article of the Treaty of the Pirenees.)

That his most Christian Majesty desiring with an extreme Passion, to see the
Kingdom of Portugal enjoy the same Repose that other Christian States acquire
by this present Treaty, had to that end proposed a good number of Ways and
Expedients, which he thought might be to the satisfaction of his Catholic
Majesty, among which notwithstanding, as has been said, that he is under no
sort of Engagement in this affair, he has gone so far as to be willing to
deprive himself of the Principal Fruit of that happy Success which his Arms
have had during the course of a long War, offering besides the Places which he
restores by this present Treaty to his Catholic Majesty, to surrender up all
the Conquests in general that his said Arms have made in this War, and to
re-establish entirely Monsieur the Prince of Conde, provided and on condition
that the Affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal might be left in the state they are
in at present, etc.

I cannot pretend to tell what the many Ways and Expedients here mentioned
were, finding little or nothing said of them in the Accounts of the Treaty that
are yet extant, or in the Cardinal's Letters, who seems to have given an
account of all the most material Passages, and yet he mentions but one
expedient as proposed by himself, and he says too, that he offered that rather
to divert Don Luis from pressing him, in behalf of the Prince than out of hopes
that it would be accepted. He made it on this occasion: Don Luis had been very
urgent with him, that since the Prince could not be restored to his Charges and
Governments in France, he might be allowed to accept of a Compensation
elsewhere, and that the Catholic King might bestow upon him either the two
Calabrias, with the Kingdom of Sardinia, or the Government of the Low
Countries, with the same Authorithy and Emoluments as it was possessed by the
Cardinal Infant, and some places for himself on the Frontiers; but the
Cardinal would consent to nothing of all this, saying, That the Prince must
resolve to be wholly French or wholly Spanish, that is, have no dependence upon
the King of Spain, or have nothing to do in France: Yet since the King of Spain
was so willing to part with these Countries, he desired that the Kingdom of
Sardinia might be given to the King of Portugal, and he would desire his Master
to agree to it, so as that the Portugueses should have cause to be satisfied.
This says he to Don Luis, is the finest Expedient in the World, both to
content the King, and let the World see that my Master seeks to get a handsome
Retreat for his Ally; for if the King of Portugal shall embrace this Expedient,
the Catholic King will be put in Possession of several Kingdoms, the least of
which is more considerable than that of Sardinia. I do not find that the
Cardinal proposed any other Expedient besides this, and this is enough to show
what an extreme Passion he had to serve his Master's Ally; he would have him
surrender up all his Dominions for that poor and little Kingdom of Sardinia,
which the Spaniards on several such occasions have offered to give away, but
could never get any one to accept of it, and yet it seems the Cardinal thought
this was too much for the King of Portugal, for he proposed it as he says
himself, without any hopes of succeeding.

There was indeed another Expedient offered at, but it came from Don Luis,
which was, That on condition the Prince might have some Place of surety given
him, such as Havre de Grace, the Duke of Braganca should have Olivenca bestowed
on him, be reestablished in his Estate and Honor, and have over and above the
Office of Constable of Castille. But this Expedient was laughed at by the
Cardinal, he thought that what Don Luis offered, was too dear at the price of
Havre de Grace, and therefore he would bid nothing at all: When he was brought
to consent at last, that the Prince of Conde should have the Government of
Burgundy with the Castle of Dijon, and the Duke of Anguien his Son, the Place
of Grand Maitre, he did not so much as pretend to an Equivalent for his Ally of
Portugal, but screwed from the Spaniards avesness for his Master, and the
Restitution of Juliers for the Duke of Nieubourg. As for the King of Portugal,
he was to surrender up all his Kingdoms and Dominions, and content himself with
his Paternal Estate, and a Pardon for what was past, which as the Article
says, was all that his most Christian Majesty by his powerful Offices could
procure for him; but in case that he did not accept of the same within three
Months after the Ratification of the present Treaty, his said Majesty promised,
engaged, and obliged himself upon his Honor, in the Faith and Word of a King,
for himself and his Successors, not to give to the said Kingdom of Portugal in
common, or to any Person or Persons therein in particular, of what Dignity,
Estate, Quality or Condition soever, any Aid or Assistance, Public or Secret,
Directly or Indirectly of Men, Arms, Ammunitions, Provisions, Ships or Money,
nor any thing else either by Land or by Sea, or in any other Manner; and that
he would not suffer Levies to be made in any parts of his Kingdoms or Estates,
nor grant Passage to such as might come from other States to the Assistance of
the said Kingdom of Portugal, so that hitherto the House of Braganca has not
been very much obliged to France.

But before I proceed further, I find my self obliged to justify the Cardinal's
Memory from a most horrible crime, which the French men themselves do not stick
to charge him with; for they among others pretend, that at the making of this
Solemn Promise, he had already resolved to violate his Faith, and that he was
intending to send those succors into Portugal, which afterward arrived there
from France, at the very time when he was obliging his Master, who was then but
a young Man and under his Direction, to swear the contrary; but I think there
is Cause to believe, that so detestable a Perfidy had not as yet entered into
his thoughts. Its true, what he says to Mr. Le Tellier, That for some reasons
unknown to the Spaniards, his yielding in the point of Portugal, was not so
advantageous to them as he made them believe; would look very suspicious, were
it not a usual thing with him on all other occasions to affect being thought a
greater Fourbe than he really was; for we find him bragging in most of his
Letters, how he cheated the Spaniards, in making them think more highly of
almost every one of his Concessions than they deserved, whereas they took his
Eminence for the Duppe all the while. But I do not in the least Question, but
that he really did design to abandon Portugal to the Spaniards at this time,
according as he was now obliged by all that is Sacred among Men; I will not
urge for a Reason that he all along most solemnly protested to Don Luis, that
in case the Portugueses submitted not to the conditions offered them by this
Peace, he would persuade his Master to hold them for his Enemies, for I believe
few will give much heed to Protestations made by his Eminence on these
occasions; but he spoke his mind without doubt in another Letter, sent by him
to Mr. Le Tillier, to be communicated to the King, wherein he represents the
affairs of Portugal to be in so deplorable a State, That the Queen Regent was
neither in a condition to defend her self, nor in any terms of accommodation
with the Spaniards, so that as things stood, both she and her Son, were in
great danger, not only of their Crown, but of their Persons. But
notwithstanding all this, he does not advise the King, that the Troops should
be ready for a Voyage to Portugal, against the signing of the Treaty, in order
to preserve that Crown, and save the Persons of the distressed Queen and her
Children, had he any such design in his head at that time, we should in all
probability find him giving some hints of it in these Letters. But to put this
matter out of doubt, he talks of sending to that Princess, to let her know,
That he thought it most expedient for her to submit her self to the King of
Spain, from whom he was persuaded she might obtain an Equivalent to advantage
elsewhere, for what Estate she and her Son were possessed of in Portugal, since
he had been often told by Don Luis, that his Master in order to complete the
Peace, would not stick to bestow on her Son the Charge of Constable of Castille
with other such like Honors. This surely is not the Language of one who was
designing to send Forces to her assistance, to animate her to carry on the War,
so that it seems to be an unjust Aspersion upon his Memory, to say that he made
this Peace with a purpose to violate it as soon as it was Signed; there is
indeed cause enough to suspect that he was not so passionately concerned for
the Welfare of his Master's Allie, as is pretended in the Article, or rather
he may be justly accused of the greatest Inhumanity to say no worse; who when
he thought this Family was in so deplorable a Condition, as he describes, and
the Castillians so disposed to an Accommodation, procured no better terms for
them, as he certainly might have done while the Treaty lasted, and the business
of the Prince of Conde was in agitation. But still he clears himself of that
which would have rendered him more infamous to Posterity; of engaging his
Master in so black a Crime, as is a premeditated willful Perjury.

But by whose fault soever it was, this is certain, That the Peace was no
sooner ratified on both sides, confirmed by the Marriage between the French
King, and the Infanta of Spain, and sworn to at the high Altar before the
Sacrament, which was exposed on this occasion; but while the People were every
where making public Demonstrations of their Joy, for so happy a Conclusion of
a long and calamitous War, great Numbers of the most expert Officers in the
Kingdom, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Engineers, Miners were marching toward Havre de
Grace, in order to Embark for Portugal: These were afterward followed by the
choice of the King's Troops, till at last the French Auxiliaries in Portugal
amounted to near 6000 effective Men. But this was none of the Cardinal's doing,
for as little as he kept his faith with the Portugueses, he dealt more
sincerely with the Spaniards, for he sent the Marquis de Choup upon the Message
mentioned in his Letters, to persuade the Queen Regent to surrender up the
Kingdom, in hopes that the Dukes of Broganca should hereafter be made perpetual
Governors, or Vice Roys of Portugal; and these were all the Instructions he
gave the Marquis, as the Marquis declared when he arrived at Lisbon, where he
met with such a cold Reception as his Message deserved; so far was he from
giving any underhand encouragement to the Portugueses to carry on the War, as
some Writers affirm he did with great Injustice to the Cardinal. Its true, that
while his Eminence was disabusing the Portuguese Ambassador, as to all his
former Promises, he entertained him in hopes that ways might be found out for
the French Troops to pass into Portugal, after the Peace was made with Spain;
but when the Count de Harcourt offered the same Ambassador, to put himself with
two Regiments into the Portuguese service, in case he could but have the Tacit
Consent of France, he was not only denied by the Cardinal, but told that if he
persisted in the Design, he should forfeit the place of Grand Ecuyer, which had
been granted to his Son, the Count d' Armagnac; so that the Cardinal seems to
be pretty clear of this so great and direct a Violation of the new made Treaty.

Nor is it to be thought that his Master could have any hand in it; for his
most Christian Majesty to manifest to the World, how disposed he was to observe
the Oath he had so Religiously taken, when it appeared that the Portuguese
Ambassador was listing Men in France, sent him repeated Orders to depart the
Kingdom, and some time afterward commanded the Agent of the same Nation to be
turned out likewise, and published his Edicts to recall home such Officers and
Soldiers as were in the Portuguese service, confiscating the Estates of the
Disobedient. It Is true, the Ambassador after he had been ordered to be gone,
continued sometime at Havre de Grace, with no less then 600 Officers,
Gentlemen, etc. about him, that he had raised for the service, and they did not
lie concealed all the while, for the Inhabitants of the Town rose in a Mutiny
against them, for eating up their Provisions; and when they and others after
them arrived in Portugal, they were under Military Discipline, so that should
they offer to obey their King's Edicts, Count Schonberg who was their Leader,
might have hanged them for Desertion; and the Count for his part when he
returned into France, was rewarded with a Marshals Baton: Levies were
afterward publicly made indeed for the same service, but then it was done in
Marshal Turenne's Name, who took the Portuguese Affairs upon his account; and
when the Spaniards made loud complaints of it, as a manifest infraction of the
Treaty, their Ambassador was put off with a cold and contemptuous Answer, that
it was but the Act of a private Person, and that the Court did not concern it
self in the Business. The same thing its true was at last done openly, and
without Disguise, but it does not appear where the fault lay then.

As the French succors arrived in Portugal, the affairs of that Kingdom began
to change face, for if they were before, as the Cardinal supposed them to be,
in a bad state, they now fell from bad to worse: The Portugueses while they
were left to stand on their own Legs, had as meanly as the Cardinal thought of
their condition, bravely defended themselves, and gained several very
considerable Advantages over their Enemies, particularly at the two famous
Battles of Montijo in 1644. and Elvas in 1658. This last Victory was the more
considerable, for that it gave a check to the fury of the Spaniards when spurred
on by the Pope, who pretended he must be forced to acknowledge that King's
Title, they made their utmost efforts to quiet his Holiness, and destroy them
out of hand; and had the year before taken Olivenca, the most important Place
for strength next to Elvas, that the Portugueses had; and that year Don Luis de
Haro, himself at the head of all the Forces he could muster together, had
obliged them to rise from the Siege of Badajoz, at the very time when the place
was reduced to Extremity, but at the last they entirely routed Don Luis, when
he laid Siege to Elvas, which defeat so disheartened the Spaniards, that for the
two following Years, they gave the Portugueses little trouble; it seems they
thought fit to defer their Revenge till the Peace was made with the French, and
then they took it to some purpose, on the Portugueses and the French together.
For in the Years 1661 and 62. Don John of Austria, at the head of a small Army,
in all not amounting to 20000, but consisting of Veteran Troops drawn from
Italy and Flanders, entered Portugal, Ravaging, Spoiling and Burning all before
him; it is true, he never gained any set Battle, for by all the Havoc he made,
he never could provoke the Enemy to fight, though he several times sent them
the Defiance, and insulted them in their very Trenches, so he contented himself
with taking a vast number of their Towns, many of them Rich, Populous and
Strong. The first year he took Arronches and Alconchel, and fortified and put
Garrisons into both places, in the former near 5000 men; the next year he was
early in the Field, and in the heart of Portugal, putting all things to Fire
and Sword; and Lisbon it self was in such a horrible Consternation, that had he
marched directly thither, it is thought he might have taken the City without
Resistance. But continuing to destroy the Country, he sent a Detatchment to
take Villa Boim, a strong and rich Place, but presently surrendered by a French
Governor. After this, he braved the Portuguese Army in their Camp, under the
Walls of Estremos, but in vain, for it was impossible to draw them to a Battle;
he then took Borba, a place of small strength indeed, but desperately Defended,
for it had a Portuguese Governor. Next he laid Siege to Geromenha, a place
strongly Situated and Fortified after the modern way, with a Garrison of 3000
Men, and provided with all things necessary for a stout Defense, but
surrendered in a Months time after the Portuguese Army had in vain attempted to
relieve it; this done, Don John would have fought the Portugueses, but found
they had altered their mind, and having strongly entrenched themselves near
Villa Vicosa, patiently beheld him Ravaging the Country round about them, he
seeing he could do no good upon them, took Veyros and blew up the Castle,
entered Monforte, and put a Garrison in it; destroyed Alter-Chaon, Cabeca de
Vide, and Alter Poderoso, and all the Country round about. He then took Crato,
and in it the Portugueses stores and Provisions, ordering the Governor to be
shot to Death for making Resistance, upon that, Assumar was presently
surrendered to him; he would have taken Possession likewise of Alegrete, but
that place, as it must be acknowledged, was preserved by a French Governor. For
when Don John sent him a menacing Summons, he was answered with a Present of
two Bottles of Wine, the Governor desiring his Highness to taste what excellent
Liquor the place afforded, sending him word with all, that he was resolved to
defend the Town to the last Drop. The jest took, and Don John without giving
the Man any further trouble, continued his march, and entered Ouguella without
Resistance, a small place but of great Importance; and having left two
Regiments in it the Summer heats coming on, retired into Quarters.

The Next year he took the Field again with an Army much stronger and better
provided then before. He had no sooner past the Frontiers, but he was expected
at Lisbon; however, he thought fit to make himself Master first of Evora, the
second City of Portugal, as he did after nine days Siege; the Garrison which
was numerous, being made Prisoners of War for that Summer, and sent away into
Castille; by this success Don John became in a manner Master of all Alemtejo,
or the Country on the other side of the Tagus. He sent a Detachment of 3000
Horse and 2000 Foot down as far as Alcacere do Sal, a Town situated upon the
River Sado; not far from Setuval, the most considerable Seaport Town next to
Lisbon, and but at a small distance from it. This was done with design to
increase the Consternation at Lisbon, in order to Don John's marching thither,
to put an end to the War. The People of that City when they heard of his laying
Siege to Evora, expecting that their turn should be next, were all in an
Uproar; but when the News came that Evora was taken, such a fury possessed the
City, that the better sort through rage and despair joined the Rabble, and all
in a common Mob, fell a committing such Outrages, that they seemed resolved to
prevent the Spaniards, and finish their own Ruin themselves. Their violence was
not a little increased by Antonio de Sousa, a Man never good at dealing with a
Multitude. He thinking to amuse them and divert their Fury upon the common
Enemy, would needs have a line drawn a cross the Terreiro do Paco, causing it
to be published, that all those brave Men that would pass the Line, and come
over to the side next the Palace, should be chosen out to help the Army in
defense of their Countries Liberty. The Novelty of the thing drew an innumerable
concourse of People together, who when their Passions were up, forgot the
Enemy, and leaving the Terreiro do Paco, fell foul upon the Houses of the
Ministers of State, such more especially, as had managed the Military Affairs,
and after they had been Ransacking, Plundring and Burning, whatever came to
hand they returned again, and it may have been through weariness, rather then
want of will, that they spared the Palace it self.

These terrible Convulsions seizing upon the Kingdom, at a time when the Enemy
was raging in its Bowels with so much Violence, looked like the symptoms of an
approaching end; but the English were now arrived and ready for Action, and
they by the quick and happy Turn, which they gave to the Portuguese Affairs,
recovered the expiring State to Life again, and enabled that People to expel
the Enemy, and follow him into his own Country, and to humble him to the
Condition in which he has remained ever since; but of this in its due place.

As soon as the Affairs of Portugal were by the help of these their Friends
brought (to a flourishing condition) they could be in their circumstances
considered, and the War in all appearance drawing toward a happy conclusion on
their side, his most Christian Majesty began to have a particular Esteem for
the King of Portugal, and to own him publicly for his Allie; and his Affection
for that Prince was now so very great, that notwithstanding the Engagements he
was under to Spain, not to concern himself with him: He was now resolved to
stand by him, and take his part against all Opposers, the Spaniards more
especially; and to become (as his Majesty was pleased himself to express it)
his Companion in Arms; He telling the Portuguse Ambassador at a secret Audience
in 1666. that he was ready, not only to bear a share with him in the Expenses
of the War, but likewise to accompany him into the Field; offering withal, of
his own accord, to enter into the League which the Portugueses had for so many
years together implored in vain, during the time of their Distress; and more
than that, was very urgent in pressing their consent to it. Its true, indeed
the Portugueses had never less occasion for his Assistance, then at the time
when he was so earnest with them to accept of it, but his most Christian
Majesty had great occasion for theirs.

For that King being then in his full Vigor, and the very flour of his Age, he
out of his extreme thirst after Glory, was meditating a sudden Irruption into
the Spanish Netherlands, several of which Countries lying convenient for
France; he laid claim to them in his Queen's Right, who being a Child of the
first Venture, ought as 'twas said, according to the Laws of those Countries, to
have inherited them from her Father, who died the last year, in Exclusion to
the Male Issue by a second Marriage. It Is true, that Princess had at her
Marriage made a formal Renunciation of any Right or Title that might accrue to
her, to her Father's Dominions, either in whole or in part: But in all other
respects, the French King found himself in a condition to make good his Claim;
his Armies after a long breathing time had now recovered new Vigor. His
Brother-in-law the King of Spain was then but an Infant under Government of his
Mother, and the Widow and the Orphan were like to make but a feeble Resistance;
for their best Troops had been drawn from Flanders, and consumed in this fatal
War with Portugal; but however, for fear lest the Spaniards were not yet
humbled enough to be securely trampled upon, or if there were none else to fall
upon them at the same time, might make some dying Efforts to repel so unjust
an assailant as they no doubt would take his most Christian Majesty to be. It
was judged convenient, that while he was engaging himself in this hazardous
Enterprise, the Portugueses should be set on to keep the Spaniards in Play, and
animated to follow those deadly Blows they had already given them, with a more
vigorous prosecution of the War. And therefore it was, that France proposed the
League Offensive and Defensive to this Court.

But to persuade the Portugueses to embrace the Proposal, was thought and with
a great deal of Reason, to be no easy matter; for as much pleased and elevated
with their Victories as they were, they had as great cause as ever to wish for
a Peace. That poor People had been in Arms for these five and twenty years, and
were now harassed out, and almost spent in defending their Country; a small
Country indeed, yet but thinly Peopled and stretched out in length, with a
Frontier of a hundred Leagues, which must be continually guarded or lie exposed
to the Enemies incursions. In this long War their Youth had been destroyed,
their Lands laid wast, their Stocks consumed, and their Moneys brought to an
end; so that should the War continue, let their Victories be never so many, it
must necessarily in a short time complete their Ruin. To a People in such a
case, all talk of prolonging the War must sound so harsh, that it could not be
imagined they should hear of it with any Patience; and that which gave the
French greater cause still to despair of gaining their ends on the Portugueses,
these had now for some time been flattering themselves with hopes, that they
should see a speedy end of their Miseries. The stomachs of the Spaniards were
by this time come down, and they desired a Peace as much as the Portugueses;
Sir Richard Fanshaw the English Ambassador at Madrid, had wrought so
effectually upon them, that the Articles were drawing up, and all things making
ready for a Treaty; Sir Richard's Secretary had been in Portugal to give notice
to that Court of what he was doing for them at Madrid, and he had signified by
Letters, that he was preparing for his Journey to Lisbon, in order to set the
last hand to the Treaty. These Tidings had been received in Portugal with the
welcome they deserved, and the blessed Messenger of Peace, as Sir Richard was
then called, was looked for with impatience: They thought their Condition upon
his coming would be a kind of Heaven, to what it then was, He being, as one of
the great Ministers expressed it, to let them in to the Beatifick Vision.

The Portugueses being thus disposed, the French saw plainly that it would be
to no purpose to make any direct motion to them, for carrying on the War; so
that in order to bring the Design about, it was thought convenient to take a
Compass, and all their Talk was of Peace while they were preparing themselves
and inciting their Friends to War; or if War was mentioned, it was only by the
bye, and as a last reserve in order to procure for Portugal a more firm,
lasting, and honorable Peace. But to secure this, 'twas pretended that a
League with France was absolutely necessary for Portugal, France being alone
able, as they said, to procure good Conditions from the Spaniards, and to see
they should be well observed. To this purpose had Messieurs, Turenne and
Colbert been several times discoursing with the Portuguese Minister at Paris.
And that the Portugueses might be sensible that nothing but their Good was
aimed at, the French Ambassador at Madrid, who was there making the most solemn
Protestations that the Pirenean Treaty should be kept inviolable, had Orders
likewise to interpose his Master's good Offices, and make a tender of his
Mediation to compose all Differences with Portugal, and put an end to the War:
This offer being hearkened to as 'twas pretended, the Marquess de Sand (then at
Paris adjusting King Alfonso's Marriage, and having the Character of an
Ambassador for that business only) was sent for to the secret Audience before
mentioned, and told that the Queen Regent of Spain had accepted of the
Mediation, and that in case such Proposals were made by that Court as were fit
to be accepted, the French Ambassador there had Orders to make a Journey to
Lisbon and conclude the Peace; or if any thing should detain him, he was to
communicate the Proposals to the Abbe de S. Romain at Lisbon, who should impart
them to the Portuguese Ministers; there being no doubt but that the Peace would
be soon adjusted, considering to what a miserable condition the Portugueses had
reduced the Spanish Monarchy. But then his Majesty did not think it advisable
for them to take up with any doubtful or fallacious Truce, and in conclusion,
bid the Marquess assure the King of Portugal, that in case a Peace ensued, He
himself would be the Guarant; if a War, he would both bear a share in the
Expenses, and become the King of Portugal's Companion in the Field.

Monsieur de S. Romain had the good fortune to arrive in Portugal, and got
Audience at the Court which was then at Salva Terra, before Sir Richard Fanshaw
came there, and he displayed all his Eloquence, in setting forth that the King
his Master had so sincere an Affection for Portugal, that understanding the
Spaniards were coming to an Accommodation, he was very desirous to see the
Peace adjusted, on condition that the Proposals made by Spain were Advantageous
and Honorable; but in case they should prove otherwise, he was ready to assist
the Portugueses with his Troops, Fleets and Money at their choice, and as their
Occasions should require. These fine Words as they were not wholly lost, yet
had not that effect upon the Court, as to dispose them for a League with
France; they were wishing still for Sir Richard Fanshaw's coming, and testified
their satisfaction at his Arrival, by giving him the most splendid Reception
that was possible at that distance from Lisbon, but all the hopes conceived on
both sides from this Treaty soon vanished; for Sir Richard had so ordered
matters, that the Treaty was to be entered upon as between Kingdom and Kingdom,
by which means the Spaniards would have been excused from making any formal
acknowledgment of the King of Portugal's Title. This so disgusted the
Portugueses, whose spirits had been mightily raised by their late Successes,
and perhaps not a little by these large Promises from France, that they
returned back the Proposals without looking further then the Inscription, with
a short Answer, that they never would have Peace with Spain, unless it were
made between King and King.

The English Ambassador returning to Madrid, found the Spaniards become as High
on their side, and utterly averse from renewing the Treaty; those fears which
had been a great motive to them in advancing so far as they had gone already,
were over for the present. They had been all along guessing at the true Design
of those great Levies that the French were making, which notwithstanding all
the French Protestations and Offers of Mediation, had given them terrible
Apprehensions, and therefore that they might put themselves into some posture
of Defense against so powerful an Agressor, they had been prevailed with to
enter upon a Treaty with Portugal. But now they were of another mind, for a War
was broken out of a sudden between England and France, which secured them for
that time from any attempt of the French upon Flanders; and should this War
continue, the English having the Dutch and French to deal with at the same
time, might not be in a condition to send supplies to Portugal, and in case
that Kingdom were once abandoned by them, there might be hopes of reducing it
again to the same state in which the English found it. But notwithstanding this
Backwardness of the Spaniards, and the Occasion of it, the Portugueses could
not yet be brought to consent to the French League; for as great as their
Danger was from the Enemy, they thought it seems they should run a greater risk
by this Engagement with their pretended Friends. All Monsieur de S Romain's
Rhetoric could not prevail with them to sign it this Year, though the French
Interest had been much increased by the King of Portugal's Marriage, and the
Arrival of fresh supplies from France; and their Fortune in the War instead of
making any Progress, seemed to be at a stand, or rather had received some very
considerable checks this Year. But then they were unprovided with Moneys to
bear the expenses of the next Campaign, and at a loss where to seek for a
supply; the French indeed continued to make their large offers, but their
kindness was looked upon as the last Remedy, and to be accepted of only in a
desperate Case; and when they thought that they must at last have recourse to
it, yet to show that they would try all expedients first before they would come
to an agreement with Mr. de S. Romain, they made their application for Money to
the Court of England, as little in a condition, as they knew that Court to be,
to furnish them after an expensive War with two most powerful Nations, and such
great Calamities as befell us at home this and the foregoing Year, but no Money
coming from England, they at last, viz. in the beginning of the Year 1667.
yielded to the French Importunities, and agreed to the League.

The principal Conditions of this League were,;That both Parties should have
the same Friends and the same Enemies, England only excepted. That France
should find as many Men as were necessary to carry on an Offensive War against
Spain, and all Seaport Towns taken from the Spaniards, were to be delivered up
to the French. France was to contribute by way of Loan one half of the pay due
to the Auxiliary Troops, and give withal, by way of Loan likewise, the sum of
300000 Crowns per Annum. Neither Party was to treat of a Peace or a Truce
without the consent of the other. And it was agreed that this League should
last for the Term of ten Years. Had this League continued in force, it would
have been to little purpose that the Portugueses withdrew their necks from the
Spanish Yoke, and so bravely defended their Liberty as they had done in so long
and tedious a War; for they had now in a manner changed Masters, and from being
Subjects to Spain, had surrendered themselves up to the Discretion of the
French, instead of seeing an end of their Miseries; they had now in all
appearance ten Years of War behind still, and that not only aagainst the
Spaniards, but almost all the World besides, that is, all the Enemies that
France should make, whose designs upon the Universal Monarchy, were then
breaking out, and had they been suffered to go on, England would not have been
long excepted out of the Number. It may justly deserve ones Wonder, that so
able and clear sighted a Minister, as all Parties allow the Conde de
Castelmelhor to have been, should upon any account whatsoever be prevailed
with, thus to sacrifice the Repose of his Country to the Ambition of Strangers;
Possibly Monsieur de S. Romain might make his advantage of the Disorders that
the Court was in at that time, and the Conde see that the Faction which had
been formerly against him, was grown to such a head, that the fury of the
People when diverted from a Foreign Enemy, was like to turn upon himself and
his Master, and might therefore think of securing to himself a place of
Retreat, when the Storm that was a gathering should break upon his Head. But if
these were his thoughts he found himself afterward much out in his measures,
for whatsoever promises France might have made him when in Power, yet after his
Fall, though he betook himself to that Kingdom, he staid not long there, but
found himself obliged to seek for Refuge in another Country; and so far was he
from securing himself at home by this unhappy League, that it is thought it did
but hasten his Master's Ruin and his own, by increasing the Peoples murmurs
against them. This is certain, his Enemies pretended that it was made in an
undue manner, without either the Advice or Consent of the Council, or the three
Estates, to the Violation, as they said, of the Rights and Liberties of the
Kingdom.

The French King having thus found Work for the Spaniards at home, while his
Ambassador was assuring the Court of Madrid, that if there were any Faith in
his Master, the Pirenean Treaty should be kept inviolable, began the so much
celebrated Expeditions into Flanders, and the Franche Compte conquering all
before him. The Success of his Arms was so astonishing to those that did not
consider how he had laid his Designs, that the English and Dutch who were but
lately come out of the destructive War, that they had been prosecuting against
each other, took the Alarm, and together with the Swede, made the famous Triple
Alliance, in order to oblige his most Christian Majesty to lay down his Arms.
This made that King begin to show some Deference to Pope Clement the 9th's.
Solicitation for a Peace, and it was agreed upon by the Parties concerned, that
a Congress of their Ministers should be held in order to adjust all
Differences; of this Agreement the French King gives notice to his Ally the
Prince Regent of Portugal, to the end that he should send thither his
Plenipotentiary to act in concert with the French Minister.

And now to all appearance were the Portugueses in much the same condition as
they had been at the Pirenean Treaty, having no other hopes of a Pea(...)e but
what the French should procure for them; and what reason could they have to
think otherwise, but that they should be sacrificed in the same manner as they
were then, and sold for some of the controverted Places in Flanders?
Philipville and Marienburg were their Price then, as such of their Writers that
are most partial to France have declared to the World, possibly the Spaniards
might bid higher for them now; and how could the Portugueses be sure that they
would not be taken at their Word? They had the French Faith indeed for their
security, and that engaged to them by the late League in a more solemn manner
then formerly, but not in so solemn a manner as it had been given before to the
Spaniards, when it was sworn in the manner before related, That France would
wholly Cast them off, and not afford them the least Succors. They were promised
its true, that if they would but put themselves wholly upon the French, and
leave them to make their Peace, they should have such Conditions got for them,
as were both advantageous and honorable; but then if France should think her
self obliged to have greater regard to her own Interest and Convenience, then
to all other Engagements, (and that such a thing was possible some former
Transactions had sufficiently proved.) In that case, why might the little
Kingdom of Sardinia be once more thought to be a pretty convenient Retreat for
a King of Portugal, or the Office of Constable of Castille an honorable
Employment for a Duke of Braganca? But in case France should think it
convenient, to continue her self, or keep Portugal embroiled in the War; then
all that the Spaniards could give, or the Portugueses ask, might not be thought
to be either honorable or safe, it was not thought so upon Trial as shall be
made appear anon.

But however, the Portugueses had now their Hands tied up, and could do nothing
toward their own Relief. To the French they had given themselves, and for any
thing they saw, to the French they must Trust. The Prince was consulting about
the choice of a Minister, whom he should send as his Plenipotentiary to Aix la
Chapelle, when on a sudden they received an unexpected Deliverance from these
their pretended Friends, brought them by the same Hand that had rescued them,
from their Victorious, though perhaps less Dangerous Enemies; but this likewise
must be spoken of in another Chapter.

These are the most memorable Transactions that have passed between the two
Crowns since that of Portugal has been in the House of Braganca, and they
afford us one Single instance of the so much talked of French Friendship, viz.
the sending of their Troops into that Kingdom upon conclusion of the Pirenean
Treaty; an action which the French or all People in the World should be the
last to remember; they were ashamed as they had a great deal of reason, to own
it at the Time, and the success that attended their Auxiliaries, has given
them little cause to glory in it since; but this kindness, if it was meant for
such, has been more than out balanced by the hard usage which the Portugueses
have met with at their hands, for certainly never were People so tricked,
abused and trifled withal, as the Portugueses were during the whole course of
Mazarin's Ministry; never were Allies so dishonourably sacrificed, as they were
to an enraged Enemy at the Pirenean Treaty, for I think I have made it plain,
that they were then designed to be utterly abandoned; and as for this last
Business of the League and Treaty of Peace, the French could have no other
regard to Portugal, than to make that Kingdom to its own great Prejudice
subservient to all their designs.

So that it must have been by other means than Offices of true Friendship, that
the French have all along supported their Interest in Portugal, and many are of
Opinion, that their Money has had as free a course into this Kingdom, as into
any other part of Europe. But other Instruments are likewise made use of, and
those of two very different kinds from each other; but considering the Genius
of the Portuguese Nation, it is very hard to determine which of them are the
most likely to succeed. These are 1st. the Ladies that are continually sent
hither to marry with Persons of Quality, who when they match out of their own
Families, do usually supply themselves with Wives from France; and to say the
truth, they have been furnished out of some of the best Houses in that Kingdom,
and it is reported, that the French King, to encourage these Alliances between
the two Courts, allows every Lady a Portion, which perhaps contributes not a
little to render them acceptable to the Portuguese Nobility, who for the most
part are not very easy in their Fortunes, and when they marry among themselves,
have seldom any Money with their Wives, for in Portugal Blood serves instead of
a Portion. It is hard to give a particular account, what services these Ladies
do for the Crown of France, but the Portuguese Writer that sets forth his
King's Pretensions to Spain, gives a broad hint of what may be expected from
them; for he says, that of the several methods used by the French, to gain
their ends upon those they have to deal with, that of sending French Wives to
govern them is the most infallible, and that they have found this a surer way
to succeed, than all inveigling Persuasions or specious appearances of
Advantage, and that it excels the force even of secret Bribes; for as he says,
they in Consequence of their having married French Women, shall be so
bewitched, that seeing and knowing they shall seek their own Ruin, as if led
thereto by a fatal kind of Necessity. It is true, this Portuguese speaks in the
Person of a Spanish Noble Man, and lays the Scene in that Court, where I
believe there are as yet but very few if any such Marriages, so that there is
cause to suspect, that he speaks so feelingly from the Experience of his own
Country. However by his leave, one that looks upon things at some distance, may
be tempted to question whether the force of these Syren's Charms be altogether
so irresistible as he makes it; for Portugal it self where they are more
numerous than in any other Country, stands yet undestroyed since their first
coming in, which is now more than thrice ten Years; and indeed should we
suppose the Sex to have never so ardent a Zeal for the Grandeur of their
Monarch, one would think it should be not a little cooled in such as are thus
sacrificed to his Interests, and sent in perpetual Banishment to so hideous a
Country as Portugal must needs appear to them that have been accustomed to the
Gallantrys of a French Court. But granting that the great Monarch by procuring
Husbands for these Ladies, does most strongly engage them to his Service, he by
the same means disobliges a great many others, and renders them highly
disaffected to His Majesty, viz. the Ladies of the Country, who as it is said,
do not spare to make most bitter Complaints of the wrong done them, by this
intrusion of Foreigners; and Jealousy, together with those other Passions that
usually accompany it, have no doubt as great an Influence upon them, as Loyalty
and Gratitude have upon the others: And the Portuguese Women, if they do not
belie their Character, are as subtle and intriguing, as the French can be:
Should they in revenge once take to Politics, why may they not Cabal together,
and form their Faction too? Did they once set about it, there is no doubt but
they have power enough left, to make a Party of their own amongst the Fidalgo's
that shall be able to make head against that of their Rivals.

Together with the Ladies the Jesuits are reckoned most zealous Promoters of
the French Cause; these Fathers as the World knows very well, have been always
Men of Intrigue, since their very first appearance, and the greatest Monarchs
have thought fit to make use of them, in carrying on their Desins. In the last
Age, the Spaniards had them wholly at their Devotion, and Philip the 2d. was
much obliged to the Society on many accounts, and more particularly for their
clearing his way to the Throne of Portugal; had it not been for them, it is
thought that K. Henry the Cardinal had according to Justice and his own
Inclinations, settled the Crown in the House of Braganca, but King Philip was
then more in Favor with the Society, and therefore was the Crown reserved for
him. But as the whole Order has sometimes since changed Sides, and come over
to the French, these in Portugal have not been behind the rest, and are now
supposed to serve that Party in this Court, with as much Zeal as any of their
Order do elsewhere; some may perhaps be apt to accuse the Society of
Inconstancy on this occasion, but if any do so, it is certainly without Reason,
for these Fathers are still what they were from the very Beginning. The
Fortunes of Spain and France are altered, but not the Jesuits, they continue
firm to their Principles; it was for the Interests of the Society in the last
Age, as it is in this, to gain the Favor of such as had the greatest Power,
the Spaniards had it then, and the French have it now; and therefore Louis the
14th. is to them what Philip the 2d. was. Since the Spanish Monarchy has been
falling to Ruin, it was time for them to make their Court elsewhere, for it is
not to be thought that they have less Sagacity than those Animals who are ready
to quit a decayed Building when its fall is at hand.

But that which is most to be admired in the Conduct of these Fathers is, that
notwithstanding their being looked upon as little better than Spys to those
aspiring Princes that have bid fairest for the Universal Monarchy, they have
yet managed their Affairs with that Dexterity, as to maintain their Ground as
long as they thought convenient in all other Courts, even those not excepted
that were like to suffer first, when ever the Design should take effect;
several instances might be given of this admirable Address of theirs in keeping
in with all Parties, both in the last and the present Age, were I not to
confine my self to Portugal. In this Court, they have enjoyed an uninterrupted
Reign from the time of Simon Rodriguez, one of the first Companions of Loyola,
and the first Jesuit that entered Portugal. He getting into Favor with John
the 3d. laid the Foundations of their greatness in this Kingdom; in Sebastian's
time the Jesuits governed all, and the Blame is laid at their doors I know not
how justly, of the lamentable Destruction wherein that ill advised Prince
involved both himself and his Kingdom; yet notwithstanding this, King Henry the
Cardinal was wholly at their Devotion. When the Spaniards got possession of
this Crown, none were more zealous in their Cause than the Jesuits: Yet when
Fortune began to frown upon them, and the present King's Father regained his
Right, the Jesuits were ready immediately to assert his Title, and that not
only to this Crown, but to all the World besides (by way of Prophecy I mean,
for in Effect they are doing what they can to procure their so much talked of
Fifth Monarchy for another Prince) and in all the Revolutions and Turns of
State that have happened since, it was sure to be their Side, which soever it
was, that chanced to come uppermost.

In the present Court, their Power is certainly very great, they having all
along had the Direction of the Kings and both the Queens Consciences, so that
considering how religiously disposed his Portuguese Majesty is, and his
misfortune in having been so Educated, that his improvements in Knowledge have
not kept pace with his other great Accomplishments, their Advice must
necessarily go a great way with him, I find in a Memoire written by one, who
seems well acquainted with the Secrets of this Court, that the Jesuits have a
great Influence, not only over His Majesty, but over the Ministers likewise,
who are said to be obliged to these Fathers for the great share they have in
the Government, and that one who has the Address to get into Favor with their
Reverences, which is done by enlarging on the Praises of the Society, may makc
a very good use of them in any Business depending at Court, provided that it
does not clash with the Interest of France; for it seems they have always an
eye to that which is now the grand concern of the Society. My Author gives one
signal Instance of their Zeal and Affection to the French Party, which shows
them to be capable of any thing in order to promote that, even to the
sacrificing of all other Interests, it being of a Design, which had it taken
effect, must have outed the present Ministers from Court, or at least abated
much of their Power; for it was to bring the Conde de Castelmelhor into
Business again, and that because they know him, says my Author, to be well
affected to France. I cannot tell upon what grounds the Conde is thought to be
so inclined, he was indeed a kind of a Martyr for the French Cause; for the
League before mentioned is thought to have been in part the occasion of his
Fall. But his being obliged after all that he had suffered for them to take
Sanctuary in England, where he was honorably entertained, and had a noble
Pension assigned him, should as one would think have inclined him another way;
its true, his eldest Son the Conde de Calbeta has married a French Lady, but
that was since the Design I am speaking of was set on foot. But however this
be, the Jesuits no doubt hoped for some extraordinary advantage from his
readmission into Court, since they durst venture to offend the Conde's great
Rival the Duke of Cavadal, from whom they were to look for a most Powerful
Opposition. But as the Attempt was great, the way they took to effect it, was
somewhat surprising, for the Queen by the advice of Father Fuess her Confessor,
was to use her endeavors with the King to bring it about. It is no wonder that
Father Fuess, being a Jesuit, though a German, should desire the advancement of
one engaged in the French Interest; yet it is somewhat strange, that a Daughter
of the Palatine Family should so far forget her Father's House, as to concern
her self in such a Cause. But they that are acquainted with the Intrigues of
the Society, will not wonder to see those carrying on their designs, who in
appearance should have the greatest reason to oppose them. My Author who seems
to be a very intelligent Person, and who as I had it from a good hand, was both
a Countryman and a Servant to her Majesty, says, that the Business was brought
so far to a head, that the Queen waited only for the time, when her Confessor
should think it proper for her to break it to the King. How it came to miscarry
I know not, but it seems to be now wholly laid aside, for the Conde has not yet
appeared at Court, and it was about 1691. that this Business was in Agitation,
since which time the Duke of Cadaval has by the Marriage of his Son, to the
King's natural Daughter, established himself at Court more firmly than ever.

The French then having such Powerful Agents at the Court of Portugal as are
the Ladies and the Jesuits, though their Interest there be very consideraable,
yet it is some wonder that it is not much greater, as without doubt it would
be, were there not so wise a Prince on the Throne, as his present Majesty. It
cannot be denied, but that the French Artifices in representing the late War,
as raised and carried on upon a religious account, have prevailed much, and
that not only among the common People, but with them likewise that are in a
much higher Station, and have had in a great measure their designed effect, in
byassing Peoples minds to the prejudice of the Allies. It is reported of a
certain very great Lady, that when the News came to Lisbon of a great Disaster
likely to befall some of the Allies upon the Coasts of Portugal, she could not
forbear expressing her satisfaction in a most unusual manner, That the
Heretics were confounded. But there are not wanting among them some so much
wiser than the rest, as to see through the French Artifices, and perceive that
all this trouble that they give World, has some other end in it, than the
advancement of their Religion, and there are those that will not stick to give
our King his just Titles, of Europes Deliverer, and the Restorer of Liberty to
Mankind. As for the King himself, he is certainly not insensible of his own
true Interest, I have good grounds to believe that the Levies he was making in
1693. were designed to help forward the common Cause, and had actually marched
toward Catalonia, had he not been assured from his Ministers abroad, that the
French were earnestly soliciting for a Peace, and that the Fortune of the War
had not turned so much to the disadvantage of the Allies, as to make them want
his Assistance. And few I believe doubt, but that the Forces now on foot have
been raised, upon a like design, should there be occasion for them; this Court
being by this convinced what little account is to be made of French
Protestations of Friendship, and where they are like to end, of these they have
had as great or a greater share than any other People, and they find themselves
now to be first marked out for Destruction, for while they are caressed by the
French Ministers at Versailles and Lisbon, those of the same Nation are again
making a Sacrifice of them at Madrid, at least if the Author of the Paper
concerning the King's Pretensions to Spain, supposed to have been written by
order of this Court be rightly informed; for there we find among other
Conditions offered to the Spaniards in behalf of the Duke of Anjou, the
Reunion of Portugal to the Crown of Spain, proposed for one; so that the
Portugueses find it high time for them to look to themselves, and in all
appearance, they will leave nothing unattempted to bring about that Reunion,
though in a different manner than is proposed by France.

OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to the Emperor, Holland, the
Northern Crowns, etc.
TIll of late Years there has been little or no intercourse between Portugal
and the Court of Vienna; the reason of this strangeness was the cruel Treatment
of Dom Duarte, Prince of Braganca, and Uncle to the present King: This Prince
at the Acclamation of his Brother King John the 4th. had been eight Years in
the Emperor's Service, and was in the Post of a Major General, under
Piccolomeni, and as it is said, he had signalized himself with great Courage,
in the War against the Swedes; but he having no notice given him of his
Brother's design, the Spanish Ministers at Vienna as soon as the news of the
Revolt came thither, procured a secret Order from the Emperor Ferdinand the 3d.
to have him arrested by way of Reprizal, for what his Brother had taken from
them, and to please them, this innocent Prince was by a manifest violation of
the Liberties of the Empire, and the Honor of the German Nation, kept Prisoner
for sometime at Grats, and afterward sold to the Spaniards for the sum of
Forty Thousand Crowns, and was by them carried away to the Castle of Milan,
where he was shut up for the remainder of his life, he ending his days there
after eight years of Confinement. This dishonorable Act of the Emperor begat
such a coldness between the two Courts of Vienna and Lisbon, that there had
been no Communication between them till of late Years; the first advance
toward a Correspondence by all that I can learn, was not made till the Year
1683. when at the Pope's instance, King Peter contributed a large supply of
Money toward the Expenses of the War against the Turks. But his Marriage
afterward with one so nearly Related to the House of Austria, as her late
Majesty was, laid the Foundation of a solid Friendship, and it was generally
expected, that this Match would have brought the King wholly over to the
Austrian Interest; it was thought that there was something of a Negotiation on
foot, to engage him on that side in the beginning of the last War, viz. in
1689. when the Count de Mansfield employed in the Business of the King of
Spain's second Marriage, took Lisbon in his way from Madrid to Nieubourg, and
the French Ambassador seemed to have smelt out some such thing, and thereupon
by way of Revenge, found means to mortify both the King and the Count. For the
King having ordered one of his Ships to be got ready for the Count to Embark
upon, the Ambassador took occasion to acquaint His Majesty, that the Count de
Mansfield, being a Minister of the Emperor, and one of his Generals, there was
cause to fear that the Ship which carried him would be attacked by French Men
of War, which might occasion some distaste between his most Christian and his
Portuguese Majesty; the King was fain to hearken to the Admonition, and digest
the Menace rather than expose himself to a greater Insult, perceiving I
suppose, that the Ambassador saw plain enough that he was not in a condition to
resent it. wherefore the Count was left to provide a Ship for himself, however
the King ordered two of his Frigates to convoy him to the mouth of the Channel.

As the War was drawing toward a conclusion, the King sent a most splendid
Embassy to Vienna, at the same time when he sent another to the French Court,
as it was thought to interpose his good Offices toward the drawing on of the
Peace. Nor did the disgrace which befell the Portuguese Ambassador to his
Imperial Majesty, break off the Correspondence between the two Courts, the
Emperor seeming now resolved to have his Ministers constantly Resident at
Lisbon, having never before had any such since the House of Braganca was
possessed of the Crown; it is much for the Interest of both Parties to have a
good understanding together, whilst the cause of the Succession of Spain is
depending, for though in regard to that affair, they have different ends in
view, yet they are both alike concerned to act in concert, till the greatest
and most difficult point be gained which is the Exclusion of France.

With the Dutch this Court has had a fair and amicable Correspondence ever
since the Year 1669. when all differences were made up that had broken ^ut
since the Peace with that Nation in 1662. of which I shall say nothing here,
since it would oblige me to give an account of the preceding War, which would
take up more room then can be now spared.

There seems to be little or no Communication between this and the two Northern
Crowns; the great distance between them being the cause that they have seldom
any thing to do with one another, all the Business the Danes and Swedes have
here, being about the Trade for Salt, which they load yearly at Setubal, but
this is easily managed by the Consuls.

The deserved Esteem this King had for the great Sobieski, and the Marriage of
Prince James his Son with the Queen's Sister, afforded matter for some
Reciprocal Compliments between them; but there was a difficulty in the
Ceremonial which would not permit them to have this little Intercourse
together. The King of Poland in his Letter, named himself first, which this
Court could not bear, and therefore refused to receive the Letter, because that
King is only the Head of a Republic, whereas his Majesty of Portugal is an
Absolute Sovereign. The present King of Poland's Envoy, when he came to Lisbon
to notify his Master's advancement to that Crown, could not be received nor
admitted to Audience for the same Reason, and not as some thought, for that
this King refused to acknowledge his Master or disapproved of his Election.

The Princes of Germany and Italy can have very little to do here, and
therefore little notice is taken of them; the Elector Palatine himself having
no Minister residing at Court. The Elector of Brandenbourg indeed has his
Resident, but that is more for the Honor and Security of the Person, than on
account of any Business, he being a considerable French Merchant of the
Religion. I have not heard that since the Business of the Infanta's Marriage,
any thing has past between this Court and those of Savoy and Florence. The
Duke of Parma has had his Envoy here upon Offices of Ceremony, I suppose upon
account of his Relation to the Royal Family, he being descended from a Daughter
of Dom Emanuel, that was eldest Sister to her, in whose right the House of
Braganca lays claim to the Crown, and consequently he would have an undoubted
Right thereto, were he not excluded by the Laws of Lamego

OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to ENGLAND.
I Believe there are no People in the World that have valued themselves less
upon their Friendship to the Portugueses, or deserved more at their Hands then
the English, I should have placed them first, had I ranked the rest according
as they merit in the Esteem of this Nation; for they well deserve to be
reckoned, and that in the chief place among the Founders, the Protectors, and
the Restorers of the Kingdom. They have certainly been the surest and most
dis-interess'd Friends to it, almost from the time when Portugal first became a
Nation, to the Establishment of the now Reigning Family upon the Throne. And in
truth, the ancient Portugueses have shown so much Gratitude, that there remain
in this Country several Memorials of the English Generosity and Valor, that
have been forgotten by our selves, and are over looked by our own Writers; but
of late we have not had the like reason to commend their Justice, though our
Nation in the present Age, as great as the Merits of our Ancestors were, has
deserved no less at their Hands. Their Ancient Writers set forth at large, how
great a share the English had in the first raising of their Kingdom, and how
they have since more then once rescued it from Destruction, and there are those
yet alive among them, that know very well how their Deliverance from utter
Ruin, and that Liberty and Peace which they now enjoy, is owing to the Bravery
of our Soldiers, and the Prudence of our Ministers; but their late Writers have
not been so Ingenuous as to deliver what they knew to Posterity.

It will not be expected that in so short a space as is left me, I should give
a particular Account of these Transactions; however, I shall briefly touch upon
some of those that have passed in former Ages, as they are related by the
Portuguese Historians, hoping that it will not be altogether ungrateful to the
English Reader, to hear News from Foreigners, as old as it is concerning his
own Country Men: And some mention must be made of what the English have done of
late Years for Portugal, and that both in Justice to those, who by their Wisdom
or their Courage, have contributed its present Establishment; and to excite
such as are more able, or may have better Opportunities to do it, to retrieve
the Memory of many signal Actions performed here by our Country Men, which as
great and important as they were; they that enjoy the Benefit of them, seem now
resolved to Bury in silence.

It is agreed by the Portuguese Writers, the Modern as well as the Ancient,
that the English had a great hand in the Conquest of Lisbon from the Mores,
whereby Portugal came to deserve the name of a Kingdom. They say indeed, that
Alfonso Henriquez changed his Title of Count or Prince for that of King,
immediately after the Vision of Ourique before mentioned, but possibly the
story of that Vision may not be true; and this is certain, that the three
Estates of the Kingdom in their Remonstrance to Innocent the 10th. affirm from
their Chronicles, that this Prince would not accept of the Crown, till it was
made Tributary to the Sea of Rome, which was not done till many Years after the
taking of Lisbon, viz. not before 1179. when Pope Alexander the 3d. by his Bull
still extant, conferred upon him the Title and Dignity of King. In their
Account of the Conquest of this City, the Portuguese Authors tell us, that in
the Year 1147. a great Fleet from England, composed of several Nations, and
bound for the Holy Land, under the Command of William Longspe, passing by the
Rock of Sintra. Alfonso Henriquez so dealt with the Leaders, that they agreed
to stand in to the Tagus, and join with him in laying Siege to Lisbon, on
condition that one half of the City when gained, should be given up to them:
Accordingly the City was taken after a Siege of five Months, and the slaughter
of 200000 Mores. Alfonso offered to make good the Agreement, and put them in
Possession of their part of the City, and to make an equal Division with them
of all that was taken, both within and without it, which they generously
refused to accept of; since as they said, they had not left their Country to
get Riches, but were engaged in a more glorious Design, and withal they did
not think it becoming them to enjoy a Sovereignty within another Prince's
Dominions; and so having accepted of a small share of the Spoils, they
proceeded on in their Voyage. I will not undertake for the several
Circumstances of this Story, for I believe some of them are not true; I believe
there will be no Account found among those that have written of the Holy War of
any such Expedition made this Year, and the famous Earl of Salisbury, if he be
the Person meant by Guilbelme de longa Espada was not yet Born; and for many
reasons we cannot allow the Account of the slain, one is, because Lisbon was
then scarce big enough to hold so many. The present Inhabitants cannot be
supposed to exceed much that Number, but the Walls that are now standing, and
were not built till 1375. though they contain but a part of the City, are of a
much larger compass then those that stood at the time of the Siege. The
Strangers had then their Camp upon the Hill, where the Monastry of St.
Francesco, and the Church of the Martyrs stand, which are now in the very heart
of the City, and the Portuguese Camp on the other side was, where the Church of
San Vincente is now, which is within the present Walls, though it has still
the Name of San Vincente de Fora, because it was formerly without the City. In
effect, the ancient City of Lisbon was not of a much larger compass then that
of the Hill on which the Castle of St. George now stands, so that they that
know any thing of the Place, will never think that 200000 People could be
killed at the taking of it, supposing every Soul to have been put to the Sword.
However, that Lisbon was taken this Year, and that by the Assistance of the
English and other Strangers, is agreed upon by the Spanish, as well as the
Portuguese Historians; I suppose they were Soldiers of Fortune, as Mariana
seems to intimate, whom Alfonso Henriquez had invited thither with hopes of
Booty and a share of the Conqusts. And it is not likely that they refused the
Reward promised them whatever it was, on account of their being engaged in the
Holy War, for there remained so many of them in the Country, that the want of
them would doubtless have broke that Voyage; for those that stayed had the
Towns of Almada, Povos, Villa Franca, Villa Verde, Azambuja, Arruda Lourinham,
and several other Places assigned them, which according to the Portuguese
Historians were all Peopled by these strangers. Almada which is a small Town
with a Castle on a Hill, formerly very strong, situated on the other side of
the River over against Lisbon, took its Name as these Authors will have it,
from an English Expression which they write Vimad-el qu. We made [Ye] all: But
if the word must needs be of an English Original, one should rather think it
came from a more modest Expression, viz. we are All made. They tell likewise,
that the Lords of the Place who took their Name from thence, pretended always
to be of English Extraction; and that for this reason, those of the Family have
on several Occasions received great Honors in that Kingdom. Povos which is a
Town Situated upon the River about four Leagues above Lisbon, was as they say,
anciently called Cornovalha, from its being Peopled by Cornish Men, and
afterward corruptly Cornaga, by which last name, I find the Place called above
200 Years afterward, possibly the reason of its being left off, may be the
great abhorrence which the Portugueses have for the first Syllable of it, which
a well bred Man amongst them will never pronounce upon any account. The Name it
has now is the common Word for Villages. In fine, it seems to be almost as
usual in Portugal, for such as would become of better Families then ordinary,
to derive their Pedigree from these Strangers that were at the taking of
Lisbon, as it is with us to have our Ancestors come in with William the
Conqueror. Such of them as continued at Lisbon, had very great Privileges and
Immunities allowed them, as well they might, if one half of the City was their
own by Compact, and the best part of the Kingdom, as the Termo of Lisbon
certainly is, was owning to their Valor. The Licentiate Duarte Nunes de Liam,
who was a Judge, and consequently must be supposed to understand the
Constitutions of his Country, Reports that these Privileges were continued, not
only to the Descendants, from the first Conquerors, but to the Persons and
Merchandises of such of their Country Men, as should resort thither; and he
says likewise, that the succeeding Kings confirmed and observed them to his
time, he wrote in the Year 1600. I have seen a large Collection of Privileges
granted by the several Kings of Portugal to the English, beyond those enjoyed
by the Portuguese Subjects, I know not whether I may call them Charters. These
were copied from the Archives of the Kingdom, in the Torre de Tumbo, but the
most ancient was of King Ferdinand, whose Reign began not till 1367. There are
several of John the 1st. his Successor, some of which refer to others granted
by his Predecessors.

By this it appears that the English had a great hand in setting up the Kingdom
of Portugal, and if the Historians of this Country deceive us not, they had as
great a share in Protecting and Securing it, as often as it has been brought
into Danger by a Foreign Enemy. Twice it was like to be wholly overrun by the
Castillians, who had possed themselves of the greatest part of the Kingdom, and
gained a numerous Party of the Nobility over to their side, and had been very
near taking Lisbon it self; the first time in the Reign of Ferdinand, the last
of the lawful Descendants from Alfonso Henriquez, the other time while John the
1st. from whom all that have succeeded him derived their Titles, was struggling
for the Crown; and they have been as often relieved by the English, and enabled
to carry the War into the Enemies Country, our Princes of the Blood
condescending to go in Person to their Assistance; first Edmund de Langley then
Earl of Cambridge, and afterward John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. And if after
the several flourishing Reigns that succeeded, they were at last reduced under
the Spanish Yoke, it was because they were wanting to themselves, the English
having sent out a Gallant Fleet, and Army to their Rescue, under Dom Antonio,
whom they had made their King, but they would not accept Deliverance, and so
they remained under the Power of their Enemies.

In the last War after the French had given them up, or assisted them in such a
manner as they should not own without Confusion, when all Europe looked upon
their Ruin as inevitable, some of the most considerable Persons in the Kingdom,
being so far of the same Opinion, that they thought it now high time for them
to save themselves, and make their Peace with the Spaniards, as the Duke of
Aveiro and their Ambassador in Holland who went over to them; Cardinal Mazarin
making himself merry with our Locker at the Folly of all the rest, for not
doing the same, and for thinking it possible for them to hold out longer; Don
Luis de Haro, who was not accounted Sanguin, making nothing of the little
Expedition that his Master was about against the Duke of Braganca, for after
this rate he is reported to have talked to King Charles the 2d. at the
Pirences: Those small Forces sent by King Charles after his Restoration, by
their unparalled Valor, soon put an end to the Quarrel, and the Victories
obtained by their Means, being seconded as they were by the Vigilence Dexterity
and Conduct of the same King's Ministers, recovered Portugal and restored it to
the condition in which it now remains.

These Forces consisted of about 3000 Men, formed into three Regiments, two of
Foot which made near 2400, and one of Horse of about 800. They were at first
Commanded by the Earl of Inchiquin, but his Lordship returning to England
before they took the Field, they were by Commission from the King of England,
put under the Conduct of Count Schomberg, who had himself the immediate Command
of one of the foot Regiments. They arrived in Portugal soon after Don John had
made an end of that successful Campaign, before mentioned in 1662. and were
disposed of into Quarters till the following Spring, when they joined the
Portuguese Army in order to relieve Evora, but in their March toward that
City, they were met with the News of its being surrendered without Resistance
in a manner, and upon very Dishonorable Terms, though it had in it a Garrison
of 7000 Foot and 700 Horse, and was provided with all things necessary for a
stout Defense, till such time as the Army should come up and attempt to raise
the Siege. The News of this loss so struck the Commanders of the Army, that
it is no wonder it should put the People into that consternation before
described. The Conde de Villa Flor the Genesis was so discouraged, that his
concern appeared to the very Soldiers in his Looks, which our Men who had been
used to see their Commanders so Dejected observed with Indignation. A Council
of War being called, it appeared that the Army was in no condition to fight the
Enemy, and it was resolved not to attempt it as bad as their Case was.
Something might have been done had Evora held out, they relying upon the
Garrisons, fallying at the same time, when they should attack the Besiegers:
But the Garrison was now made Prisoners of War, so it was resolved that they
should encamp themselves at a Place called Landroal, which lay so between the
Enemies Frontier Places, that they might cut off any convoys of Provisions
coming from thence. Don John in the mean while having possessed himself of so
Great and Populous a City in the very heart of Alemtejo, became thereby Master
in a manner of the whole Province, and was providing for his Army at his
Enemies Cost, by putting all the Country under Contribution, for which end and
to gave the greater Alarm to Lisbon, whereby to increase the Tumult there, he
sent that large Detachment before mentioned, as far as Alcacere do Sal. The
Court at this time apprehending no less Danger from the Multitude then the
Enemy, and seeing the Affairs of Portugal to be in all respects desperate, was
continually sending Orders to the Commanders to fight at any rate; the Army at
last being reinforced with what Troops other parts of the Kingdom could send,
or the Garrisons spare, marched toward the Spaniards, hoping to find them
divided, but not being able to hinder their Detachments from joining the main
Body, they were for retiring again. Don John followed at their Heels to give
them Battle, but they had passed a small River, called Degebe, before he came
up with them, and they had posted themselves so advantageously, that there were
but two Passes through which he could come to Attack them. That where the
Portugueses thought the greatest Danger was, it being in its self the easiest
to be forced, was defended by one of the English Regiments. Don John made his
greatest Efforts to gain it, and there ensued a very hot Dispute, for at
several times he sent in fresh Troops to renew the Charge, which were as often
repulsed with loss, so that he was obliged at last to desist from the Attempt,
Don John found now that he had other Enemies to deal with then those he had
hitherto been used to. Being frustrated of his Design, he put a Garrison into
Evora, and began to march toward the Frontiers, where he expected to be
reinforced with fresh Supplies, in order to return and both secure and enlarge
his Conquests. The Portugueses began now to take Courage, and perceiving Don
John's design, being pressed withal by repeated Orders from Court to Fight,
directed their March the same way in order to wheel about and get before him,
which they might easily do, having secured their heavy Baggage at Estremos,
whereas the Spanish Army was much encumbered with Carriages. However, the March
of the Portuguese Army was so hasty, that as the Conde da Ericeyra says, the
English bore both, that and the heat of the Sun with Impatience. Its true, the
Toil which our Country Men under went at that time was very great, but least
any should gather from that Expression, that they showed any great Backwardness
in the service, I shall tell the occasion of it, which his Lordship is pleased
to omit. The two Armies were at a small distance over against each other, both
making what have they could to pass a River (Tera) before the Night that
preceded the Battle of Amexial. The English being in the Rear of the Portuguese
Army, I suppose, because that was to become the Front when they got before the
Enemy; as Evening drew on, the Alarm was taken in the Front, that the Enemy was
at hand, but then the English were at a great distance from that part where the
Action was like to be, and without them it seems nothing was to be done; Orders
were thereupon given for them to Advance with all speed, which they did as fast
as 'twas possible for them to run throughout the whole length of the Army.
Their eagerness to engage with the Enemy, and their Pride no doubt to see so
many thousands of Armed Men look upon them as their Guardians, spurring them on
beyond their strength, insomuch that several of them through Heat and want of
Breath, fell by the Way and some were lost; but by that time they came up, the
Alarm ceased, and there was nothing for them to do, as 'twas well there was
not, for as some of the Officers have assured me, the Men were so Faint, and
Weary, as to become altogether unfit for Action; such was the occasion of the
Impatience taken Notice of by the Noble Author in his Account of this days
March.

The next day the Spaniards by reason of their slow March occasioned by their
heavy Luggage, put it in the Power of the Portugueses to oblige them to Fight.
As the Armies came in sight of each other, the English Horse with a Party of
Portugueses were commanded to dislodge several Battallions of the Enemy, that
had possessed themselves of a rising Ground, which the Portugueses thought
necessary for them, in case they should come to a Battle. They did not only do
as they were Ordered, by driving those Batallions from the Hill, but they
followed them into the Plain on the other side, and found themselves insensibly
engaged in a hot Skirmish with the whole Body of the Spanish Cavalry, that was
conducting the Carriages toward another Hill a League off, where their Foot
had already posted themselves; but they were so surprised and disordered by
this sudden Attack, that had our Men been seconded as 'twas expected they
should be from the Army, 'twas thought they might have put them entirely to the
Rout. Count Schomberg saw what Advantage was to be made of the Confusion he
perceived them in, and was marching toward them in all have with such of the
Cavalry as were near at hand; but giving notice of what he was doing to the
Conde de Villa Flor, He in all have sent positive Orders to command him back,
possibly for no other Reason but to keep up the Custom of Thwarting the Count,
who had hitherto been opposed in almost every Motion he made. The Portuguese
Commanders seeming resolved to spare the Enemy, or give him any Advantage over
them, rather then suffer the Count to know more of their Trade then themselves,
which without Question was one Reason of their former Losses, as the Deference
they paid him afterward was of the Success that followed. The Count obeyed the
General's Orders, though with some Reluctance, but it was not long before he
took the liberty to act more of his own Head, and thereby saved Portugal.

The Portugueses possessed themselves of the rising Ground, from whence the
Spaniards had been beaten; they on the other side retired to two opposite
Hills, drawing up the Horse in a large Plain, at the bottom of that on the
right Hand, and their Foot on the tops of both, planting a Battery of four Guns
on each. Till three a Clock in the Afternoon, they spent the time on both sides
in Canonading each other, and some light Skirmishes, without doing any
considerable Damage on either side; but by this time it was observed, that the
Spaniards fired more slowly then before, and played but four Guns of Eight that
they began with, which made the Portugueses suspect them to be designing (as
they were) to draw off and continue their March; hereupon it was debated in a
Council of War, what was to be done in the Case: They had positive Orders from
the King and the Conde de Castlemelhor, to Fight upon the first occasion, which
they had great cause to despair of ever being able to do, should Don John give
them the slip at this time, and be re-inforc'd with the Troops that were ready
for him on the Frontiers. On the other side, the Spaniards had so placed
themselves, that there was no Fighting with them, but at great Disadvantage;
their Horse which were double in Number to the Portuguese, being six thousand
to three, had a large Plain before them, and in regard to the Foot, their
Advantage was much greater, yet not on account of their Number indeed, for the
Portugueses had Eleven Thousand to Ten of theirs. But they had so Fortified
themselves upon one of the Hills, or rather Nature had done it for them, that
Don John thought he could not have found a better, or more secure Place of
Arms, as he told the King his Father, in a Letter after the Battle, in which he
compared it to the Castle of Milan, adding, that he thought himself so safe
there, that he was almost ashamed of his over great Precaution, and that the
Enemy in mounting it, came scrambling up like so many Cats [Como Gateando.] But
the truth is, his Highness did a little exaggerate the matter, as two of the
Officers who commanded the Party that did this Feat, most ingenuously
acknowledged, and thereby undeceived me of an Error, who could think little
otherwise of it then as a direct Precipice. Each of them severally affirming,
that neither they nor their Men, made use of their Hands in mounting it; they
said indeed, that it was very steep, but according to their Description, it
could not be near so inaccessible as the Spaniards themselves have made it.
However, these Difficulties weighed so much with the Portuguese Commanders,
that the Council broke up without coming to any Resolution; But for all this
Count Schomberg was never the less attentive in observing the Countenance and
Motions of the Enemy, and carefully seeking about, where and how he might be
attacked, when those that had been for Fighting in the Council, came about him,
Simon Vasconcellos, more especially, who urged to him the repeated Orders of
the King and his Brother the Conde de Castelmelbor, and it was agreed at last
amongst them, even in the absence of the General (one of them undertaking for
him) to bring it to a Battle; and as they were ranging the Cavalry in order,
the Count took occasion to acquaint the General of what they resolved on, who
now seemed well enough satisfied, declaring that he for his part had been
always for it.

The Fight began between the Horse on both sides, the Portuguese Left charging
the Spaniards Right Wing; I cannot give any exact Account of the part which the
English Horse had in this Action, not having had the opportunity to speak with
any Eyewitnesses of their Conduct. However, those Officers from whom I
received my Information concerning the Foot, have assured me, that the Horse on
this occasion behaved themselves with the like Gallantry, as their Country men
did in the other part of the Battle, to be spoken of presently: Though they had
not the like success, they were commanded to begin the Charge, and renew it
several times together, which they did with their accustomed Bravery, though
they were obliged every time to leap a wide Ditch, wherein several of their
Horses stuck, and the French who were to have sustained them, fired their
Pistols at a distance, and then marched off and sheltered themselves under a
Wall. But it seems our Horse met with their Match at this time, having to deal
with a Body of Old German Troops, who had learnt the Trade as well as
themselves; for as it is said, they kept their Bullets till the English came
close up to them, and were not to be easily broken by so small a Number.

While the Horse on both sides were engaged in a fierce, and for sometime
doubtful Fight, our Foot were facing the forementioned inaccessible Hill, as
the Spaniards thought it; the Portugueses firing their Muskets at the Enemy,
who was at so great a distance, that it was impossible to do any Execution. The
Spaniards in the mean time playing with their Battery from the Hill, which did
some Damage to the English, who were to the Left of the whole Army, killing
four or five Men among their Pikes. Count Schomberg who as being the Author of
this Battle, had a more than ordinary concern upon him for its success, was now
every where giving Orders and Encouragement to the Officers and Soldiers; he
coming to the Left to animate his Country men, as he then called the English,
to behave themselves as became them, found that notwithstanding their
Yesterdays Fatigue, the sight of the Enemy had made them Wanton, a thing as it
must be confessed usually observed in our Soldiers and Seamen, when they are
in hopes of an Engagement. These were become Proud before hand of their
Buff-coats, which as they thought they saw on the Backs of the Spaniards, Don
John's Guards being clothed in Yellow. The Count hearing some of them Bragging
how fine they should be, gave them a gentle Reproof, by telling them, that the
time to Boast was when the Armor was put off; but seeing that the Enemies
Cannon was like to prove troublesome to them where they stood, he ordered
Lieutenant Colonel Hunt, who commanded them at that time to advance nearer the
Hill to certain broken Houses, by which means the great Guns might shoot over
them, and the Houses be a shelter to them from the small shot. When the Count
left them, they marched as they were directed, the Enemy as they advanced
nearer, firing most furiously upon them, though they received but little hurt,
even after they were come within reach of the small Shot; the Officers supposed
that the reason was, because the Spaniards firing so fast as they did,
neglected to ram their Muskets, and that the Bullets tumbled out as they were
aiming downwards, before they could give Fire; they were confirmed in this
Opinion, when they observed afterward, that such as were wounded, had been
shot in their upper Parts. When they came up to the Houses, it was found that
they did not afford Covert for half their Men, and here the Soldiers began to
grow impatient indeed; the Place seemed hot, and the Enemy was near, and they
thought it hard that they must stand there to be Pelted at, whilst they might
be in Action, wherefore they were all for having their Commander lead them on,
and showed so much egarness to be up with the Enemy, that he resolved to
gratify them, though he had no Orders for it; and so forward they marched
through all the Fire and Smoke, that the Spaniards on the Hill could make. The
Lieutenant Colonel commanding upon pain of Death, that none of his Men should
fire till he gave the Word; when they were got up to the Brink, the three
foremost Ranks were ordered to give fire at once, the first kneeling, the
second stooping: The Soldiers took their aim so well, that this discharge was
answered with a dismal hideous Groan from the dying Spaniards, but being
seconded by another, the Rear half-files presently advancing and firing in the
same manner, the Enemy began to give way in disorder, our Men perceiving their
Business to be in a manner done, gave as load a Shout as 'twas possible for
them to make, and then fell in with the But-ends of their Muskets, and
presently put them into Confusion, and in a short time entirely routed them
beyond all possibility of Rallying, continuing the Pursuit for about a Mile,
having made themselves Masters of the four pieces of Cannon, Don John's Tent
and rich Baggage, and many of our Men looked upon their Work as so far done,
that they thought it high time to go to Dinner; for among other things, they
had seized upon Don John's Provisions, which they found just ready Dressed, and
were falling to, but Count Schomberg soon found employment for them elsewhere.

This resolute Action of the English Foot occasioned the famous Victory of
Amexial, Canal or Evora, for the Battle goes by all three of those Names; but
the Author of the second Part of Portugal, Restaurado now lately published, so
orders the matter, as to communicate the Honor of it to his own Country men,
and not content with that, he will scarce suffer the English to have any the
least share in it. In his account of this Battle, he without taking notice of
any preceding Action among the Foot, sets Himself and another General Officer
at the Head of four Regiments, in order to march up the Hill, one of these he
allows indeed to be English, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hunt, but
then he takes care to drop them by the way. Before they begin their March, the
Conde de Villa Flor is brought in to make a florid Speech, which works so much
upon them, that at the last Words they are in Motion; but the English being to
the Left of all, and nearest the Plain where the Cavalry on both sides were
engaged, are attacked by four hundred Horse with great Bravery. But they
forming themselves into a close Body, the Firelocks keeping within the Pikes,
make such Resistance by their repeated Discharges, that the Three Regiments led
on by the two Commanders, continue their March unmolested. In ascending the
Hill they think fit that they might make sure work of it, to send a single
Officer to see whether the Enemy might not have some Horse there to oppose
them. The Officer does as he is ordered, making his way through Clouds of
Bullets, as the Author expresses it, takes a full view of the Place, and sees
no Horse there; with this Answer he encourages them to make up to the Top, and
then the Three Regiments act over again the very same things which (as it has
hitherto been believed) the English had done before.

This Account Published, as it is, under the Name of Dom Luis de Menezes, who
was himself in the Battle as General of the Artillery, and doubtless acquitted
himself therein with Honor, and afterward had the Title Conde da Ericeyra,
must at first sight infallibly shake the Credit of the foregoing Relation, if
not entirely destroy it; and so put our Country men out of Possession of an
Honor, which till the latter end of last Year, they had enjoyed as their
undoubted Right. However, there are some further Passages to be told relating
to this Battle, which may possibly keep the former Account from being thought
altogether incredible.

But before any thing be said in Defense of the one, or Answer to the other,
there are certain Reports that have been current about Lisbon for some Years,
which the Public ought to be informed of, and that in consideration of the
respect due to one of the Conde's Quality. These Reports are such, as if there
be any Grounds for them, may make one suspect that the Conde has been much
injured in the Edition of his Works. It was the common talk in Portugal for
several Years after the Publication of the first Volumn, that some other Person
besides his Lordship, had a hand in Composing and Digesting his Papers; but
then its true, that People differed much in their Opinions concerning the
Person supposed to be thus Employed, some would have it, that it was a Person
of Quality indeed, but one of the other Sex: Others were for a certain Priest
whom the Conde, as they pretend, kept in his House for that purpose. I will not
undertake for the Credit of either the one, or the other of these Reports, as
being altogether ignorant on what gounds they were raised; but the Truth is,
there is great cause why they that wish well to the Conde's Memory, should be
glad they were believed, and some Passages in the Book it self makes one think
that there may be something in them; the Language bestowed by the Author on
those he calls Heretics. Our King Charles the First for one, when he reflects
on the Behavior of that Blessed Martyr in his last Agony, is not common among
Men of the Conde's Rank, but seems to come rather from the indiscreet Zeal of a
Bigoted Lady, which is the only excuse its capable of. And as for the Account
now under consideration, the Reader will soon perceive, that it savours
strongly of something that I shall not name, but of which above all Men in the
World, one would soonest suspect a Romish Priest. But to our Purpose.

King Charles the Second being informed of the wonderful Bravery of his
Soldiers shown at this Battle of Amexial, was pleased out of his pure
Liberality, to order Forty Thousand Crowns-to be distributed amongst them. All
that know any thing of the Character of that Prince, know that he was not to be
easily imposed upon by sham Relations of this kind, and it was as apparent to
the World, that his Exchequer did not overflow with Money, and consequently it
must be some very important Action, that his Majesty thought fit to Reward with
so large Donative. But was it possible for so understanding a Prince as King
Charles, to think it an extraordinary thing for above 2000 Foot to make
Resistance against a Body of 400 Horse? Yet this is all the part that our
Author allows them in the Victory, only in conclusion he says, that between
Horse and Foot they Iost about 50 Men, and that they and the French together
behaved themselves Valiantly. Our Horse lost many more, the greatest part of
them being cut to pieces by their renewing the Charge so often as they did,
while they were abandoned by the French.

But if the English Foot did any thing to deserve the Notice of their King, it
was on the Hill, against which they were at first Posted, and upon which the
main Business of the Battle was transacted; for there by confession of all, the
Spaniards were strongest and were first routed, and unless it were up thither,
our Foot scarce moved from their first Station. That they did something worthy
of Admiration, and upon this Place we may appeal to the Memories of all People
of any Curiosity in Portugal; for the fighting over of this and some other of
their Battles, was observed to be the main subject of Conversation amongst them
for many Years afterward, and their own Officers in the Army did not stick to
acknowledge that the Crown of Portugal was preserved by what the English did in
this; but I am writing in England, and shall content my self with such Evidence
as is at hand. There are two Gentlemen in London, who commanded in this very
Action, from whence the Author of Portugal Restaurado has excluded our Country
men; the one has a Command in my Lord of Oxford's Regiment, the other is one
of the Old Gentlemen in the Charter House, who are so far from magnifying the
Performance, that they contradict some circumstances in the Public Accounts,
that made it appear more hazardous and daring then it really was. They know
very well that they were not only engaged on the forementioned Hill, but that
till the Action was over, there were none besides them; the former of these
gives a very demonstrative Proof, that they could have no Assistants to
accompany them at the beginning; for where they ascended the Hill, the nature
of the Ground was such, that it would not admit of the whole Regiment (the
Party consisted but of one) for which reason, two Companies that were to the
Left, were forced to return and join the other English Regiment that was drawn
up in the second Line, and was commanded by Colonel Person. Its true, the Three
Regiments might get up afterward by other ways, but that they gave the English
time enough to do their Business for them, will appear from what follows.

The Conde Villa Flor General of the Portuguese Army, when the English were
first in Motion, was standing on the rising Ground, which he had possessed
himself of in the Morning, that was opposite to, and a League distant from the
Hill, we are speaking of. He seeing the English making up to the Enemy, and
observing that contrary to the custom of the Portugueses, they did not so much
as once fire all the way, was persuaded that they were running over to the
Enemy, and instead of making Speeches, to animate his own Soldiers to follow
them, was most bitterly exclaiming against the Heretics, declaring, That he
washed his Hands from having any thing to do in the Destruction of Portugal, or
giving this occasion to the Heretics to betray them; he was so fully
satisfied, that this and no other was their Design, that all they did whilst in
sight confirmed him in his Opinion. Mr. John Cargill who was Chaplain to the
Regiment, which the Genesis was crying out against, being near him at that time,
and understanding what he meant, but not having Portuguese enough to speak to
him, enquired for some body that could speak Latin, and having found one,
desired him to acquaint his Excellency, that the English instead of being
guilty of so vile a Treachery, as he was laying to their Charge, were doing him
a most Important piece of Service; but the Genesis was not to be persuaded out of
his Senses, his Eyes and his Ears convincing him, that the Heretics were a
doing that which, as he said, he had all along expected from them. He had seen
them running up to the Enemy, till they come so near, that they might shake
Hands, without doing the least act of Hostility; he presently afterward heard
a Shout too loud, as he thought for so small a Company to give, and he could
think no otherwise, but that they, and the Spaniards were Congratulating each
other upon their Conjunction; as for their general Discharge it could be
nothing else but a Salvo, they doubtless shooting their Bullets into the Air.
Such were the Speeches that the Conde de Villa Flor made while our Soldiers
were beating the Spaniards for him; he changed his Note indeed when he came
afterward to understand the matter, if it be true as it is reported, that he
said, Aquelles Herejes sam mel hores que os nossos Santos; these Heretics are
better to us then our own Saints. But for that time, all the Chaplain could do
in order to his Conviction, was to prevail, that a Messenger should be sent
along with him, to see what the English were adoing upon the Hill: In their way
they met Count Schomberg, whom Mr. Cargill acquainted with the Consternation in
which he had left the General. The Count upon hearing this, Galloped toward
the General, and as we may suppose, disabus'd him of his Error. The Count was
then just come down from the Hill, for he having the Concern of the whole
Battle upon him, found occasions for his Presence in every Part, and thought it
necessary at this time among the English, lest their heat should carry them on
too far in the Pursuit, whilst their Service was required elsewhere. He had got
up with them by that time they had followed the Enemy about a Mile; and though
he discovered by his Words, and much more in his Countenance, how well pleased
a Man of his Character must be with so Gallant an Action; yet they were his own
Regiment, and he checked them for their too great Eagerness, telling them that
the Enemies Horse were making toward their Country men below, and commanding
the Officers to Rally their Men that were then all in Disorder in the Pursuit
and Plunder. While his Orders were putting in Execution, he returned to the
Plain, and when he heard Mr. Cargil's Story, he rode up to quiet the General.

After the Conference between the Count and the General, we suppose it was that
the Three Portuguese Regiments, headed by the two Commanders, had the Speech
made to them, and were ordered to march up the Hill, for it was just at this
time that the Enemies Horse attacked an English Regiment in the manner
described by our Author, only he gives a wrong Name to it, for it was Colonel
Persons; and this was just as Lieutenant Colonel Hunt's Men, who had nothing to
do with any Horse, at all, were leaving the Hill: For they having spent some
time in getting into Rank and File, were making what have they could to join
their Country men, seeing four Squadrons of Cuirassiers charging them, who were
so warmly received, that they soon wheeled off, leaving behind them several of
their Men and Horses upon the Ground.

That the Portugueses did not ascend this Hill before our Men had been there
and done their work for them, will appear likewise from hence: The Author,
says that they began their March at the same time when seven other Regiments
of Foot on the Right, assisted by five Squadrons of Horse, went to Attack the
Spaniards on the other Hill, whom after some Resistance they routed, taking at
the same time the other four Pieces of Cannon; but this was not attempted till
after the English had been upon the steep Hill, and as a great Officer declared
presently after, had not been done at all, were it not that the Portugueses
were provoked to it by what the English had done before.

However, while these seven Regiments assisted as they were with five
Squadrons, notwithstanding the Advantage they had in Number and in the Place,
by much more accessible then the other, as appears by their making use of
Horse, were for some time put to it by the dispirited Spaniards. Our Author
assirms, that the three Regiments knowing nothing of what the English had been
doing (for he mentions not a word of it, and has done his utmost to keep the
Reader from suspecting any such thing) mounted the most inaccessible Hill; two
of them directly Fronting it, the third wheeling about to the Right, all
keeping their Fire as the English had done, till they gained the Top, which
they all did at the same time when they make a general Discharge, and presently
put the Spaniards into disorder, take their Guns which Dom Luis de Menezes
turns upon them at the same instant, and put them entirely to the Rout. But
where these things to do then, the Conde de Villa Flor must have been more in
his Wits then to make such an unequal Division of his Forces, at least he would
have disposed of them in another manner; he would have ordered the seven
Regiments to wheel about, in order to get up to this Place, where the Enemies
chief strength lay, and had sent the Three where there was less Danger. Count
Scomberg as least, who as brave a Soldier as he was, was so Prudent a General
as to be always for making sure Work; when he came up to the English, would
never have taken them off from the Pursuit, could he have suspected that there
would so sudden an occasion for doing over again all that they had done
already. But the Truth is, there is so great an Agreement in some of the most
material Passages in this Account, with what the English had been doing before,
as it is related by our Officers, who never saw or heard of the 2d. Volum of
Portugal Restaurado, that they all seem to speak of one and the same Action, so
that there is cause to suspect that the Conde had given an Account of the Part,
which our Country men had in the Battle, and that the Revisors of his Papers,
or which is more probable, the Inquisitors when the Book passed through their
Hands, out of their great kindness to the Heretics, resolved to make a
Portuguese Action of it, by changing the Names and Time: There are more Reasons
for this Conjecture, then are necessary to be told at present. It is not denied
but that the Portugueses might come upon the Place where the Action was
performed, but it appears from what has been said, that it could not be till
the Business was in a manner done, and till the English were about leaving it,
so that they might have spared the Officers pains whom they sent to view it,
there being neither Horse nor Foot in any condition to withstand them. All the
work that they had to do was, that usually done, a broken scattered and
confounded Enemy, and which a Brave Man will never by his Good Will set his
Hand to, which is downright killing.

The English being drawn off upon a Business that became them better, had not
been long there after the Enemies Horse were repulsed, but a Gentleman came
Riding up to them from Count Schomberg with Orders to Halt, adding that the
Portugueses on the Right had attacked and put to the Rout the Spaniards on the
other Hill; sometime afterward Count Schomberg himself came to them, and
ordered them to join the Army that was going to incamp, it them growing
Duskish. The Count staid with them part of the Night, telling the Officers many
diverting Passages, and we may guess at whose Expense he diverted himself. Were
that Great Man alive now, he had no doubt before this time received from
Portugal a further occasion for his Mirth.

It is very likely that a Person unskilled in Military Affairs must be guilty
of many Errors in his manner of Relating this Transaction, but as to the
substance of what has told, he has delivered it with that assurance which is
Natural to one who himself believes what he says, he having received the most
material Passages from several Competent Witnesses, at several places and
times, all agreeing with each other, and with what our Author himselves
relates, where he does not plainly do that which 'twould be a great indecency
to Name. However, since many cannot have the like opportunities to inform
themselves, he shall insist only upon this notorious Truth: That at the Battle
of Amexial, part of the English Foot without the Assistance of Portugueses or
others, attacked a great Body of Spaniards, posted upon a Hill by themselves
thought inaccessible, Defeated and Routed them, taking their great Guns, their
General's Tent and Baggage, and by this means occasioned the Victory, which
preserved Portugal from imminent Destruction. This he believes to be so evident
a Truth, that there is scarce a Person of any considerable Rank in the several
Nations, that were concerned in the Transaction, but either is or may be
convinced of it by Eyewitnesses, those that have conversed with them, Letters
from Public Ministers, or the like. And since on account of the supposed
Author's Quality, the History of Portugal Restaurado is likely to be
communicated to those that are in the Highest Stations, they who have prefixed
to it the Name of Dom Luis de Menezes, have done a great discredit to their
Cause, and a most irreparable injury to the Memory of that great Man. For while
such as have a true sense of Honor, shall think that Lord could be Author of a
Peace, wherein so little Gratitude is expressed to the Savers of his Country,
so much Artifice used to Defraud them of the Honor got while they were
exposing their Lives, to rescue a distressed People from Destruction, and all
for no other apparent Reason, but our difference in Opinions: for there appears
throughout the Work as great Partiality in favor of the French, as Prejudice
against the English; How vile a thing must they take this ancient Popery to be,
and how mischievous amongst the People, that can have so Maligant an Influence
upon a Noble Mind! Certainty should Dom Luis de Menezes prove guilty of so
disingenuous a Work. The General of the Artillery did not gain more Honor by
his Sword, when he fought at the Battle of Amexial, then the Conde de Ericeyra,
forfeited by his Pen when he Discribed it.

In this Battle, the Spaniards, as it is said, of 16 Thousand, had 4000 killed,
and 6000 taken Prisoners, among whom were 2500 Wounded. The loss on the Victors
side was inconsiderable; for among all the 8 Companies that were engaged on the
Hill, there were but 16 private Soldiers, and an Ensign killed. The Portugueses
indeed while they were killing the Spanish Foot; and fighting with the Horse,
lost a thousand of their Men, and had 500 Wounded. The King of Portugal being
very sensible of the great services done him by our Men, resolved to bestow a
Largess upon them as a mark of his Esteem. His Gift was very Extraordinary in
its kind: for it was three Pounds of Snuff to each Company; and not despicable
for its Value, considering into how low a state Portugal had been reduced. But
our Foot Soldiers had not such consideration in them; for when the Present was
made in his Majesty's Name, they took it and tossed it up into the Air out of
Contempt and Disdain, and as they grew Angry, they began to remember, not their
own services, but the loss of their Valiant Country men of the Horse Regiment,
and to vent their Indignation that such Men that had been so often commanded on
to the Slaughter, should be so basely abandoned as they were. However, their
Passions cooled, and they came to themselves again upon the first occasion for
Action; and though they were to fight for Portugueses, yet they behaved
themselves like English Men still, insomuch that the remainder of the present
Campaign, and the two that followed, seemed just the Reverse of those made by
Don John the two foregoing Years, and the beginning of this. Soon after the
Battle Evora was besieged and taken, and the next Year Valenca in Estremadura,
at both which Sieges the English signalized themselves in their usual manner,
of which several remarkable Instances might be given. In 1665. the Spaniards
made shift to bring another Army into Portugal, under the Marquess de Caracena,
to be served at Montes-claros, in the same manner as Don John's had been at
Amexial. In this Battle while a whole Regiment of French fairly ran away, some
particular Persons excepted, who came and Fought by our Country men, the
English, as it is said, contributed no less to the Victory then they did in the
former.

But an Account of these and some other very considerable Transactions would
come with a much better Grace, from a Portuguese then an English Hand; to
commemorate Benefits, being an Office properly belonging to the Receivers,
wherefore it is to be hoped that some Person of that Generous Nation will save
us the trouble. If any such shall undertake to write a Supplement to Portugal
Restaurado, the Portuguese Mercury of July 1664. will furnish him with a
Precedent in one particular Instance, that is not unworthy of his imitation,
which since it proves the Portugueses to be not altogether insensible of
kindnesses done them, and shows that they may be ready to make amends for such
Omissions as we now complain of, I shall here set down, after having given a
short Account of the occasion of it.

At the Siege of Valenca, when the Portuguese Batteries had made a Breach in
the Wall, wide enough for an Assault as 'twas judged by the general Officers.
The Governor of the Place refusing to Capitulate, but on such Conditions, as
the Besiegers thought unreasonable, it was resolved to attempt the Town by
Storm; accordingly the two English Regiments were ordered to be in a readiness
to mount the Breach, they being to begin the Assault at the firing of 6 Guns
all at once. At the same time false Attacks were to be made in other Places, to
divert the Besieged, and two hundred French with Scaling Ladders, were to
endeavor to enter the Town where they found least Resistance. When the English
were upon beginning the Assault, amidst vast quantities of Artificial Fires,
which the Besieged who were upon their Guard poured down upon them: These Fires
happened to put the Fascines that were in the Besiegers Works below into a
Flame, which the Marquess de Merialva then General, thought none so fit to
extinguish as those that were to make the Diversion, and therefore gave Command
that the 200 French should lay aside their scaling Ladders, and together with
the rest that were to make the false Attacks, be employed in quenching the
Fire. This being done, there was no body to renew their former Orders; the
Marquess indeed had called them off from what they were about, but 'twas
pretended that to command them on again, was none of his Business, but Count
Scomberg's, against whom the Marquess at that time had a great Pegue; the Count
was then taken up in giving necessary Directions for the Assault; in the mean
time the Signal was given, the English mounted the Breach with great
Resolution, as many of them as could stand in it, maintaining a very unequal
Combat against the whole Force of the Town, while those that were below to
support them, were galled by the Enemies shot on all sides, insomuch that when
they retired at last, it was with the loss of about three hundred of their
Companions. The place Capitulating soon after the next News-book gave an
Account of the Siege, and just made mention of this Action, but in such a
manner as to make People believe, that about Ten or a Dozen English men, and
two Portugueses had through their own Rashness got themselves knocked on the
Head; for it was said that the information which had been given concerning the
Breach, proved a Mistake, and so only the foresaid Number went very bravely up
and were Killed, and that many were Wounded although they did not come near the
Breach.

This Account coming out while the Army was in Quarters, there being some of
our Officers at that time at Lisbon, they resolved to wait upon the Secretary
of State to demand Reparation for this Slurr put upon them, and the Memory of
their deceased Friends. They had all along observed the Portugueses to be free
indeed of their Verbal Acknowledgements, but very backward in trusting them to
Writing, and they were now at last so far incensed, that some of them did not
spare to give Antonio de Sousa the Secretary very heard Names, even when they
came within his Hearing. The Secretary to their surprise told them in their own
Language, that some of them spoke broad English; however they insisting in
their Demand of satisfaction for the Wrong that had been done them, he promised
them they should have it; accordingly in the next Mercury appeared this
additional Account, which though it wants much of supplying the Defects of the
former, yet as it must be acknowledged, abounds with very Honorable
Testimonies of Gratitude.

If Mercury were a Spaniard, he would make Relations of things that never were
done, but being Portuguese, he does not mention those that were, unless it be
upon exact Information. Since the last was Printed, he has received Advice of
certain Actions, worthy to be remembered, performed on our Side at the
Enterprise of Valenca, and it is but just that they should be related, that
they be not deprived of that glorious Precomum which consecrates them to
Eternity; and to such Honorable Guests as the English are, the first Place in
this Relation is due.

Four Regiments were commanded to the Breach, two Portuguese and two English,
one of these was Count Schombergs, the General of the Strangers, Commanded by
his Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hunt, the other was Colonel Henry Persons. They
went to the Assanlt with the greatest Valor, twenty with an Ensign that
carried the Coulors mounting the Breach, there not being room for more (but
some of the Gentlemen under Named will tell that they had much more Company.)
For as 'twas said in the last, the Breach was not yet completed, it being a
mistaken Information that was given concerning it. The Twenty seeing themselves
unaccompanied, were not discouraged, but they all fought till they Died, the
Combat was so furious, that the Coulors were burnt within the Breach. The two
Regiments disparing now of being able to enter, might have made their Retreat,
but their great Courage would not suffer them; so they drew up at the foot of
the Wall, and though they stood with their Breasts exposed, yet they fought to
Admiration with those within, as if they had been on the Level in open Field;
so 150 of them were killed, falling in the same order in which they stood.
Among these were the said Lieutenant Colonel Hunt, and his Major John Whitmore,
and John Fitz Patrick one of his Captains. Of Colonel Person' s Regiment,
William More, Gregory Noland and H. Traverse, Captains; there were killed
besides these three Lieutenants, four Ensigns, and seven Sergeants, all worthy
to live eternally in our Memory and our Gratitude, who with so much, constancy
exposed their Lives for us. There were 300 Wounded, among these were Captain
Francis Stanly, and Captain Nathaniel Hill of the foresaid first Regiment, and
Captain Thomas Bonser, and Captain John Roch of the other, and without doubt
they had all died, for they had no Covert, were it not that the General
commanded them to Retreat, which they did in so gallant a manner, as raised a
Noble Emulation in the whole Army. And since they that were neither Killed nor
Wounded deserved no less Honor, by what they did, it is fit it should be known
who they were. Of the first Regiment were Captains Francis More, William Love,
Henry Boad and Andrew Maynard; af the second besides, Colonel Person were
Lieutenant Colonel John Bellasise, Major John Rumsey, and Captains Richard
Heafield, and Charles Langley. Certainly the English have behaved themselves
with extraordinary Valor, and to great satisfaction since their coming to
assist us in this War, and that which they are particularly esteemed for, is
their orderly carriage toward the Portuguese Peasants in their Quarters. On
the second of this instant July, entered the Port of Lisbon 150 foot Soldiers
arrived from England, which may in some measure repair the Number of those
that died in Valenca, but not satisfy our Regret for the loss of such
Companions.

While the King of Englands Soldiers were fighting the Battles of Portugal, his
Ministers were no less busy in securing the Effects of their Victories, by
Negotiating the happy Peace, which that Nation now enjoys. King Charles had so
great Commiseration for the Portugueses when in their most deplorable
Condition, that Sir Richard Fanshaw his Ambassador at Lisbon, had Instructions
from him in the beginning of the Year 1663. to interpose his good Offices, and
use all possible means in order to make their Peace with the Spaniard; but the
Spaniard was then Triumphant, and could think of nothing but making a quick
dispatch of the War. When the Condition of Portugal began to mend, Sir Richard
was sent upon the same Errand to Madrid, where it is true, he did not meet with
that success as was expected in his Embassy; for though upon Notice of his
Arrival, such Preparations were made for his Reception, that the like had
scarce ever been done for any Ambassador at that Court, yet upon his coming
near Madrid, he found the Ministers mightily altered all of a sudden, insomuch
that it was six Weeks before he made his Public Entry; and the Court proved so
untractable and unwilling to accommodate their Minds to their Fortunes, that it
was two Years before he could gain any thing upon them, and when he had brought
them to consent to a Treaty at last, his Negotiations did not keep Pace with
the Victories obtained in Portugal, as appeared by the great disappointment he
met with at Salvaterra, in the beginning of the Year 1666.

About the same time when our Ambassador was preparing for his Journey from
Madrid to Portugal, Sir Robert Southwel was sent as Envoy from King Charles to
this latter Court, to assist at the adjusting of the Peace between the two
Crowns. Upon his Arrival in Portugal, he heard that Mr. de S. Romain had just
got before him, which made him hasten to Salvaterra, where the Court then was.
His Instructions were of a fresher Date then the Ambassadors, and consequently
more accommodated to the state of the Portuguese Affairs at that time; but the
Ambassador being not yet come, he found the Ministers unwilling to enter upon
any Business before his Arrival, they expecting from him such Conditions as
should give them entire satisfaction. The Ambassador not answering their
Expectation, but on the contrary highly disgusting them with the Title of his
Project of Peace, while Mr. de S. Romain was most profuse in his Promises of
the mighty things that his Master would do for them, the Treaty was wholly
broke off for that time. However, Sir Robert Southwell applying himself to the
Conde de Castelmelhor, the next Morning after the Council had sent that hasty
Answer formerly mentioned, though he found him in a very great Heat, yet had
the Address to pacify him, and were it not that the Case was soon altered at
Madrid, he might have brought the Treaty on again. The Conde expressed himself
highly dissatisfied, that it should be thought that they would ever Treat with
Spain, but upon equal terms, saying, That the Spaniards might perhaps conquer
Portugal, but should never conquer the Portugueses, who for their parts would
first leap into the Sea before they would come to any Accommodation, unless it
were made between King and King. But the Envoy soon brought him to a Temper, by
representing that what the Ambassador had offered, was only the first and rude
Draught, or the Embrio as it were of a Treaty, so that there was little reason
for him to be offended at the Inscription, which was a thing of no Consequence,
it signifying nothing what Name or Title was given it now, since No body ever
Christened a Child before it was Born. The Conde as he was pleased with the
conceit, so he would not deny but that it was apposite to the case in hand, and
the Envoy having assured him, that his Instructions were ample enough to
procure for Portugal all reasonable satisfaction; it was agreed that a new
Project of a Treaty should be drawn up, which was done accordingly, by the
Ambassador and the Envoy together. It contained the very same Articles which
with some small alterations are now in force, between the Crowns of Spain and
Portugal. With this they both took a journey to Madrid, but the War newly broke
out between England and France, made that Court believe there was no such
necessity as before of a Peace with Portugal, and so nothing could be done then
for that Year.

By the beginning of the next Year, the Portugueses had concluded and signed
their League with France. Its true, the Conde de Castelmelhor the supposed
Author of that League on the Portuguese side, was the same Year removed from
the Ministry and the Court, but this together with the other Changes that
succeeded, was brought about by the Queen and her Party, who were more strongly
engaged in the Interests of France; the Queen was so engaged both by Birth and
Inclination, and perhaps much more strongly, yet as she hoped to be
countenanced by the French Court in what she had done, and was doing against
her Husband, and in her further design of marrying with the Prince; so that the
French Faction became now more predominent at Court then ever, and they seemed
there not only averse to all thoughts of a Peace, but afraid least any
Overtures should come from Castille, to put the People in mind of it, wherefore
the Frontiers were strictly guarded to hinder all Communication between the
Subjects on both Kingdoms. The precaution perhaps was needless, for the
Spaniads whether it was that their thoughts were wholly taken up with the War
they had then with France, or that they hoped when a Peace was made with that
Crown by the Intervention of other Princes, that they should be able after all
to deal with Portugal, made no Advances toward a Treaty. This backwardness of
the Parties concerned was enough to make a Mediator out of love with his
Office, and might have given any other Person then the Gentleman that then
executed it, just cause to despair of doing any good upon them. However, the
English Envoy was not Idle, to bring two Nations to a Peace, and make them
Happy though against their Wills, after they had been destroying one another
for seven and twenty Years together, was an Enterprise so glorious for a young
Minister to effect, that one of Sir Robert Southwell's Character was not to be
detered from the Attempt by any Difficulties; but in order to accomplish his
Design, he was forced to go a great way about, it was in vain to think of
succeeding by any direct Application to either Court, he was therefore fain to
choose other Instruments to work with, and his choice was so good, and he
managed them so well, that he wrought out his ends by them, by disposing both
Courts for that Peace which was concluded in the beginning of the Year 1668. to
the unspeakable satisfaction of the two Nations.

At the Battles of Amexial and Montescloros, several great Persons of the most
Illustrious Houses in Spain were taken Prisoners, in the former Don Gaspar de
Haro Marquess de Eliche, five times Grande of Spain, and Heir to the two great
Favorites, the Conde Duque de Olivares and Don Luis de Haro, he being Son to
the Latter. Don Anielo de Gusman, eldest Son of the Duke de Medina de las
Torres, and Don Juan Henriques Conde de Escalante; at Montescleros, Don Diego
Correa General of the Cavallery, and several other Persons of the first
Quality. These Noblemen had ever since their Misfortune been confined to the
Castle of Lisbon, where they were frequently visited by the English Envoy. They
had all along expressed a great Esteem for our Nation, and would sometimes
Treat our Officers amongst them, acknowledging them for their Conquerors, for
they would by no means allow that Title to the Portugueses. The Envoy having
contracted a more particular Acquaintance and Familiarity with them, thought
they might be of great use to him in prevailing upon the Court of Madrid to
renew the Treaty; he saw that their Prison was very uneasy to them, and that
they were impatient to be at Liberty, of which they could have little hopes
till the Peace was made, and the knew their nearest Relations to be Men of the
greatest Power in Spain, who might by their Solicitation be prevailed upon to
think of a Peace. Coming once amongst them, he began to upbraid them in a
familiar way, for their Remisness in not endeavoring to free themselves from
their wretched Confinement, telling them that they seemed to have a worse
Opinion of their own Condition, then some of the Fathers had concerning the
state of those in Hell; from whence as they thought there was some Redemption.
But he found them desparing of being ever able to regain their Liberty; so far
were they from entertaining any hopes of it, that they told him, if Origin had
been a Spaniard, he had never been so favorable in his Opinion; however, the
Envoy to show that he did not advise them to Impossibilities, undertook to
overcome the greatest Difficulty, and make way for a free intercourse between
them and their Friends. This offer encouraged them to write their Minds to
their Relations in Spain, in order to set them at Work to bring on the Treaty
of Peace again. They delivered their Letters to the Envoy, who so managed the
matter, that the Governor of Elvas, one of his particular Acquaintance, though
wholly ignorant of the Design, conveyed the Packet to a Servant of one of
these Noblemen, who was employed on the Frontiers to provide him with
Necessaries. But to get Answers to their Letters, which they could not well
expect by the same way, the Envoy took another Course. He had at that time an
English Frigate watching for him in the River, but he finding his Negotiations
to be now in a fair way toward a happy Conclusion, instead of imbarking for
England, ordered the Captain to make a Voyage to Cadiz, sending on board him a
Servant of his, who had been frequently employed in Messages of a like Nature,
with another Packet from the Spanish Noblemen, who arriving at Cadiz rode Post
to Madrid, where the Letters he brought with him soon produced their desired
Effect.

Whilst the English Envoy was thus contriving ways to bring the Court of Spain
to sue for a Peace, he had a harder Game to play still, which was to dispose
that of Portugal to a Compliance, it was to no purpose for him to motion the
matter to that Court, at a time when it was become wholly French. As for the
Nobility that were then uppermost, they were either engaged in the Queen's
Party, or had Commands in the Army, which made it to be for their Interest to
have the War continue. But then there was at the same time in Portugal a Power
superior to both these, and he thought fit in this case of necessity to serve
himself of that, for the common Good of all.

The People ever since the Revolt from Spain, had been in Possession of an
absolute kind of Sovereignty, and had on several occasions exercised the same
over those in Authority without Exception; as all the late Turns and Changes in
the State had been brought about by their means, they pulling down and setting
up as they pleased, so they kept those they placed in the Government in
subjection to their Wills. Their Power was never more uncontrollable, then
whilst they were deposing King Alfonso, and placing Prince Pedero in his room,
but had not yet fixed him in the Government. They were at that time in a great
Ferment, and according as their Motions were directed by such as had the Art to
manage them, they were like to bear down all before them: Now while the
greatest Men in the Kingdom were tampering with them, that by their means they
might destroy one another, the Envoy did not think it beneath him to be dealing
with them too, in order to preserve the whole Nation; to this end he thought
the fittest Instrment he could make use of, was the Juis do Povo, and therefore
he took Acquaintance with him, and to keep him well affected, gave Orders that
the Juis should have such Work as there was occasion for in the House, that was
proper for one of his Calling, and he would sometimes condescend himself to
Discourse the Man, encouraging him to contribute on his part by that great
Authority which belonged to his Office toward settling the Nation, by an
Advantageous and Honorable Peace. The Juis do Povo is accounted the chief
Magistrate of Lisbon, his Office somewhat resembling that of a Mayor; he is not
indeed of equal Dignity with my Lord Mayor of London, which perhaps may be the
reason why he has a much greater Power; for he must be of one of the meanest
Hardicraft Trades, whereby he is more fitly qualified to become the Peoples
Head, and he does not think himself too good to become the Ringleader in
Popular Commotions, acting as it were the part of a Massaniello by Law. Great
things are told concerning those that bore this Office during the War; King
John the 4th. being observed to be a little remiss in the Affairs of
Government, and too intent. upon his Sports; it is reported that he once going
to ride out into the Country to Hunt, the Juis do Povo laid hands on the Reigns
of his Horses Bridle, and obliged his Majesty to stay at home and mind his
Business; nor will this seem strange if his Power were so great as they say it
is to this Day, that he could at a Words speaking raise the whole Posse of the
Commonalty. The Envoy found the Person that was then in Place to be an honest
well meaning Man, and ready to concur with him in his Design, on which, as one
of a moderate Capacity might easily be made to understand, the Happiness of his
Country depended; and this Man showed himself so very Zealous and Industrious
to promote it, that his Picture is to be seen at this Day amongst theirs who
were more immediately concerned in making the Peace. The Envoy took care
likewise to have his Party amongst the Peoples Representatives in Cortes, which
were assembled some time after Alfonso had been Deposed; his Table was open for
the Members, and he had his Cabals with them, the Effects whereof appeared as
soon as the Business came under Debate.

The Letters of the Spanish Noblemen were answered with Powers from the Queen
Regent to the Marquess de Eliche, to enter upon a Treaty with the Prince of
Portugal, to the entire satisfaction of that Kingdom. Letters to this purpose
were no sooner come, but care was taken to have the Contents of them published
every where both in City and Country; the News was welcomed by the People, who
now hoped to see a speedy end of their Miseries, with such Public
Demonstrations of Joys as it deserved, which the Court in vain labored to
suppress.

Mr. de S. Romain had now great occasion to bestir himself, but he found the
People so prepossessed already, that all his Artifices were like to have no
effect upon them; he therefore sets forth a Memorial directed to the Prince,
the Ministers, and the Cortesoens, or Members of Cortes, wherein he Declares:
That the Prince could not break the League with France, and consequently not
make Peace with Spain both, because in taking the Government into his hands, he
took upon himself the Obligations of the Crown to maintain the Treaty made
between his Brother and the King of Spain, and in consideration of the great
Benefits conferred on Portugal, by His Most Christian Majesty, who had given
innumerable Demonstrations of his Friendship to that Kingdom, having spent his
Treasures and the Blood of his Subjects in its Defenec; and likewise because it
was impossible for an advantageous Peace with Spain, to be made with security
in the form Proposed, since the Intervention of the King of France was wanting,
wherein alone consisted the certainty, that the Promises and Conditions of the
Treaty should be kept; That the Castillians whilst they dreaded the Armies of
France and Portugal, would indeed to free themselves from the Danger they were
in, submit to any Terms that the Prince as a Conqueror should impose. But a few
days of Delay could be no loss in this Conjuncture, and since France was not
far off, he advised the Prince to send thither a Copy of the Spanish Proposals,
and when he had received an Answer from thence, he might then consult what was
most conducive to his Subject's Good. As for the Spaniards, they minded nothing
but their own Interests, and as they had shown upon several Occasions, would
never stand to the Treaty, but while they were under an Impossibility to carry
on the War. That their Ancient and inbred Hatred was now mightily increased by
the Miseries which the Valient Portugueses had brought upon them, and therefore
they in all future Ages, would be endeavoring either by Force, or Art, or
Alliances, to reunite the Crown of Portugal to Castille, and all this in order
to take their Revenge in so cruel a manner, as to destory the very Memory of
the Nobility, by scattering over the face of the Earth, such of them as should
escape their Tortures and Poisons, and to impoverish the People to that Degree,
that they should have nothing left to enable them any more, to shake off their
heavy and Tyrannical Yoke.

The Marquess de Eliche who had his Agents abroad, was one of the first that
got a sight of this Memorial, and he immediately drew up an Answer to it, which
he took care to have dispersed throughout the Kingdom. In it he sets forth,
That the French Artifices to augment their own Power by weakening their
Neighbors were Notorious to the World, of which there was no need to go far
for a Proof, none doubting but that they had succored Portugal in this last
War, to the end only that by other Men's Hands they might beat down the
formidable Power of Castille, in order to become themselves too strong for both
Parties. That this and no other was their Design, was demonstrated by their
Proceedings after the Peace made at the Pirenees, where the King of France in
Person gave his Word to King Philip the 4th. and confirmed the same in the
Capitulations of Marriage between him and that King's Daughter, that he would
give no Succors to Portugal against Castille, and at the same time assisted
that Kingdom with Money, Generals, Officers and Soldiers; that having obtained
an Advantageous Match with the Princess of Spain under an Obligation,
containing the most binding Clauses the Law could afford, and confirmed with
the most dreadful Oaths, that neither he nor his Successors would make any
claim of Inheritance to the Kingdoms or Dominions of Castille, he was now
contrary to his Promise, and the Treaty making War against that Monarchy. That
he labored to obstruct the Peace with Portugal, in order to divide the Forces
of Spain, that he might the more easily seize upon that Crown, in case the
Succession should fail; That he might with the same injustice attempt the
Conquest of Portugal, under the same Pretext that he used in breaking with
Spain, viz. its not being in his Power to Defraude his Successors of their
Right. That though he now opposed King Philip's Right to that Crown, he would
doubtless make use of it hereafter as a Color for his unjust Invasion. That
the Prince did not make the League with France, which as 'twas Notorious, was
clapped up upon some secret Designs without the Peoples consent. That if the King
of France could make War upon Castille, on pretense of his want of Power to
deprive his Heirs of the Succession belonging to them, with how much greater
Reason was the Prince obliged not to deny his People the Blessings of an
Advantageous and Honorable Peace, after a cruel War of Seven and Twenty Years,
which had hitherto been carried on for that end only? That if Self-defence made
the War be hitherto accounted Just, yet when it could be continued upon no
other Pretense, then the Conquest of other Kingdoms, to which neither Portugal
nor France had any Right, it would become unjust, displeasing to God, and
consequently unprosperous. In Conclusion, he declared that his Powers were
restrained to a limited time, for that Spring coming on, the Queen Regent was
about disposing of her Forces as she should judge convenient, wherefore he
desired that the Prince would appoint Persons to confer with him, about the
Treaty of Peace, or else he should look upon himself as disengaged from his
Commission, leaving upon the Prince's Conscience, all the Mischiefs of the War,
with the Damages and Inconveniences sustained by the Prisoners, who filled the
Gaols at that time.

In this Paper Combat the Spaniards had all the Advantage they could desire,
unless it were among such as either out of Interest or for some secret Reasons,
were for having the War continue. The Officers of the Army would fain have had
it prosecuted with Vigor, that Portugal by the Conquest of the Neighboring
Kingdoms, might re-imbourse it self for the damages it had sustained in the
Sixty Years of the Spanish Usurpation. The Ecclesiastics, the Cortesoens, and
the People were more Loud and Clamourous for a Peace, as thinking the War would
become Unjust if it continued any longer, it being the common Voice to be heard
at that time, from the Pulpits, and in the Streets, that Castille might have
some Pretensions upon Portugal, but Portugal could have none upon Castille. But
the Court held out still, as being or seeming at least to be, utterly against
the Peace, and that possibly because the Prince thought himself obliged by the
French League; perhaps the Queen might be afraid to disoblige France by
consenting to the Peace, while the Cause of her Divorce and of her intended
second Marriage was depending before that Court; for should that Court be
dissatisfied with her Conduct, who could tell, but that Monsieur de Lionne
might never have found out the Clause in the Pope's Bull, which at last enabled
Cardinal Vendome to grant the Dispensation?

This Business was hotly debated on both sides, when the Earl of Sandwich
unexpectedly arrived at Lisbon from Madrid, with full Power from the King of
England, and the Queen Regent of Spain to conclude the Peace. His Excellency by
his Presence and Authority, soon put an end to the Dispute, for by this time,
they that were for the Treaty, had made their Party so strong, that nothing
could withstand them; the Cortes plied the Prince with three several Addresses
for a Peace, and upon his demurring, to give his Answer. The Juis do Povo came
and peremptorily demanded his Consent. The Juis waited likewise on the Earl,
and upon his Knees assured his Excellency of the Favor and Protection of the
People, in all his Proceedings, and as it is said, he went to the French
Ambassador likewise, to assure him, that in case he did any thing to obstruct
the Peace, he must expect to have his House pulled down about his Ears. In
short, the Earl of Sandwich by his prudent Management, so ordered the Matter,
that in a very few days all things were adjusted; for his Powers given him at
Madrid, bear Date the Fifth of January, 1668. and the Peace was Concluded and
Signed the Thirteenth of February following, to the unspeakable Joy of the
Parties concerned. By this Peace the Portugueses became an Independent People,
and were restored to the same Condition with respect to Spain, as they had been
in under the most flourishing Reigns of their former Kings; at the same time
when their Deliverance from the Spanish Yoke was completed, they were set at
liberty likewise from the French League, which might have proved the more
intolerable Bondage of the two, and all this without being brought under any
Engagements to their Deliverers, the obligations of Gratitude excepted: Those
indeed are the strongest of all other Ties upon generous Minds, but then they
are often complied with by a bare Acknowledgment of the Benefits received.

Having mentioned the Benefits conferred on the Portuguese Nation by ours, it
may be expected that an Account should be given of those received from them. It
must be acknowledged to their Honor, that on several occasions they showed a
generous concern for our Kings Charles the First and Second in their Distress,
doing them many good Offices by their Ministers, both in England and elsewhere,
and that they gave a Hospitable Reception to the Princes Robert and Maurice in
their Port of Lisbon, though they were like to suffer no small Damage thereby
themselves; the Remembrance of which things proved no doubt a great Motive to
King Charles the Second, to take them into his Protection. But as to Returns in
Kind, thanks be to God, our Nation was never in a condition to need them, and
the Forces of Portugal are so limited, that little can be expected from thence,
upon any the most urgent Occasion. Their Concurrence indeed might have served
to a good purpose, in the Leagues that have been made of late against the
common Enemy, if on no other account, but the convenience of their Habours,
which in a War by Sea, must have been of a mighty Advantage to the side they
adhered to: But they thought it was for their Interest all along to continue
Neuters, and our Princes have not thought fit to oblige them to Declare, though
in Defense of the common Liberty, in which they had as great a concern as
others. We suffered them to enjoy the Benefit of Trade, which we lost our
selves, while we were engaged in their Defense; we did not make the least offer
to compel them to take Party while they were wholly at our Discretion, we being
Lords of all the Seas about them, the Ocean and the Mediterranean, as well as
our own Channel. Such a compulsion would have been to destroy our own Gift, and
take from them that Independency we had maintained them in. It is the Property
of another Monarch to treat as his Vassals such Sovereigns as he takes into his
his Protection; to get them into his Power, by assisting them, and then to
serve himself of them in working out the Ruin of their Neighbors, and their
own among the rest, whereas our Princes have taken another Course, and far from
making their Benefits uneasy to the Receivers, or snares to entrap them withal,
have treated them as Sovereigns whom they raised to their own Level; and
therefore notwithstanding their advantage of so much greater Power, they have
abstained from every thing that carried the least appearance of Constraint, as
thinking it beneath themselves to require such a Submission even to their just
demands, as might lessen the Majesty of a Crowned Head.

Such a generous Proceeding must needs have wrought very much upon a Prince of
so great a Soul, as his Portuguese Majesty is known to have, and laid stronger
Obligations upon him than all other Considerations could have done; and
consequently if the English have not met with a suitable Treatment in his
Kingdom, the Fault ought to be laid wholly on his Ministers and Inferior
Officers. If the Privileges of our Countrymen residing in Portugal, granted
and confirmed by so many of his Royal Ancestors, and ratified by Solemn
Treaties, have of late Years been either manifestly violated, or eluded by all
the little Arts of Chicane, if during the last War his Maritime Towns that were
almost the only Ports in Christendom left free and exempt from our Dominion,
became Nests for French privateers, and Irish Pirates, if by Reason of our
Religious observation of the Peace with Portugal, these Corsairs found a safer
retreat at Lisbon, O Porto, and Faro, than at Merseilles, St. Maloes, or
Dunkirk, and our Merchant Fleets were more infested upon the Portuguese Coasts
than those of France, or in the Straights, if our Ships taken under their
Castles, and in their Rivers, were carried up and disposed of in sight of the
King's Palace; whereas by an express Article in our Capitulations, all English
Ships by whomsoever taken, when brought into any of the Portuguese Dominions,
were to be restored to the right Owners, and lastly, if on these and all other
occasions, a greater regard was had to the French Menaces, when they could do
nothing else but threaten, than to our Complaints, while we had the Remedy in
our own hands; if any of these things were so, the Blame ought surely to be
laid wholly upon the Ministers, to whom the King as has been said, defers so
much in the management of Affairs, a Prince of his Portuguese Majesty's Honor,
Justice and Prudence, cannot be supposed to have had any part in such
unaccountable Proceedings; but whether any of these things were so, it belongs
to the Persons more nearly concerned to make out. In matters which fall more
immediately under the common observation our English Traders residing in that
Kingdom, have great cause to be satisfied with the Portuguese Nation, where
they are treated with all the Respect and Civility they can look for, by a
People who cannot be insensible of the great Advantage that our Trade brings to
their Conntry; for we furnish them with Necessaries of Life, in exchange for
Supplies to our Luxury: We Cloth them with our Woollen Manufactures, and Feed
them in a great Measure with our Fish from Newfoundland, and in Exchange for
these Commodities, we rid the Country of their Wines (and that at excessive
Rates) which all of the wiser and better sort among them think much better
parted with at any rate, than kept at home, Nature having provided them a more
wholesome and agreeable Liquor. But it is not only the Benefit of Trade that
recommends our Countrymen to the Portugueses, their fair and generous Dealing
in their Commerce, used to gain them such Credit, that Palavra de bum Ingrez,
the Word of an English Man has been taken for the best Security; its true,
that in the Inland Parts, the horrid Ideas the People had of Heretics, as they
take us to be, made them look upon our Countrymen as a strange sort of
Monsters, insomuch that when our little Army first marched into the Country,
the Peasants instead of blessing them as their Deliverers, would watch for
opportunities to do a mischief to the Straglers; but the first Campaign ended,
they found them to be quite another sort of Creatures than they had imagined,
and began not only to take them for Men, but for something more, finding them
to be as Peaceable and Gentle in their Quarters, as they had been Fierce in the
Field; for instead of Domineering over their Landlords, and playing the Tyrants
as the French men did, our Soldiers spent their time in serving the People they
were quartered upon, and doing any Work that was needful in the Family; such an
obliging Carriage in Men, whose Bravery they had so much cause to admire, so
altered their Sentiments concerning these Heretics, that should an English man
travel in the most unfrequented Parts of the Country, where the English Name
has been scarce heard of, either before or since the War, he shall be received
and caressed with all the welcome the poor People can make, when a French man
shall run the Risque of being knocked of the Head. I have mentioned this matter
the rather, because the Manners of our Countrymen seem to be so much changed of
late Years, that perhaps it will be as great News to them, as any thing I have
related, for possibly the People of Ireland and Flanders may differ much from
the Portugueses in their Opinion concerning our English Soldiery.

The common People about the City are not observed to be guilty of any Rudeness
toward the English, on account of their Religion; such as have had cause to
think themselves most exposed to affronts on this occasion, having never met
with any, which in my Opinion, ought in Justice to be ascribed to the Humanity
of the Portuguese Nation, after they have been a little conversant with us, as
well as to the Prudence of the Government. It is true, that opprobrious
Language to Strangers is so severely prohibited, that upon complaint made
against any that shall call an English man Heretic, no punishment short of
Death, or the Galleys, will be thought too great for the Offense. We had like
to have seen the last Year an example of the King's Justice upon an Offender of
this sort; a certain Lawyer in his Pleadings, was pleased to bestow upon the
English, the Titles of Heretics, Lutherans, Schismatics, Excommunicated
Persons, etc. Complaint hereof being made to His Majesty, he gave command that
the Lawyer should be Imprisoned, in order to his further Chastisement; the Man
took Sanctuary in the Church, but it was resolved in Council, that his Crime
was of that Nature, that the Church could not protect him, and an Order was
given out to force him thence, but the Criminal as I have been told since died
soon after, and so put a stop to further Proceedings. And this makes me almost
astonished at the Hardiness of the Inquisitors, who in the preceding Year, viz.
1697. took an occasion to publish an Edict in all Churches, which is to be seen
at this day on most of the Church Doors. (I am sure it was not long ago, and is
like to remain for many Years as other Orders of the Inquisition that stand by
it have done, it being Excommunication to take them down) wherein the English
in general are Stigmatized, not only for Heretics, but for Usurpers likewise;
but this is an Offense of too heinous a Nature for a private Person to
animadvert upon, and therefore I shall content my self with having only
mentioned it.

FINIS.

