REFLECTIONS UPON THE EAST-INDY AND Royal AFRICAN COMPANIES.

WITH Animadversions, concerning the Naturalization of Foreigners.

By ROGER COKE, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

CHAP. 1. Reflections upon the East-Indy COMPANY.
MOnopolies are the most wicked, tyrannical and injurious Usurpations over
other Men, and the greatest Violations of the Law of Nature, of any other, and
are so much worse than Robbery, by how much the Quality of them is worse, and
the Extent farther. A Monopoly, is the arrogating a Power of Working or
Trading, by one Man, or Company of Men, exclusive to all other: Here consider,
that all Men are born naked, and the generality of Mankind have nothing but
their Labor, Industry and Ingenuity (I do not mean undue Craft and Deceit) to
Feed, Cloth and Provide themselves an Habitation with; and therefore for one
Man, or Company of Men, to impose upon all others besides themselves, a
Negative of not Working or Trading, infinitely resolves into all others, who,
if this Restriction had not been, might have not only subsisted in these Trades
and Employments, but also have enlarged and improved them by their Industry and
Ingenuity; for all Arts are infinitely improvable, and one Man in the present
Time, and another in future Generations, may proceed further in any Art than
was known or understood in former Ages, which will be lost, if this Man shall
be Excluded from having any benefit of it, or be punished for working in it.

If one Man, or Company of Men, rob another, or more Men, this extends no
farther than the Loss of what these were robbed, which it may be is easily
Repairable: But for any Man, or Company of Men, to arrogate to themselves a
Power of Robbing all others in those Employments, which they Ascribe to
themselves, for ever Ruins multitudes of Men and Families, which might have
been employed in them: And let any Prince consider the consequence of Granting
Monopolies to his Subjects; for if any of his Subjects, which might have been
employed, if the Employments and Trades had been free, shall, to supply their
Necessities, Steal or Beg; the same Prince hangs and punishes these poor People
for not Working, when before he had given others a Power to punish them, in
case they did Work.

Nor are these Monopolies less impolitick than wicked and injurious; for the
greatest Benefit which any Country or Kingdom enjoys, is by the Employment of
the Inhabitants, which being restrained to a few, the residue become a Burden
to that Country to maintain them, and these also become dangerous to that
Country for want of Employment: From whence it follows, that they must either
seek unlawful Means to subsist, or flee into other Countries to get Subsistence
there, which was denied them here, and this will be in double proportion, as
much to the Benefit of that Country, as a Loss to this. Besides, Monopolies, I
say, are injurious to the rest of the Inhabitants of the Kingdom and Country
within, and to the Vent of the foreign Trade of them; for by their Restraint,
the Inhabitants shall pay dearer for worse Commodities, than if the Trade were
free; and being dearer and worse than in other Countries, enables the
Inhabitants of those Countries to vend these in foreign Parts, whilst these are
necessitated to be consumed at Home.

Objection.

If any finds out a new Invention beneficial to the Country, in any Mystery
(which he could not have done, in case he had been restrained from working in
it) the King, by Act of Parliament, may grant him the sole use of it for 14
Years.

Answer.

But then where there is no Mystery for the benefit of the Subject found out,
the King can grant no Patent, or Monopoly for any other, or the Law had been in
vain, if the King could have granted such Patent without it.

It Is true, that it is great Wisdom in any King and State, to give all due
Encouragement for improving any Art or Mystery beneficial for the Country; but
this of Granting a Patent for the sole Use of it for Fourteen Years, is of all
other the worst, and will be of little Use to the Country; whilst the
Inhabitants of other Countries, will have manifoldly more Advantages by it: For
when this Mystery shall be practiced, it will necessarily be known to others,
besides the first Projectors, and so cannot be contained in the limits of that
Country; and when this shall be known in other Countries, where the Working it
shall be free, this will be so much cheaper Wrought and Vended, than where it
is more restrained; and therefore I have heard that the Dutch (who are Wise in
their Generation) will give Noble Rewards to any who shall find out any New
beneficial Mystery, but then they will permit the Use of it to be free.

King James the First, in the first Year of his Reign, viz. May 7. 1603, issues
out a Proclamation, calling in several Monopolies; and in his Speech at the
opening the first Parliament of his Reign, exclaimed mightily against them; and
in the second Year made Peace with Spain, whereby the English solely (the Dutch
then being at War with Spain) enjoyed a more beneficial and enriching Trade
than any other.

But the King had no sooner made this Peace notwithstanding his Proclamation
and Speech in Parliament, but he Incorporated the Spanish Trade exclusive to
others; which the Wisdom of Parliament, in that celebrated Law 3. Jac. c. 6.
made free for these Reasons.

1. For that Trade is a National Interest, and the Support of the Nation, is
to be upon a Public Account; and therefore the Incorporating the Spanish
Trade, to a few, enfeebled the Public Support of the Nation.

2. It would ruin infinite Numbers of Artificers, whose Labors would be
maintained, if the Trade should be free, which could not be if it were
restrained to a few, and these would have a Prerogative of giving what Prizes
they pleased unto poor Artificers, otherwise they should not be employed.

3. The Incorporating this Trade, would restrain the Navigation of the Nation;
to the manifold ruin of many mariners, which otherwise might be employed in it,
and also multitudes of Ship-wrights, and Ship-Carpenters, which may be employed
in it.

4. The Incorporating this Company, would cause a Dearness upon all sorts of
Commodities returned in this Trade, the Corporation being hereby enabled to set
what Prizes they pleased upon them, otherwise none could be had.

5. The Incorporating this Trade, would so much more lessen the King's Revenues
by Customs, as the Trade hereby should be diminished; and all these Reasons are
as strong against all other Companies which trade exclusive to other men,
whether it be to Hamburg, Muscovey, or to the Countries and Kingdoms within the
Sound, as in the Spanish Trade; and, I say, it was this most beneficial Law
which has enabled this Nation to continue the Spanish Trade to this day, whilst
it has lost those.

And if this King were so loose of his Royal Word, almost so soon as he made
it, it cannot be doubted, but that he will be more constant of it afterward;
for in the Parliament, in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, no less than 37
Monopolies were Voted Grievances, and damned; and as the Father laid the
Foundation, so his Son built upon it; for in the Year 1640. when King Charles
marched to York against the Scots, who then had Invaded England, upon the the
Complaint of the Northern Gentry, he recalled by Proclamation thirty one
Monopolies; and then declared he did not know how Grievous they were to his
subjects, because he was Governed by such (I cannot say) Counsels, that no man
durst before complain of them.

From Monopolies granted by these two Kings, we proceed to that of Oliver
Cromwell, in his erecting this now East-Indy Company, An. 1657. to Trade to the
East Indies, exclusive to all others of the Nation; but before a further view
be taken of this Patent, its fit to see the Extent of it, under the Title of
the East Indies, and if I mistake in it, it is in the power of the Company to
correct me.

Their Patent extends from Cape Bon Sperance, to the North of China, taking in
the Eastern Coast of Asia, with the Eastern Coast of China; together with all
the Islands which lie between the Cape of Good Hope, and the North of China,
which I say is more, if you compute the Coast on both sides of the Red Sea, and
the Gulf of Persia, than half the circumference of the Globe of the Earth; and
that their Power may be as unlimited, as the Extent of their Dominion, they
doubly impose an Oath upon every Member, to be true to the Company: How Oliver
was endued with such a Prerogative, needs not be disputed, because he would
have his Will to be Law; but I do not find any King of England, ever assumed
such a Power, nor any other, but the Convocation, which imposed the Oath Ex
Officio, without Consent in Parliament, An. 1640.

However Oliver would, in his Zeal, have the Pope to be Antichrist in exalting
himself above God, and in disposing the Kingdoms upon Earth, wherein the Pope
and he were Simeon and Levy; but herein the Pope and he differed: The Pope
would have all his own Tribe to Partake of his Blessings; whereas Oliver, by
this Patent, excluded all the rest of the English Nation in this Trade, but
permitted the Dutch, French, Portuguese, Hamburgers, etc. to Trade in it, It
may be, because he could not help it; yet I do not find he, or his Company,
ever made War upon them for so doing, though his Company has upon the rest of
the English Nation, and that with such Barbarity, as was never Practiced, by
Turks, Jews, or any other Infidels upon them; Its too long to recite them here,
this Parliament has heard thereof sufficiently; and are particularly set forth
by Mr. White, in his Account of the Trade to the East Indies.

But though the Company have not been pleased to make War upon any other Nation
but the English, for Trading to the East Indies; yet they were pleased to make
War, without any Declaration, or Cause, upon the King of Syam, and the Mogull;
and rob the Mogul's Subjects to carry on the War, as Mr. White Observes, and
whilst the Company have thus rent themselves from the rest of the English
Nation, they patiently submit to the Dutch in forcing Poloroon from them,
caused by their own neglect and avarice; from which the Dutch are become the
sole Proprietors in the Spice Trade; and also from the Trade to Bantam for
Pepper, whereby they are forced to Trade for it to the most unhealthful parts
of Sumatra, (which Queen Elizabeth forbid) whereby we lose more English Men
than the Trade is worth, which is little regarded by this Company; and whilst
they are making their Causeless Wars, upon the King of Syam and the Mogul they
permit the Sophy of Persia, whose Predecessor An. 1621. granted the English the
half Duties of all Nations, Trading into the Gulf of Persia; and which in the
year 1672 came to 80000 l. per An. (I would know by what Right this Company
Claim these) to reduce them to 3000 l. per An. And is it not strange this
Company should exclude the rest of the Nation from trading to the East Indies,
because of the Charges of their Forts; and yet for 15 years receive more from
the Sophy of Persia, than the value of the Stock they traded thither with.

For the further Frauds which this Company exercises over the rest of the
Nation, in the Returns of Commodities from the East Indies; and how being a
Monopoly in the whole, they Monopolize the Sales by private Contract among
themselves, to the farther Grievance of the Subject. I referr the Reader to Mr.
White's Account of the East Indy Trade, too long to be here inserted.

CHAP. II. Reflections upon the Royal African COMPANY.
AS Oliver established this present East Indy Company, and excluded the rest of
the Nation from trading into that half of the World, which the Company call the
East Indies; So King Charles the 2 d. erected this present African Company,
excluding all others of the English Nation from trading to Africa, from the
Country of Susa, to the Cape of Good-Hope; so that if you take the extent of
this part of the Coast of Africa, its little less than a Quadrant of the Globe,
being above 80 Degrees; so that the prerogative which these two Companies claim
against the rest of their fellow Subjects in these two Trades, extend to two
thirds of the circumference of the Globe of the earth, and herein both are at
peace with all the world besides, and only in a state of War with the rest of
their fellow Subjects, in Case any of them presume to trade to either. Here
let us see first the Consequences of this Restraint, upon the Nation in the
foreign vent of our domestic manufactures: Secondly, in reference to our
American Plantations; and Thirdly, in reference to the returns, which this
Company imports into England from that part of Africa, wherein they Trade,

I am not sure of the Companies Patent for this Trade, they know better, nor
will I take notice how far the export of our woollen manufactures have been
restrained in other Countries of England, I shall only take notice of it from
the County of Suffolk: Before this African Company was Incorporated, the
Cloathiers in Suffolk yearly vended 25000 Cloths to Africa, but about two years
after this Company were Incorporated, the Clothiers in Suffolk, as they did
before, endeavored to have vented their Cloths in the African Trade, but they
were not permitted, and the Company would take off but 500, and those at scarce
half the Prizes they were sold before: Hereupon both the Great Inquest of
Suffolk (the Guildalle, and the Franchise of Bury) at their next Assizes,
presented this as a Grievance; and Employed Sir Jervais Elvais (who is now
Knight of the shire for Suffolk) and some others, to represent this to the King
and Council; but the Duke of York being president of this Company, no Redress
could be had; and so the Case now stands at this day. So it is submitted to the
Wisdom of Parliament, whether this Exaction by this Company, be not the ruin
of many Multitudes of Poor English Artificers; and gives the Employment in
them, as well as Navigation to Africa with these, to the Dutch and other
Nations.

I am assured that this Company (and the Parliament may Inquire into the Truth
of it) after it was Erected, carried it so that the Planters in our American
Plantations, were not permitted to Buy Negroes but of the Company, and the
Planters must buy only such as the Company would sell, and at the Price of 30
l. per Cent. more than they did before; so this is submitted to judgment,
whether this will not resolve into a dearness of all the Products of our
American Plantations, and thereby enable both the French and Dutch, who are
Competitors with us in these Trades, to the Endangering the Loss of them, so
far as either French or Dutch shall carry on Theirs in Competition with us.

The Returns into England from Africa are principally Gold-dust, which is so
much less as the restraint by the Company is more. Elephant's Teeth and
Beeswax I say nothing of Beeswax, but I say the Company raised the price of
Elephant's Teeth so high, that the Dutch could bring them in cheaper, and so
work the Manufactures of them cheapor than the poor English could work them;
and this being a Manufacture of Holland, the Dutch by the Act of Navigation may
Import them.

Hereupon several of our Artificers in Ivory, for several Years, I Will name two
of them, Mr. Jole in the Old Baily, and Mr. Tanner in Colemanstreet, were
necessitated to go into Holland, and work them there, and then bring the
Manufactures into England; and whether this be not a grievous tyranny of this
Company over multitudes of poor Artisicers in Ivory, is submitted to Judgment:
Yet this, as well as the East Indy Company, have the Confidence to petition the
Parliament, to have this abominable Tyrannies over the rest of their fellow
Subjects, to be Established by a Law.

As these two Companies are Simeon and Levi in their Wickednesses over the rest
of their fellow Subjects, in the Exercise of their Dominion, so are their
Pretenses the same for their so doing, viz.

First, That these Trades cannot be managed but by a Joint Stock, to the
excluding the rest of the English Nation, which is a Lie diametrically to their
Practice; for then Interlopers could not Trade in either, which, above all
others, they persecute, by seizing their Ships and Cargoes, and Imprisoning
their Persons; and its Well they escape so.

The Second is, That they are at great Charges in erecting Forts, for securing
these Trades: If they have any such Forts, as the East Indy, the Fort of St.
George, and another at Bombay, for which they pay Ten Pounds a Year to the
Crown; yet I fear the African Company have not the same Plea, now the French
took from them their Fort this last Summer, at one of the Mouths of Gambo; but
the Fort St. George, and that at Bombay are of no use in the Indian Trade,
being quite out of the way; and if they be of use to the Company, is this a
Reason that no English but themselves shall Trade to near half the known World.
The Zealanders have built a Fort, in the Scheld called Lillo, whereby they
restrain all other Nations, but the Dutch, from Trading to Flanders and
Brabant, etc. Yet sure it would be a strange Impudence in the Zealanders, to
forbid the rest of the Inhabitants of the United Netherlands to Trade to any
part of the World, because they have erected a Fort in the Scheld called Lillo;
yet they may do this, as well as these Companies forbid all the other English
to Trade to Africa and the East Indies, because one Company has Fort St.
George, and the other a Fort at one of the Mouths of Gambo.

But there is a difference between the Zealanders and these Companies; for they
permit the other Dutch to Trade up the Scheld, and restrain Foreigners; whereas
these Companies permit Foreigners to Trade in the East Indies and Africa, and
only forbid the English, upon pretense of their Forts. And sure it is just with
God, that these Companies which have thus Rent themselves from the rest of the
Nation, and insult over their fellow Subjects, should themselves be Subject to
the Insults and Injuries of the French and Dutch, without any reasonable
Prospect of relief from this Nation, so treated by them.

CHAP. III. Of the State of the Nation, in reference to the Law against
Foreigners enjoying the Liberties of the Natives of England.
THe Glory and Majesty of every Kingdom and Country is founded in the Number of
People, and the well Ordering and Governing of them: So that as the Loss of any
of the Subjects, is a Diminution of the Grandeur and Strength of that Country,
so is the Addition of more Subjects, an Increase of both; and therefore it is
not the greatness of the Extent of a Country which makes it formidable, but the
Number, and well Governing of the People: So that though the Kingdoms in Spain,
Subject to the now King, be one hundred fold greater than the United
Netherlands; yet these are five fold more formidable by Sea and Land than all
those Kingdoms in Spain, wherein they cannot Raise an Army to defend Catalonia
against Thirty Thousand French.

And as the Strength and Grandeur of every Country is founded in the Number of
the Inhabitants, so is the Riches and Trade of it, for every Man s Necessities
is supplied by Trade; so that though men be poor, and maintained by the Loss of
Particulars, yet in the whole, Trade is increased by it, yet more or less, as
Men live more or less in Society and Conversation; and therefore wherever
People are thin, or few, they are poor, lazy, rude, and of little use to the
Public, yet a public Charge: As in Spain, it may be the Inhabitants are
tenfold more than in Holland; yet by Reason of the vastness of Spain, the
Inhabitants are few and thin in proportion to it, so as all the Wealth of the
West Indies cannot support the burden of Maintaining them; whereas in Holland,
where the People are numerous, and daily conversant in Business, every Man is a
benefit to the Country, as well by Strength and Trade.

We have formerly compared the State of Spain and England, from not unlike
Causes; for as Spain's Expelling the more, and the Inhabitants excursion into
the West Indies has exhausted the Inhabitance of Spain, and the Inquisition
debarred it of a Supply; so has the Peopling our American Plantations, and the
repeopling Ireland since the Massacre, and late Wars, so much dispeopled
England, as the Peopling them has been more; and the Law against Naturalizing
Foreigners as a greater bar for a Supply, than the Inquisition in Spain.

As the Law against Naturalizing Foreigners, debars the Nation from a Supply
for the exhausting the Nation in peopling Ireland, and our American
Plantations; so the Privileges of Corporations, exclude all the rest of the
Nation, but the Freemen, from Trading in them; whereby these Men Ignorant of
their own Interest, from the poor Estate they are thereby reduced to, daily
decline to worse, whereby it becomes impossible to increase the Strength and
Trade in them beyond the power of these men in them.

To supply this Defect, the Commons in the third Westminster-Parliament, the
3d. of December, 1680. Gave Liberty to bring in a Bill for a General
Naturalization of all Alien Protestants, and allowing them Liberty to Exercise
their Trades in all Corporations. So did the Commons last Session: And is not
there as much Reason all Native English should have the same Liberty?

But why must this Liberty be permitted only to Protestant Artificers and
Traders? For my part, I understand but little Benefit can accrue to the Nation
by it, now the French King has expelled these out of France; for as the Case
stands, Holland, Flanders and France are the places from whence we can expect
any benefit by this Liberty: In Holland, Artificers and Traders are as free, as
they can expect to be in England; but in Flanders, though they be an
industrious and honest sort of People, yet they are all Popish, and I am
confident, if they might enjoy the exercise of their Religion in England,
multitudes of them would seek an Asilum here, to be freed from the Insults they
are always subject to from the French; and its not unlike, but Multitudes would
free from the Tyranny and Oppressions of the French in their New Conquests, if
they might use their Religion here.

The English pretend to love Englishmen above all others, and it becomes them
so to do; but in our practice, this Love is both partial and unreasonable; I
say, it is partial by the Freemen in Corporations, excluding the rest of their
fellow Subjects from working and Trading in them, which is a prime Cause of
their Poverty; and I say, it is unreasonable to exclude Foreigners from being a
Supply for those sent out of England, into our American Plantations and
Ireland: Suppose a Man is so in love with his Family that he will not employ
any other in managing his Farm whereby half of it lies wast; Is it not
unreasonable that he will not employ none of his Neighbors to help him to
improve it to the best Advantage; or if by Fire or Rapine he cannot by his
Family preserve his House or Goods, yet would it not be prudence in him in such
Case to make use of his Neighbors? Is not the Case ours? Have not the French
and Dutch upon the matter got from us all the Fisheries upon the Coasts of
England and Scotland, to Iseland, Westmony, Greenland, and the Newfoundland;
and are our poor Port-towns, by excluding the Natives and all other, in a
Condition to Oppose them herein, much less to retrieve these Fisheries from
them?

Suppose any one of these Corporations should lose one half, more or less, of
their Ships and Freight, Would not this be so much a Loss and Weakening to it?
Convert the Proposition, and admit like number of others Ships and Freight,
should set Up and Trade in that Corporation, Would not this be as much an
Enriching and Strengthing to it? And therefore if in this Conjunture of time if
it please God so to bless his Majestys Arms, that the French could not, or
without great hazard, trade in the Newfoundland Fishery, and to Green-land; and
the French might more surely manage these Fisheries from our Ports, whereby
many of the French should buy fish from our Ports, would be as much a
strengthing and Enriching to this Nation, as it would be an impoverishing and
weakening to the French.

If we should permit Foreigners to purchase Lands in England, the Nation
without any hazard would get so much Treasure, as the Purchasemoney is more,
which had it not before, and retain the Lands still, which it had before; and
be so much more strengthened as the Purchasers are more; whereas a Merchant in
acquiring Wealth, runs hazards of being Undone and gets no new Inhabitants.

Ambitious Princes venture their own Dominions to acquire New by War, and that
by Oppression, Rapine, Murder, Desolation, and making Men miserable; whereas by
permitting Foreigners the Freedom of English Native, we Conquer without a War,
run no hazard, and Enrich and strengthen the nation; and all this in double
proportion; for so much as the Nation hereby gains, and is strengthened, so much
are those, which may be Enemies to us, impoverished and weakened. Xenophon, in
Cyropoedia, Says, That by reason of the Goodness and justice of Cyrus his Reign
many nations became Subject to him, and was Cyrus the less Great and Glorious
by it? why then should this Law debar she Nation the benefit which it might
enjoy by Naturalizing Foreigners, whereby the Nation would be so much more
enriched and strengthened, as this Admission of these Foreigners shall be more.

Objection.

If we should admit popish Foreigners the Freedom of Englishmen, it might
endanger the Peace of our Church and State.

Answer.

For my Part, if I thought so, I would never Plead for it; for I do as much
abhor the popish Superstition, as any Man, and am as fearful of the Usurpation
which the Pope Arrogates over princes, and the Consciences of Men; yet I
apprehend no danger of either, by permitting popish Artificers to work and
trade in England, as well as Holland: For it is one thing for popish Priests
and Jesuits to make it their business to pervert Men to their Sentiments; and
another thing for poor People to make it their business how to Subsist, which
will take up their whole time; especially where they are in a strange place,
and strangers to the People, unless by accident in their Dealings for their
support, and also to the Language of the People where they live: I would know
what inconvenience has followed from permitting Brewer in the Year One Thousand
Six hundred and sixty seven, and his Followers, which were all Papists, to
instruct our Natives in making and Dying Fine Cloths; and in all the Tumults
and Wars in the late times, after the Year One Thousand Six hundred and forty,
let any show any one Instance wherein the Walloons, or their Descendents,
planted in London Norwich, Canterbury and Colchester, Contributed to either of
them, however they had been provoked thereto by the Bishops Laud and Wren.
Besides if these Men cannot be prevailed upon in their Persons to alter their
Sentiments in their Religion, their Posterity may, if our Churchmen will make
it their business.

Can any man believe that all Sciences and Arts, or the improvement of them is
circumscribed within our English Pale; or would it become us, as the Romans and
Grecians did, to esteem all the World besides to be barbarous? Or is any
Science or Art less valuable because found out or improved by a Foreigner? Was
Thucidides History of the Peloponesian War, or Plutarch, Livy, or Th^^^^'s
Histories etc. or Euclid's Elements less valuable because written by
Foreigners? Or was Christianity less valuable, because it was planted by
Foreigners? And I say, next after Spiritual Benefits, the honest Employment of
Poor People, is it the greatest Benefit to any Nation: And I submit it to
Judgment, whether Religion may not be better improved upon Men in honest
Callings, than upon idle Persons who subsist by Pilfering, Begging, Stealand
Pining.

Edward the Third was the most Generous and Noblest Prince of the Norman Race,
and did not he, notwithstanding the Law against Naturalizing Foreigners, and
against his own Profit, introduce the Walloons, who instructed the Natives in
making Woollen Manufactures? And is this benefit less valuable to the English
Nation, because it was introduced by Foreigners.

After Kett's Rebellion in Norfolk, the City of Norwich became almost desolate;
and in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, it was often debated in
Council, whether it should be demolished, as being a Receptacle of vagrant and
idle Persons, and so dangerous to the Government. But Queen Elizabeth (the most
Noble Princess of the British Race) when the Rage of Alva's Persecution, drove
numbers of the Flemins into England, Planted them chiefly in Norwich and
Colchester, who instructed the Natives in making Norwich Stuffs, and Colchester
Bays, and are not these above all Places in the World become the most famous
hereby? Or are the Benefits less valuable, because the Natives were first
instructed in them by Foreigners; So King Charles the 2d (as is said before)
entertained in the year One Thousand six hundred and Sixty seven, Brewer and
his followers, who instructed our natives in making and Dying Fine Cloths,
Thirty Pounds per Cent: cheaper and better than before; and is this improvement
less valuable, because the natives were instructed in it by Foreigners? I dare
say at this day above an Hundred Thousand people (Men, Women and Children) are
employed in silk weaving and silk throwing in and about London and Canterbury,
which was first taught by Foreigners, are these therefore less valuable? And is
not the famous Engineer Sir Martin Beckman, a Brandenburger? or are the
benefits the Nation now enjoys by him less valuable, because he is a Foreigner?
or would the benefits which the Nation may reap by Foreginers instructing our
natives how to Cure white Herrings, Pilchards and Codfish be less valuable, if
they were instructed in them by Foreign people etc.

CONCLUSION.
IF I have but Superficially, yet to the best of my Ability, discoursed in this
little Treatise, so that the end designed by it, be not so Manifest, but that a
better and more intelligent Person may make it more; yet it may be a
Groundwork for another to do it better; I am sure the Design is Noble the end
being the Publick's Good.

I was the rather induced to this Undertaking, because the Circumstances of the
Nation, as the Case stands, render it very difficult to have the State of it
truly represented: For the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Lawyers, whose
Interest it is to have the Nation and Trade of it increased, whereby the value
of the Lands of it, would be so proportionably; do not make it their business
to enquire into it; and our English Merchants who understand it to be the
Interest of the Nation to enlarge the Trades of it, yet their Interest,
especially those which trade by excluding the rest of the Nation, is to
continue the Trades of England, as they now stand; for thereby they take off
the Manufactures of the poor Natives at what prizes they please, and no more
then they please, whereby the Artificers in them, are not only reduced to
Poverty in Working, but cannot be further employed than these Merchants please:
And also impose what prizes they please upon the Natives in their Returns.

In Holland the Interest of the States, is founded in their Trades; and they
are generally Merchants which understand it, and sit all the year round, and so
no Grievances arise in Trade, but they take notice of them, and Redress them.

Whereas our Parliaments for near eighty years together, have either rarely
met, whereby Grievances have been so multiplied and fixed, and so many
interested in them, that the body of the Parliament has been Distempered
thereby, not only in electing Members, but in their Sessions; so that as the
humor of the Times were, Parliaments were continued for near twenty years
together, and at other times discontinued above half as long; but its hoped
these will be prevented in time to come, and then the Parliament will be at
more leisure, and in a better Temper, truly to confider the State of the
Nation, in reference to what has been beforesaid.

Nota Been.
HEre I make an end of these three Heads, and what I have offered, if I mistake
not very much, carries its own light with it, and is enough to convince the
Unprejudiced: If any think themselves aggrieved or injured hereby, let them
object, and expose themselves, as I have done, and I shall either make my
Rejoinder, or Comply with their Sentiments: But for the further satisfaction of
those that are well-wishers to their Native Country, and would have it flourish
in Trade and Navigation, without which it cannot long continue, the Figure it
makes at present in the world, but must daily fall from bad to worse; I may
shortly advance something they may approve of, as conducing for the benefit of
it, by way of Reply to Sir Francis Brewster's late Book, Entitled, Essays of
Trade and Navigation.

FINIS

