A DISCOURSE OF TRADE.

In two Parts.

The first treats of The Reason of the Decay of the Strength, Wealth, and Trade
of ENGLAND.

The latter, Of the Growth and Increase of the Dutch Trade above the English.

By ROGER COKE.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun near the West End of St. Paul's: and
R. Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, 1670.

To the great Example of Virtue Sir CHARLES HARBORD.
SIR,
IF I could describe Trade in all its excellencies, so well as Ben. Johnson
does the mind, and were to present it to him who I thought did know best how to
value it, I would prefer Sir Charles Harbord: For in him besides a well weighed
understanding, it will meet with an open and free access (which are the
principles from whence Trade is best generated, preserved, and increased)
conjoined with so even a temper, that he is never moved to judge, or act, but
from causes before understood by him.

This, Sir, is one reason why this Treatise implores your Patronage; and I wish
that the same method of reasoning were observed in Geometry, Numbers, Divinity,
Physic, and Natural Philosophy, as in this Discourse, viz. first to establish
the principles, and by a certain rule to reason under them. The principles from
which all Learning and Reasoning are generated Anal. post. l 8. c. 32. lib. 12.
are three (though Aristotle is pleased to restrain them to two) viz.
Definitions, or sensible things or actions before known, which cannot be
defined; Petitions, and Axioms or Common Notions. Here you may be pleased to
take notice how by not right understanding the nature of these Principles, and
confounding them, all Learning and Reasoning in these studies is rendered
perplexed, difficult, and uncertain, and without any Order or Method; which
that I may avoid, I think fit here to declare the nature of them, and how they
differ from one another.

A Definition is the explaining the name of some intelligible thing or act,
which may be understood, but cannot be the object of sense, nor can be taken
for a Proposition. Sensible things and actions may be alike known to sensitive
Creatures, who have like senses: but definitions are only understood by
intelligent Creatures, never to sensitive. For example, a Man, a Tree, a Horse,
or any sensible thing may be alike perceived by all sensitive Creatures, who
have like senses. But Father, Merchant, Lawyer, Point-line, etc. may be defined
and understood by intelligent Creatures, but can never be perceived by
sensitive. By no power of the understanding can any man, negatively void of any
sense, be made to perceive any thing which is subject to that sense. A man
negatively blind, cannot be made to perceive things which are only visible, nor
deaf to perceive sounds which are only audible; and so it is of the other
senses. And as in Things, so in Actions; carnal copulation, killing another,
and taking from another, are sensible Actions, and cannot be defined: but
Murder, Justice, Adultery, Theft, etc. may be defined and understood by
intelligent creatures, but can never be perceived by the senses, or sensitive
Creatures. How much time is lost, and confusion caused in defining sensible
things by Aristotle, Plato, and our Schools, which every ignorant man knows as
much as the most learned; and a thousand times better than all these Sophisters
by their contention in them, I leave to you Sir to judge.

To this loss of time in defining sensible things, Aristotle and our Schools
from him, do not only confound definitions with propositions; sometimes giving
a definition the power of a particular proposition, other times of an
universal; but he makes a man to be an universal proposition, and the man
Callias to be a particular: Nor is Euclid wholly free from mistaking herein;
for he oftentimes confounds definitions with propositions, as hereafter shall
be showed. So as Clavius following the Authority of Aristotle and Euclid, and
attempting to Analyze the Propositions of Euclid in a rational method, not only
makes the Comment more perplexed and tedious, but not otherways to be done;
which is the reason he says in his Scholium upon the first Proposition of the
first Book of Euclid, that you must take the way he is forced to do, as well as
others before him.

2. Petitions are immediate Propositions, wherein is propounded some certain
knowledge, which is either understood to be necessary in one or more of the
definitions, or some sensible thing or act before known; or 2dly. you require
that one or more of the definitions, or acts may be expressed, or done by every
learner; or lastly fact or defect may be propounded in one or more of them,
which must be unquestionably true, as it is propounded: These are frequently
confounded by Commentators upon Euclid, with Axioms and common Notions. So,
Sir, as it is no wonder that no method or rule of reasoning is observed in
Geometry, where the principles of it are so perplexed and confounded; whereby
Urania, so far and lovely in it, is so clouded, and all ways of approaching her
so obstructed; that of ingenious men, who desire to pay their Oblations at her
Altars, not one of twenty can find the passage to her.

3. But these principles are so sterile, that without the conjunction of a
superior and nobler cause they are never impregnated with any new generation
of knowledge. Nor can this knowledge be begotten from any less power than that
which is eternal and necessary in all things or actions, as they are
propounded. These principles from their excellency are styled Axioms,
Dignities, Universals, and Common Notions; and though every acquired
proposition has the authority of a Petition, yet by no learning or reason can
any Proposition have the authority of an Axiom.

The principles thus established, men begin to learn and reason, whereby
knowledge may be infinitely improved by reason, but never the principles; for
as Aristotle in very many places affirms, they are indemonstrable, and the
intellect without reason, is of them, and reason is of conclusions deduced from
them. Here, Sir, I cannot pass over the first stumble which is laid before
every learner in our vulgar Logic, which in the first page affirms Logic to
prove (not the consequences but) the Principles in its own Science and others
too: which is all one, as if one says the consequences (which must ever be
proved by the premises) go before the principles, and the principles and
premises come after the consequences and conclusions. So as not only all rules
of reasoning are hereby inverted and destroyed, but the authority of Aristotle
contemned, who as I remember, in 16 places of his Analyticks, and frequently in
his Physics, Metaphysics, Topics, and Ethics, affirms the principles of
Science to be indemonstrable; and that reason is of Science, and demonstrable:
And sure it is great pity none of the Rabbines correct it: though from no
learning or authority of Aristotle or our vulgar Logic was ever any progress
of knowledge in any one proposition acquired or heard of, I am sure not by me.

These principles thus established, this method or rule must be observed in the
generation of knowledge. One or more of the definitions, or things, or actions
before known (which are termed the subjects of the proposition) must be assumed
in every scientifical proposition, either simply or conditionally, wherein
either some thing or act is propounded to be done (which is termed a Problem)
which was not before known in any of the petitions or demonstrated
propositions, or some new knowledge in the Subjects propounded (which is termed
a Theorem) which was not before known: and in the demonstration of this thing
to be done or knowledge to be understood (which are termed the Questions of the
Proposition.) The major proposition must be an Axiom, the minor proposition so
made up of the Petitions, and before demonstrated propositions, and the
Hypothesis, if the Subjects be conditionally assumed, conformable in all parts
to the major proposition, that the affirmation or question of the proposition,
or the contradiction, if the demonstration be negative, may flow into the
conclusion.

Here, Sir, be pleased to stay a little, and behold rational knowledge thus
begotten, how fair and lovely she is in her pure and simple nakedness! how
pleasant and easy are her ways? and how excellent and noble is her extraction?
descended from eternal causes: begotten by a mind so pure, as partakes not any
affection of any sensual appetite or passion: Her ways all plain and before
known, and may be apprehended as well by youth of both Sexes as men of riper
years. Nor does knowledge thus begotten by the mind die with the body; but
though she be the daughter of time, remains an eternal monument of the minds
excellency, being subject to no alteration, wrimple, or decay by any power of
time or fate. Oh Divine knowledge! how is thy excellency imposed upon by Price,
Affectation, Vain glory, and hard Words? How are thy ways obstructed by
Faction, Prejudice, and Selfinterest? Whilst thy glorious beauty is never
conspicuous, but by denying these, and frequenting the humblest paths.

If, Sir, I have more than becomes me insisted upon your patience, I am so far
from excusing my self herein, that I acknowledge I have ofter before done it,
with this advantage to my self, that as well in this as many other things I
have had the honor to be confirmed by your more discerning Judgment. This
Treatise therefore presumes to inscribe your Name, whereby it well hopes to be
enlivened when its own little worth shall find no other Monument: so, Sir, I
desire you to entertain a belief of me, that no man more truly honors you, or
wishes you more happiness than,

SIR, Your most devoted and obedient Servant Roger Coke.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
GOD has endued other Creatures besides Man The Nature of Man.
with Sense, Appetite and Fear; so as excited by their Appetite, and directed
by their Senses, without any subordination of one to another, they pursue and
attain those things, which Nature had before provided for their subsistence;
and prompted by their innate impulse of fear, they avoid and flee from those
Creatures and things, which are Enemies and hurtful to them. But the case is
otherwise with Man, for God has endued him with a Higher and Nobler Faculty of
Soul, in giving him understanding, which by Reason, not Love, Hatred, Fear, or
Desire, Governs all his Actions: for where these or any of them prevail, those
men never understand, judge, or act aright. And Men, not as other creatures,
live in Society and Subordination. So that under the Laws of God, and their
Superiors, men eat their bread in the sweat of their brows. Nature of her own
accord has ordained subsistence necessary for other creatures: Where as though
God has made all things for the use of Man, yet nothing is useful to Man (pure
Water, Milk, and some of the fruits of the earth in their seasons excepted) but
as it is prepared by Humane Art and Industry. While other Creatures live free
and Independent from one another, only Man stands in need and help of another:
And therefore where things are best prepared for Humane necessities and
convenience, there Necessity of Trade.
men most resort: from whence Humane Society, Industry and Civility, is
improved above those places where these are not, and men but few.

And this is so well understood, that Trade is now become the Lady, which in
this present Age is more courted and Celebrated The excellency of Trade.
than in any former by all the Princes and Potentates of the World, and that
deservedly too; For she acquires not her Dominion by the Horrid and Rueful face
of War, whose footsteps leave ever behind them deep impressions of misery,
divastation, and poverty, but with the pleasant aspect of wealth and plenty of
all things conducing to the benefit of Humane life and Society, accompanied
with strength to defend her, in case any shall attempt to Ravish or Invade her.

Take an Instance or two herein. When the United Netherlands made their
defection from the Crown of Spain, Spain was in its greatest height and riches;
after some Commotions, ten of the Provinces did either return or were subdued
to the Crown of Spain; yet the other seven for near 40 years together, by War
and Policy maintained themselves against all the Power of Spain, until the
charge became so insupportable to the Crown of Spain, that Philip the Second,
about the year 1607. was forced to seek a Truce from the States, and afterward
in the year 1648. Philip the Fourth a Peace. Yet all this War was maintained
by these States purely upon the account of Trade, and that Foreign; for other
means all the World knows they had none: And though they were constantly
assisted by Queen Elizabeth and the French Kings successively, yet were all the
Forces of England and France as constantly paid by the States. In our late
Wars with them, notwithstanding the extraordinary supplies employed upon that
occasion, and the losses sustained by the Dutch incomparably more than were the
English, yet this Nation by experience found, that the Dutch upon the Account
of their Trade supported the Charge of the War against all difficulties. The
Bounds set by War are Towns, Forts and Castles, whereas neither Land nor Ocean
put any Period to the Jurisdiction of Trade.

The English and Dutch have of late by a furious War contended who should
enjoy her, but whilst these Covetous Combatants contend so fiercely for her,
the French King by all the Modes of France Courts her for himself; yet this,
though Covertly carried, was perceived by some of the jealous Combatants, who
had rather enjoy her, neither can tell how, than wholly lose her to their
Powerful and Courtly Neighbor.

But War is not the Mean by which this Lady may be won; for though she be
pleased to be Guarded by Arms, yet will she never admit to be governed by them;
therefore if either English or Dutch had subdued other; yet should not Trade
have longer continued with either, than men observe the Rules and Method by
which it may be advanced more than in any other Place, which has equal
conveniences.

If this Lady were to choose an habitation in all the known World, she could
not find any so capable of her reception as England, (I had almost said and
Ireland) whether it be in regard of the Multitude, Excellency, and Convenience
of our Ports: Abundance of Wool better than in any other place of the World,
but Segovia, and from us they had it: Cattle of all sorts equal, if not
superior to any other place: More Horses, and more serviceable in Trade than
any where else: Timber for shipping the best in the World: Lead, Tin, Seacoal,
and Fullers Earth, not to be found out of England, so much, or so Good: and
capable of all other things but Wines, (and we were better without them) which
may any ways conduce to the supplying the necessities, or adorning the
convenience of Humane life, equal with any other place. The Coast enriched with
a shore more worth than the King of Spains West Indies: The Inhabitants stout
and valiant, accompanied with a lively wit and healthful constitution, and
generaly disposed to her service.

One would think it strange (I might say monstrous) that the Dutch Nation, who
are denied these advantages, and are of a more dull and heavy constitution than
the English, should out-wit us in that wherein God and Nature have given us all
the Prerogatives we our selves can desire. But we undo our selves by banishing
this Lady we so desire and contend for; she is already so far withdrawn, that
we neither know where to find her, nor much better how to recover her.

Though this beloved Lady is become very Coy to us by Land; yet in reason we
hope to prevail upon her by Sea. In our application we tell her, the Swelling
Ocean every day beats round about our Shores, to invite us to the enjoyment of
her; and that by a long and uninterrupted series of Ages we have been possessed
of her before ever the Dutch Government was formed into States.

We have moreover in the year 1662. contributed several considerable sums of
Money toward the Advancement of the Fishing Trade; but how the Moneys have been
disposed of, and whether the Moneys Collected be not yet in the Collectors
hands unaccounted for, may be worthy Consideration; especially considering how
great a discouragement it will be to all Public undertakings, when such
benevolences are diverted from their designed end.

Many men not understanding the Reason of this Ladies strangeness to us of
late, have ascribed it to two causes, viz. that we Import more than we Export;
and that men generally live above their Estate; but neither of these, though
true, are Reasons of the decay of Trade; for the Dutch we see Import all, yet
thrive upon Trade, and the Irish Export eight times more than they Import, yet
grow poorer. And Trade if it be well managed, no where thrives better than
where men spend above the ordinary means of living.

We have lost the Trade upon the matter by Sea and Land at home; but before we
demonstrate from what causes, or propound any Expedients by which we may be
relieved, let us see how it stands abroad: We have lost the Trade to Muscovv,
and so have that to Greonland, the Trade to Norway possessed by the Norwegians,
and the Reasons given in to the Parliament last Sessions: The Trade to Guinney
driven by a few, and exclusive to other men: The Spanish and Turkey Trades
abated, and in danger: So that unless it be in the French and Canary Trades,
wherein we undo our selves, we are making have to betake our selves to our
Plantations only, yet shall not be long able to continue that Trade for want of
shipping.

It is true indeed, that England of late under King James, By what accident
England of late became so rich.
but more especially under King Charles did flourish by Trade, and was more
Rich than any other Kingdom in these Western Parts of the World; but this was
by an Accident of the Times, not to be again hoped for: For the Austrian Family
under Maximilian the Second, and Philip the Second, attained to that Power and
Riches, when the Netherlands made their defection from the Crown of Spain, that
it was not only formidable to the Great Turk, but to all the Christian Princes
of Europe; Queen Elizabeth therefore and the French Kings successively openly
assisted them in their defection: But Philip the Second dying, and Queen
Elizabeth soon after, King James and Philip the Third, in the beginning of
their Reigns made Peace, which continued near 40 years with little
Interruption. During which the Wars continued between the United Netherlands
and Spain, with little Intermission; whereby the English became Proprietors of
the Trade with Spain, and by consequence great sharers in the Wealth of the
West Indies. And this Benefit moreover the English reaped by these Wars, that
the Merchant supplied the Spanish Netherlands with Commodities; and both
Spanish and United Netherlands were supplied with Soldiers from England,
whereby many of them on both sides, especially Officers acquired much Wealth.

But the Nation, not content to enjoy Peace, Riches and Plenty From what cause
it lost its Riches.
above any other Nation, brought upon itself all the miseries and Calamities
incident to a Civil War, so that Regal Power, as to the exercise of it, for
near 20 years together was suspended; during which, in the year 1648. the Dutch
made Peace with Spain, and Oliver in the year 1654. brake with it (which was a
folly never to be forgiven in his Politics, nor the losses this Nation
sustained thereby, ever again to be repaired) whereby the Condition of the
English and Dutch in reference to the Trade with Spain became quite inverted;
and this continuing near seven years, the Dutch are so good Masters of Trade,
that little hopes is left the English of Enjoying it as before.

From hence it is, which being past cannot be helped; and for the Reasons in
this Discourse which may be helped, and for other Causes which only God in his
goodness can help: From hence it is, I say, that this Kingdom becomes decayed
in Trade, and must every day degenerate into worss, unless some such
Reformation be made, with Gods great blessing upon it, as may uphold the Riches
and Glory of it.

REASONS OF THE DECAY OF THE English-Trade. PART. I.
Definitions.
What is Trade?

Def. 1. Trade is an Art of Getting, Preparing, and Exchanging things
Commodious for Humane Necessities and Convenience.

Annot. So as Trade happens three ways. 1. By acquiring, or getting things
commodious, which are called Growths. 2ly, By Preparing them, which are called
Manufactures. 3ly, By Exchanging these Growths and Manufactures for Money or
other Growths and Manufactures.

And Trade is twofold, viz. Native, and Foreign. 1, Native when the Growths or
Manufactures are got, Prepared, and Exchanged upon the place. 2ly, Foreign, when
Growths and Manufactures are exchanged in Foreign Places.

What is Money?

2. Money, is the Standard by which all things in Trade are valued.

What is Navigation?

3. Navigation is an Art of Conveying things upon the Body of the Waters from
one place to another.

Who are the Dutch, intended in this Discourse?

4. Those who are subject to the States of the United Netherlands.

Who are the English?

5. Those who are born in Subjection to the Crown of England.

Who is a Dutch Merchant?

6. One who Trades under the Protection of the States of the United Netherlands.

Who is an English Merchant?

7. One who Trades under the Protection of the English, and born in Subjection
to its Crown.

Who are the Dutch States?

8. They who govern Trade in the United Netherlands, and all places subject to
them.

Who are the Council of State in England?

9. They are those Persons with whom the King pleases to Advise and Consult in
State Affairs, where no Provision is made by Municipal Laws.

What are Corporations in Trade?

10. They are men, who in Trades where they are incorporated by Civil Power,
exercise those Trades excluding all others.

Memorand. It is lawful to assume all things and places in Trade, under those
names, by which they are usually called.

Petitions.
Pet. 1. The Dutch freely entertain men of all Nations in Trade, and grant them
equal Privileges with the Natural Dutch.

Pet. 2. The English Nation consumes all the Commodities of France imported
into it.

Pet. 3. The French Commodities Imported into England do Exceed in Value the
English Commodities Exported into France.

Annot. Mr. Fortrey, a Gentleman of the Kings Privy Chamber, in his Treatise of
England's Interest and Improvement, page 22, says, That the excess is above
1600000 l. a year, which did appear to the now King of France upon a design he
had to forbid Trade between England and France; and gives the Particulars, page
22, 23, 24. whereupon the King of France finding how much it would prove to his
loss, to forbid the Trade, laid it by, but raised the Custom of some of our
English Commodities, whereby the vent of them is much hindered.

Pet. 4. England, before it had the accession of our American Plantations,
wanted men to Improve the Growths and Manufactures of it; and also the Fishing
Trade.

Annot. Sir Walter Rawleigh takes notice in his observations upon Trade, which
he dedicated to King James, that this Kingdom, in 55 years lost above 25
Millions of Pounds, besides other incredible advantages, which would have
accrued to this Kingdom in Strength and Trade by the Dutch Dressing and Dying
our White Clothes. I will not dispute, whether it had been good policy to have
restrained the Exportation of our White and Undrest Clothes: I only affirm that
England could have better and cheaper Maintained and Employed those men in
Dressing and Dying them, than Holland and Amsterdam, having no excise upon our
Commodities, and Fullers Earth better and cheaper than in the United
Netherlands. Besides England could then better and cheaper have maintained all
those men, who in the United Netherlands so much desired our Wool, Lead, and
Tin, in their Manufactures.

Sir Walter Rawleigh further takes notice that in four Towns in the East
Countries, whithin the Sound, Queensborough, Elbing, Statten, and Dantzick,
were yearly vented, between 30 and 40000 last of Herring by the Dutch, at 15 or
16 l. the last, which amounts to 620000 l. and by us none.

To Denmark, Sweden, Lifeland, Rivel, Narne, and other Ports within the Sound,
there are Carried and vented by the Dutch above 10000 Last of Herrings at above
15 or 16 l. the Last, which amounts to about 170000 l.

Into Russia the Dutch sent about 1500 Last of Herrings, sold at 30 s. the
Barrel, which amounted to 27000 l. and we about 20 or 30: I am sure we send
none now.

To Stoad, Hamborough, Bream, Embden upon the River Elb, Weaser, and Embs, were
carried and vented of Fish and Herring 6000 Last, which at 15 or 16 l. by the
Last amounted to 100000 l. by us none.

To Clevleand, Gulickland, and to Germany up the Rhine and Maine, were vented
by the Dutch 2200 Last of Fish and Herring sold at 20 l. the Last, which comes
to 44000 l. by us none.

Up the River Maze, Leigh, Mostrick, Vendlow, Zutphen, Daventer, Campen, Swell,
and all over Lukeland, is carried and vented 7000 Last of Herring by the Dutch
at 140000 l. by us none.

To Roan were carried 5000 Last of Herring by the Dutch, and sold at 20 l. the
Last, which came to 100000 l. by us not 100 Last.

To Gelderland, Artois, Henalt, Brabant, Flanders, were carried between 8 and
9000 sold at 18 l. the Last, which came to 171000 l. by us none.

Sir Walter Rawleigh left out Spain, and France, except Roan, and the Dutch
Trade of Fish into the Streights, and what they consumed among themselves,
which Questionless was and is now very considerable; yet were all these Fish
caught upon our Coast, and no question, if we had, had the Hands, we might much
better and cheaper have maintained them, and caught, and cured them, having
many more, and much better and more convenient Ports than they.

Pet. 5. Money is a convenient mean to improve Trade.

Pet. 6. Foreign Trade is the only mean to Enrich this Kingdom.

Pet. 7. Multitude, and Concourse of People, Advance Trade.

Pet. 8. Scarcity of People Diminish Trade.

Pet. 9. The Law against Naturalization permits no man of any other Nation to
have equal Freedom and Privilege in Trade, with the natural English.

Pet. 10. The Law of Navigation Entitled, Shipping and Navigation Encouraged,
made 12. Car. 2. 18. and continued, 13. Car. 2. 12. restreins the English in
Navigation to Ships English built, and to be sailed by 3/4 English; and Foreign
Commodities to be Imported by English in Shipping so built and sailed, and to
the Natives of the Place.

Pet. 11. The rents of Lands are valuable, as the Trade of the Place is.

Pet. 12. Stock is a convenient mean to advance Trade.

Pet. 13. Men are necessary to improve Trade.

Pet. 14. Timber is a necessary mean to build Ships.

Pet. 15. Ships are necessary means in Navigation.

Pet. 16. The Timber of England was wanting even before the Act of Navigation,
made 12. Car. 2. 18. and confirmed 13 Car. 2. 14. this appears by the Acts of
35. H. 8. 17. and 35. El. 11.

Pet. 17. The means ordained by the 1. Eliz. 13. and 35. El. 11. to supply the
Timber of England before wanting and decayed is interrupted by the Act of
Navigation.

Pet. 18. Before the Act of Navigation, we wanted Shipping: this appears by the
title of the Act, which is an Act for the encouraging and increase of Shipping
and Navigation; for if we had not wanted Shipping, the encouraging and
increasing thereof, had been vain and superfluous.

Pet. 19. The loss and decay of the Ships of England must not in Navigation be
supplied by acquiring any Foreign built Ships; for by the Act of Navigation, if
any English man Trades in any Foreign built Ship to any of our Plantations, or
to any Port of England, or Ireland, it is Forfeit, Ship, Goods, Guns, Tackle,
and Ammunition.

Pet. 20. Navigation is the only mean of vending our Growths and Manifactures,
in Foreign Trade unless it be into Scotland.

Pet. 21. The Act against the Importation of Irish Cattle made, 18. and 20.
Car. 2. cap. 1. has abated the Trade of England; with Ireland for Beer, Hops,
and Bills of Excharge, for Money, all sorts of Hats, and Stockings, Cloth, and
Stuffs of all sorts, Victualing Ships of all, as well Foreign as English. etc.

Pet. 22. All the Canary Wines Imported into England are consumed in it.

Pet. 23. The Canary Wines Imported do exceed in value the English Commodities
Exported into the Canaries. I cannot exactly compute the excess; but have it
from good hands, that the Canary Wines yearly Imported are about 13000 Pipes,
which are valued at 20 l. the Pipe, which amounts to 200000 l. yearly; and that
our Commodities Exported do not near amount to so much in value: before we did
exceed so much in drinking them, we Imported them at 10 l. the Pipe, and Traded
to the Canaries only upon the account of our Commodities in Barter for the
Wines.

Actions or Common Notions.
1. Where the means of Improving any business are wanting, that business will
be so much diminished, as the means by which it might have been supplied are
diverted.

2. Where any thing is wanting and decayed, that thing will be so much
diminished, as the means of supplying it are interrupted.

3. If the means of doing any thing be wanting, that thing will be so much
hindered, as the means are diminished.

4. The doing of things will be so much hindered, as the means of doing them are
hindered.

5. Every thing will be so much diminished, as is abated of it.

6. Any business will be so much hindered, by how much the means of improving it
are excluded.

7. Where the consumption of things imported, does exceed in value the things
Exported, the loss will be as the excess is.

Prop. 1. Theorem. 1.
The Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade, are so much diminished, by how
much they might have been supplied by those men who are diverted in our
American Plantations.

Subjects. The Trades of England, and the Fishing Trade.

Question. Whether they be so much diminished by how much they might have been
supplied? etc. I say they are.

Ax. 1. For where the means of improving any business are wanting, that
business will be so much diminished, by how much the means, by which it might
have been suppliep, are diverted.

Pet. 24. But men are necessary to improve Trade.

Pet. 25. And before we had our American Plantations, we wanted men to improve
the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade.

Therefore the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade, are so much diminished,
by how much they might have been supplied, by those men who are diverted in our
American Plantations. Which was to be demonstrated.

Corollary. 1.
By the same reason the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade, are so much
more diminished, by how many men are diverted from supplying them in Repeopling
Ireland, since the Late Massacre and War there.

Corollary. 2.
By the same reason the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are yet so much
more diminished, by so many men, as extraordinarily died in the late great
Plague. 1665.

Annotations upon this Proposition and the two Correllaries.
Before we had our American Plantations, the Coasts of England were in a
convenient manner Planted; and the Multitudes of Inhabitants in England such,
that in the 2. and 3. Ph. and Mary 3. the Parliament taking notice that a great
number of persons within the Realm, had laid their Lands, Farms, and Pastures,
to Feeding of Sheep, Oxen, Runts, Schrubbes, Steers, and Heifers, and such like
Cattle, having no regard to breed and rear up young Beasts and Cattle, whereby
was grown great scarcity of Cattle, and necessary victual for sustenance of
diverse sorts of People within this Realm, and more like to be if speedy remedy
were not provided, therefore several provisions were made for breeding and
rearing of Cattle.

Experience had made trial and proof of the goodness, of this Law, to be very
beneficial and profitable to this Realm; and therefore in the 13. El. 25. it
was made perpetual; and as a very profitable Law the Act of 7. Jac. 8. makes it
to extend to grounds which were since enclosed or hereafter should be enclosed.

Before the Dutch became States, or when at least they were but The Poor
Distressed States, besides our staple at Antwerp we had the sole Trade into
Muscovy, Turkey, and up the Elb whereby Germany, Denmarks, Jutland, Holstein,
etc. were supplied with our Cloth and Woollen Manufactures. We did moreover
supply Muscovy with Fish, and in a considerable measure, France, Spain, Italy,
and several parts of the World within the Streights.

And for the further encouragement of the Fishing Trade, and for the
preservation of the breeding of Cattle; In the 5. Eliz. 5. It was ordained that
Wednesday, as well as Friday, and Saturday, should be observed as a Fish day
within this Realm, upon pain that every person offending, should for every time
he or they should offend, forfeit 3 l. or suffer three Months Imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprize, and every person, who was knowing thereof, and
concealed it, for every such offense should forfeit forty shillings, which Act
yet continues in force, but only the Penalty of eating. Flesh upon Fridaies,
Saturdaies, and Wednesdaies is reduced by the 35 Eliz. 7 to twenty shillings,
and the concealing of it by any Person, knowing it, to ten shillings.

Consequences of this Proposition and the two Corollaries.
After our American Plantations became peopled by us, the Dutch began to
partake with us in the Turks and Muscovy Trades; our Staple at Antwerp
diminished in a very great measure, to intend the Trades to our Plantations, we
neglected the Fishing Trade, whereby (except the Trade of red Herrings, which
cannot be cured by the Dutch) the Dutch in a manner became solely in a short
time possessed of it, and thereby have accquired this incomparable advantage
above us in the Trade of our Plantations; that as we employ only our ablest men
in trading to them, who in the diversity of Clime and Diet are very subject to
Diseases and Mortality; and leave the impotent Women and Children at home
without imploiment; they employ three times more men in the Fishing trade, and
four times more to the benefit of their State, and also all manner of impotent
People, Women, and Children; and have this advantage above us in time of War as
well as Peace, that all hands employed in the Fishing Trade are at home, and
serviceable when they are at War; whereas the Inhabitants in our Plantations
are of no use or benefit to us in War, which was very apparent in our late War
with them.

The Coast of England (which should be the Glory, Strength, and Ornament of an
Island) in peopling of them, and loss of the Fishing Trade, soon became decaid;
nor was there, or now is there, as the case stands, any possible relief herein;
for necessarily so much as is taken from any thing, so much less will be left;
and the law against Naturalization debarring a future supply, the Addition of
our Miseries in the Maslacre of Ireland and the late great Plague, the
supplying Ireland has not only rendered the Coast desolate; but the Country too
becomes thin and uninhabited: From whence notwithstanding we observe none of
the Fish-daies (which were above half the year) enjoined by the 5 Eliz. 5. nor
the several Laws made by King Philip and Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
for breeding of Cattle, and have excluded the Kingdom of Ireland from trading
with us in Cattle, yet our Markets are plentifully enough supplied with them;
nay, the Graziers are so overstocked, that they want Markets for them. This
Mischief moreover attends this Nation, That as Necessity is the Mother of
Ingenuity, so the Law against Naturalization debarrs all Ingenuous men to plans
with us; and Ireland and our Plantations are open Gates, for all necessitous
and ingenuous men to run out from us, and settle in them; where, but especially
in Ireland, for little they may lead an idle and lazy life.

In this condition I leave to thee, Reader, to judge, whether it will not be yet
so much more pernicious to the Trade of this Nation to endeavor a further
discovery of new Plantations; and that if the Project of Peopling Carolina from
the Residue of the men we have left in England, if it succeeds, will not so
much more enfeeble this Nation, and reduce the Trade thereof to so much a less
proportion by how many men shall be withdrawn from it?

We see in some sort the Influence the Law against Naturalization has upon our
Trade: Let us consider the influence it has upon the Strength and Welfare of
it, now we have peopled our Plantations, and repeopled Ireland, since the late
War and Massacre there, and compare it with the Kingdom of Spain.

Spain in old time, if Credit may be given to Livy and Plutarch, was the most
warlike, and continued longest and sharpest Wars against the Romans, though it
were subject to many little Kings; and it is scarce credible, with what huge
Armies they did maintain it. And as in old times, so in this later Age, when
Spain was divided into the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, Arragon, Portugal,
Navarr, and Granado, in the Reigns of Fernando and Isabella, the War against
the Moors was prosecuted purely by the Kingdom of Castile and Leon; for Arragon
refused to contribute to it, and Navarr and Portugal stood neuters, and were
not concerned in it. Yet it is admirable to read with what huge Armies for 10
years together (for so long the War lasted) Fernand and Isabella continued
those wars; and it was in their Reigns, that Columbus made his Discovery and
Attempts upon the West Indies: whereas all the Spains now are united (except
Portugal) under one Monarchy, and have moreover, for ought is known, accession
of greater Dominions than any Kingdoms of the Western or perhaps of the Eastern
World, it is become so weak and feeble, as it is a Question whether it be in
the power of Christendom to support it against the power of France; and the
King of Spain, though Lord of all the Treasure of the West Indies, of the
greatest and richest is fallen to be the poorest and weakest Prince of
Christendom: nor can any other reason be given hereof (at least that I
understand) but removing the Moors out of Granado, the transporting so many
Spaniards into the West Indies, and the Inquisition which bars out any future
Supply.

Let us take notice of the weakness of Spain, both at home and in his
West Indies. In some particulars, when Portugal made Defection from the Crown
of Spain; Spain without any success for near 20 years maintained War against
it, chiefly by Soldiers brought out of Milan, Naples, Sicily, and such Forces
as it hired out of Germany and Switzerland; (for few could be raised out of
Spain) But this proving insuccessful, trusting to the Gallick faith in the
Treaty at Bayonne, 1659, the King of Spain brought the Marquess Caracen, and
the greatest part of the Army in the Netherlands, to continue the Wars against
Portugal; but this Army being broken by the joint force of the English, French
and Portuguez, Spain was ever after forced to continue upon a defensive
posture, until it was necessitated to seek a peace by the loss of the Kingdom
of Portugal; and what the consequences of the loss of the Army under the
Marquess of Caracen have been to the Spanish Netherlands in the year, 1667, is
understood very well by the English, Dutch, and Switz, and the consequences yet
further feared by them.

And as the weakness of Spain is such at home, so it is more in his Indies,
from whence his Wealth and Riches flow, and for ought is known they are greater
than any Prince in the World has; yet being but thinly planted, how easily do
they every year receive the impulsion, devastation and plunder of a few
Jamaican Capers?

But sure it were worthy consideration how to prevent this for the future: for
if the vast exhausting of the Treasure of the English and Dutch in their
French, East-Indy, Turkey and other Eastern Trades, were not supplied out of the
Spanish West Indies, these Trades must either be discontinued, or these Western
parts of the World, in a short time, would be utterly impoverished by them: so
as it is evident both English and Dutch must necessarily suffer so much, by how
much these Jamaicans impoverish or interrupt the King of Spain or his Subjects
in the returns of his Plate-Fleets, and I may safely say the English Nation
looses ten times more than the Jamaicans get by every Quicksilver Ship they
take from the King of Spain or his Subjects.

Let us compare the State of England with that of Spain, The State of England
compared with that of Spain.
and see if from not unlike causes it does not necessarily degenerate into the
Condition of it. First, Ireland and our Plantations, do in proportion to
England more exhaust it of men, than the West Indies do Spain; and if no
provision be made will in less time, than since the West Indies came to be
subject to the Crown of Spain, leave it less peopled. Secondly, The Massacre in
Ireland, wherein is said 300000 Protestants were murdered, and probably as
many of the Rebels suffered, the late Plague wherein near 200000 persons died,
and our late Civil and Foreign Wars do more than equilize the transplanting the
Moors out of Granado; and Lastly, the Law against Naturalization, is a greater
Bar to a future Supply in England, than the Inquisition is in Spain.

We have compared the Condition of England and Spain, now I will instance
wherein the Condition of England is worse by our Plantations, than Spain is by
theirs. First, in that the Crown of Spain in the West Indies acquires new
Subjects; whereas we in our Plantations, wholly people them from our selves:
And the King of Spain being head of the House of Austria, besides the supplies,
which he draws out of Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Switzerland, has upon all
occasions large supplies of men out of Germany.

Before we had our Plantations, England, when it was not troubled with Civil
Wars, did usually in their offensive Wars prevail against France and Scotland.
I cannot tell whether the Coasts of England be better planted than the Coasts
of the King of Spain's West Indies: I am sure the French King and Dutch are
more able to attempt the invading of them, than the Jamaicans those of the
West Indies.

By this Law against Naturalization we bid defiance to all the World to
continue our Adversaries, and deny the Assistance of all Proselytes, who
otherwise might be of us, and assist us. Whereas the Prudence and Practice of
the Romans and greatest and wisest Princes and Potentates of the World, for
which they have been and now are celebrated famous, have proceeded otherwise:
and this may be more fully understood in Sir Walter Rawleigh's Safety and
Defense of People, etc. And God himself would not permit the Jews to continue
in the Land he had given them, unless they did not oppress the Stranger. Jer.
7. 6, 7.

1. As the Law of Naturalization debarrs us of any future Supply for all the
Strength and Trade, which this Nation loses in peopling our Plantations, and
repeopling Ireland; so it was the Reason that before we had our Plantations,
this Nation lost to the Dutch above 48000 pounds per An. in dyng and dressing
our Manufactures; and above 1646000 pounds per An. in the Fishing Trade; for
this Nation could have better and by half cheaper have maintained the Managers,
if this Law had permitted.

2. This Law is the Reason that those Multitudes of hands which are employed
abroad in our Woollen Manufactures, are not employed here. So that by the
severity of many Laws against the Exportation of Wool, we restrain our Wool
from foreign Trade, and by this Law we exclude the World from working it here;
whereby our Wool becomes a drug and of no esteem, being neither well wrought at
home, and not permitted in foreign Trade.

3. This Law is the Reason that in our Tin and Lead we are the only Drudges to
work it out of the Mines, whilst all parts of the World but our selves, improve
Trade, and grow rich by Manufactures thereon.

Corollary. 3.
By the same Reason the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are so much
more diminished by how much they might be supplied by those hands, and so much
Money as is diverted from them in relief of idle persons by the Statute of the
43 of Eliz. intit. Who shall be Overseers for the Poor, their Office, Duty, and
Accounts.

Annotations.
Reader, That the Mischiefs and Inconveniences which have ensued this Law may
better appear, take with thee these Considerations. First, That God has made
Man to eat his bread in the cares of Mind, and sweat of his brows; that man
therefore who neither cares nor labors, has no reason to expect that he shall
have any thing to care for. Secondly, Consider that the Nation was much more
inhabited when this Law was made, than now. From hence then, Reader, take a
Prospect of the Inconveniences, which have ensued this Law.

1. That where pure Necessity does not require, it inverts the end which God
has by Nature made, viz. That where Man does not care for and govern, he
should eat his bread by Labor and Industry.

2. That notwithstanding our great loss and want of men, for the reasons
beforesaid, these idle persons provided for by this Act, are so more a loss to
the Nation than if they had never been, by how much the Nation loses in
maintaining, and providing for them: and this is increased to such a height
that notwithstanding the want of men, more now than when this Law was made, yet
the charge of maintaining poor people in very many Places is 6, 7, 8, 9 fold
more than before: and what the further consequences hereof will be, if not
prevented, is most worthy the consideration of the Parliament.

3. It is a discouragement to all industrious and laboring people, when lazy
and idle people shall be maintained in their idleness from the fruits of their
Labor and Industry.

4. It encourages wilful and evil disposed persons to impose what wages they
please upon their labors; and herein they are so refractory to Reason and the
benefit of the Nation, that when Corn and Provisions are cheap, they will not
work for less wages than when they were dearer, so as it often happens that one
days indifferent labor, shall maintain these persons three or four days after
in Idleness; which if this Law had not been, might have been for a reserve to
support themselves and families in adversity and sickness.

5. As sundry Laws provided against wandering Beggars and Vagabonds, so this Law
provides for, and relieves stationary Beggars.

6 This Law is the principal, if not the only reason of the excessive wages of
servants as well as laborers; in making Provision for such, who will neither
serve, nor labor.

7. From this Law therefore it is principally (and for the want of good
education of the governing part of the Trade of the Nation, of which we shall
treat hereafter) that as Mr. Mun observes in his excellent treatise of
England's Treasure by Foreign Trade, cap. 19. that the English Nation is
reproached commonly among strangers for the multitudes of People which in
England Cheat, Roar, Rob, Hang, Beg, Cant, Pine and Perish; which otherwise
might help to increase and maintain the Wealth and strength of these Kingdoms,
especially by Sea, for our own safety and terror of our enemies.

8. The charity which might be employed in the releife of truly impotent and
aged people is heerby abated and diminished.

Corollary. 4.
By the same reason the Trade of England and the Fishing Trade are so much more
diminished, by how much they might be supplied by those lazy and idle persons,
who are diverted from them, by living upon Wastes, Commons, Chases and Forests.

Annotations.
So as this difference is between these persons, and those maintained by the
43. El. 2. that as those are maintained by the loss of the Nation; so these are
maintained to no benefit of it: but are dangerous as well to the Nation, as
Government of it. This appeas by the Riots and Tumults, which they make upon
all Endeavors of Improvments, notwithstanding compensations are made double
and treble to the value of what they reaped thereby. The number therefore of
these kind of persons increasing, which daily does, as well by a succession of
those who are born upon such places, as otherwise, and being at liberty to work
or not, the Government will be so much more endangered by how much they are
increased; and so much more by how much less these Commons, Chases, Wastes, and
Forests can maintain them; to supply which, breaking Hedges, cutting Woods, and
stealing Fowl, etc. are the usual means by which they make up their living.

How advantageous it would be to the Trade of the Nation, if all these idle
hands were employed in it; and how great a Revenue might be raised out of these
Wastes, if they were improved and employed in Trade, and binding out Prentices,
and in defraying Public charges, were most worthy Consideration of the
Parliament.

Corollary. 5.
By the same reason, the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are so much
more diminished, by how much they might be supplied by those persons, who are
diverted form them in being hanged.

Apology.
I do not dispute the Authority of any Law in this Corollary, or in any
Corollary or Proposition in this discourse; I only contend that the ends
designed by Legislators, are not always attained; and therefore Anciently our
Ancestors were so careful of preparing Laws, that they usually made them not
longer lived than the end of the next Session of Parliament; so that, if the
end designed by them were not attained, the Laws themselves should expire. The
end of punishing Malefactors is twofold, viz. to deter others from Committing
Crimes, and for the Offender to make Restitution so far as he is able. But I do
not understand that the end of punishment is to destroy, where murder or a
higher Crime is not the offense. Nor is Hanging, which is transient, so
Permanent a Terror to offenders, as a constant inflicting extraordinary duties
upon Offenders, whereby they might, or in a great measure might expiate their
Crimes by satisfying the persons Offended. Nothing in nature but by some means
or other might be made beneficial, sure therefore much more man; nor does man
distroy in any thing else, but on the life of Man, where any other means can be
found to preserve, and the end, in making restitution, is holy lost.

Corollary. 6.
By the same reason, the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade, are yet so
much more diminished, by how much they might be supplied by those men, who are
diverted from them, in being imprisoned for debt.

Annotations.
Herein moreover is the end designed in Punishing Offenders inverted, for in
being committed prisoners, the means which is thereby spent in paying Fees to
Jaylots, is inverted from that end to which it might have been employed toward
the Payment of his Debts; and the persons of the Prisoners made useless any
ways by labor or industry to contribute to the satisfaction thereof.

Corollary. 7.
By the same reason the Trade of England, and Fishing Trade are so much
diminished, by how much money and so many men as are diverted from supplying
them in buying and morgaging Land.

Pet. 5. For money is a convenient mean to improve Trade.

Annotations upon this Corollary.
Before we contended that the Law against Naturalization, makes the Kingdom
weak and unable to improve the Trade thereof; in this Corollary we complain of a
practice against Law and Conscience too. For by the Statute of Westminster, 2.
made the 13. Edw. 1. c. 4. it was provided that Estates in Tail should remain
to the Donee, and his Heirs according to the form of the gift of the Donor, and
for want of issue of the Donee, to revert to the Donor and his Heirs: And that
Fines levied upon such claims be void. Yet by what practice or usage Fines
come to Bar Heirs in Tail; and recovery of those in remainder I cannot tell. I
am sure the Will of the Donor, (which in Conscience ought religiously to be
observed,) is hereby violated: And all that money which is expended in Buying
and Morgaging such Lands, is diverted from the good use by which it might be
employed in Trade; besides the multitudes of mischiefs, which arise in
vexatious Suits between Vendor and Vendee, Morgager and Morgagee, to the utter
undoing one another; whereby multitudes of Solicitors, Bankers, Usurers, and
Scriveners, (who no ways advance the Trade of the Nation) become vastly rich,
whilst the Trade of the Nation hereby becomes starved and neglected, and by
consequence the Nation so much poorer. By reason hereof the Stock of this
Nation supposing it double to the Dutch; yet do I not believe one sixth part so
much is employed by us in Trades beneficial to the Nation, as by them; and I
wish this Quere were determined, Whether from this cause the Bankers and
Scriveners of London cannot raise more Money, in one week, than the Parliament
of England can in two years?

How many ways this Kingdom might be enriched, and the Trade thereof increased,
if the Statute of Westminster. 2. made 13. Edw. 1. c. 1. were observed.
1. The Will of the Donor (which by all Laws of Religion and Gratitude ought
religiously to be observed) would not be violated, for which we may justly fear
the Judgments and Vengeance of God.

2. The vast and wild Prodigality of vain men and women, would be restrained
within the bounds of their Estates: And the impoverishment, which they bring
upon the Kingdom by their Pride, Vanity and Luxury, in a very great measure
would be abated.

3. The Families of the Nobility and Gentry, would hereby be preserved and
continued.

4. The multitudes of Solicitors, Bankers, Scriveners and usurers, who row
swarm more than ever, and devour all the good of the Nation, but no ways do any
good to it, would diminish, and these very men be necessitated, to seek some
better means of subsistence, whereby the Kingdom might receive benefit, now we
so much want hands to advance the Trade of the Nation.

5. The Supernumerary Pages, Lacquies, and Waiting Women, who are Moths to fret
and consume their Masters and Ladies Estates, might be employed in ways
beneficial to the Kingdom.

6. The Stock of the Nation to be employed in beneficial Trades would be
tenfold more employed in them.

7. The Riches acquired by Trade; would continually be employed in it, as well
as in the United Netherlands.

8. The Interest of Money without a Law, would fall to be as low, as in the
United Netherlands.

9. Men would be more intent to improve their Estates, when they know what they
must betake themselves to; and may more securely follow their business, than
when they are engaged in Law Suits about Morgages and Titles of Land.

Reader thou may add many more, but if any man shall give me one for not
observing this Law, I will give him all my nine.

Proposition. 2. Theorem. 2.
The Timber of England is diminished, and is in danger to be destroyed, by the
Act of the 12. Car. 2. 18. and confirmed 13. Car. 2. 18. Entitled An Act for
Encouraging and increase of Shipping and Navigation; and commonly called the
Act of Navigation.

Subject, Is the Timber of England.

Question. Whether it be diminished by the Act of Navigation? I say it is.

Ax. 2. For where any thing is wanting and decayed, that thing will be more
diminished, if the means of supplying it be interrupted.

Pet. 4. But the Timber of England was wanting and decayed before the Act of
Navigation.

Pet. 17. And the means of supplying the Timber of England, is interrupted by
the Act of Navigation.

Therefore the Timber of England, is diminished by the Act of Navigation. Which
was to be demonstrated.

Annotations upon this Proposition.
It is now above 120 years since the making of the Act of 35. of H. 8. 17. when
without all question the Timber of England, was above five times more than now
it is; yet notwithstanding the heat and distemper of those times, so vigilant
were our Ancestors in the preservation of the Timber of this Nation, (the best
For Shipping in the world) that though they did not foresee all ways for
preserving and increasing it; yet they saw that the great decay of it, was
universally such in England, that unless speedy remedy in that behalf were
provided, great and manifest likelihood of scarcity, and lack of Timber for
building, making, repairing, and maintaining Houses and Ships would be; for
prevention whereof several provisions were made; but never put (or at least not
in my memory) in execution. Which is the fate in many of the Laws of these
times. Queen Elizabeth, a Lady of incomparable Prudence and Foresight, and more
jealous of the Honor and Safety of this Nation, than any of her Ancestors or
predecessors) as one of her chiefest cares, in the first year of her Reign, for
the Preservation of the Timber of England, gave free liberty to all men, as
well Subjects as Strangers, freely to Import Masts and Raff. Notwithstanding
this provision, this vigilant Queen, taking notice of the great decay of Timber
occasioned by converting the same into cloven board, did, in the 35. of her
Reign, cap. 11. Ordain, that every stranger which should ship, carry, or
Transport Bear, or Fish (except Herrings) in Cask, should before such
Transportation; and every Subject which should Transport Beer or Fish before,
or within four months aster, for every six tuns of Beer or Fish, should import
from parts beyond the Sees, 200 of clapboard fit to make Cisk to contain three
foot and two inches in length at least, upon penalty of forfeiture of such
Fish, Beer, and Cask. Yet though both these laws stand now in force, and the
good and safety of the Nation be so much concerned in them; the Act of
Navigation makes it forfeiture of Ship, Goods and Guns to import any Raff,
Masts, Timber, or Clapboard, unless by English ships (though the English since
the Rumps first institution of the Law have not built one ship for this Trade,
nor ever will so long as it stands in force) and sailed by English, and the
Natives of the place, whether the Natives have ships or not. So that if an
English man, Dutch man, Hamburger, or any Easterling Trade for beer or fish,
and do not import the clapboard prescribed by the 35 Eliz. 11. the goods and
cask are forfeit: But if they do import clapboard, the ship and goods and guns
are forfeit by the Act of Navigation.

I have often heard my Father complain of the vast destruction of our Timber by
converting the same into Clapboard, whereby all the best of our Timber is
consumed; for when any Oak will rend, or so far as the ground end will rend,
Rift bearing about a third penny more price then if it were sawn into planck,
the converter intending his profit converts it into Rift; and that if he could
ever see a Parliament wherein he could ever hope to do any good, he would bring
in a Bill to prevent the destruction of our Timber hereby.

Old Oliver entertained this Law but coldly, but however he were otherwise more
careful of his own Interest than of the Nations; yet he permitted the English
Merchants to trade in Foreign Bottoms for Timber, whereby he was not only better
and cheaper supplied than the Nation has since been, but he enforced the King
of Denmarks Subjects to sell their ships built for that Trade, and wherewith
they used to impose what terms they pleased upon the English, being better and
cheaper supplied than they could.

Consequences of this Proposition.
Besides the mischiefs and inconveniences which have come upon this Nation by
not observing the Law made the 35 of Eliz. 11. these inconveniences have ensued
the Act of Navigation, in reference to the Trade of Timber, which were proved
before a Committee of the House of Commons last Session of Parliament.

1. Before the Rump made this Law, the Trade to Norway for Timber, was
generally driven by the English in better of our growths and Manufactures;
whereas now it is driven in Dollars and the Treasure of the Nation; and those
Growths and Manufactures of England which are exported into Norway are rarely
exported but by Norwegians.

2. That the prizes of Norway timber were become near double.

3. That our own Timber was much wasted by reason of the dearness of Norway.

4. That we had not built one ship for that Trade since the Law, nor could ever
hope to do so long as it stood in force, because a foreign ship may be built for
half the price, and be more free for Trade; whereas the Norwegians had doubled
their shipping; and built them twice as bigg; and from 600 Mariners, increased
them to 6000; whereby the English in a short time must necessarily be excluded
the Trade of Norway, unless he drive it by Norwegians, and in Norway bottoms.

5. That the English are now almost wholly laid aside, the Trade of Norway
being generally driven in Norway bottoms and those sailed by Norwegians.

6. That the English are wholly left to the King of Denmarkes disposing,
whenever he pleases to impose any further abuses upon them than were complained
of; which were that the English ever since 1646. and by the treaty made with
his Majesty 1660. paid of a Rixdollar per Last for the growths of Norway
(except the Town of Bergen) but since the late War with them, they paid custom
for Timber a Rixdollar and half per Last, for other growth, a Rixdollar and,
others 2 Rixdollars and, and others 3 Rixdollars, and in measuring the Lastage,
the same ships which before the War had their measures adjusted were raised
some 35 others 40 Lasts.

7. That it was the Interest of the King of Denmark to make the Trade of Norway
insupportable to the English, for thereby as the case stood his Subjects would
monopolize the Trade, yet could no redress hereof be had, until in the years
1667, 1668. his Majesty permitted his Subjects to Trade in Foreign Vessels, and
strangers to import Timber; and this reduced the Exorbitant Impositions of the
King of Denmark to the Treaty of 1660, or otherwise he would have undone his
own Subjects in that Trade, as they were in the time of Oliver.

I insist more particularly hereon, because that by the scarcity and waste of
our Timber by reason of this Law, and which must be in a vast measure increased
in rebuilding the City of London, the French and Dane will have in their own
Dominions, and the Dutch may have down the Rhine, Maze, and Scheld out of
Germany, Liege, and Lorrain, such Quantities of Timber, as between any of them
and us will be no proportion; and what the fatal consequence hereof will be to
this Nation, if no care or provision be had, I almost tremble to consider.

Proposition, 3. Theorem, 3.
The Building Ships in England is hindered by the Act of Navigation.

Subject, is the Building Ships in England.

Quest. Whether it be diminished by the Act of Navigation? I say it is.

Ax. 3. For if the means of doing any thing be wanting, that thing will be so
much hindered, as the means of supplying it are diminished.

Pet. 16. But the Timber of England before the Act of Navigation was wanting
for Building Ships in England.

Pet. 14. And Timber is a necessary mean to build Ships.

Prop. 2. The Timber of England is diminished by the Act of Navigation.

Therefore the Building Ships in England is hindered by the Act of Navigation.
Which was to be demonstrated.

Annotations upon this Proposition.
It is agreed upon by all men that the Timber of England is of all other the
best for Building Ships; but then it must be understood, that like choice may
be had in England, as in other places; and so long as we had as good choice in
our English Timber, as the Dutch, Dane, and French, we built better Men of War,
and stronger and more durable Merchants Ships, than any of them: But now all
the choice Timber of England is wasted and consumed; the Dutch, Dane, and
French bave equal choice as before, it is much to be feared that for the future
we shall not long enjoy this Advantage, but not be able without excessive
charge to build so good Ships as any of them.

Proposition 4. Theorem 4.
The Ships of England are diminished by the Act Navivigation?

Subject, is the Ships of England.

Question, Whether they he diminished by the Act of Navigation?

I say they are.

Ax. 3. For where the doing things are hindered, and the less and decay of those
things not otherwise supplied, these things will be diminished.

Prop. 3. But the building Ships in England is hindered by the Act of Navigation.

Pet. 19. And the loss and decay of Ships of England must not be supplied in
acquiring any Foreign Ships by the Act of Navigation.

Therefore the Ships of England are diminished by the Act of Navigation. Which
was to be demonstrated.

Annotation.
I do not understand how this Law makes good the title of it; For I am
confident at this day is not one half of the Shipping in England, take prize
ships into the reckoning, (which I guess to be above 4 times more than the
Englesh lost in both the late Dutch wars) In Ispwich are somewhat above one
third of what were, when the Rump instituted this Law; At Woodbridg not one
third; and at Alborough, Dunwitch, Walderswick and sold not one fourth, as
were before this Law. And I wish some man would take pains to make further
inspection herein to prove me mistaken.

Proposition 5. Theorem 5.
The Navigation of England is hindered by the Act of Navigation.

Subject, The Navigation of England.

Question, Whether it be hindered by the Act of Navigation?

I say it is.

Ax. 2. For the doing things will be so much hindered, as the necessary means of
Doing them is Diminished.

Prop. 4. But the Ships of England are diminished by the Act of Navigation.

Pet. 3. And ships are necessary in Navigation.

Therefore the Navigation of England is hindered by the Act of Navigation. Which
was to be demonstrated. So as we can neither build ships, nor can we buy;

Annotations.
Nor must any English man navigate any English built ship to trade to any part
of England, Ireland, or any of our Plantations, unless she be sailed by English
at least, under no less penalty than loss of Ship, Goods, Guns, Ammunition, and
Tackle; though it be evident the Coast of England be desolate and almost
uninhabited: and the Country as well as Coast is so thin of People, that it is
not half peopled. By the Act of 1 Eliz. 13. It was free for all men as well
strangers as Natives to import Pitch and Tar, which Law stands yet in force;
yet if by the Act of Navigation any English man, unless in English built ships,
and sailed by English import any; or any stranger not Natives, whether the
Natives have Ships or not, import any, the Ship Goods, Guns, Tackle and
Ammunition are all forfeit. So by the 1 Eliz. 13. All men might import hemp and
cordage paying strangers duties. Now if any English ship import any hemp or
cordage and be not sailed by English at least she is forfeit etc. nor must any
stranger not Native upon any less penalty: Yet it is evident that the
Inhabitants of Leifland; from whence the best hemp (if not all) is to be had,
trade not with us at all.

Consequencies.
From whence it came to pass that in two years after the Rump, making this Law,
the building of ships became one third penny dearer; and Sea-mens wages so
excessive that we have wholly lost the Trades to Muscovy and Greenland thereby:
and from hence it is, that all Foreign Commodities, imported into England
(except in the Turkey Trade, and some Trifles from Guiney and the East Indies)
are consumed in England; whilst thereby we give the Dutch and other Nations a
power of driving the Trade of the World, where the Commodities are not English
or subject to the Crown of England.

Proposition 6. Theorem 6.
The Trade of England and of Fishing into Foreign Parts is hindered by the Act of
Navigation.

Subject, The Trade of England and of Fishing into Foreign parts.

Question, Whether it be hindered by the Act of Navigation? I say it is.

Ax. 4. For the doing things will be hindered so much, as the necessary means of
doing them are hindered.

Pet. 20. But Navigation is the only means of vending the Growths and
Manufactures of England, and Fishing in Foreign Trade, unless it be in Scotland.

Prop. 5. And the Navigation of England is hindered by the Act of Navigation.

Therefore the Trade of England and of Fishing into foreign parts is hindered by
it. Which was to be demonstrated.

Annotations.
Nor must any Foreign ship or vessel trade to England with any foreign
Commodities, unless in ships or vessels of that place or Country, and Navigated
by the Mr. and Mariners of the place at least, whether they have ship; or not;
So as now we have neither ships nor Mariners sufficient for our Trade, we upon
the Matter exclude the Trading Part of the World from Trading with us, from
whence these Consequences follow.

Consequences.
1. That the Growths and Manufactures of England to be exported in Foreign
Trade, are reduced to a few English Merchants, who may take what they please,
and at what terms they please; and leave the rest upon the poor Natives hands,
without any other possible means of Relief. So as our Native Commodities are
not valuable as if Trade were free, but as a few Merchants please to set a
price upon them.

2. As in our Native Commodities, so in Foreign, the Merchant and Natives of the
place may impose what rates they please; and in the mean time, we exclude
multitudes and concourse of men and Traders, which would infinitely advance our
Trade thereby; and now we complain for want of Trade, when as by this Law it
seem^ impossible to be otherwise.

3. As this Law makes a few Merchants Masters of all the Trade of England: so
it makes Mariners the Merchants Masters; for being but few, and the Merchant
being restrained to them, if he gives not them what wages they please, he must
not trade at all.

Annotations upon the Act of Navigation ingeneral.
1. The Title of this Act is an Act for encouraging and increase of shipping,
yet it restrains the Navigation of Engl. to English built ships, upon no less
penalty than confiscation; whereas for above 120 years the want and decay of
Timber has been complained of in Parliament: and how then this can be a means
to increase shipping, especially when we have so few builders; I shall be glad
to be informed. But the consequences of Laws of like nature have been observed
and reflected upon. For by the 4 H. 7. 10. No Gaseoyn wine, or Toulouse woad
was to Laws of like nature found by experience mischievous to this Nation.
be imported into England, but in Ships English, Irish, Welsh, or of the men of
Barwick or Callice, and the Mr. and greater part of the Mariners to be Subjects
of the Realm of England, upon pain to forfeit the said Wine and Woads; which
was supposed to be made for the maintenance of the Navy of this Realm; and that
the said Wines and Woad might be had at more easy prizes. The experience
whereof has ever since appeared to the contrary; for that the said Wines and
Woad were sold at such excessive rates as had not been before seen within this
Realm, and the Navy thereby never the better maintained, and therefore the
Stat. of 4 H. 7. 10. was repealed by the 5. and 6. Ed. 6 18. And liberty for
all strangers in Amity with the King, as well as Subjects, to import the said
Wine and Woad.

By the 5 R. 2 3. None of the Kings Subjects might carry forth or bring in any
Merchandise but only in ships of the Kings Allegiance; this was repealed by the
1 Eliz 13. because that by reason thereof there has not only grown great
displeasure betwixt Foreign Princes and the Kings of this Realm, but also the
Merchants have been sore grieved and damaged.

Though the 5 of R. 2. 3. did not permit the Kings subjects The impossibility
of Executing the Act of Navigation.
to trade but in ships of the Kings Allegiance; yet by the 6 Rich. 2. 8. where
no English ships were to be had, English men might trade in strangers; ships
and though by the 4 H. 7. 10. Gascoin Wine, and Toulouse Woad, might not be
brought into the Realm but by the English Ships, and English Merchants and
Mariners; yet if they could not have Fraught in an English or Denizens Ships,
they might fraught a Strangers; whereas by the Act of Navigation; though we
have not built one Ship for the Trades of Greenland, Norway, nor Muscovy, since
the Act of Navigation. Yet if we buy any, or Fraught any Strangers Ship for any
of the Trades, it is forfeit with all her Goods, Guns, Lading, Tackle, and
Ammunition. So that though we may possibly have some Trade to Norway for
Timber, when our Prize Ships are spent, upon such terms as the Norwegians
please and not otherwise: yet it will be impossible to have any Trade to
Muscovy or Groenland; for the Muscovite Trades not with us, and the Whales have
no Shipping at all.

Other Mischiefs and Inconveniences which have ensued the Act of Navigation.
The 17 Car. 2^ complains, that the Importation of Gunpowder from Foreign Parts,
was against Law prohibited, and All the mischiefs complained of 17 Car. 21.
brought upon us by this Law.
the making thereof within this Realm engrossed, whereby the price of Gunpowder
was excessively raised, many Powder Mills decayed, the Kingdom very much
weakened and endangered, the Merchants thereof much damnified, many Mariners
and others taken Prisoners, and brought into miserable Captivity and Slavery:
Many Ships taken by Turkish and other Pirates, and many other inconveniences
have from thence enseud, and more are like to ensue, if they be not timely
prevented; and therefore this Law permits the Trade free to Strangers, as well
as English to import Gunpowder: and though this Law stands yet in force, yet
against it and all the reasons in it, the Act of Navigation makes it no less
than confiscation of Ship, Goods, Guns, Tackle, and Ammunition for any English
man to import any unless in an English built Ship, and Sailed by English at
least, or for any Stranger, not Native of the making it, to import any, whether
he has Ships or not.

Prop. 7. Theorem 7.
The Trade of England is diminished by the Acts made 18. and 20. Car. 2.
against the Importation of Irish Cattle,

Subject, Is the Trade of England.

Question, Whether it be diminished by the Act against the Importation of Irish
Cattle?

I say it is.

Ax. 5. For every thing will be so much diminished, as is abated of it.

Pet, 21. But the Act against Importation of Irish Cattle, has abated the
Trade of England; with Ireland for Hops and Beer, and in Returns of Money by
Bills of Exchange, Cloth, Stuffs of all sorts, Hats and Stockings of all sorts,
Victualling Ships, etc.

Therefore the Act against Importation of Irish Cattle has diminished the
Trade of England. Which was to be demonstrated.

Annotations upon this Proposition.
The reason of this Act, is by the Preamble expressed to be the lowness of the
Rents of England, caused by the multitudes of Irish Cattle imported into
England. It is true, the Evidence of Fact, is ever resolved by the testimony of
Witness; but this is ever done without reason, and therefore for strengthening
the Authority of him who testifies, the Name of God is usually invoked, that
what is affirmed, is true; but in reasoning the Testimony of no man is more
than another, but as the Question in reason, is resolved by ante^edent Causes;
nor herein is any man allowed to outsware another, who gives a better reason,
by the 7. Pet. multitudes and concourse of people advance Trade, and scarcity
of people diminish Trade: and therefore if all men should affirm that a great
Trade should be made where people are scarce and thin, this should never
prevail with me, since it is against the nature of Trade; but on the contrary
where people are scarce and thin they are rude, Flat, Heathenish, idle, and
ever poor; and when they take great pains, which is very rare, for want of
Education it is to little purpose. By the first Proposition, The multitudes of
the English diverted into our Plantations, has diminished as well the Fishing
Trade as the Trade of our Native Growths and Manufactures; which is more
diminished by our re-peopling Ireland, since the late War and Massacre there;
and so much more diminished by how many extraordinarily died of the late great
Plague; and by the 6 Proposition, the Growths and Manufactures of England in
Foreign Trade are diminished by the Act of Navigation, and multitudes and
intercourse of Foreiners are excluded by it, whereby the Trade of England is
every way interrupted and diminished: And since the Rents of Land are valuable,
as the Trade of the place is; It is from hence that the Rent of Land is so
abated and fallen all over England, but much more since the Act against
Importation of Irish Cattle; so as the end designed by the Law, which was the
raising the Rents of Land, is so far from being attained, that from these
Reasons the Trade of England being more diminished by this Law; the quite
contrary has ensued.

One of the Reasons alleged by the Act entitled, An Act for the Encouraging
of Trade, made the 14 Car. 2. for the excluding Foreiners to Trade to our
Plantations, is, to hold a greater kindness and nearer Correspondency between
the English Nation and them; which reason of mutual kindness I am sure will
hold stronger between the English Nation and Ireland; for if we lose them, or
any of them, we lose no more than the Subjects in them, who unless it be in
reference to Trade, are of no use to England; whereas if by reason of this Act,
we lose Ireland, or any part of it, the safety of this Nation will be
endangered thereby.

If the Importation of Irish Cattle had abated the Rents of England one half,
and thereby the Commodities of England had been reduced to half the price; the
Nation had not been poorer thereby, however the Nobility and Country Gentlemen
who were in Debt, and the Poor Tenants who had Leases of their Farms, would
have been damnified and undone thereby: but in General, Navigation and the
Trade of the Nation would have been advantaged by it.

The Reasons in the Act of Navigation are good for England against Foreiners
Trading into our Plantations; and so is the restraining them from the Trade of
Ireland; for otherwise other Nations, especially the Dutch, would have reaped
more benefit by them than we should have done: but without question our
Plantations and Ireland too would have been much increased and enriched by a
Free Trade, more than by this restraint; and by like Reason the Trade of
England too would have been much more, and the Nation much more enriched than
now, if no restraint had been put upon the Trade by the Act of Navigation. For
by the Act of Navigation the greater Trading part of the World are excluded the
Trade of Ireland; and by the Act against Importation of Irish Cattle, upon the
matter the Trade between England and Ireland is interrupted and destroyed: and
here let us see the Consequences hereof.

Consequences.
The Imaginary Reason that the Importation of Irish Cattle caused the abatement
of the Rents of England is truly caused by the Act in the Southern and Eastern
parts of England: for the Northern People, Welsh, and Scots taking advantage of
this Law, have raised the price of lean Cattle so excessively, that very small
or no profit arises to the Graziers, when they are Fatted. So as before the
Act, we bought cheap and sold cheap, which was but reasonable; whereas now we
buy dearer and sell cheaper, which is intolerable.

2. Before the Act we could Victual Ships with good and substantial Food
cheaper than the Dutch, and upon all occasions the Dutch and French, and other
Nations when they were in our Harbors, did take a very considerable quantity
of our Provision; whereas since the Act the Dutch and French Victual much
cheaper in Ireland, than we can do in England; and in Holland and Zealand Irish
Beef I am told by Traders thither is sold for a penny a pound; so as having, as
the case stood, but one advantage above the Dutch, (besides the excellency and
conveniences of our Harbors) in Navigation; by this Law we have given the
Dutch a greater advantage over us than we had over them.

3. Before this Act, the Eastern and Southern parts of England did in a very
considerable manner supply Flanders, France, Portugal, and Spain with Butter,
which now we have interrupted the intercourse of Trade between England and
Ireland, we have thereby put the Irish upon necessities of making Butter, which
they do so much cheaper than is possible to be done in England, notwithstanding
the abatement of our Rents, that they supply Flanders and France much cheaper
than the English can; whereby our Trade for Butter and Cheese is become much
worse than that of Grazing of Cattle: and now the Irish have established these
Trades, much more advantageous to them than their Trade was to us with their
lean Cattle: I understand no remedy hereof, but they will increase their
advantages, and we must yet more continue losers.

4. Besides the abatement of our Native Growths and Manufactures, caused by the
Act against the Importation of Irish Cattle, as England was the Storehouse for
all sorts of Commodities coming from our Plantations, and other Foreign Goods,
as all sorts of Dying stuffs, Hides, Fruit, Sugars, Tobacco's, and of all sorts
of Silks as well wrought as unwrought, Ribbands, Gold, Silver, and Silk-Lace;
so the Trade with Ireland was driven by Commutation of the Product of the money
for their Lean Cattle; which being now interrupted, this Trade of England with
Ireland for these becomes proportionably lestened and diminished. Whereas now
they transport their Beef into France, Holland, Zealand, and Flanders, they
make returns in the Growths and Manufactures of those Countries; whereby the
Irish Trade is become as beneficial to them, as it was formerly to us.

5. His Majesty's Custom for the Lean Cattle is quite extinguished.

6. The Shipping and Mariners employed and built for this Trade, are by this
Act neglected, and made useless, about 100 Ships being before employed in this
Trade only.

7. That as before English Shipping was generally employed in the Trade with
Ireland, so the returns out of Ireland in Hides, Tallow, Wools, and Yarn into
Foreign parts was in English Shipping; whereas now we have not only lost the
Profitable Returns of these Commodities, but Foreign Ships are only employed in
these Trades.

Proposition 8. Theorem 8.
The Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are so much hindered, by how many
men, and so much money and stock as are excluded by Corporations.

Subject, The Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade.

Question, Whether they be so much hindered, by how many men, and so much money
and stock as is excluded by Corporations?

I say they are.

Ax. 6. For any business will be so much hindered, by how much the means of
improving it are excluded.

Pet. 13. But men are necessary to improve Trade, and Pet. 5. money is a
convenient mean to improve Trade; and Pet. 12. stock is a convenient mean to
improve Trade.

Therefore the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are so much hindered by
how many men and so much money and stock as are excluded by Corporations. Which
was to be demonstrated.

Annotations.
So as the Trade of England, and the Fishing Trade are diminished by our
American Plantations, by the re-peopling Ireland, and the late great Plague,
and our late Foreign and intestine Wars: It is hindered by the Act of Navigation
in Foreign Trade abroad, and the greater Trading part of the world are excluded
from Trading with us at home; and the greater part of the Nation excluded from
Trading at all, unless it be upon such terms as they cannot be any ways
encouraged in it: whereas in the mean time Supernumeraries of Solicitors,
Bankers, Scriveners, and Userers, who instead of Trading, divert all the means
of improving Trade, and engross (I am confident) above six times as much money
as is employed in Trades beneficial to the Nation; and I believe are more than
the free Trading part of the Nation.

For my part as I desire the good of the Nation in what I have said, free from
any passion or affection to any party or person; so do not I intend the
prejudice, but good of every Corporation: for if men, money, and stock be the
only means to enrich and strengthen any place, then every Corporation is so
much more capable of Riches and Strength, by how many more men, and so much
more money and stock is employed in Trade. The Dutch (who of all the world are
the most considerable, and richest, and most mighty by Trade) understand this;
and therefore Amsterdam (of all other places the most famous for Trade) is now
designed to be enlarged with free liberty for all the world to Plant and Trade
with them. In or about the years 1636. and 37. about 140 Families out of the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, forsook us and went into Holland, where the
Dutch did not only entertain them, but in Leyden, Alkmert, and other places,
planted them Rent-free, and Excise-free for seven years.

Corollary.
By the same reason Foreign Trade will be so much hindered, by how much the
means of Transporting money in it are excluded.

Pet. 13. For money is a convenient mean to improve Trade.

Annotations.
The Dutch, Venetians, and Florentines, who understand this, and have no money
of their own, freely permit the Exportation of money in Trade, and grow rich
thereby, and the King of Spain, who has all the Treasure of the West Indies,
upon the penalty of Death, etc. forbids the Exportation of it, grows poorer,
and can keep none. Mr. Mun (a man of excellent knowledge and experience in
Trade) in the 4th. Chapter, of Englands Treasure by Foreign Trade, affirms, he
knew a Prince in Italy (of famous memory) Ferdinando the First, great Duke of
Tuscany, who being very rich, endeavored thereby to enlarge his Trade by
issuing out to his Merchants great sums of money for very small profit: He
himself had of the Duke 40000 Crowns gratis for a whole year, although the Duke
knew it would be sent away in specie for the parts of Turkey, to be employed in
Wares for his Country. Afterward Mr. Mun affirms he knew Legorn so much
increased, that of a poor little Town it was become a fair and strong City,
being one of the most famous places for Trade in all Christendom. And yet it is
worthy observation that the multitude of Ships and Wares, which come from
England, the Low Countries, and other places, have little or no means to make
returns from thence but only ready money. See more herein in the said Chapter.
Though Trade may be maintained by barter of Commodities, yet he who Trades in
money and barter, shall have a vast advantage.

Proposition 9. Theorem 9.
In the Trade of England with France, the English Nation loses so much as the
value of the French Commodities imported exceed the English exported, which Mr.
Fortry affirms to be above 1600000 l. yearly:

Subject is, The English Nation.

Question, Whether it loses so much by the Trade with France, as the value of
the French Commodities Imported exceed the English Exported?

I say it does.

Ax. 7. For where the consumption of things Imported, does exceed in value the
things Exported, the loss will be as the excess is.

Pet. 2. But the English Nation consumes all the Commodities of France imported.

Pet. 3. And they exceed the Commodities of England Exported 1600000 l. a year,
if Mr. Fortry has truly computed it.

Therefore the English Nation loses so much as the excess is. Which was to be
demonstrated.

Annotations upon this Proposition.
Nor is this all the loss the English Nation sustains by the Trade with France;
for Trading for French Wines in the perilous Months for Navigation of
September, October, November, and December, we lose more Shipping and Seamen
in acquiring of them, than in all our other Trades besides; and in our
immoderate drinking of them, we more than ordinarily dispose our bodies to the
Strangury, Fevers, Gout, and Stone, when they are pure: and to so many more
Diseases as when they are so many ways sophisticated and adulterated by
Vintners; so that instead of drinking Health to the King of England, we drink
Sickness to our selves, and Wealth to the French King.

So that Reader thou may understand, what vast Revenues the English, and the
Dutch much more than the English, yearly bring into France by their Trade with
it. For though the Dutch Trade, (for Reasons hereafter specified) be not
managed to the loss of the Dutch, as the English is; yet I am confident, and
have it by good Authority, that if a true estimate were made of it, it would
appear to be above sixfold more beneficial to France than the English Trade is.
Sir Walter Rawleigh takes notice that the Dutch Trade into all Ports and Creeks
of France, we chiefly into 5 or 6, and in those the Dutch have 4 times the
Trade we have. So that if the French King can establish a Spice Trade, wherein
he is wonderously industruous, being King of a Flourishing Country, he will
have but little occasion to Export any Treasure, nor need he fear but the
English and Dutch will still continue carriers of all the Wealth they get by
Spain, and other places, into France.

Consequences.
From hence it is that the French King becomes so rich above any other Prince
or State in Christendom; and being Prince of a noble and brave Kingdom, which
abounds with most things conducing to the benefit of Humane Life, and very
fruitful of men, as well as other things; and having few considerable
Plantations to exhaust his men; he becomes not less Potent and formidable to
all Christendom, than Rich and Glorious. Nor can I ever hope (the Pride and
Luxury of the English, and the necessities of the Dutch, are such) to see this
vast increase of Wealth by the English and Dutch Trade with France to be
abated; and what the further consequences hereof will be in time, it is more
than time to be considered both by the English and Dutch.

Corollary.
By the same Reason the English Nation loses so much as the Canary Wines
Imported exceed in value the English Commodities Exported into the Canaries;
which if the value consumed be 260000 l. yearly, and our Commodities do not
amount to near 65000 l. yearly, we lose above 195000 l. by this Trade.

Pet. 22. For we consume all the Canary Wines Imported.

Pet. 23. And the Canary Wines imported, do exceed in value, the English
Commodities Exported.

Annotations upon this Corollary.
So as having lost those gainful and beneficial Trades to Muscovy, Groenland,
and Norway too upon the matter, which is not longer lived if things must stand
as now they do, than our Prizes taken in the late War last; having lost our
Fishing Trade, more worth than all our Trades besides; and the Turkey, Spanish,
and Guiny Trades, and up the Elb, are now no longer ours: the Dutch, unless in
the Turkey Trade, and up the Elb, are more Masters than we, and so in a short
time are like to be in these too. We flourish in the French Trade, and are so
solely possessed of the Canary Trade, as we admit of no competitor.

Consequences.
From this wild and vast expense by the English in the French and Canary
Trades, does follow a neglect and contempt of all our Native Cloth, Stuff, and
other Manufactures, and our Liquors; the French Silks, Fine Linen, and Lace
are preferred in all our Debaucheries: he is esteemed a Clown, if the excess be
not in Sack and Claret, etc. And what now can the poor Country man expect in
reward of all his labors, especially if he has a Lease, but to ruin himself
and Family, by his labor and pains, for others who by their Prodigality and
Luxury, undo themselves and the Nation as well as the poor men?

Lemma.
So as Reader thou may understand, (as Master Mun observes) that the Kings
Customs, and particular men may grew rich by a Trade, whereby the Nation is
impoverished: for Merchants, Vintners, Drawers, Exchange people, etc. grow
Rich, and live higher than other men; but the Nation droops, and in a very
short time will be beggered by them. Nor must you, Reader, take your Measures
of our Trade, by the rise and fall of the Kings Customs; for unless Trade be
freer here than in other places, and that the greatness of the Customs arises
from the greatness of the Trade, not the greatness of the Impositions, the
higher the Customs the worse the Trade; for all must be consumed in the place:
and though the Customs be now eight times more than in Queen Elizabeth's Reign;
yet being upon Tobacco's, Sugars, Wine, and French Toys, the Nation is so far
from being enriched thereby, that it is so much the poorer by how much men
debauch themselves by excess in them.

Apology.
I do not desire to be understood, as if I did intend any diminution to his
Majesty's Revenue by what is said of the height of Customs in this Lemma; and
therefore, though the influence, which height of Customs has upon Trade, and
the advantages, which the Dutch States reap by the lowness of their Customs be
the subject of another Propositition: Yet that I be not mis-apprehended, I say,
That if the Impositions, which are now paid in Customs were paid by way of
Excise, as they are in the United Netherlands, these benefits, his Majesty as
well as the Merchant would have. 1. His Majesty's Revenue, as the case stands,
would be as much as now, unless in Exportation by Certificate, which is not
much considerable. 2. As the Trade and Traders by the lowness of Customs would
increase, so would his Majejesties Revenue proportionably: whereas Trade
diminishing by the height of Customs, so must his Majesty's Revenue. 3. The
Duties imposed upon Customs, when they are high, excite men to use all means to
steal them, whereby they get so much as they conceal; whereas if the Customs be
low, men would not run like hazard to get little or nothing thereby. 4. The
Merchant would be free to employ his money he pays in Customs, in his Trade upon
occasions, as they are offered. But if so much as is imposed upon Exportation
by Certificate, were imposed upon the Customs, and the Customs as they stand
were collected by Excise, the Kings Revenue would be the same, and improvable
as Trade would thereby improve; and the Merchant have the benefit of employing
all the money he pays in Customs in his Trade.

From the lowness of Customs and height of Excise it is, that though the
English Nation be capable of a ten-fold greater Trade than the United
Netherlands, yet the Revenue the Dutch States acquire hereby, is above
threefold more than the Kings Revenue by Excise and Customs.

Epilogue.
THus Reader thou may understand, that though England be the most excellent
and convenient place for Trade of all others, yet our practice and ordering it,
is contrary to the nature of it; which ever flourishes most in convenient
places, where it is more free, and people more abound. The abundance of our
people (besides those which the hand of God has taken away) are diminished in
peopling our Plantations, and in re-peopling Ireland since the late War and
Massacre there: So as thereby the strength as well as Trade of the Nation is
abated proportionably: and yet as matters stand, we have interrupted our Trade
with Ireland: Nor can we for the future expect any great benefit from the Trade
to our Plantations for Tobacco's and Sugars. For the Dutch by the late Treaty
at Breda being possessed of Surinam, which yields better Sugars than our
Barbados, and may do in a much more inexhaustible manner, being upon the
Continent, and as good Tobacco's as our Virginia; and being better Masters of
Trade than we are, and having no Laws of Naturalization, to restrain them from
peopling it, and supplying themselves at home; we for the future can expect
little other comfort from our Plantations than to supply our selves with Sugars
and Tobacco's, but must leave the Dutch to enrich themselves with supplying the
world thereby. Already the Dutch, upon expectation of supplying themselves with
great quantities of Sugar and Tobacco's from Surinam, decline buying the Sugars
of our Plantations; whereby they are become a Drug, and fallen from 42 s. a
hundred, to 26. This puts the Sugar Bakers on new projects, viz. the boiling up
of Panellis Sugar to supply and serve instead of loose Lisbon Sugar, which was
the principal Commodity returned in lieu of our Bays, Says, Searges, and
Perpetuanoes, there vended in great quantities, and for want of returns by
exchange not to be there obtained, the value principally returned in Lisbon
Sugar; so as our Native Commodities in the Lisbon Trade too must in a short
time not fall only, but want vent.

As Ireland and our Plantations have exhausted our men, whereby our Trade and
strength is abated and diminished, so the Law against Naturalization debars any
future supply of other men from Planting with us; and the Law of Navigation
excludes much the greater Trading part of the world from Trading with us from
abroad, and our Corporations restrain our Trade to as few at home: so as Trade,
which ever flourishes in multitude and freedom, is by us, by all imaginable
ways circumscribed, taxed, and reduced to a few.

While we are contriving newer and more severe Laws against the Exportation of
Wool, and neglect the careful inspection and management of our Woollen
Manufactures, whereby they have lost their Reputation abroad; we put the world
upon necessities of supplying themselves elsewhere, and especially from
Ireland: whereby the Dutch not only partake with us in our Turkey Trade, and up
the Elb; but the Dutch and French in our own Markets in England have a free and
open Trade in Woollen Cloths and Stuffs; and in the mean while our Wool becomes
a Drug, and of no price or esteem at home: whereby, notwithstanding the
severity of all our Laws against the Exportation thereof, great quantities are
exported; and so will be until we establish such a Trade in our Woollen
Manufactures, that men shall be better encouraged to work them here than
elsewhere; for all men will rather venture their lives than lose their means of
living.

We neglect to give any encouragement in assisting Ingenuous and Industrious
men in any undertaking for the Public good. I give one instance in the County
of Suffolk, and here in Clerkenwel: The English during the late Dutch and
French War, did betake themselves to Weaving Poldavies, or Buck, which they did
make into double Buck, being two threads spun together, and made of our English
Hemp, (which Ipswich and Woodbridge men affirm to be better than any East
Country Hemp for this use) which made better Sails than any other, and did
manage a considerable Trade thereby, to the great benefit of Suffolk: but now
the Dutch and French Buck is sold somewhat cheaper (the English not being as
yet so much Masters of the Trade as the Dutch and French.) This Trade begins to
decline again, and to be neglected for want of some small Encouragement, which
might be done by some small Imposition, for some time upon the French and Dutch
Buck, until we should be enabled to work it as cheap, as it is in France and
Holland.

As we give no encouragement to our industrious Natives, so we utterly
discourage all industrious Foreiners from improving and increasing Trade. I
need not here repeat the discouragement put upon the Silk-throwers by the
Corporation and Company of London, wherein near 20000 people are employed;
though the first introduction of Silk-throwing was by a Foreiner, the worthy.
Father of Sir Thomas Chamberlain, now a worthy Citizen of London, because the
Wisdom of Parliament has provided security for the Silk-throwers.

But though the Weaving Silk be as much or more advantageous to the Nation, yet
certain ingenuous and industrious French Artificers, who endeavored to
exercise their Trades last Summer in the Suburbs of London, were Indicted at
Hicks Hall, by certain of the Yeomanry of the Company of Weavers,
Commissionated by the Bailiff, Warden, and Assistants of the said Company, and
committed to the New-Prison in Clerkenwel; though the difference between the
said Company and the Protestant Strangers using manual Occupation, was upon the
Address of the French and Dutch Churches, depending before his Majesty and
Council. Nor could any relief herein be had, though his Majesty in Council the
29. of October last referred the business to the Lords of the Committee of
Trade, until his Majesty in Council the 10th. of November last, was pleased to
discharge them.

I need not here recite the benefits the Nation at this day reaps by the
permitting the Walloons to establish their Trades at Canterbury, Norwich,
Colchester, and other places: the Nation (at least the Southern and Eastern
parts) know they are the best Trades we have now left: Yet I cannot but take
notice that within the memory of man, the returns of Maidstone Market did not
amount to weekly above 30 l. whereas since, admitting about 60 Families of
Foreiners in the thread Trade, the returns are weekly now above 1000 l. to the
incredible benefit of the Lands, as well as all sorts of people adjoining.

How pernicious this practice of excluding Foreiners must needs be to the
Nation, as it now stands, if it be continued, is understood by his Majesty. And
the French King so well understands how much it will conduce to the advantage
of France to encourage the freedom of Trade, by entertaining all sorts of
Foreign Artificers, that in contradiction to all the Ecclesiastical Powers
opposing it, he has granted free liberty to all sorts of Foreign Artificers and
Merchants to exercise their Consciences in all Ports and places in his
Dominion, and to have Churches allowed them with equal or more Privileges than
his natural Subjects. Sure now it will be no ways prudent in us so to
discourage any herein, as to be entertained by the French King, as well as
Dutch.

So that all the good and beneficial ends designed by Trade, viz. of employing
all sorts of Impotent People, Women, and Children; of Strengthening, and
enriching our selves by Trade are quite inverted by us. For the Fishing Trade,
and the Trades of Making Dying and Dressing our Clothes and Stuffs, wherein all
sorts of poor people might have been employed, is lost and neglected by us,
whilst we intend the Newcastle Trade, the French, Canary, Turkey, East India
Trade, and to our Plantations, wherein only lusty men are employed, and the
Impotent People, Women, and Children are exposed to beggary, and the public
charge. Secondly, Ireland and our Plantations Rob us of all the growing Youth
and Industry of the Nation, whereby it becomes week and seeble, and the
Strength, as well as Trade, becomes decayed and diminished, I, and the Law
against Naturalization Bars us of any future supply. And thirdly, Our
Affluence, Luxury, and irregular management of Trade, renders us poorer, and in
a worse condition, than if we had no Trade at all.

So as here, Reader, thou may understand the reason of the decay and falls
of the Rents of Lands in England; for by the 11 Petition, the Rents of Lands
are valuable as the Trade of the place is: the Trade of England therefore being
diminished, the Rents of the Lands in England are consequently fallen and
diminished in proportion to it.

REASONS OF THE INCREASE OF THE Dutch-Trade. PART II.
Wherein is Demonstrated from what causes the Dutch govern and manage Trade
better than the English, whereby they have so far improved their Trade above
the English.
Petitions.
1. MEN labor more industriously in Trade, and upon easier terms in the United
Netherlands than in England.

2. The Dutch have down the Rhine, Maez, and Scheld, out of Germany, France,
Lorrain, Flanders, and other Spanish Provinces, greater quantities of Timber,
more choice, and upon less terms than can be had in England, but more since the
Timber of England is so much diminished by the Act of Navigation, and much more
when the City of London is rebuilt.

3. The Dutch have Pitch, Tar, Hemp for Cordage, Tackle, and Iron, in greater
quantities, and for less terms than the English can, out of Norway, Denmark,
and other Kingdoms within the Sound.

4. Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Tackle, and Iron are necessary means in fitting up
Ships for Navigation.

5. The Dutch build Ships for Navigation more conveniently than the English.

6. The Dutch acquire more Foreign Commodities in Trade out of Germany cheaper
and with more convenience, than the English do out of Scotland.

7. The whole world is Water and Land.

8. The Dutch pay less Customs for Foreign Commodities at home than the English.

9. The Dutch pay less Customs for Foreign Commodities in Foreign Trade, than the
English do.

10. The Dutch pay less interest for money, than the English.

11. The Dutch States are more conversant in Trade than the Council of State in
England, or any other.

12. The Dutch generally breed their youth of both Sexes in the Studies of
Geometry and Numbers, especially more than the English do.

13. The Study of Geometry and Numbers, is the best Education for understanding
Trade.

14. The Dutch States have equal or more means in Trade, than the Council of
State in England, or any other.

15. A Dutch Statesman is more interessed in Trade than a Counselor of State
in England, or any else.

16. Dutch Merchants and their Wives are generally more conversant in Trade
than the English.

17. Dutch Merchants have fewer impediments in Trade than English, and have
their Controversies in Trade sooner determined, and with less charge and
trouble.

18. The Dutch pay less Customs for their Domestic Manufactures in Foreign
Trade, than the English do.

Axioms or Common Notions.
8. Where men labor more industriously upon less terms upon any thing, this
thing is cheaper managed.

9. Any business which is more freely managed may be greatlier managed than if
it were more restrained.

10. More business is done by more means, and cheap, if the means be had upon
easier terms.

11. More business may be done by more means, and cheap, and more conveniently,
if the means be more convenient and cheaper.

12. Who buys cheaper than another, and more conveniently, may sell cheaper,
and with much more gain, if the charge be otherways less.

13. All things are either Foreign or Domestic.

14. They who are more conversant in any business, and better Educated in it,
may understand it better than another.

15. They who may understand any business better than another, may govern it
better than that other.

16. Where men are more interessed in any business, they are less subject to be
corrupted to the prejudice of it.

17. They who have fewer impediments in any business, and less charge and
trouble in it, may improve it better than another who has more.

18. The whole is equal to all parts.

TREATISE II.
Proposition 1. Problem 1.
HOW the Dutch manage a greater Trade at home than the English.

Subjects, Are the Dutch and English.

Question, How the Dutch manage a greater Trade at home?

Construction. By the 1 Pet. 1. the Dutch freely entertain men of all Nations
in Trade, and give them equal privileges with the natural born Dutch: By the 9
Pet. 1. The English by the Bar of Naturalization and freedom of Strangers
restrain the Trade of England to the English only. I say the Dutch may manage a
greater Trade at home,

Ax. 9. For any business which is more freely managed, may be, and is greatlier
managed than if it were more restrained.

Constable. But Trade is more freely managed by the Dutch at home than by the
English.

Therefore the Dutch manage a greater Trade at home, which was to be done.

Annotations.
From hence it is that the Dutch States without the danger of War, or putting
themselves into the power of fickle and unconstant Fortune, and by destruction
and devastation of other Countries, killing and making men miserable by poverty
and slavery, from no principles from within themselves, but by acquiring men
and means from other places, have attained the means (though all the United
Neatherlands do not in bigness exceed the County of York nor have half the
conveniences of that Country, except in numbers of people) to manage a greater
Trade at home than any other Country of the world. It is true, the times since
they became States have concurred much to their advantage herein; for
entertaining all sorts of persons, who, upon the account of either Religion or
Faction, forsook their Countries, they have been much more enabled to do this.
But the Province of Holland above all other, for no sort of people was denied
admission there; whereby Holland, as it is of more strength than all the other
Provinces, so it contributes 11/16 to all Public Taxes.

Whereas this Nation does not only lie under the restraint of the Bar of
Naturalization, and Ireland and our Plantations are always open to exhaust us
of our men: but besides the multitudes of English which are dispersed in other
places of the Netherlands, Rotterdam, Middleborough, and Flushing, are about
English, and of English Extraction. About the Years 1636. and 37. about 140
Families out of Norfolk and Suffolk forsook us, and Planted themselves in
Leyden, Alkmen, and other places of the United Netherlands, and there
established the Woollen Manufactures of those places, which at this day is as
much advantageous to the Dutch, and prejudicial to us, as Queen Eliz. (after
the example of K. Edward 3.) entertaining the Walloons, persecuted by the Duke
of Alva, and planting them in Colchester, Norwich, Canterbury, etc. was
advantageous to us, and prejudicial to the King of Spain: And sure it is worthy
the consideration of the Parliament how this may be prevented for the future.

One Thomas Tilham born at Martley in the County of Worcester, and formerly a
Surgeon in Warwick treated with the Elector Palatine of Rhine, about 6 years
since to bring in a Colony to Inhabit, and establish Woollen Manufactures in
the Palatinate; which the Prince allowing, the said Tilham has brought in a
Colony of, its believed, between 2000 and 3000 men, who now manage a Trade upon
Woollen Manufactures; and for Tilhams Reward herein, the Prince has made him
Commander of them. Many of these people came to Tilham out of Essex and
Suffolk: One Skip of Herefordshire is gone to him with some people; so are
several others out of those parts.

So that, though all Princes as well as States almost understood the wealth and
strength which attends a Domestic Trade, as well as the Dutch; Yet we only of
almost all the world are so careless herein, that we neither care for
increasing our Domestic Trade, nor to restrain our Artificers from betraying
the mystery of ours: though the free admission of People of all Nations was the
first Principle of the Greatness of the Dutch Domestic Trade, and the
restreining our Domestic Trade to the English only, is the first Principle of
the Decay of ours.

Prop. 2. Theorem 1.
The Dutch manage Trade cheaper in the United Netherlands than the English do
in Engl.

Subjects, are the Dutch and English Nation.

Question, Whether the Dutch manage Trade cheaper?

I say the Dutch manage Trade cheaper.

Ax. 8. For where men labor more industriously and upon easier terms upon any
thing, this thing is cheap managed.

Pet. 1. Lib. 2.
But Men in the United Netherlands labor in Trade more industriously and upon
easier Terms, than in Engl. Pet. 1. lib. 2.


Therefore the Dutch manage Trade cheaper in the United Netherlands, than the
English do in England. Which was to be done.

Annot.
As the Law against Naturalization is the reason, why the Dutch in the United
Netherlands, manage a greater trade, than the English do in England, so is it
the reason, that Trade is cheaper managed there than in England. For if the
Trade of England being managed by reason of this Law by English men only, who
by reason of our Plantations, the Repeopling Ireland, the late great Plague,
and our late Wars are thin and very few, if you will have any work in Trade
done, you must do it as the employed English please; or you must have no work
done: whereas if the Trade of England were as freely managed as in the United
Netherlands, the English man then must work and be as industrious as other men,
or he must not work at all: This freedom of managing Trade in the United
Netherlands, as it increases the hands there, so it makes men more industrious
in Trade; for the multitudes of people concurring in Trade an emulation of
excelling one another is excited, whereby every man endeavors to excel the
other in some way or other; whereas in England, Trade being circumscribed by
the few English in it; they not only work dearer, but are careless in working.
Nor will I ever believe that Industry is restreined to English, exclusive to
other Nations. I cannot pass over how much the Trade of England. is at this day
bettered by Queen Eliz. prudent Entertaining the Dutch and Fleming, against the
Law of Naturalization; who not being able to endure the insupportable Tyranny
of the Dake of Alva, sought refuge in this Nation; where in Colchester,
Norwich, and Canterbury, they were planted, and there they brought in those
Trades, where at this day are the best we have left in England.

Prop. 3. Problem. 12.
How the Dutch may and do build more Ships for Navigation, and cheaper than the
English.

Subjects, are the Dutch and the English.

Question, How the Dutch may and do build more Ships for Navigation and
cheaper than the English?

Construction, The Dutch have down the Rhine, Maez, and Sceld out of Germany,
France, Lorain, Flanders and other Spanish Provinces greater quantities of
Timber, more choice and upon less terms than can be had in Engl: but much more
since it is so much diminished by the Act of Navigation, Prop. 3. lib. 1.
and must be yet much more in rebuilding the City of London. I say the Dutch
may build more Ships, etc.

Ax. 10. For more business is done by more means, and cheaper if the means may
be had upon easier terms.

But Timber is a necessary mean in building Ships, and 14. Pet. lib. 1.
Construction.
the Dutch have more Timber, more choice, and upon easier terms than the
English.

Therefore the Dutch may and do build more ships for Navigation, and cheaper
then the English. Which was to be done.

Annotations.
It was proved before a Committee of the House of Commons last Session of
Parliament, that the Dutch build ships of equal dimensions for one half the
English can; It is true that the goodness of our Timber heretofore when we had
sufficient, and choice, did in a great measure compensate the charge in
building Ships; in regard that Ships built of English timber were much more
Durable and strong: but now all our best Timber, is wasted and destroyed, and
must be more in rebuilding the City of London, our Timber not coming to
perfection in less then 150 years growth, if care were taken for the
Preservation and increase thereof, which I never hope to see; I do not
understand for the future how we shall possibly build so good Ships as either
Dutch, Dane, or French, for three times the price: And so Reader I leave to
thee to consider the fatal consequences like to ensue, upon this poor Nation
in this thing only.

Prop. 4. Probl. 3.
How the Dutch may and do fit up more Ships for Navigation, and cheaper than
the English.

Subjects, are the Dutch and English.

Question, How the Dutch fit up more Ships for Navigation and cheaper.

The Dutch have Pitch, Tar, Hemp for Cordage, and Tackle, Construction. 3 Pet.
lib. 2.
and Iron in greater quantities, and for less terms than the English can out of
Norway, Denmark, and other Kingdoms within the Sound. I say the Dutch may fit
up more Ships for Navigation, cheaper than the English.

Ax. 10. For more business may be done by more means and cheaper, if the means
may be had upon easier terms.

But Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Tackle, and Iron, are necessary means in fitting up
Ships for Navigation.

And the Dutch have more or greater Quantities of Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Tackle,
and Iron than the English, and upon easier Terms.

Therefore the Dutch fit and do up more Ships for Navigation, and cheaper than
the English. Which was to be done.

Annotations.
Here must I take notice that since the Rumps institution of the Act of
Navigation the condition of fitting up ships for Navigation in England is as
bad as the building of Ships, and that against the Act of the 1 Eliz. 13. which
stands yet in force. For by the 1 Eliz. 13. It is free for all men to import
Pitch and Tar in any Vessels; whereas by the Act of Navigation; if any English
man imports any Pitch, or Tar unless in an English built Ship, and sailed by
English at least, now we have neither men nor Ships to do it, the Ship is
forfeit, Goods, Guns, Ammunition, and Tackle: and so it is in a strangers Ship
who is not a Native of the place, whereby he may impose what terms he please,
or otherwise we must not have either Pitch or Tar at all: And our Condition for
Cordage and Tackle is much worse, for though we may have Pitch and Tar, upon
such Terms as the Dane and Swede please: yet it will be impossible in a short
time to have any Cordage or Tackle at all. For it must be imported by either
English men in English Ships, when we have neither men nor Ships to do it; or
by the Natives of the place, when the Inhabitants of Riga, Revell, Narve and
other places of Leifland, from whence all the best hemp (if not all) for
Cordage and Tackle comes, trade not with us at all.

Prop. 5. Problem 4.
How the Dutch may and do acquire more Foreign Commodities by Navigation,
cheaper and more conveniently than the English.

Subjects, are the Dutch and English.

Quest. How the Dutch, ut supr.

Construction. By the 3. Prop. 2. the Dutch may and do build more ships and
cheaper than the English, and by the 4 Prop. l. 2. they may fit up more ships
and cheap, and by the 5 Pet. 2. they build Ships more conveniently: I say the
Dutch etc.

Ax. 11. For more business may be done by more means and cheaper, and more
conveniently, if the means be more convenient and cheaper.

Constable. But the Dutch may, and do build and fit up more ships, more
conveniently and cheaper than the English.

And Ships are necessary means in Navigation.

Therefore the Dutch may and do acquire more Foreign 15 Pet. 1.
Commodities by Navigation cheaper and more conveniently than the English.
Which was to be done.

Annotations.
So that as the Dutch build and fit out Ships cheaper than the English, so they
build them more conveniently for Trade. For every Trade they build Ships,
whereas in England unless it be in the Island Trade (wherein I do affirm are
not one fourth part of the shipping in England, as was when the Act of
Navigation had its first birth) all Ships serve for all Trades, the Dutch here
in so far excel the English and all other Nations; that truly upon this
account, they can, notwithstanding the Impositions of the King of Denmark in
the Trade of Norway for Timber, supply any part of the world cheaper than the
King of Denmarks own Subjects, notwithstanding the Abundance of Timber and
Pitch and Tar, which so much abounds in Norway. This appeared in the time of
Oliver, who permitting the English to Trade for Timber, Pitch, and Tar in Dutch
bottoms, forced the Norxegians to sell the Ships they had built to Trade with
the English for want of Employment; so in the years 1667, and 1668. the Kings
permitting the English to trade in Dutch bottoms for Timber to Norway, and the
Dutch to import it; reduced all the excessive Impositions which the King of
Denmark had imposed upon the English before in that Trade, or otherwise he had
undone his own Subjects.

And as in this Trade, so in all others, they so excel in the convenient
building of Shipping; that Sir Walter Rawleigh in his observation on Trade,
which he dedicated to King James near 60 years since, affirms, if an English
Ship of 200 Tuns, and a Holland Ship of like burden be at Danske or any other
place beyond the Seas, they serve the Merchant cheaper by a 100 l. by reason
the Hollands Ship is sailed by 9 or 10 Mariners, and ours with near 30.
Notwithstanding we yet continue our old way of building Ships, and so must so
long as the Law against Naturilization stands in force; for the English know no
other; and if the English Merchant will not build as the English Carpenter
pleases, and his way, he must not Trade at all; for if he buys and Trades in
any Foreign Ship, she is forfeit, Goods, Guns, Ammunition and Tackle by the Act
of Navigation. So as the Dutch build Ships for half the price the English do,
and Navigate for half the price. From whence it follows,

Consequences.
That though the Dutch much more than double abound in Mariners above the
English, yet navigating with much less than half the hands, they may drive
above 4 times the Trade by Navigation than the English do; and building and
fitting up their Ships for half the terms do navigate for half the price: From
whence it is that though the Herrings (except red Herrings which cannot be
cured by them) and other Fish, be taken upon our Coast, the exportation of them
as free, as in the United Netherlands, yet cannot we supply any part of the
World so cheap as they; whereby they have only left us the Trade of red
Herrings, and to supply our selves by excluding them, from trading with us,
with white Herring.

Probl. 6. Theorem 12.
The Dutch may and do acquire more Foreign Commodities in Trade cheaper and with
more convenience than the English, in all the world.

Subject, The Dutch.

Question, Whether they may acquire? etc.

I say they may.

Ax. 18. For the whole is equal to all the parts.

Pet. 7. 2. But the whole world is Land and Water.

Prop. 5. 2. The Dutch acquire more Foreign Commodities by water cheaper, and
with more convenience.

Pet. 6. 2. And so do by Land.

Therefore the Dutch may and do acquire more Foreign Commodities in Trade
cheaper and with more convenience than the Englishs. Which was to be
demonstrates.

Prop. 7. Prob. 4.
How the Dutch may and do sell more Foreign Commodities at home and in Foreign
Trade, cheaper, more conveniently, and with much more Gain than the English.

Subjects, Are the Dutch and English.

Quest. How the Dutch? etc.

Construction, By the 6. Prop. lib. 2. they acquire more foreign Commodities in
Trade, cheaper, and with more convenience; And Pet. 1. lib. 2. the Dutch pay
less Customs for Foreign Commodities at home and in Foreign Trade, and 10. Pet.
2. they pay less interest for money.

I say the Dutch sell, etc.

Ax. 12. Who buys cheaper than another and more conveniently, may sell
cheaper, and with much more Gain, if the charge be otherways less.

Construction, But the Dutch buy more Foreign Commodities cheaper, and more
conveniently; and their charge is otherwise less in paying less customs and
less interest for money.

Therefore the Dutch may and do sell more Foreign Commodities cheaper, more
conveniently, and with much more Gain then the English. Which was to be done.

Annotations.
Pay less Customs, By reason whereof principally the Dutch do not only thrive
by the Trade with France, but upon the matter their whole Trade is founded in
it: For without the Salt of France the Dutch could not Fish: and by the Fishing
Trade, the Wine, Salt, and Brandies of France, they drive their Trades into
Germany, the Northern, and North-east Countries; from whence they draw those
Commodities, whereby they are enabled to drive their Trades to Spain, into the
Streights; and to the East and West Indies; whereas by the benefit of our Money
and Commodities we are only enabled to lose about 1600000 l. a year, if Mr.
Fortry has truly computed it.

Nor is this all the Benefit the Dutch receive by the smalness of their
Customs, which Sir Walter Rawleigh affirms not to be the 19 part so much as the
English, (though in truth they are much less) yet by this means they draw all
Nations to Traffic with them; and though the Duties they receive be but small;
yet the multitudes of all sorts of Commodities brought in by themselves and
others, and carried out by themselves and others, is so great that, they
receive more Customs and duties to their State in one year by the Greatness of
their Commerce than England does in two by the greatness of their customs.

And as this Monarchy by reason hereof has lost the Trade to a Commonwealth,
so by reason hereof a Commonwealth in Italy has lost their Trade to a
Monarchy. For the State of Genoa imposing Customs upon 16 per cent. upon all
Commodities imported, the Duke of Florence takes the advantage thereof by
making Legorn a Free Port; whereby it is become one of the most famous and
flourishing Towns in Europe: And the Genoans are forced to turn Usurers, upon
what they had got before. And this year the King of France in probability has
laid a foundation to undo Legorn by making Marselles a free Port.

The King of Sweden, within the memory of man, made Gottenburg a Free Port for
7 years, which at this day has established such a Trade there, that of a poor
and unregarded Village, it is become the most flourishing Town of Trade in the
North, or North-East. Here Reader let me desire thee to partake some part of my
Grief, in beholding such unsafe and barred Ports as Gottenburg, and all those
of the United Netherlands to be by means of their freedom so Rich and
Flourishing; whereas our most excellent, noble, and safe Harbors, (but
especially Falmouth which Cambden prefers before Brundusinus, or any other, and
for its excellency and convenience, deserves to be the Store house of
Christendom, yet has scarce a Cock-boat belonging to it) are all neglecte and
passed by, by reason of the height of our Customs, the Laws of Naturalization
and Navigation.

Pay less Interest for money. By reason whereof the Dutch may preserve stores of
all sorts of Commodities, and at any time sell them cheaper than the English,
who pay more Interest for money. Sir Walter Rawleigh affirms that Amsterdam is
never without 700000 Quarters of Corn; besides the Plenty they daily vent; and
that a Dearth of Corn in England, France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, or other
places enriches Holland 7 years after: whereas we are only permitted to sell
it, when cheap, to the no benefit of England, and to buy it when dear, to the
impoverishing of us. Besides, it is impossible, when two or more Ships are
employed in any voyage, the one paying after the rate of 4 per cent. the other
6, if otherwise their charge be equal, that upon equal terms they can sell
their Commodities, upon equal profit.

So that though the height of Customs and Interest of money, do both prejudice
Trade, where it relates to any other place where either are less or lower; yet
the height of Interest is more insupportable, in that it every day increases;
whether it be in preserving Stores, or in reference to the length of Voyages in
Foreign Trade. And whereas the public Revenue is augmented by the height of
Customs, yet to the prejudice of Trade; so Trade is more prejudiced by the
height of Interest, without any advantage to the public Revenue. Nor does the
mischief of height of Interest money end here, but it has a like bad influence
upon building, and fitting out Ships, where no Custom is paid: So as a Dutch
Ship of equal Dimensions, may be built and fitted out to Sea for half the terms
an English Ship can: and this Ship thus built and fitted up for half the terms,
is sailed with half the hands; so as this charge being both ways double to the
English, and the English paying Interest more, the English Merchant labors
from hence, in a threefold charge more than the Dutch Merchant does, and this
not to be at one time discharged as Customs are, but ever to be imposed upon
the Ship so long as she lasts: from whence a will necessarily follow, that if
our Customs were lower than the Dutch, yet if the Interest of money be in
proportion higher, the Dutch may and will hereby only maintain the Trade of the
world exclusive to the English.

Corollary.
By the same reason the Dutch may sell more Domestic Manufactures at home, and
in Foreign Trade cheaper, and more conveniently than the English, and with much
more gain.

For by the 2 Prop. lib. 2. Trade is cheaper managed in the United Netherlands
than in England: and Prop. 1. lib. 2. It is more managed there than in England:
And 18 Pet. 2. The Dutch pay less Customs for their Domestic Commodities in
Foreign Trade.

Prop. 8. Theorem 3.
The Dutch may sell more Commodities in Trade, than the English, cheaper, more
conveniently, and with much more gain.

Subjects, Are the Dutch and English.

Question, Whether the Dutch may and do sell, ut supra?

I say they may.

Ax. 13. For all things are either Foreign or Domestic.

Proposition 7. 2. But the Dutch may sell more Foreign Commodities at home and
abroad, cheaper, more conveniently, and with much more gain than the English.

Corollary.
And may sell more Domestic Manufactures at home, and in Foreign Trade,
cheaper, more conveniently, and with much more gain.

Therefore the Dutch may and do sell more Commodities in Trade, cheaper, more
conveniently, and with much more gain than the English. Which was to be
demonstrated.

Annotations.
They do it, and have done it, and are thereby become the greatest Prodigy that
ever the world brought forth. For let any consider them in their first
principles, being inconsiderable either for Number or Quality from their first
rise, to be opposed by the most powerful Monarch in Christendom for near 80
years together! and from no principles of Trade from within themselves, nor
having scarce a piece of Ground to build one house upon, nor one stick of
Timber, or scarce one handful of Hemp, Pitch, Tar, or Iron, to build or fit out
a Ship; and notwithstanding their constant Wars with Spain, to engage and
undertake so many Wars against the Swede, Dane, Portugal, and in the East and
West Indies? To build so many fair and stately Cities beyond any other part of
the World, and all this in less than 100 years; and at this day to manage a
greater and more gainful Trade than all the world: whereby their Wealth is
inestimable, and all this in contradiction to seeming impossibilities. Nor is
their strength and power at Sea less terrible, than their wealth inestimable;
and at this day all the Affairs almost of Christendom are transacted at the
Hague: Queen Eliz. a Princess of most excellent Prudence and foresight, though
she were careless in hindering them in the progress of their Trade, yet was
very vigilant in restraining their strength by Sea: nor would she permit them
to build many Men of War, and those not considerable; whereby without any
control she kept them in perfect subjection at Sea. After King James loved
peace, and his Book so well, that he did not restrain their rising power by
Sea. K. Charles (of Sacred memory) foresaw the danger of it, and would have
restrained it, but it pleased God he reigned in such perverse times, that he
either was not, or, which was worse, could not be understood by his Subjects:
so as now their power at Sea is swelled to such a prodigious greatness, as it
is a question whether it can be controuled by all the power in the world; and
what the consequences hereof will be, only God knows. I do not believe the
Dutch intend us any good by it.

Prop. 9. Problem 6.
How the Dutch States may and do understand Trade better than the Council of
State in England, or any other.

Subjects,. Are the Dutch States, and the Council of State in England, or any
other.

Question. How the Dutch States? etc.

Construction, By the 11 Pet. 2. The Dutch States are more conversant in Trade,
and by the 12 Pet. 2. The Dutch generally breed their Youth of both Sexes more
in the Studies of Geometry, and Numbers especially than the English. I say the
Dutch, ut supra.

Ax. 14. For they who are more conversant and better Educated in any business
may understand it better than another.

Construction, But the Dutch States are more conversant in Trade than the
Council of State in England: and the Dutch generally breed their Youth of both
Sexes better for understanding Trade.

Therefore the Dutch States may and do understand Trade better than the Council
of State in England, or any other.

Apology.
I am so far from intending any diminution by this Proposition to the Regal
Authority in this Nation, or any oblique aspersion upon his Majesty's Privy
Council; that I do affirm no one thing could conduce more to the grandeur of
his Majesty and the public Interest of the Nation, than to have a constant
Council of Trade established by Act of Parliament, which might not only inspect
and regulate as well our Native and Foreign Trade; but also be advising and
assisting to his Majesty in such Treaties with other Princes and States,
wherein Trade is concerned. And how much more this is to be desired, wherein
the particular good of every individual person in the Kingdom is concerned,
than Corporations, which are advanced to the prejudice of the rest of the
Nation, I submit to any indifferent man. And if it be no aspersion upon a Privy
Counselor, who is not a Lawyer, to say in the knowledge of the Laws, the
Lawyer may be more understanding; I do not understand how it can be any to say
a Merchant better educated, and more conversant in Trade, may better understand
it, than a Privy Counselor, who is not so educated, and less conversant in it.

I say moreover, if all which I have complained of in the former, and this
Treatise were regulated, wherein in point of liberty, we were equal with the
Dutch; yet if the Dutch shall better Govern and Regulate Trade than we, thereby
only the Dutch may and will drive the Trade of the World exclusive to the
English.

Prop. 10. Theorem 3.
The Dutch States govern Trade better than the Council of State in England, or
any other.

Subjects, Are the Dutch States, and the Council of State in England, or any
other.

Question, Whether the Dutch States govern Trade better?

I say they may.

Ax. 15. For they who may understand any business better than another, may
govern it better.

Prop. 7. 2: But the Dutch States may understand Trade better than the Council
of State in England.

Therefore the Dutch States may and do govern Trade better than the Council of
State in England, or any other. Which was to be demonstra ed.

Annotations.
From hence it is that the Trade of England is managed confusedly,
distractedly, and sharkingly by the Traders: neither is there any established
Power by which it may be better Regulated: And to this great Wisdom and
understanding of the Dutch in governing Trade, may be justly added so great a
staidness and prudence in all Treaties with Foreign Princes and States in
reference to Trade, that thereby they have advanced their Trade with all Foreign
Princes and States: And to this they conjoyn power, by which they, upon all
occasions, improve their Trade above what they had before got by Treaty; which
whosoever reads Leon ab Altzma, one of their States, may easily observe.

Prop. 11. Theorem 4.
A Dutch Statesman is less subject to be corrupted to the prejudice of Trade
than a Council of Statesman in England.

Subjects, Are a Dutch Statesman, and a Counselor of State in England.

Question, Whether the Dutch Statesman be less Subject to be corrupted to the
prejudice of Trade?

I say he is.

Ax. 16. For where men are more interessed in any Business, they are less
Subject to be corrupted to the prejudice of it.

15 Pet. 2. But a Dutch Statesman is more interessed in Trade than any English
Council of Statesman.

Therefore less subject to be corrupted to the prejudice of Trade. Which was to
be demonstrated.

Annotations.
So as to the great wisdom and power of the States in governing, is conjoined
Interest, whereby their Counsels are established in greatest security, not only
safe hereby from all possible bribery or corruption from any Power from abroad
or at home: but this moreover creates a diligence in them all to inspect the
management of all Foreign, as well as Domestic Trade, whereby as well in the
Fishing Trade, as in all their Domestic Manufactures, their Fish and
Manufacture; have a reputation incomparably above ours: Whilst our Aulnage, etc.

Prop. 12. Theorem 5.
Dutch Merchants may and do improve their Trades better than English.

Subjects, Are Dutch and English Merchants:

Question, Whether the Dutch improve their Trades better?

I say they may.

Ax. 17. For they who have fewer Impediments in any business, and less charge
and trouble in it, may improve it better than others, who have more.

Pet. 17. 2. But Dutch Merchants have fewer impediments and less trouble and
charge than English, and have Controversies in Trade sooner determined, and
with less charge.

Therefore with less charge Dutch Merchants may and do improve their Trade
better than English. Which was to be done.

Annotations.
When Controversies in Trade arise in England, it will be first a very probable
question, whether the conusance of them belong to the Common Law or Admiralty:
Here the Merchant must wait and intend this business, whatsoever his
concernments are otherways; if after God knows when the Jurisdiction be
determined, then it may be they are removed into the Chancery, where after a
tedious delay they may be decreed, and upon a motion, a new Order for
re-hearing; or it may be returned to the Common Law, or perhaps brought into
Parliament: and after all this flux and re-flux of vexation and charge to the
certain undoing of one or both parties, these Controversies resolve in the
determination of men, who it is impossible, should understand them: for all
Judgment is from antecedent Knowledge; and therefore if the nature of Trade,
Bills of Exchange, and accounts in Trade, etc. and all the particularities
which lead to the Controversies in question, be not before understood, which it
is impossible the Judges in Chancery, Common Law, or Admiralty should do, their
Education and Breeding having been otherways, it is impossible they should
judge aright.

Proposition 13. Problem 7.
How Dutch Merchants and their Wives generally understand Trade better than
English.

Subjects, Dutch Merchants and their Wives, and English.

Question, How Dutch Merchants and their Wives generally may understand Trade
better?

Construction. By the 16 Pet. 2. Dutch Merchants and their Wives are more
conversant in Trade, and 12 Pet. 2. The Dutch generally breed Youth of both
Sexes more in the studies of Geometry and Numbers especially. I say Dutch
Merchants, etc. may understood Trade better.

Ax. 14. For they who are better Educated and more conversant in any business
may understand it better.

13 Pet. 2. But Dutch Merchants and their Wives are generally better educated
to understand Trade.

16 Pet. 2. And are more conversant in Trade.

Therefore Dutch Merchants and their Wives generally may understand Trade
better than English, which was to be done.

Annotations.
In all rational designs men first consider the end. 2. From what principles
they may attain the end: And thirdly, so to order these principles, that the
end be attained by fewest means and shortest ways. The end designed by
education of Youth is to live justly, to be assisting in Government, and to be
helpful to other men. The first principle to do this by education is, that God
has given every Youth understanding, as well as sense, to govern all his
Actions by reason, not love, hatred, fear, or desire. 2. That it is in the
power of every learner to do something which is required of him, whereby he may
improve his knowledge by practice. And 3. The means by which Youth is
instructed is Speech and Method, both which must be before understood.

To live justly is not founded in the principles of Geometry and Numbers, yet
this I say, that by these men are better enabled to live justly than others who
are more ignorant in them; for God and Nature has made all things to consist
in Number and Quantity: that man therefore who is ignorant herein, though he
means justly, yet does not understand in his dealings, whether he does justly
or not: And in so high an esteem were these most noble Sciences among the
Grecians, when Learning flourished so among them that they esteemed all the
world Barbarous but themselves, that the greatest Philosophers of them, would
have all Justice and Government to consist in Arithmetical and Geometrical
proportion. Plato (who would have all Gods works to be done in Geometrical
Proportion, and excluded every one his School who was ignorant in Geometry)
though bred in a Democratical State, would have Justice and Government to
consist in Geometrical Proportion. Xenophon, though bred in an Aristocratical,
would have Justice to be founded in Arithmetical proportion.

Afterward Aristotle, that he might not be less a Philosopher than Plato, or
Xenophon herein, divides Justice into Corrective and Distributive Justice;
corrective to be in Arithmetical Proportion; and Distributive in Geometrical:
though for my part I believe he never understood one Prop. either in Geometry
or Numbers.

1. The ends designed by Education in Geometry and The ends of Education in
Geometry and Numbers.
Numbers, are such, that every man by knowledge in them, is better able to deal
in any business relating to Humane Conversation, not in Trade only.

2. All fortification is founded in these studies, especially in Geometry: so
is encamping and approaches, and defenses against them. Archimedes so excelled
herein, that when Marcellus besieged Syracuse, he alone twice beat back the
Roman Army, nor (its believed) had the Romans taken it, if Archimedes had not
been surprised.

3. Architecture, Surveying, and Measuring all Bodies and Superficies, is
wholly founded in them.

4. Astronomy is founded in Geometry and Numbers, so is measuring the distance
of places, whereby Navigation is better to be improved.

5. History (which so enobles the minds of men) is rude and imperfect without
knowledge in these Studies, for no man without understanding Numbers can
compare Era's, Epocha's, and periods of times, when Actions were done; nor how
they were done in place without Geography, which is founded in Geometry.

6. Youth by education in these Studies, where a method of Reasoning is
observed, does not only acquire by every Proposition a new and certain
knowledge, which at some time or other may be beneficial, but gets a habit of
right reasoning, whereby he is enabled to judge of any Proposition in any other
Science or faculty, and to judge of the reasons in them.

2dly. The Principles of Geometry and Numbers, as of The Principles
all Sciences are three, viz. Definitions, Petitions, and Axioms, which as I
understand, are not rightly understood by Euelid, nor any Commentator upon him:
but Aristotle is so far from understanding the Principles aright, that he does
not understand the Number of them: For he says Anal. Post. lib. 1. 10. tit. 3.
and 6. lib. 1. c. 3. de anima.
that the Principles of Science are two, Proper, and Common; Proper, as a Line:
Common, as if equals be taken from equals, what is left will be equal; and the
Logic taught in our Schools establishes no Principles at all.

3dly. The Means by which Youth is instructed in Geometry The means.
and Numbers, and in all other Learning, is Speech and Method. Speech is the
instrument or mean by which men converse and instruct; our English Tongue
therefore being copious enough to instruct Youth in Education, it is vain and
superfluous to do it in any other, where men are not necessitated to speak
different Languages: The Greek and Latin Tongues being the Language of no
place, I know no necessity of them, unless men desire to multiply Gods Curse in
the confusion of Tongues, by retaining these now there is no necessity of them.
Yet the better sort of the Youth of England is condemned to the learning of
these tongues, which they at last understand so imperfectly, that not one of a
hundred can speak or know in either so well as his own: and whether this is the
nearest way to Instruction, I leave to any man to judge. The Ancient Egyptians,
Syrians, Caldeans, Grecians, and Romans instructed their Youth in their Mother
Tongue, whereby they became so eminent in Learning, that this present Age
enjoyes much benefit from them.

The Affricans before the Reign of Mansor Emperor of Afric and all the
Spains, who reigned, as Pedro Mexico says, about the year 1105. were accounted
barbarous. This Emperor, being a great lover of Learning, caused all Hist.
temp.
Books written in Greek, either concerning Philosophy, Physic, or History to
be translated into the Arabian Tongue, and founded many Colleges in the Cities
of Fez, Morocco, Africa, Trevissin, Tunis, Argier, Hippona, etc. and endewed
them with great Revenues for reading these Studies in the Arabian Tongue:
whereby not men only, but women so profited in Learning, that as Leo Affricanus
affirms, the women of Lybia in those days were very learned, and above all
things else, sooner busied in good Books, than meddling with Cloth and Garments.
And it was in this Emperors Reign, or soon after, that those famous
Philosophers, Averroes, Mesues, Rasis, Rabbi Moses, and many others flourished.
Nor do I know any reason, but if Learning were taught Youth in the English
Tongue, whereby the English might be as learned as the Romans, and Grecians,
but the English Tongue would be in as much esteem as the Greek and Latin.

The Method of Learning in Geometry and Numbers, and in all other Learning, is
by disposing the knowledge in the Petitions and Propositions before known; so
the knowledge what was before understood to be eternal and necessary in the
Axiom, that the question of every Proposition not known before, may necessarily
be known in the conclusion of the Syllogism. But this is impossible to be done
by any Authority of Aristotle, where are no Petitions or mean knowledge in the
Subject; and those Principles which he establishes are so confounded, that as
he makes a Line to be a Proposition Principle, so he makes a man Anal. Post. to
be a Universal, lib. 2. c. 19. tit. 7.
yet a Line is as much a Universal as a man: From whence, as it is impossible
any progress of Learning or Rational Knowledge can follow; so such knowledge as
this will. Universals are every where and cannot be perceived by sense, Ana.
Post. l. 1. c. 31. tit. 1.

A Man is a Universal.

Therefore a man is every where, and cannot be perceived by sense.

If it be impossible from Principles thus established to learn or know; then
must it be more impossible to learn by the vulgar Logic, where are no
Principles at all, and all Rules of Learning inverted in the first Definition
(as it is called) which says Logic proves (not the Consequences but)
Principles in its own and other Sciences.

Consequences.
From hence then it is, that in Geometry, is no method observed in Reasoning,
whereby the study of it is rendered perplexed and difficult, which is of all
others the most natural and easy: The construction of the fourth Proposition,
lib. 1. is from no antecedent knowledge; and if the negative part of that
triangular demonstration be true, which makes two triangle lines tocomprehend
no space then, is all the doctrine of Triangles false; for if a right lined
Angle be not space, it is nothing; yet nothing but two right lines comprehend
it: And in the vulgar Arithmetic is no reason at all taught; but the learners
without understanding any reason are required to divide the Product of the
second and third, by the first, and the Quotient will give a fourth
proportional number, etc. But how this comes to pass is not understood, whereby
learners take no pleasure in learning, and soon forget what was told, without
any possible means of improving knowledge in any other Proposition: So as it is
from hence that the nobler and better sort of the Youth of England being bred
up in these vain and fruitless Studies of Grammar, Logic, and Arist. and,
being thereby fitted for no Business or Conversations, are disposed to lead
idle and debauched lives: and the Female Sex, though it be of mankind as well
as the Male, and endued with a rational soul, and therefore accountable to God
and their Superiors for their Actions, are less bred ingenuously in England,
than in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the United Netherlands, whereby they
may be enabled to govern themselves when Virgins and Widows, and to be
assisting to their Husbands and Families, when Wives.

I have before often treated by Apology, as well became me, because the King
and Laws to which I am Subject were concerned. I need none in what is said upon
this Proposition. I have equal right here with any man, and any man with me.
The method prescribed is not four lines, whereby in Geometry as well as Numbers
I will, by Gods leave, from causes before known, demonstrate the question of
every Proposition not known before: whereas by twenty years learning of
Grammar, Logic, and Aristotle this was never done, nor possible to be done.

Proposition 14. Theorem 7.
How Dutch Merchants and their Wives generally may govern Trade better than
English Merchants and their Wives.

Subjects, Dutch and English Merchants and their Wives.

Question, Whether the Dutch govern Trade better than the English?

I say they may, and do.

Ax. 15. For they who understand any business better may govern it better.

Prop. 12. 2. But Dutch Merchants and their Wives genenerally understand Trade
better than the English.

Therefore may govern Trade better. Which was to be demonstrated.

Annotations.
From hence it is that Dutch Merchants Wives frequently, when their Husbands
are abroad in Trade, or any other business, order and govern their Trades as
diligently and discreetly as if they were at home; which is a very great
advantage both to the State and their Husbands, and Families, and might be of
as much, or more to the King and Merchants here in England, if their Wives were
so educated, as to be enabled to do so.

Epilogue.
SO as Reader thou may understand, and that by demonstration, in the former
Treatise from what causes, and by what means the English Nation is become so
degenerate in Strength, Wealth, and Trade. In this thou may understand by
what means and degrees the Dutch in less than 100 years have attained such
prodigious Riches and Strength by Trade: we have little left but the French and
Canary Trades (wherein we undo our selves) and the Trade of our Manufactures
and Plantations. And in these two the Dutch may out do the English in Foreign
Trade, if their charge in acquiring them does not exceed their charge
otherways. And herein they may clearly out do the English, if it be true; which
is said, that in them English Factors Trade in their own names, yet upon the
account of Dutch Merchants; whereby it much more comes to pass, which Sir
Walter Rawleigh long ago observed, that our Sea and Land Commodities serve only
to enrich and strengthen other Countries against our own.

If we lose the Trade of England, we must lose Navigation; if we lose
Navigation we lose the Sovereignty of the Seas; if the Sovereignty of the Seas,
then read the condition of the Nation in the Danish Invasion, and remember it
not long since. Notwithstanding the Nation is in this condition, yet are we so
engaged in Factions and Dissentions, that neither the continued series of Gods
manifold Judgments these many years upon it by Wars Intestine and Foreign,
Plagues, Fires, and Hyrricanoes, nor the growing greatness of our Neighbors
the French and Dutch, does any ways alarm or awaken it.

I might here Reader proceed to a third Treatise, by observing the same method,
and demonstrate that England is capable of greater Wealth, and strength than
the United Netherlands (or perhaps any Country else) and that from those
natural prerogatives wherewith God has endued it, the Nation may manage a
greater, better, and more valuable Trade upon much less terms than the Dutch
can a less, worse, and less valuable Trade: But it will be to no purpose to
proceed herein, until Trade be relieved, wherein we showed cause.

The End.

