The GIANT Whipped by his GOD MOTHER; OR, A Loving EPISTLE Wrote to the most
Notorious Observator, Monsieur L'ESTRANGE.
By the Anti-Papistical J. C.
My dear G^d Son!
KNeel down and ask my Blessing, thou Child of Threescore and upwards, that
may be Grand-sire to thy God-Mother; but I say, my good Boy, thou shall not
want my Blessing, since thou will have me be thy God-Mother: Rise up Sir Knight
of the Lying Oracle, and may the Reward thou deservest, be bestowed upon thee,
the Tripos of the E^ms, or Colemans sanctified Ruff. Why, thou Spawn of
Garagantua, thou Coloss of Iniquity, mounted upon the Pelion of thy own Wit,
and the Ossa of Impudence, stretching forth thy Impious hands, like a true
Titan against Heaven, that would, with thy Observating Club, knock Jupiter
out of his Throne, art thou not afraid at last to come to thy 12 Godfathers?
But they, even they, my Giant Boy, will never appear more dreadful to thee thau
thy enraged God-Mother, at this instant, with the Rod of Correction in her
awful hand, breeching and slashing her irreverent God-Son, in the Keen Fury of
her Spleen: Do thou know thou Tube-peeping Observator, thou Fly-flap of the
Times: thou Maggot-blower of Sedition, what it is to stir the Rage of a Woman?
Come on I say, my pretty Narcissus, that loves thy own Shadow so well, and
dotest on the Image of thy own Wit, come on I say, and set thy Foot to mine,
and thou shall find I am an Amazon as you call me, and shall make thee a Pigmy,
carry thee about in a Cage, and show thee with thy ridiculous Wit for a
Monster, that have already made all the Town to laugh at thee. Nay thou have
moved the British Blood; and by the Soul of Boadicia, I will smoke thee, thou
Neitherlandish Sooterkin, that flies in the face of a Woman, out of all thy
lurking holes, I will tell the World of thy tricks, thou tumbling Puppet that
dancest to thy own Music: It Is no wonder thou have so great a Spite to
Fleet-Bridg, a place fatal to thee and thy two Beaver Hats, whilst thou fattest
bare to thy dear Misses; 'Twas then Fleet-Lane was more Beloved, when thou
hauntedst all the little Gaming Houses without License; The loss of thy two
Beaver Hats, thou Goats Head, made thee ever since have a squinting eye on
Goat-Ally; thy Brains then caught cold, and thou have been somewhat enfeebled
ever since: Then thou usedst to handle Women more gently before thou were
become the Popes Spigot, to let forth Poison for the Whigs, when thou would
have excused a Whigg for Printing of Treason, and have Licensed the Wife to
have committed Adultry; o thou prime Faggot Stick of the Nation, and stickler
for Justice and Government; but thou art since dwindled away to a Straw, and
^ailest at Virtue i^ Women, and can now only endeavor to beget Jealousy in
the Husband, in railing against the Honesty of the Wife: but thy Spite and thy
Malice is so well known, That thou art no more regarded than a Cha^tering
Monky; Thou railing puff of Vanity, thou bladder of Conceit, thou bubble of
Wind and Water; thou Jack a-Lent of Straw, that struttest like the Giants in
Guild Hall, and have as much dread in thee: is it thus thou show all thy
mighty parts against a Woman? Is this the mighty Gogmagog L'Estrange, that at
last stoops to wrestle with a Woman? Are all your Polymical Volumns with all
their high Rants and Rores, dwindled into a weekly sheet, that rails at and
abuses a Woman? Well, have at you, with your own Weapon the Tongue, which most
properly belongs to our Sex, thou scold in Breeches; you will find a Woman has
Teeth as well as Tongue, and can bite as well as talk; there are She-Satyrs as
well as Hee-Goats, thou Student in Goatham College, who with the Quintessence
of Tom Thumb, and the Remarks of the Seven Wise Masters, setst up for an
Observator, and as soon as thou see any thing in Petticoats, criest out, an
Amazon, a Sybill, a Goat, and take them all for thy Godmothers. But since I
was thy God-Mother, thou man of an Hundred Names, which of them did I bestow on
thee, when thou wast dipped in an Un-Christian Font? Was it Tory or Towzer?
Crack-fart or Gim-Crack? Papist or Pragmaticus? Protaeus or the Pied-Piper?
Fiddler or the Flea-Catcher? 'Troth, it is so long since, I have forgot? Thou
have a Bead-role of them, which will serve thee to number thy Ave Maria's by,
and will stick longer to thee than thy Mummy'd Flesh to thy rotten Bones. Well
Tory, what was it made thee to rore thus against thy God-Mother Evidence, ha?
tell me thou shorthand of Beelzebub, in whose ugly Character of thine is
comprised more evil and mischief than in forty men besides; what was it that
put thee into that Fit of undutiful rage and madness, as to provoke me thus to
Chastize thee? Did Twenty Thousand Apprentices call thee Papist and Popish
Observator? did they indeed? and therefore you will be revenged of your
God-Mother, was that like a gracious Child of the Church of England? was that
done like the Giant Don Rugiero? or like a Pigmy as thou art, poking thy Bodkin
Pen at a Woman, whom thou take to be a Crane with a long Bill, that will take
thee by the Nose, and make thee Cry out, as loud as 'ere St. Dunstan made the
Devil with his Tongs: But tell me, why do thou wince so, and kick and fling
at the Name of Papist, like an old Horse with a galled Back, that loves not to
be touched in that part? Not a word, ha? That will not stop Mrs. Evidences mouth,
nor Mr. Witnesses neither, nor Mr. Affidavits, but therefore you will be angry
with your God Mother? But know Sir Crack-fart, that she fears you not, and will
not let you go like a Sneaking Cur without a pat from her Heel, or a Butt in
the Hamms, that shall lay the Giant Hodg on his back sprawling, since thou have
made her a Beast and a Goat. You say, God-Son, That I am good at applying, and
since I am a Sybill, sure I should be good at Prophesying too. O God-Son, have
a care I say of the Tree with three stumps, that every month bears Evil Human
Fruit, for the time is coming, that the Five Hundred Headed Beast, and Monster
as you have made it, the dreaded Senate will appear, and then barking Towzer
will run away as if a Rattle were tied at his Tail, without so much as an
Appeal or Godb'w'ye, and leave his Dear Friends, his Citts and his Bumpkins,
his Zekiels and his Ephraims, his Vindicators and his Replyers, his Dialoguers
and his Observators, and his whole Litter of little barking Whelps, that used
to follow the Heels, and attended the Fingers end of his Dogship, to the mercy
of the Hangman.

As I am a true Sybill this will come to pass, my dear Godson Crack-fart, and
that before ever thou will be able to perform the Task thou have undertaken, of
Writing Canting and Libelling out of the Kings Dominion. O Rhodomantado! this
is a true Crackfart Rhodomontado, sure thou had mounted the Molehill
Mountain of thy own Ability, and saw all the little Whiggs like Pismires
crawling under thee, which thou intendest with one dash of thy Pen, to beat
into the Earth, for strike them out of the La^d of Nature. Why thou shadow of
a Giant, thou Thrasonical Hercules, with thy Observating Club upon thy Neck,
thou braying Ass in a Lions Skin, is it thus thou performest thy boastings in
meddling with thy Godmother? I will tell thee, if thou will write Canting and
Libelling out of the Kings Dominions, you must write your Worship out of the
Kings Dominions, for Nonsense and Libels drop from thee continually, as
naturally as Maggots from a Sheeps Tail, or Lice from a Beggar; I am sure the
Sybil does not overshoot her self in this. Now flourish your Mighty Pen against
Peticoats, do English Don Quixot, do, tilt at a Woman, and see what a pat the
twerling Tongue of a feeble Female, will take thy empty Noddle, that shall turn
the Brains in thy Calves-Head, notwithstanding thy brazen Forhead, more Brass
than Mambrino's Helmes, or the Barbers Basin, Pollish'd over with Impudence
Vd's Splutter-a-Nails, let hur come at this Fidling Crackfart Godson of mine!
Art running into the Neitherlands, art thou? I have not done with thee: thou
Masquerading Scribler, thou Mouse dropped out of the Snout of an Elephant, thou
confounder of Whiggs, both He Is and She Is, thou Champion for the Cause, that
threatnest Twenty Thousand Children, and then fallest foul of a Woman: thou
Juggling Hocus Pocus of the Nation, that promises Wonders and perform'st
nothing; thou Whigg-tail groper, I will pull thee out by the Heels, tho thou
were locked up in a Chest in thy Book-sellers-Garrat, and show the World what a
tumbling Baboon thou art, dressed in Dublet and Breeches, chattering against a
Woman. Let me take breath, that I may reason a little with this ill contrived
Godson of mine, that he may see all this Chastisement is not for nothing, but
out of pure Love and Care, that he might forsake the Devil and all his Works;
for I see alas! I see he is going the way of much Wicked flesh, running a full
gallop up Holborn Hill, to the fatal place, without so much as calling on his
Sybil Godmother, in Goat-Ally, or taking a Bait at his own House: But perhaps
my young Giant Godson, of Threescore, being so tender a stripling, and well
Corrected by his Godmother, may forsake his Evil Courses, and take up ere it be
too late, and not attempt the dangerous Adventure of attacking a Woman, and a
bold Britain too, a more desperate act than running his Noddle into an Hive
full of enraged Bees. Mrs. Sybil advises thee, thou whifler to the Devils
Regiment, to put up thy Pipes, and not fall a tooting at every Whiggs Tail that
Waggs, for thou will never be regarded, now thou have been flasht by thy
God-mother, who is able to manage thee without the help of Care or Janaway, two
Giants, that have made thee Tremble, for all thy Crack-fart Thunder. Nay I will
yet be more bitter to thee than the Weekly Packet of Advice, which makes thee
disgorge thy self. I tell thee, thou inveterate sower of Sedition, I will be as
opposite to thee, as Truth is to all thy Works, I will learn to write Dialogues
as well as Epistles, and to compose Satyrs and keen Iambicks, to be revenged of
thee; There shall not be a Whigg, but shall wag his Tail at thee, in spite of thy
Teeth, tho thou think to be Lycenser General of the Whiggs Tails, that none
may wag without thy License and Observation. Godson, you must excuse a Woman if
she be a little impertinent with you, and that she does not fence with you
according to your own Art of railing in Mode and Figure, she is only used to
the downright natural way of speaking Truth, and correcting the Errors of her
God-child, after the woman's manner, that is, laying it on according to her
Female ability. I shall now conclude with this most seasonable Advice, tho I
have little hopes of thy amendment, thou have been so long pickled in the
Devils Poudering Tub, however, as a Godmother ought, I say, I do advise thee,
to leave peeping after and observing the wagging of the Tails of the Whiggs:
This is all I have to say to thee, and therefore without farther Ceremony, thou
impotent, fumbling, overgrown, mercenary Scribler; thou frivolous, foolish,
Dialoguing Whig-Tail Observator, farewell and be hanged,

So wishes the She- Whiggs and Your Sybil Godmother in Goat-Ally, J. C.


