CARDAN HIS THREE BOOKS OF CONSOLATION Englished.

Of great Use in these Times.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, and S. Croutch, at the
Princes Arms, against the Royal Exchange. 1683.

TO THE READER.
YOU have here an Antidote against every Trouble, prescribed by that Physician,
whose prodigious Parts, and singular Fancies, have made him Admired and Envied
by most of the Learned World. He had ('it is true) his Deliriums in common with
all great Wits; but his lucid intervals were such, as made him pass in the
Opinions of some, that read his Works, for more than a Man.

(...) (...) not the fate of those other Ancient Monuments, which perished in
the Barbarian Wars. For as he showed himself a most excellent Philosopher in
all his Writings, so it is not to be imagined, but that on this occasion, he
outdid whatever he had done before: seeing the Subject he Handled was neither
Common, Foreign, nor Feigned; but sprang from his own Natural Affection, and
great trouble of mind.

II, Now although we want this useful Book, to furnish us with those excellent
Arguments, which (without doubt) he made use of to quiet his own mind. Yet
shall not this discourage us (considering our need) from offering the best we
can devise: as those who cannot get stately Palaces to dwell in, must be
contented with simple Cottages.

III. And the necessity of such Discourses as these appears hence; That
supposing our selves free from all other vexations, yet will the remembrance
and dread of Death, four all our present enjoyments.

IV. But besides the fear of death, how many other troubles are there against
which we had need be fortified? Our Hunger is satisfied with Meat, our Thirst
with Drink, our Weariness with Rest: But the fear of evils (whether real or
imaginary) is so rooted and fruitful in our minds, that unless it be obviated
by wise considerations, it is impossible to keep them serene, and undisturbed;
seeing it leads us from one discontented thought to another without end.

V. I know not what benefit others may reap by this my labor, as to my self,
(for whom I chiefly designed this Book) the considerations contained therein,
have abundantly profited me. And as it was said of Asclepiodorus, that he could
paint without colors; so shall I without any Art or Skill declare, how greatly
we err both in our Opinions and Wills.

VI. Now although the number of our cares and miseries be great, yet if nearly
considered, we shall find several of them to be such as need no Medicine; as
those which men voluntarily undergo: For who will attempt to comfort Marcus
Regulus in his sufferings; whom neither Natural Affection to his Children, and
Relations, nor the entreaties of his Friends, could persuade from hastening out
of Rome, to be tormented at Carthage. Such undaunted Spirits were the Holy
Martyrs, St. Paul, St. Stephen, etc.

VII. But there are other kind of hardships, which the most delicate do not
refuse, for the sake of Honor, Pleasure, or Profit: Some serve Kings, others
their Mistresses; one man consumes his time and himself with Study; another
commits himself to the mercyless Sea, and are so little troubled at these
toyls, that it grieves them to be withheld from engaging in them. Some led on
only by hope, spend their days in solitary places; refusing all the comforts
and conveniences of this life; Macerating themselves with Fastings, and
Watchings, who being asked for what end they do this, reply, for hope, that
after death, they shall receive an everlasting recompense. Some take great
pains merely for Pleasure, as Harvest Laborers, who after long Toil and Sweat
in Summers Sun, do notwithstanding Dance when the Pipe or Viol Sounds. Others
sit at play till their Feet ache with Cold; the pleasure of the sport exceeding
the sharpness of the pain.

To begin with private Evils, we may take this for a certain truth, that it
matters not to happy living, what a man's Fortune be; seeing there is no
condition of life, but admits the exercise of some virtue; and what wise man
will torment himself in adversity; considering how vain, short and uncertain
the Life of Man is.

X. In what a kind of uncertainty do we live, when a man rises from his Bed in
the Morning, to be uncertain of his return to Rest again: or when he lies down
to sleep, whether ever he shall rise. Well do the Spaniards in their Language
call man a shadow, for in truth he is no more, his body being so frail and
brittle, and exposed to so many dangers, that nothing is more to be admired,
than that it should usually subsist so long.

I allow those Philosophers to be in the right, who made all things consist in
Opinion. For what Custom, Law, or Sentiment has so far prevailed, as never to
meet with contradiction.

The Philosophers had never contended so long among themselves, had the matter
of their debates been evident and certain. For what man is so mad as to affirm
the Swan to be Black, or the Crow white, seeing the matter here is to be
decided by common sense.

But touching what is Good and Evil (Good Lord) what Disputes have arose, what
wranglings and oppositions? Which makes me remember a pleasant story written by
an Ancient Poet, that excellently well sets forth our Folly.

XII. When mighty Jupiter had made the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, Men, and
Beasts, he soberly considered, that unless he alloted Punishments and Rewards
for men's Deserts, they would be not only guilty of great irregularities toward
one another, but Affront the Gods themselves; for which cause he commanded
Vulcan to make two brazen Tuns, the one to receive all that was good, the other
whatsoever was evil, making both good and evil things winged, that Mortals
might more conveniently receive them according to their Deserts. But the
Goddess Pandora a busy huswife, moved with that restless curiosity which is
common to all the Sex, must needs be peeping in 'em, when immediately both the
good and evil flew their ways, the good up to Heaven, the Evil down to Hell,
hope only remaining in the Vessel of evils, and suspicion in the other. Which
news when Jupiter heard, he takes the empty Barrels and in a mad raging fit,
throws 'em down; which being perceived by mortal men, who are desirous (as you
know) of News, they immediately draw near, and embrace the empty Vessels;
persuading themselves they had gotten both good and evil; whereas in truth
neither good nor evil happened to either of them; only they that light on the
better Vessel, found themselves possessed with an opinion of good mixed with
suspicion; and the other with opinion of evil mixed with hope.

XIII. Like to what Travelers tell us touching such as pass over the Deserts
of Arabia, who chancing to tread upon some piece of Iron, or other cold thing,
are suddenly startled with fear, least they have trodden on some venomous
Serpent; so does the bare opinion of good and evil perplex all mortal
Creatures: although it is certain all good things are flown up into Heaven, and
all evil down into Hell. And therefore ever since the great Jupiter has taken
no notice of men's deserts.

Now although this be but a fiction, yet does it give as satisfactory an account,
as the definitions of Philosophers or Schoolmen.

CHAP. II. Afflictions advantageous. Grief unprofitable. The mischiefs of
conceitedness and self-love.
AS all earthly joys are vain and unstable, so in the World to come all things
are certain, assured and everlasting, unto which Almighty God calls us by the
sufferance of these Afflictions which we term Evils, according to that of the
Prophet, Because thou were beloved of God it was expedient that Temptation
should try thee. For Almighty God not unlike a Father that entirely loves his
Children, brings them up in all continency and sobriety, restraining them from
pleasures and not suffering 'em without chastisement, to live wickedly. And on
the contrary, such as he lightly esteems, he suffers to wallow without
control, into all manner of luxury and riot. Shall we say the life of such
Servants is more happy than that of those Sons. For as Gold is purified in the
furnace, so is the life of a good man purged by adversity. But what signify all
the sufferings of this World (as St. Paul says) if compared to the glory which
shall be revealed. Will not he that believes this rejoice in adversity and
lament in prosperity? and amidst his miseries persuade himself, that God makes
trial of his faith, that he may afterward take him to himself. If in getting
worldly glory we usually so greatly rejoice, although we know it to be of short
continuance, what ought we not to do for this Heavenly glory, which is
everlasting, certain, and fully satisfactory. Did men believe these things,
they would save me the labor of writing, for who so mad as not to be willing
to change this short life, for that which is Everlasting, this frail for that
firm, this unhappy for that most happy, this troublesome for that most quiet.

It Is our infidelity that makes us miserable: For what can be more profitable
after death, or more comfortable in this life, than the hope of that which is
to come. And though the same were not, yet ought not a man to be dejected, seeing
there is scarcely any misery so great but is attended with some advantage. And
as adversity and misfortunes have been to some men a means of their promotion,
so has Prosperity been to others an occasion of their misery. The servitude of
Ventidius occasioned his becoming Consul.

What Is more irksom than Sickness; Yet did it profit the Emperor Augustus being
in Arms against Brutus. For being warned by his Physician to remove from his
Tent, he by Sleep recovered his health, which had he done for any other
respect, 'twould have been dishonorable: And had he not done it, he had
certainly bin slain or forced to fly. Plotinus a Philosopher of Plato's sect,
had among others a Scholar named Ornucius Marcellus greatly diseased with the
Gout and Palsy; who through diligent hearing of his Master (who disputed and
read with great sweetness and facility,) forgot often times to eat: and so with
attentive hearing became a singular Philosopher, and with much abstinence
recovered his health. A Distempered Body does oft-times much conduce to the
health of the mind.

II. It is observed that Sickly people for the most part live longer than those
of a firmer constitution.

Pope Paul the 3d. though he was a learned Man and not unlike to attain to the
Papacy, yet did the opinion of his Old age and sickly body, chiefly occasion
his advancement. Amongst other advantages which Adversity has, this is not the
least, that, a Man's misfortunate day's once past, he lives the rest of his
life with greater delight. Who can relish health, that has never been sick? Who
knows the sweetness of his Country, so well as he that has been long abroad? Or
who can take pleasure in Riches but he that has been poor? As Salt savours
Meat, so does past misery render our lives more pleasant. What turned more to
Tully's advantage than his Banishment, when his Goods were sold, and his House
pulled down, then he found how welcome he was to the Citizens, how useful to his
Country, and how dear to his Friends: and had he modestly used his Glory,
nothing that happened to him in his life could have been more to his advantage.
Howsoever, In all misfortunes of a Man's life this argument is of great
importance, that we must of necessity comfort our selves at last.

III. Neither does sorrow serve for any other end, than to increase care, and
render our minds more unapt for good counsel. Continual grief and weeping will
drive us at length upon desperation. Since then it is in our own power to
aggravate or diminish our cares, it is the part of a wise man to disburden
himself of sorrow and patiently bear whatsoever happens.

IV. An undaunted suffering of Adversity has often helped gallant spirits. For we
generally soonest take pity of those that courageously undergo any misfortune,
and presume more of their innocence and virtue, than of those that in like
extremity give way to fear. Agis the Lacedemonian King, being condemned to dye,
was drawn with a Cord to the place of execution; it happened he spyed a Servant
of his standing by weeping, to whom he says; my Friend, prithee forbear
weeping, for being unjustly condemned, I am become more worthy of life, than
those that put me to death. And having thus said, he willingly strangled
himself. When Scevola determined to kill the King Porsenna, he for his valiant
and voluntary confession received pardon; which if he had not done, but with
denial craved Mercy, besides dishonor, he would have suffered a most cruel
death. In short, patience in Captivity, and magnanimity in Adversity have ever
been praised and found to be most advantageous.

V. It is a guilty Conscience that makes a man unhappy. A man is nothing but
his mind, if that be out of order, all is amiss, and if that be well, all the
rest is at ease.

I remember a certain Rich man, falling mad, snatched up a Straw and complained
he should dye for hunger, because there was no Corn within the empty Ears.
Would we know why we are Fools, it is because we count our selves wise. Socrates
who by Apollo's Oracle was said to be the wisest of all Mortals, confessed he
knew but one thing, and that was he knew nothing. Ptolomy that famous
Astronomer, was wont to say that man who pleased himself was hateful to the
gods. And he pleases himself that imagines himself wise or provident, and
imputes all to his own wisdom and conduct.

CHAP. III. Men pull down Evils on themselves. Pleasure ever attended with
pain. No condition of life free from trouble. Kings more miserable than other
men.
I. SOme men there be who may be compared to the Gudgin, that knows under the
Bait lies a Hook, yet hurried and driven on by lust, run themselves into
infinite misery. It Is said of that Fish that she first craftily (and yet
foolishly enough) with her Tail beats the Bait from the Hook, but if that will
not do, bites it. Whereas we more senseless run on without either fear or wit.

III. Perhaps thou will say I would have Pleasure without Pain: It Is contrary
to nature, for Joy is continually attended by Sorrow, Glory with Envy; Wisdom
is not gotten without labor, Wealth is not obtained without care, Children are
kept with trouble, Banqueting is attended by Sickness, Ease with poverty,
Power with envy, Quiet with weariness. Every man has something to complain of.
Some be afflicted with Poverty, others want Children, this man is Sick, that
man wants a Wife, and this man would be rid of his. But that which is most
strange is, that to be happy and liable to no misfortune, is also a calamity.
It Is said of Polycrates that having never met with any calamity, he greatly
desired to experience some mishap, and therefore threw into the Sea a Ring of
great value, on purpose to have cause to complain. But Fortune it seems having
sworn his happiness, restored it again in a Fish.

IV. But least I be thought to argue with Fables. Pray what pleasure do Princes
receive at their Meals, when continual eating of Delicacies, has taken away
their Taste. It Is Coarse and Homely Fare that makes Finer Meats Relish.

Or how can he be happy that never felt Grief. This is certain, that without
Adversity a man cannot Live comfortably, nor take delight in Mirth without some
Sorrow. And is it not a comfort in our Calamity to have not only one Man for a
Companion, but all Mankind. What Is more seemly than a Commonwealth well
Governed: yet what is more hard than to Live in it. The Romans by their Severity
to themselves Conquered the whole World. But what is more Slavish than living
under such Laws, when Men are constrained to Marry, Labor with their own
Hands, Educate Children, and follow the Wars: The bringing up of Children
(especially many) to a poor man, seems to surpass all Sorrows. What is more
Dangerous and Laborious than War, wherein Men toil Night and Day, sleeping in
Winters Snow, and marching in Summers Sun, Watching continually, climbing
Mountains, and sailing the Seas, afflicted with hunger and thirst, and reduced
to those Extremities as to kill or be killed. So that it is no wonder to see
how willingly Soldiers behold the displayed Ensigns, and receive the News of
Battle, seeing they shall by a happy Victory be either eased of their travail,
or by death terminate a painful Life. The Lacedaemonians lived so hardly at
home, that it never grieved them to serve abroad in the Wars.

Neither be Kings (whom Men respect as Happy) exempt from Common Calamities,
but rather more Unfortunate than other Men. It Is observable that Poets have ever
laid the Scenes of Tragedies in Kings Palaces, and on the contrary, Comedies
and pleasant Entertainments in private Houses. Princes Palaces are continually
inhabited by such foul Monsters as Envy, Hatred, Lust, and Oppression. Even the
Princes mind is the seat of all these, whereby he is never suffered to sleep
quietly by Night, nor rest by day. Sometimes the thoughts of his gross
Enormities terrify his mind, otherwhiles his quiet is disturbed with
Jealousies and Suspicions, studying Day and Night to weaken the force of
Neighboring Princes, and keep himself secure from his own Subjects
Encroachments. Supposing, in short, a Prince never so Just and Prudent, yet is
it almost impossible for him to be void of Cares and Fears. Seeing then all
mortal men be subject to some kind of vexation, who art thou that seek to
live free from that Law to which all others are subject? Why do thou not
complain, that thou art not made immortal, winged, and King of the whole world,
and free from all misfortunes.

VI. It Is storyed of the Hares that considering how they were persecuted they
became desperate, and resolved to drown themselves in the next River; for which
cause being one morning assembled, on they went to effect their determination;
The Frogs that happened to be upon the bank hearing a noise, for fear leapt
into the water: which when the Hares heard, and finding it was for fear of
them, they changed their minds: because the Frogs more unhappy than they, yet
sought to preserve their Lives. Truly the Adversity of others, never made my
Misfortunes seem the less: But the unavoidableness of Troubles, to which all
naturally are subject, has much mitigated my private Griefs. For who but a mad
man will lament that which cannot be helped. A wise man considering the course
of sublunary things, will expect any kind of mishap, and be prepared against
the worst.

CHAP. IV. Time a certain Remedy of all Troubles. Death makes all equal.
I. IT IS also to be remembered, that Time is a medicine for all manner of
Troubles. Who grieves for his Grandmother, that dyed fourscore years ago? or
Goods lost thirty years since. Such is the nature of time, that first it
lessens our extreme sorrow or joy, secondly, wears out our Affections, and
lastly, works in us forgetfulness of what is past. Why cannot we then have that
influence ^ver our selves, by which we may effect a speedy cure. A great
argument it is of wisdom to bear that with patience immediately, which others
cannot do till a great deal of time be past. Set we before us the Examples of
several worthy men, that have patiently undergone the utmost of Fortunes
Malice. Be modest in prosperity as well as in Adversity. And pluck up a good
heart, persuading our selves that our unhappy days be past, and better times
will succeed. Make not thy Life a burden to thee, whosoever thou art that has
light into this Valley of Tears. Consider the Life of man compared with
Eternity is less than nothing. That the whole World will pass away and thou
with it, and never after return again: so that it matters not what thy present
Circumstances may be.

II. What will it avail thee 300 years hence, whether thou have been an
Emperor, or a Cobbler: Whether thou have been Lucullus or Iris, Xenophon or
Cleon, a Slave or a Freeman, happy or unhappy. Whether thou have dyed in thy
Bed or at the Gallows. How does this our time pass away, how speedily, how
forcibly? what a good fancy was that of him that cut in one Stone three Faces,
a Child's, a young man's and an old man's, admitting as it were no difference.
Imagine that now which will really happen; the transition of time, and thou
shall find all things, nothing.

We ought to behave our selves like men in Prison that are in hopes of
deliverance, who although attended with weariness at present, yet (especially if
men of courage) yield not themselves up to Grief.

III. Seeing then we all expect equality in death, the rich may be sorrowful
but not the poor. Were it now proclaimed as 'twas in the times of Lycurgus,
that all Goods should be Equally divided, which would be most troubled?
Forasmuch then as those that be rich must one day be poor, and they that be
poor one day rich, be thou contented.

IV. Our folly hinders us from setting a due estimate on things: It makes
Pygmies become Giants, hides our happiness from us, and makes us afraid of our
own shadows. If there be any thing to be feared or desired in this life it is
moral Good or evil, a guilty, or a quiet Conscience.

CARDAN OF CONSOLATION.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. The folly of our unwillingness to dye. And vanity of such as are
solicitous about their Funerals. Misery of Old Age.
I. HItherto we have discoursed of Human Calamities and their remedies in
general. Come we now to Particulars. And first of the fear of death. Consider,
what happiness thou have found in life, to make thee so much in love with it.
Do thou alone possess any delight which we have not experienced. We have seen
the Stars, the Heavens, Mountains, Seas, Rivers, Lakes, Fields, Gardens, Cities
and pleasant Villages, had Music, Songs, Banquets, Love intrigues and
Dalliances, with all sorts of earthly delights, nor have we wanted Learning to
judge, dispute, make Verses and Orations; born Offices, and acquitted our selves
honorably of them, satisfied the necessities of our Children, Friends and
Kindred, and lived together with them in good reputation; wanting neither Food
nor Raiment, and abounded in all the conveniences of this life: and yet cannot
but unfeignedly say with Solomon. Vanity of vanity, and all is vanity.

II. As to other men's experience; let them speak for themselves, as to my own
part, I have felt more Grief than Pleasure in this World. Seeing then this love
of life avails nothing, nay tho it were desirable, it is better to cast off
this burden of Cares and like an honest man restore that which thou have
borrowed. Whereas if thou torment thy self, what do thou get thereby, but to
consume in dying that small time which is remaining; seeing whatsoever time is
spent in thinking of death, may justly be so called. I am much taken with the
saying of Agathius, who tells us that Death does not only remove sickness, and
all other vexations; but whereas these happen often, that comes but once.
Neither can Death be accounted a great Evil, seeing it comes upon so light
occasions, and is so ready at hand. Such things as are hurtful to our natures
are not common and soon found, whereas there is nothing more common or sooner
found than death. Death is to be met with every where, and in all things, in
Fire and Water, Air, Wind, Thunder, Earthquakes, wild Beasts, Fishes and
Fowls, in Meat and Drink, Bed, Trees, Sleep, Sorrow, Joy, Laughter, Company,
Discord, Concord, and finally, in all Circumstances. Philomenes seeing his Ass
eat Raisins, bid his Boy give him some Wine to drink, and fell into such a fit
of laughter, that he killed himself. Coma being apprehended and examined for
Robbery by Rutilus the Consul, required time to make his defense, and putting
down his Head between his Knees, he stopped his own breath, and died so quietly
that his Guard knew nothing of it till they saw him dead.

3. Seeing then men die with such ease, what can Death be better compared to
than a Dream. Socrates dyed with a Jest in his month. Do we think then that he
felt any great grief? Certainly no; for men cannot jest in extreme pain, the
mind being taken up with far greater matters. This is also be to admired, that
men should with the greatest aversation dread Death, and yet earnestly use
those means that bring it. The lustful person, prefers his pleasure before
it, the injured his revenge, the Eater his gluttony, the Ambitious his honor,
the Covetous his riches, the Soldier his spoil, the Mother her children, the
Merchant his traffic, and the Student his learning. They are to be esteemed
most valiant, that scorn to dye unless a weighty cause requires it.

IV. Some perhaps be of Aepicarnus his mind, Dye says he I would not, but to be
dead I care not: Pray what hurt is it to want, hunger, thirst, grief, labor,
sadness, fear, and in short all those Evils in general which the Soul must of
necessity want being parted from the Body; and seeing it dies not, but in lieu
of these troubles partakes of heavenly joys: why should we not willingly accept
of this change. It was the saying of Socrates that Death may be fitly compared
to a sound sleep.

V. I remember my Father Faucius Cardan was wont to say he continually desired
death, because when he slept he tasted the pleasures of it; meaning, I suppose,
that all sensual delights contain more pain than pleasure, and therefore it was
better being without 'em. Diogenes being sick, and found by his Physician
asleep, was asked how he did, well, answered he, for one Brother envyeth
another. Cosmas Medices (a wise and virtuous man in our times) being at the
point of death, closed his own eyes, which his Wife seeing, demanded the
reason; I do it says he, because it is customary. Socrates being by Crito
persuaded to escape out of Prison, as well for his Friends sake as his own,
refused to do it, answering wisely; I am going into those parts, where I shall
certainly find as good, or perhaps better friends that those I leave behind.
And you will also bear me company in a short space. In fine, Death does
certainly take away more Evils than it brings. If Death be an Evil, to be
dead is to escape it, but if it be a Good, thou have no cause to lament. That
it is one of these no man doubts.

VI. I remember that being much afflicted with a Tertian Ague, the seventh Fit
of it laid me for dead. In which time although every Member was almost deprived
of its use, yet felt I nothing worse than a certain kind of tickling throughout
my whole body accompanied with no small pleasure. Possessed I was indeed with
fear I should dye. Which made me enquire of others who had been at the point of
death, whether they felt any great smart or not, who told me that in the Head
or Toothache, or such like distemper they endured greater pain. I have observed
that although Women and Children be most fearful to take Medicines, and yield to
cutting of Veins, yet when at the point of death, they neither complain nor
lament, but are rather offended if we seek to preserve their lives.

VII. What is our life, but a continual toil, perpetually attended with Labor,
Suspicions, and Dangers. What delight is there that is not followed by
Repentance? Thou art revenged, then look to thy self; Have thou eaten thy fill,
then Satiety will offend thee? Have thou lightly ^ined, then thy appetite is
not ^atisfied. Do thou give way ^o Lust, expect sadness and in ^he end
sickness. In short, either ^hy desire is not satisfied, and art ^hereby still
discontented or else ^ormented with Satiety, and Re^entance.

VIII. Observe how bruit Beasts ^ield to death, how little they ^re tormented
with the thoughts ^f it beforehand, and how pa^iently they endure it when it
comes: and can we suppose God ^as endowed them with greater gifts of fortitude
than our sevles.

A good Man is always ready to lay down his life. Callicratides the
Lacedemonian Captain, hearing the Soothsayer foretell Victory to the
Lacedaemonians and death to himself, answered: Sparta in losing me will not be
at all weakened.

IX. What great acts have been performed by such who feared not death, how
happy have been their Lives, how glorious their ends. In fine, why shall we
refuse to yield to that equality, which makes the Beggar a Prince, and the
Tyrant simple, and harmless dust.

X. Neither the vast Army of Xerxes, nor Treasure of Tyberius, or Cruelty of
Antonius, could any whit prevail against Death. We shall all be equal and
harmless there: and except Virtue, there will be no difference. No man can be
ignorant of ^his journey. It Is a fond and sil^y opinion that renders this so
^yful and advantageous a mat^er unpleasant and terrible. Upon what light causes
have some slain themselves. I knew a Scholar a Countryman of ours in Padoa,
who being slighted by a Gentlewoman with whom he was in Love, Poisoned himself.
Another in our City for vexation that the price of Corn fell, Hang^ed himself.
Another, and he ^ikewise an Italian, finding he could not conveniently pay his
Debts, Drowned himself: I saw a Woman who for mere sorrow that she had
committed Adul^tery (asking God forgiveness for what she had done) immediately
drank Poison. Cleopatra although she might have lived in honor, yet to prevent
her being carried about in Triumph, caused a Serpent to sting her to death.
Porcia the Daughter of Cato and Wife to Brutus, (a most heroic spirited Woman)
hearing her Husband was slain, eat burning Coals and died. Damocles a beautiful
Boy beloved by King Demetrius, being watched when he should enter naked into
the Bath, and knowing the King designed to abuse his body, dived down to the
bottom of the Water and drowned himself. It Is endless to relate Instances of
those that for Fear, Love, Grief, Anger, and other occasions of no weight have
sought their own deaths. We read moreover of whole Legions, that offered
themselves to apparent destruction. As they that were with Leonida in the
Persian Expedition. What would not these People have ventured on a great
occasion, when for so small a matter they did not refuse to dye.

XI. But perhaps thou will reply, I do not fear Death, for not being an Evil,
it is necessary; and to fear that which cannot be avoided, were vain, cowardly,
and hurtful. Yet would I dye easily and such a death as Augustus desired and
obtained; for by living till I am Old, I shall not only gain a longer life, but
also an easier death.

XII. 'Twas Aristotle's opinion that Old men dyed not only without pain, but
also without any seeling of death, because the heat of their bodies was
quenched. Which may be illustrated by this Example; If you go about to draw a
Tooth, that is not loose, you feel great smart, but if 'twere loose of it self
before; its drawn without any trouble. So green Youth with extreme reluctance
yields to death, whereas old Folks in dying feel almost no grief at all. In
India men are said to live commonly an hundred and thirty years, by reason of
the goodness of Air and the Peoples being without cares. Whereas we continuing
in cares, luxury, and immoderate labors, choosing Air for profit, not for
health, bring upon our selves diseases and untimely death, and yet lay the
fault on Nature. How much better were it to know how to use the benefit of
Nature, if thou esteemest Life to be such a pleasant and desirable thing. How
have Hermites lived so long but by living temperately and void of care? The
longest life is short, because death will certainly put an end to it: Only
Virtue and worthy actions can extend it, and Idleness and Vice shorten it.

XIII. Alexander, though he lived not above 33 years, died an Old man, by means
of his great Exploits. Whereas Argantonius may be said to have died young, though
he lived an hundred and twenty years, because he was remarkable only for his
Age. It Is likewise to be noted, that commonly all notable men have died in their
youth. Hercules, Achilles, Castor, Pollux, Ajax, Jason, Lucan, Catullus,
Tibullus, Virgil, Demosthenes, Cicero, Julius Caesar, Severus, Alexander,
Probus, Aurelian, Claudius, died all of 'em young: Who were too great and too
good for this World, and therefore the Gods took 'em to themselves.

XIV. But put case thou live to be old, how many vexations must thou expect,
what infirmities, Weakness, Maladies, Rhumes, Catarrhs, besides, the seeing of
thy self avoided and loathed by every body: Thou art tiresom even to thine own
Children, burthensom to thy self, troublesome to thy Friends, and contemptible
to thy Servants. Thy Taste is gone, rest thou can not, and being burdensome to
thy self, how can thou but be burdensome to others. We read that Zeno the
Philosopher, when he could not get rid of his life by Age, Strangled himself.
What pains and art was Tully fain to use to persuade people to bear their Old
age. Whereas no man thinks it necessary to exhort men patiently to endure
Health, or Riches: I am extremely taken with that saying of Theraminis, who
only escaping out of a ruined House, and his Friends congratulating his good
hap, cries out, O Fortune, for what sadder chance do thou reserve me! What he
said was not without reason, for not long after he suffered a painful death by
the cruelty of Tyrants. What man that has lived to be Old, if proffered to live
over again his past time, would accept of the condition. And seeing Old men can
expect nothing but Craziness, Coughs, Consumptions, Cares and uneasiness; I see
no cause why they should desire to live. And if when we are young and enjoy the
full use of our senses, beauty, strength, wit and authority, we are often weary
of our life, what shall we do when we hear (if we have any hearing left) our
selves called Old-doating-fool, and be made the subject of men's laughter and
pity.

XV. Art thou troubled to dye alone and leave so many behind thee? Remember to
what a great company thou art going, and that those whom thou have left alive
must of necessity follow thee, and that so speedily that they may be said to
dye with thee and bear thee company. The Fates are always at work, suffer none
to transgress their limits: This is an unalterable Law, It Is appointed for all
men once to dye.

XVI. And as amongst Condemned persons, those that have been less Criminal, are
first dispatched, whereas the others who have been guilty of greater crimes,
are reserved last to behold the terrors of death: So God first takes away those
whom he loves; to prevent their being the sad witnesses of others Miseries. I
remember when I was but a Child, my Mother Clara Michera, then a Young Woman,
was notwithstanding wont to wish she had dyed in her Infancy: when Older, she
still continued to say the same; I Asked her the reason, whereto she replied, I
live in expectation of Death, which could not have been so troublesome in my
Infancy, being then unsensible what it was to live or dye.

XVII. There is nothing but brings greater sorrow with it than joy, for
pleasure when gone, is succeeded by sadness. What do we Live for, to Eat and
Drink, and talk of News, and do the same things over and over again? What is
there in this Life that can delight? daily trouble to dress and undress a man's
self: Whereas the dead feel neither Cold in Winter, nor Heat in Summer, Cares
and Fears come not near them, for in the Grave the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary be at rest.

XVIII. It Is said of the Galatians that they so little regarded death, that they
chose to fight Naked. The Gymosophist answered Alexander very ingeniously, who
being asked by him which was strongest, Life or Death, replied Life, because it
bears so many Calamities.

XIX. Were it not for death, what a Cage of ravenous birds would this World be?
men would only meditate and improve their Arts of Violence and Oppression,
seeing in this short time they Live, and within sight of Death, they are guilty
of such Enormities.

Again, how needful is it that good men may thereby receive the reward of their
virtues, and live amongst such blessed Spirits as inhabit above the moon and
stars. So that Death can be only terrible to wicked men, who are to be
tormented in dark and solitary places.

XII. Some men are troubled about the manner of their Burial, a foolish care,
and not to be compared to that pleasant humor of good Diogenes, who lying Sick
and like to dye under a Tree, Answered them that asked him how he would be
Buried, that they should let him lie where he was: to which they replied, the
Beasts would tear him in pieces; prithee says he, then, lay a stick by me that
I may drive 'em away: Nay say his Friends, that will be to no purpose when you
shall be senceless; to whom he again replys, What harm can they then do me?

CHAP. II. The death of Parents, Children and Relations not to be Lamented.
Remarkable Examples of such as have born them patiently.
I. HAving said thus much touching our own deaths, come we now to consider what
reason we have to Lament the death of others, whom we Love. We mourn either in
respect of our selves or them; if for them, we believe their Souls are mortal
or immortal; if mortal, then we thus Complain: O Alas, henceforth thou shall
be no more thirsty, hungry, cold, hot, naked, sick, liable to injuries and
vexations, yea that which is more, thou art no longer liable to death as I am.
Or if thou believe the Soul to be immortal, then must thou thus Lament. Alas
my dear Friend (or Child,) thou art of a mortal Creature become an immortal
Spirit, of a miserable Wretch, an happy Soul, thou have passed from death to
Life, from a Vale of Tears, to a Place of Inexpressible Joy. Who can hold his
sides in hearing thee thus Complain? But if thou say I Lament my own Loss, then
thou show thy self an Envious and Narrow Soul, in desiring to detain him in
Misery, and deprive him of those Joys he possesses, on Account of some little
Advantages thou receivest by his Company.

II. Besides, consider though thou have lost thy good Friend, yet has he left
behind him him as good men as himself. But supposing thou shall never light of
the like, yet remember what pains thou have taken for him when living, how
burdensome he has been to thee, and how uncertain thou art of his good will
toward thee, and what he might at length showed himself to thee had he lived
longer. How commonly have men been injured, yea ruined by their own kinsmen,
brethren and relations, by whom heretofore they have been assisted.

Cassius and Brutus helped Julius Caesar to fight against his Country; but
being made Emperor, they slew him. Alexander while he Lived was faithfully
served by his Soldiers, but when dead, his children, kindred, and friends, were
all destroyed by them, and yet at the death of one of them, he felt such grief,
that he scarcely could ever forget it.

III. The Thracians at the death of their friends were wont to rejoice and make
good cheer, because they considered them as delivered from all wordly misery,
and arrived at felicity. And on the contrary, when any Child was born, they
wept and lamented its entrance into a troublesome world: which custom a Citizen
of ours followed, who dying, desired, that with music and dancing he might be
carried forth to his Burial.

IV. Wise and discreet Lawmakers, in compliance with Popular Folly, appointed
limits to Mourning. Lycurgus gave leave for a man to Lament Eleven Days, but
after that he must be no longer seen to Lament.

V. When thou Lamentest the Death of thy Friend, tell me whether thou had
rather dyed thy self? Thus it must needs be, either Children must dye before
their Parents, or Parents before their Children, or else all together. But to
dye all together is esteemed a great Calamity. Do thou mourn because thy
Friend or Child is delivered from Old Age? Or do thou Lament that in others,
which in thy self thou think ought patiently to be endured. Or will thou
weep like the Old Woman I knew, who coming to the Gate where we were, begged
Alms, and the more to move us to Compassion alleged, She was without Father or
Mother, whereupon we asked what Age she was of, she Answered a Poor Old Woman
of above Fourscore, which made us all burst out into Laughter, for although we
pitied her Age, yet we could not be much concerned at the loss of her Parents.

VI. It Is reported that in the Island of Coius, the Old Men being past
Threescore, are wont to be carried in Triumph through the City, and afterward
slain in the sight of all the People. Because after that Age, they being
unprofitable, their deaths in respect of the want of Provision, may greatly
benefit the Commonwealth. The Country of the Caspians abounding with men, but
scarce of Provision; their Custom is, after their Parents be passed Threescore
and Ten, to shut 'em up and starve them with hunger, which is indeed Cruel and
Barbarous, but when Natural Death happens to our Parents, we ought patiently to
bear their Loss, in as much as they have run through their Course of Misery,
whereas we are to abide the troublesome Assaults of it.

VII. Yet would I not Counsel thee to do as a Young Man did who claimed Kindred
of us; for he, when he was told his Father was dead, fell a dancing in the
presence of several People, and cried out 'twas pity he dyed not sooner: but
the wretch escaped not unpunished for his impiety, and breach of the precept,
for he dyed of a Consumption soon after. Not only Moses, but even Homer affirms
those to be short-lived, that do not render their Parents the respects due for
their Education. But as it is the temper of an ungracious Son to wish the death
of his Parents, so it is the part of a wise Son patiently to bear it. And in
like manner the loss of other Relations; have thou lost thy Brother, experience
shows us, that most brothers be quarrelsom, cumbersom, envious, captious, and
disdainful. The Poet was wont therefore very well to resemble Brethren to the
winds, because they ever disagree, and live as if they were born for no other
end (in respect of each other) but to quarrel. Cain gave us an early Specimen
of what Brotherly Love would be. Then Jacob deceived Esau, Absalom kills his
Brother Amnon, Abimelech the Son of Gideon, murdered his Threescore and Nine
Brethren, leaving only One alive. It would be an endless Task to recite all the
Mischiefs which one Brother has done another. I knew one man that killed his
Two Brethrne at several times; Another the Year before was Beheaded for having
murdered Three of his Brethren. But admit thy Brother be a good Man: yet what
benefit can thou expect from him more than others? if thou want
Assistance, a Friend, as Solomon says, is better than a Brother, if thou
expects Love, it must be from thy Parents; if Obedience, from thy Son; if
Flattery, and Obsequiousness, from thy Servant.

VIII. But thou will Reply, I loved my Brother dearly: but did he love thee?
Alexius was Brother to Isaac Emperor of Germany, by whom he was not only
redeemed out of Slavery from the Turks with a considerable Sum of money, but
also admitted to share with him in the Government of the Empire;
notwithstanding which great kindness, he not only a while after his return,
deposed Isaac from his Kingdom, but put out his Eyes and kept him in perpetual
Imprisonment.

Thou may boldly say thou love, and not be deceived, but can not know
how thou art beloved thy self. Thou weepest for him, who had he survived, would
not have shed one Tear for thee. If thou were unwilling to dye before him, why
do thou lament that he is first dead. Is it not sufficient for thee to
believe he is gone to Heaven, or art thou sorry he has obtained liberty, and
everlasting life.

IX. The death of Children seems indeed a sad Affliction, and in a manner
insupportable, especially if a man has none left, and all hope of having more
cut off. Yet let us consider whether he is more happy that is barren and has no
Children, or the other? The Childless man has only to lament his want of
Posterity, which if thou desire in respect of perpetuity, thou foolishly
hopest that amongst so many thousands of men, thy Posterity should remain, though
the world were never to end? But that the World will end, all Authority grants
unless it be that of Aristotle. But if thy Posterity do always remain, art thou
ever a whit the happier for that? So subtle a thing is this pleasure of
Posterity, as indeed it may be called nothing; for after a few years all memory
of our Ancestors is worn out. Who is he that ever knew almost his great
Grandfather? Whereas on the contrary, to so small a pleasure how great care is
joined? Hence comes danger of death, charge of their education, fear of want,
care for their learning, wantonness in childhood, rashness in youth,
stubborness, disobedience and pride, especially in those whose Parents are
rich. Compare the life of those that have not Children, with those that have,
and thou shall soon find a vast difference? The former live comparatively
without care, free, jocund, and lively: fear neither Poverty nor Riches,
public nor private Calamity. In times of Famine, War, or Pestilence a good
natured Man's mind is wholly concerned for his Children and Relations. In time
of Plague, thou have no place to flee to, in times of War thou can not
remove. In times of Famine unprovided whither to go.

Consider well these encumbrances and see whether they are comparable to the
want of Children.

X. Again, Why art thou troubled at the loss of Children? As for thy Childs
part, thou have no reason to lament, who either feels nothing, or else is in
inexpressible felicity: And as to thy self, thou have changed danger for
security, labor for rest, bondage for liberty, and yet complainest? Not long
since I heard some poor Women lamenting and wishing the death of their
Children. Had it not been better for them to have had none than thus to wish
their deaths? Take this for a certain truth, if thou art poor, thou can have
no comfort in Children: and he that is Rich, what security has he of
continuing so?

But thou have lost thy Child? And cannot that loss be supplied? it is true, the
death of thy Father or Brother cannot be repaired.

XI. Thou will say perhaps, My Son was now become like unto me, I had spent
much money, care and pains upon him, and probably might have happened to be a
brave Fellow. But these complaints better become the Women; for if thou
bewailest thy loss of Money, then thou had more need be cured of thy
covetousness, than comforted for the loss of thy Son: Besides, the better he
was, the fitter for Heaven, and the greater reason have thou to be comforted at
his departure; for had he staid longer here in the world, so great and
bewitching are the temptations thereof, that thou have great reason to fear his
being struck with the contagion of bad examples. Whereas now he has escaped the
Vices of the age, and gone to the place of innocent Souls to enjoy those divine
pleasures which are too big to be described; unto which felicity he could not
arrive but by death. He has paid that debt which is due to Nature, and gone to
the Grave where thou must soon follow. Weep for thy self then, not for him, for
his misery is over, whereas thine is to come. I must confessed Nature does
strongly impose upon us in this case, otherwise we could not forget so much as
we do the love of our selves, our Country, and duty both to God and Man. So
dotingly fond are we of 'em, as shows in effect we rather hate them. We indulge
them in wilfulness, ease and wantonness, revenge, pride and covetousness.

XII. Nature cannot be blamed as enduing us with this foolish care and
immoderate love; for the appetites she has implanted in us are modest and
limited; and if we pass the bounds, it is not Her fault. Other creatures eat and
drink only when necessity urges them, whereas Man does this unseasonably and
wantonly. Being guilty of the same immoderation herein, as in the love of his
Offspring; not valuing what becomes of his own Body or Soul provided he can
leave them rich.

XIII. This extreme affection is not according to Nature, but a Vice. Behold
other living Creatures when they have brought forth their young into the world,
and find them able to shift for themselves, take no farther care of them: In
this far happier than Men. Let the examples of the Wise moderate thy grief.
Alexander made a Funeral Oration for his own Son, wherein he praised him for
his virtues, and so buried him. Demosthenes the 7th. day after the death of his
only Daughter, put on his white Garment, was Crowned, and Sacrificed an Ox.
Dion fitting in Council upon public affairs, and informed his only Son had
fallen from the Housetop and broke his Neck, gave order for his Burial, and
continued on his business. The Constancy of Pericles is to be admired, for
having lost within eight days his two Sons, young men of exceeding great hopes,
did notwithstanding put on his white Garments, was Crowned, made Orations to
the Athenians, and coming from his House where his Children lay dead, delivered
his advice upon sundry weighty matters, and discoursed at large touching the
art of War. So Anaxagoras whilst he was disputing with his Scholars, word was
brought that his Son was dead, whereat he paused a while, and returned answer
to the Messenger, he considered he had begotten a Mortal Creature. When Brutus
openly punished his two Sons, what terror did this strike into his Citizens,
what fear into his Enemies, and admiration into his Neighbors? For that
instance of his Justice and Severity, did mightily advantage the Empire and
stir up all Counties round about it to the emulation of so great a virtue.

XIV. Neither does Story only furnish us with instances of Men's heroic courage
in this particular, but also of Women's. Cornelia the Mother of the Gracchi, of
many Sons having only two left, and they both slain, (besides the reciting the
worthy deeds of them and their Father,) did not make any other show of sorrow.
Argilon the Mother of Brasides, the Lacedemonian King, hearing her Son was
slain, gave no sign of Grief, but Asked whether he Nobly and Worthily Dyed.
Another when word was brought her of her Sons being Slain, Was it not
necessary, says she, that he should slay others, or be slain himself? I could
give a Thousand instances of this kind, were it necessary.

CHAP. III. The unprofitableness of Riches. A brief Account of the Authors
Life. Poor men more happy than Princes. No man poor that has whereon to Live.
I. MOst men's minds are so greatly set on Riches, that till Death comes they
think of nothing else. For every man fancies he has a long time to live, and
puts the Evil Day far from him, as if the forgetfulness of that time were a
means to escape it. And not contented with this, they esteem all men fools that
pursue not the same Ends. As if Riches could deliver from Death, or were of any
value to a Man in the Grave. Rather ought we to consider we are to pass over
into those parts, whither we can carry nothing with us, but our Virtues or
Vices: for whenever thou shall dye, will come into thy remembrance not thy
wealth, but thy grievous offenses, not thine honor or pleasures, but thy faith
and hopes of mercy. For at that instant all things will seem to thee to be
annihilated, and thy disturbed fancy will imagine the whole world to be sinking
into its former confusion. And as the Land seems to move in the sight of such
as sail on the Sea in a Ship, so in the hour of death will all things seem to
pass away. when thou shall for ever take leave of this earthly life, never more
to return to thy friends, wealth or pleasures, in which thou have so greatly
trusted. Therefore if thou expectest any other life after this, why do thou
not spend thy time in Virtue? But lest I be thought to give that counsel to
others which I never had occasion to use my self; know that I also have been in
misery; and therefore expect to be the more credited.

II. I was born in a time of Pestilence, when my Mother being big with Child of
me, was forced to leave the City; half dead came I into the world, in the year
1501, when all men despairing of my life, by virtue of a Bath made of Wine, I
was recovered. Within three months after I lost two of my Brethren and one
Sister. The Plague continuing in our City, took away my Nurse: whereupon I was
charitably received into the house of Isiodorus Resta a noble Gentleman and
friend of my Father, where after a few days I fell sick of a Dropsy and Flux of
the Liver, yet nevertheless preserved, whether through the wrath or mercy of
God, I know not. There was no kind of distemper which I did not undergo till I
attained eight years of age. At which time, I became Servant to my Father, and
so continued till I was eighteen.

III. Thus did I pass the flower of my youth, both without delight and study.
At length perceiving I could not compel nor persuade my Father to give me
Learning, I intended for love of it, to enter into some Religious house. My
Mother seeing her want of Children, entreated my Father to put me to School,
where, I remembering my time already lost, and the shortness of Man's life,
earnestly applied my self to my Book, ever in fear lest my Father hearing some
bad report, should take me away.

I was not a little perplexed with the difficulty of the Latin Tongue, but
having with much labor mastred the uneasy part thereof, my Father gave me
leave to study Geometry and Logic, in which I made some proficiency. Then
distance from my Father making him begin to love me, he died, having newly
begun to affect me. At that time the Wars began in our Country, when being poor
and void of all other help, through the great care and diligence of my Mother I
was maintained, when my small Patrimony was not sufficient; for such as it was
I spent it in the office of Rector in the University: Nor had I any other way
of getting my living but by playing at Chess.

IV. At length after I had rubbed through several straights, I settled my self
and Family in the Town of Pavia, where by practice of Physic, though poorly, I
made a hard shift to maintain my self and Family; for I had contracted debts by
my vainglorious office. Then my Mother sends for me home to the City, where I
found all things in disorder as to my private affairs, no friends, or
assistance, my Kinsmen sued me at Law; and was refused in our College of
Physicians, being suspected a Bastard because my Father used me so ill. Neither
can I boast of any favor from the Physicians of Padoa, where having twice
deserved to be made Doctor, they denied me my Grace. But at length through the
earnest suit of the President, I took that degree. This might well shame me to
relate, were not their injustice the cause, not my want of Learning.

Not long after this I fell into a Consumption, a distemper which many
Physicians hold incurable* Yet it pleased God I escaped it after seven Months
without help of any Physician, and beyond all expectation. Let any one now
imagine what cares, sorrow and vexation my mind endured, when on the one side I
considered mine own great poverty, and on the other, my Mothers unwieldy and
helpless age. Besides this, the opposition of my Relations, the wrong received
from the Physicians, the threatenings of a Great Man, the despair of Health,
want of Friends, and an House to lie in, did all together beset me. I needed
whereon to live: Labor I was not able, and could not think of begging, were my
necessities never so great. Yet at length notwithstanding these manifold
vexations by returning to the City, I recovered my Health, met with Friends who
comforted and bountifully relieved me.

My Physic in my sickness was Abstinence. Against my Misfortunes I made use of
Patience, against Poverty, Sparingness, against Prosecution diligence to avoid
the strokes of it; against Repulses the precepts of Philosophy; and from the
beginning of my troubles (this Book though not then written) did greatly comfort
me.

Being thus returned to my Country, my Mother at last recovered her health, and
was my self relieved and defended by my good Patron the Reverend Bishop Philip
Archintus, both for Virtue and Learning an excellent Man. Afterward through
the assistance of Alphonsus D'Avila (to whom I Dedicated my Book De
Aeternitatis Arcanis) I was admitted one of the College of Physicians, with the
good liking of every honest man, being then almost Forty years of age.

Such has been the course of my Life: what helps my Studies have contributed
to the mitigating of the sundry hardships thereof, any man may imagine. As for
Riches I ever contemned them, with the same greatness of mind, as all other
chances of Fortune; Patience in all the occurrences of my whole Life has
extremely helped me: for by virtue thereof I have found assistance in my
greatest extremity, even from them of whom I have least desired or expected any
thing; for Franciscus Bonafidus, an able and faithful Physician, so stoutly
defended my Cause against the Doctors of Padoa, as no Brother for a Brother
could do more.

Great assistance did I also received from Francis Cruceirs, a most upright
Lawyer, my Suit depending in the City of Milain, who greatly encouraged me to
proceed in this my present Work, as well as in others, but I have found that to
the writing of Books, a Mind free from such troubles as I have suffered, is
absolutely requisite.

But I have said too much perhaps touching my self. Yet what honor and credit
can base Parentage be, the slightings of my Father, Friends, and Country, my
want of Health, and Poverty, next to Beggary? Whosoever thinks I have spoken
this out of Vainglory, must repute me a very Fool. But it was my design by my
own Example to teach these two things. First, that it is nothing but a guilty
Conscience can make any man miserable. Secondly, that constancy of Mind does
greatly help, not only to bear Evils, but to procure a change of Fortune. But
however this is necessary to keep thee from being miserable, to believe thou
art not so. Which Rule in one word may be taught and learned of every man.

IV. But I promised at the beginning of this Book to treat of Poverty and its
Remedy: For the Burden of it seems to some intolerable, as it was observed of
old by Menander. In discoursing of which, we shall first consider, That the
Poor man is no less happy than the Rich. Secondly, that Poverty is no hindrance
to the atchieving glorious Actions. And Thirdly, that there is nothing more
hurtful to a poor man than to desire to be rich. Fourthly, that Riches after
death do neither profit the deceased, nor his Posterity.

V. As to the First, I affirm there is greater felicity to be found in a poor
Commonwealth than in a rich; less hatred, ambition and disorder. Pliny often
mentions the respect which the Carthaginians gave the Romans for their Virtue,
although at Wars with them: But when once Riches grew in Credit, nothing
continued stable, nothing quiet; the People always at variance, the Senate
without authority, Laws violated, Gravity and Sobriety ridiculed and laughed out
of countenance, all things profaned and mixed with the dregs of Slaves and
Strangers. Whence it appears that Misery is an attendant of Riches, and
Quietness of Poverty.

VI. But to pass by Commonwealths, let us turn our Discourse to private
persons, whose Lives are far more happy than those of Princes and great
Persons; for what proof of Friendship can they receive, when hope of Reward, or
fear of Punishment are the motives that influence all about them. And therefore
King Philip reproved his Son Alexander, because he thought to gain the goodwill
of his people by Liberality. But supposing they were in this particular equal
to private Persons, let us consider whether their Lives in other matters are to
be compared, inrespect of happiness, with them. The Poor Man rising early;
after his Hands be washed, betakes himself to his labor, at which having for
some time exercised himsel (besides the help of his hungry Supper) the night
before with his fellow-laborer, they savor all sorts of Meat, whatsoever comes
to hand seems pleasant, delicate and precious. At Dinner they discourse of
jocular matters, and talk what hope they have of time to come. This company
breeds no Discontent, this diet causes no Satiety, no Disdain, no Suspicion.
The Dinner ended, after pausing a while, they return to accustomed labor, by
which they get a good appetite to Supper: there being met, they want no mirth,
gentle Jests, and pleasant Tales, according to the quality of the Guests. Then
to Bed they go, whereunto preparing themselves, the shining Stars put them in
mind to look up to Heaven, to that most blessed Country where they hope at
length to arrive. If conscious to themselves of any amiss word or deed, they
implore the Divine Forgiveness: and being wearied with hard labor, the Good
man soon falls into a sound sleep. Thus does he enjoy Health and a long Life,
neither troubled at what is past, nor afraid of what is to come.

On Holy days, he rests his wearied Limbs: Then wanders at will, and if there
be any thing in City or Country pleasant and worth seeing, he may without
offense behold it. He veiws the Suburbs, green Fields and smiling Meads, meets
his Companions, and every where takes his disport. No vexatious thoughts hinder
the tranquillity of his mind, but joyeth in Life, and lives prepared for Death:
and if he chance to be so learned that he can read History, he may be accounted
somewhat the more happy.

VII. Whereas the life of a Prince is quite contrary; for he having with much
difficulty got off yesterdays Surfeit, gets up, his Mouth not well in taste, and
troubled with the nauseous belches of his own Stomach, is so uneasy that he
knows not what to do with himself. Then his Guard comes about him, Soldiers,
Servants, Parasites, Flatterers, and Suitors; People swarm, cry out and
complain; the Porters keep back the importunate Guests, and some (and they
perhaps the most troublesome) for Money are let in. And if the Prince be a man
of business, he examines his concerns, which finding to be infinite, he loathes
his own life; for some things he despaireth to bring to pass; and others he
hopes not without difficulty to effect. Now he blames the unfaithfulness of
some persons: Then accuses the negligence of others. At last he finds all his
Friends and Servants are friends to their own interest, and serve him only to
serve themselves. Now is his mind perplexed how to provide against such an
imminent danger. Then he goes to Chapel. Afterward hears Suits, wherein the
more attentive he is, the more is his trouble and anxiety of mind; so at last
he refers all to his Council.

VIII. Then comes Dinnertime, when he has Dishes, Platters, Cups, Saucers,
Carpets, Wine, Sallets, Sauce, Meat, Bread, and all sorts of Dainties; but
being thus settled at Meat, either he has no Company at all, or if any, they be
his inferiors, who are ready to gape for every bit of Meat he puts in his
mouth; whereas he having no appetite, and being used to these delicacies, they
do not at all please him, neither takes he delight in any thing he sees;
ashamed at his own fastidiousness, he looks here and there, and at length
chooses something that is least displeasing to him. But supposing this day
brings him a Stomach, which is very rare, does he then receive any
satisfaction? none at all, for he is suspicious and fearful of every thing,
Meat, Drink, Cups, Napkins, Trenchers and Knives may be Poisoned. What pleasure
can there be in Eating, to a man beset with so many fears? were it not better
to eat buttered Parsnips and Turnips in an Earthen-platter?

IX. When Damocles had long flattered Dionisius, the Tyrant caused this
Parasite to put on his Princely apparel, placed him in his Chair of State, and
set before him all the Riches of Syracuse; Which done, he by a small Thread
hanged over his head a sharp naked Sword, which Damocles seeing, durst not
stretch out his Arm, no nor endeavor to carve those Delicacies which were set
before him: But finding himself on every side beset with fear, prayed his Host
to deliver him from this Royal Feast, by which he learned so much, that he
never after desired to become King.

X. Again, when a Prince has sumptuously Dined, and all his dishes with great
Ceremony taken away, then in come Jesters, Juglers and Fiddlers; some they
craftily flatter, and others they disgrace, whereat these laugh, the others
inwardly fret and vex: in the mean time the Prince with feigned cheer, museth
on matters more weighty; and business calling him away, to Council he goes,
where many matters be brought in question, neither pleasant to hear, nor easy
to effect; because some of them are unjust, and others perilous. Now is he
offended at his Ministers administration, and by and by discovers another
Treachery; another's ingratitude galls him, another's Mistakes: His mind being
thus vexed, he sighs and laments, endeavoring to get rid of such troublesome
thoughts, and thereupon betakes himself to diversion: rides out of Town, but
alas all in vain, for black cares sit fast behind him: and the worst of it is,
he can go no whither but the People follow, and by the sight of them, bring
that to mind, which he cannot endure to think of. Then after discourse of
sundry Matters, to Supper he goes, with the same Appetite he eat his Dinner;
and at length to Bed, where before he sleeps, he ruminates on sundry unpleasant
matters, how many Men are or must be Executed, though not justly, yet
necessarily, what Secret practices are in hand against him, what War to be
undertaken, and the manifold hazards of it; and on sundry other anxious
affairs, which make him at length think himself the most miserable of all
Mortals, and wish rather to have been born any thing than what he is. And thus
passing from one fancy to another, he turns and tosseth his mind; and in the
end finding all things vexatious and perplexing, desires Sleep, which is not
easily had. But admit he does sleep, his restless Fancy is troubled with such
unpleasing imaginations, fearful Dreams and Visions, as surpass all
description. In a word, though his Bed be soft, rich and delicate, yet is his
rest oft-times hard and short.

XI. What is a Kingdom, says Antigonus, but a glorious Servitude? Kings are
only the Ministers and Servants of many: Or if they be Lords over others, yet
are they too often Slaves to the vilest lusts, incest, adulteries, covetousness,
murders, fears and jealousies; suspect many times their nearest friends,
Children, Wife, Concubine, Cup Bearer, Barber; and what Guard so vigilant as
can defend them. Whereas the Life of a poor man is void of all cares and fears,
he lives long, is healthy and vigorous.

XII. I remember but three men that have passed the age of an hundred years,
and they almost Beggars, one was a Carpenter, the other an Apothecary, and the
third a Plowman. For how can his life be long that lives in Lust, Idleness,
and Surfeitings; they are always idle, or excessively laborious, sitting up in
the Night, and sleeping in the Day; whence proceed Dropsies, Consumptions, and
Gouts, to the Rich: whereas you shall seldom hear a Poor man complain of it.

XIII. It Is observable a Poor man has more beautiful Children than those that
be Rich, and are generally more fortunate: They frequently are barren, or if
they have Children, they are commonly very weak and sickly; whereas you shall
never hear Poor men complain of the want of Issue, yea, are rather overstockt.
Moreover Poor men enjoy that Liberty, which the Rich dare not pretend to. A man
of a mean fortune can visit every place, but Princes are withheld most times by
Punctilo's of Honor, and want of Preparation to receive them. In Summer,
notwithstanding the greatest care, they are annoyed with Dust; in Winter shun
the Cold, and yet feel it. Whereas the Poor man in Summer works in the shade;
and in Winter with labor expels the Cold by a most advantageous manner. The
Rich man anxiously preserves his Lands, which the Poor man beholds as well as
he, and the seldomer he has liberty to look abroad, the more pleasure he has in
seeing. I my self for this very reason never wished to have Gardens in the
Suburbs, as knowing other men's would be more pleasant to me; and all the
delight which we receive in these things is from their variety and novelty.

XIV. All men endeavor to live, which living the Poor man obtains as well as
the Rich; his Body is healthful and vigorous, and mind best fitted for
Contemplation.

XV. The Rich man's mind is continually perplexed with Cares, whereas the Poor
man is only concerned to get his living. The former of these studies how to
keep his wealth, how to increase and bestow it. He is forced to keep others,
and though called the Master of all, yet is he Servant to the whole family; his
Life is many times in danger for his Riches: whereas the Poor man fears neither
the losing of his Life nor his Estate. One only fear the Poor man has, and that
is, lest he should lack whereon to subsist; but yet without cause, for being
honest and industrious, should he meet with any misfortune, there is no man but
will be ready to help him: for such a one cannot want Friends, the charity of
Good men, and the assistance of Hospitals. I could never hear of an Honest man
that was any considerable time in want. Its certain that Riches have killed
more than Hunger. I have known an hundred persons my self, whose great Estates
have occasioned their ruin; some imprisoned by their Relations, others stabbed,
hanged, robbed and murdered as they were traveling; but I never knew above four
that died of Hunger, and that by their own fault. Seeing then so few persons
perish through Poverty, and so many by Riches, I pray which condition is most
eligible. A Rich man is laden with unnecessary Apparel, Household Stuff, which
require care in preserving and daily reparation. Gold is no more wholesome to
drink in than Glass, nor Silver more cleanly than Stone. Garments the more
simple they be, the more convenient and less burdensome. Man is born Naked, he
needs a covering, but no burden.

XVI. Socrates beholding great variety of Merchandises to be sold in a Fair,
how many things, says he, are there here of which I have no need? He esteemed
them likest the Gods that wanted fewest things. Costly Apparel is spoiled by
Dust and Moths; Water rots it, and Thieves steal it, or Neighbors borrow it.
What is fine Attire but a burdensome and troublesome Bravery? In short, what has
a Rich man more than a Poor? The latter has Life, Health, Children, Meat,
Sleep, Friends, Liberty, Security, Pleasure and Rest, with all other things
needful. Lord, says the Prophet, give me neither Poverty nor Riches. And were a
wise man left to his choice, he would certainly prefer the former before the
latter. Riches are more dangerous than Poverty; for Poverty is relieved by art
and industry, but there is no remedy against the discommodity of Riches. Also
the fall from Riches is great and without recovery, whereas Poverty differs
little from Sufficiency, and keeps a man out of danger of falling. In Poverty
at farthest, the Body can be only endangered, whereas Riches endanger the loss
of both Body and Soul. Finally, if Poverty be removed, all the inconveniences
wherewith it is attended be taken away. But such as love Riches, if they lose
them, do notwithstanding keep still those vices and imperfections which they
caused whilst they possessed them. Poverty is certainly worthy of great honor,
for we are beholding to it for the inventions of Arts; whereas Rich men never
deserved this praise. Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Epictetus, and Cleanthes,
were all poor men, the latter of which was fain all day to draw Water to get
his living, and to Study in the night. Socrates was little better than a
Beggar. Plato became rich by his second Voyage into Sicily. Aristotle lived a
long time poor, and when an Old man, was enriched by Alexander. Homer that
famous Greek Poet, was but a poor blind Harper. And Virgil the Prince of Latin
Poets, was far from being over-rich. The whole rout of Grammarians and Orators
were such kind of men: Pompilius, Andronicus, Orbilaus, Valerius, Cato,
Laenius, Julius Higinus. Plinius Caecilius reports that Quintilian was not
overstockt with wealth. Juvenal mocking Statius the Famed Poet, tells us he
begged his Bread.

XVIII. Paul Aemilius that Famous Captain could not make his Wife a Jointure.
Also Marius and Sextorius, came but of mean Parentage, yet one of them was the
Terror, and the other the Safeguard of Rome. Scipio Africanus had lain in
Prison for debt, had not Gracchus assisted him. Arator Cincinatus, Calatinus
Fabricius, that fought with Pyrus, Valerian, Publicola, Menenius Agrippa, Q.
Aemilius, Aristides, Photion, Meltiades, Cimon, Spartacus, Viriatus, all the
Dukes of Lacedemonia, even the bravest of them, as Lisander, came but of a mean
Family. And whom can you allege against these, the desperate Alexander, or
Caesar the destroyer of his Country, or Scylla with his Proscriptions.

XIX. But to return to the Point in hand; what greater misery can God lay upon
a man, than to suffer him to covet Riches: It Is Labor without end, and like
the turning of Sisyphus's Stone; who is said, for revealing the Secrets of
Heaven, to remain in Hell, and there continually to roll up a heavy Stone to
the top of a steep Hill, which presently rolls down again, and he without
ceasing follows and brings it up upon his shoulders. For to what end do thou
labor for more than will buy thee necessaries, depriving thy self of the
comforts of what thou may enjoy. Thou shortenest thy days and hindrest thy
health. Some men I have known live miserably, to the end they might have a
stately and honorbale Burial.

XIX. But thou perhaps desire not Riches upon this account, but to leave thy
Son a fair inheritance; so that thou labourest, studiest, watchest, hazardest
the health of thy Soul and Body, do violence to thine own Conscience, and
destroyest the peace of thine own Mind, that thy Son may spend, consume, make
havoc, Whore, Drink, Game, and Live in Riot and Idleness: To make him Proud,
Soft, Ridiculous, Foolish, Mad, and good for nothing. Again, How often have we
seen a great Fortune left to a Son or Daughter, make 'em a Prey to some greedy
and perfidious Villain. In short, Riches have been the cause of the most Bloody
and Tragical Events which we meet with in all Relations. Most of those I ever
heard of that by inheritance arrived to great Estates, have spent and consumed
'em in a short time. How can it but trouble thee when thou lie upon thy
deathbed, to think that what thou have gotten by great toil, will serve only
as a means to debauch thy Son. The Son of Ruinus having received from his
Father a rich inheritance, fell into such a frenzy as cost him his Life. How
many ways are Laws violated? How many Rebellions happen! How many Treasons,
wherein such as are of mean fortune are almost never concerned. Besides, thou will leave thine Estate to a Son, or Brother, who probably will not part with
one Farthing of it to redeem thy Life from the Grave.

Yet such is thy madness as with loss of thine own quiet thou seek to make
them Rich. Wherefore seeing Riches procure neither Glory nor Felicity to our
Selves or Posterity, there can be nothing more pernicious to us than to desire
'em, and anxiously pursue the search of them. But here the Example of all the
World will be objected against what I say, for every man seeks Riches, but no
man wishes to be Poor. I shall not here set my self to refute this Objection,
only say in short, that the Multitude are ill Judges of things, that they are
the great Masters of Error, and Enemies to all Philosophy, that their Examples
are in no wise to be imitated, they being continually in the wrong. For
whatsoever is profitable or necessary to any Creatures, that is naturally
desirable: in which desires, bruit beasts (who are guided only by Sense) do not
transgress. Whereas man who has most Reason in his Understanding, has least in
his Actions: for he Eats, Drinks, and Sleeps, more than either Convenience or
Necessity require: whatsoever more than necessary is desired, is not only not
good, but contrary to Nature. All men naturally desire Riches, as Meat or
Drink, not because Excess of them is natural, but because somewhat in them is
natural, that is to say, so much of them as serve to purchase Necessaries,
which what man is he that does not get. For to have nothing, nor know which way
to get any thing, is contrary to Nature.

But it may be Objected against the Advantage which I alleged Poor men enjoy,
such as Labor, Exercise, Industry, Patience and Abstinence, that these also
may be enjoyed by them that be Rich, and the choice of these being in the Rich
Man, he is consequently the most Happy. For if we willingly want pleasure, the
want of them cannot seem grievous. Yet herein is a great mistake, because that
Man who has been gentily brought up, his mind is made effeminate, his body
tender, and unable to endure Labor. He that has accustomed himself to sundry
meats, his digestion becomes delicate and squeamish: And if a man so Educated
changes his diet to poor men's fare, he soon becomes diseased, full of
obstructions, and subject to consumptions. Or if he betakes himself to Labor,
he grows thereby unhealthy, falls into feverish distempers, and in a short
space dies. If such kind of People, I say, as these, apply themselves to hard
study, they commonly shorten their days; as did John Picus Mirandula. It Is
rarely seen that a Man born to a great Estate becomes Excellent in Learning:
unless he at first lived meanly, or in his youth fell into some Frenzy. Again
the Rich have more need of the Poor, than the Poor of the Rich. For the Rich
Man needs a Physician, a Barber, a Groom, a Plowman, a Cook: and which of them
needs a Rich Man?

XX. So great are the vexations which attend Power and Authority, as will
endear Poverty to a Considerative Man.

Charles the Fifth though he Governed well and happily, yet how did the thoughts
of preserving his Empire disquiet him. Sometimes he was afraid that Sultan
Solomon would invade the confines of his Empire; otherwhiles he was perplexed
how to preserve the Islands of Baleares: Then he fears Sicily and Pulia were
not able to hold out against the Infidels; each Province called for his Care,
so that his thoughts were never at rest. And shall we call him happy who was
tormented with such Anxieties? for my part I should wish my self rather a
Carthusian Monk, and undergo all the Severities of that Order, than to wear his
Crown stuffed with those Cares: will any man say Francis the French King might be
called happy, or Sultan Solomon? Alas which of 'em lived not in Fear? which of
'em lived free from misfortunes? And tho perhaps they never met with any great
mishaps, yet considering what has befell others, and might befall them, they
likewise may be said to have spent their days in fearful expectations.

XXI. Polycrates who in his whole Life never met with any misfortune, was at
length taken by the King of Persia and hanged. It were endless to recount the
number of Kings whom Fortune has laughed at to scorn. Thou who admirest the
Life of Princes and Great Men, standing gazing at their outsides, could thou
but look into their breasts, would heartily pity them, when thou complainest
of Poverty, do but consider how many are poorer and miserably than thy self,
in comparison of whom thou art Happy. How many be Sick? How many Deaf? Blind?
How many in Prison? How many in Exile? How many condemned to dye cruel and
ignominious Deaths, than all which without doubt thou art more happy. Moreover,
if thou complainest only of Poverty (unless thou would be a King) thou have
no cause to lament. Behold how many live miserably in the City? how many beg in
the Suburbs; how many spend their days in the Country in extreme want, yet
burdened with Families and Children. How many poor Villages are there, that
pass joyfully their days in a mean condition; because they see none near 'em
richer than themselves: when as the same persons if they resort to the City,
where they see the Riches and Bravery of others, then they repute themselves
miserable, and lament their hard fate. But this may be rather called Envy than
Poverty. Should it come to pass now as it did in the time of Noah, that all
money, provision, Cattle and other commodities, were carried away in a
universal Flood: I believe then no man would think himself injured by Poverty.
Why then do thou complain having whereon to live. This plainly evidences it is
not Poverty but Envy that molests thee, Why do thou not desire the Treasures
of Kings, and the Riches of India? How many Countries and People has Poverty
subdued and preserved. Alexander possessing nothing but Bodies and Weapons,
Conquered all Asia. The poor Commonwealth of Rome subdued the proud Gauls, the
stately Italians, the crafty Carthaginians, the numerous Greeks, and the
disdainful Jews. And by the same means the Germans, Persians and Scythians,
maintained their Rights, and kept their Liberties. But as soon as Scylla became
Great, and introduced the Love of Riches, the Glorious Liberty of the Roman
People melted away like Ice against the Sun: then followed Sedition, Civil
Wars, and all manner of injustice and cruel Murders, and in a short time the
whole Empire wasted to nothing.

XXII. Great Estates are seldom preserved long in a Family. For we rarely see
the Grandchild of a wealthy man dye Rich, which makes me the less marvail at so
many great men's disdaining Riches. Crates the Theban so little valued them,
that he cast 'em into the Sea. Zeno having lost his Estate, thanked God for
that happy mishap which made him a Philosopher. Diogenes not only patiently
suffered Poverty, but being Asked by Alexander what he wanted, replied, Nothing:
refusing the bountiful offers of that great Prince. Which made him say, that if
he were not Alexander, he would choose to be Diogenes.

CARDAN OF CONSOLATION.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of Banishment, or Confinement.
I. THE next Calamity to Poverty is Banishment, and in this matter it is only
Opinion that makes a man Miserable: For how many men have merely for Pleasure,
spent the greatest part of their Lives in Traveling and viewing strange
Countries; as Plato, Berosius, Galen, and Dioscorides: and how many Foreigners
amongst us do the same for Profit. There was an Italian a Citizen of ours, who
in Threescore Years had never traveled farthur than the Suburbs of the Town,
which being told the Prince, he commanded that henceforward he should not pass
those bounds: The poor Old man disliking this Confinement, desired leave to
travel in his Old age, which in his Youth he never minded, which being denied,
he fell sick and died.

II. As for my part, I should never value being Bannished my own Country,
provided I had whereon to live and maintain my self and Family elsewhere: For a
Man shall many times find more Civility and Respect abroad than at home.

III. Were Travail and leaving a Man's own Country to be reckoned an Evil, why
do so many Princes and great Personages voluntarily daily undertake it. To
behold the different Situations of Cities, the various Customs, and manners of
People, cannot but be exceeding grateful to the Curious. Thou gainest hence
Experience and greater Respect when thou returnest home. What pleasing sights
do offer themselves to thee, of Towns, Seas, Mountains, Rivers, Meads, Woods,
Hills and Plains. Alexander is said to Travel rather to excel Trajan, who
envied his Fame, than from a desire to Conquer the World.

IV. We find Homer commending his old Friend Ulysses, for nothing more than for
this. Again, Domesthenes, Cicero, Aristides, Thucidides, Themistocles,
Alcibiades, Codrus, Theseus, Eumolpus, Trax, Aristotle, Camillus, Corialanus,
Marius, Datanus, Trisibulus, Dion, Hannibal, Demetrius, Phalerius, have all
been Bannished their Countries. Conon voluntarily Bannished himself into
Cyprus, Iphicrates into Thrace.

V. In short, Consider again that of Socrates, the whole World is a Wise man's
Country, and so long as such a one is in the World, he is never out of it. Very
pleasant was the saying of Diogenes, who being told that the Synopenses had
commanded him to forsake their Country: and I, says he, command them for ever
to abide in it.

VI. Whosoever performs any worthy Act at home, instead of Glory, gains only
Envy. Where was our Savior himself less respected than in his own Country,
being not only disdained and afflicted there, but at length cruelly put to
Death.

CHAP. II. Of Injuries.
BUT perhaps thou will say, this is not my Case, thou art Wronged and Injured,
and therefore defirest Revenge. But pray consider whither this course will lead
thee, for he that seeks to revenge one injury, brings upon himself another: And
he that offered the first injury without occasion, what will he not do when
provoked? Is it not better to be quiet, and consider, that thy enemy being a
bad Man, it is his nature to be doing Mischief; and that he cares not whom he
hurts: That Vengeance belongs to God, and he will repay it. If thou have given
a just Cause, blame not him, but thy self, if not, it is the part of a Wise man
to bear it patiently. When Socrates was stricken upon the Shins and advised by
his Friends to be revenged for that Affront, Shall I, says he, if an Ass kicks
me, kick him again? And when his Wife snatched his Cloak off his Shoulders, and
his Friends persuaded him to Chastise her: No, no, replies he, it is sufficient
you know which is Socrates, and which is Zantippe.

VII. Diogenes receiving a box on the Ear, cried out, Who thought I needed an
Helmet, as often as I go forth? So likewise Crato being stricken on the Face by
Nicodromo Citaredo, did no more, but wrote Nicodromo's Name upon the Place, by
which means he showed the whole City the Injury offered him. And Plato being
told that Zenocrates Slandred him, said first, He could not believe it; but
when he was satisfied it was so; Answered, I cannot think he would thus speak
without Cause. What could be more Nobly and Prudently said.

VIII. But we Christians ought above all others to bear Injuries with Patience,
following herein the Example of our Lord (the Founder of our Religion) who
being Reviled, Reviled not again, and as a Sheep before his Shearers is Dumb,
so he opened not his mouth. What a foolish thing is it to seek Revenge, when it
cannot be had but with loss to the Person injured. Pausanias revenged himself
on Philip, but was Hanged for it. So did Andrew Lampugnes upon Galeazeus
Sforza, but thereby wrought, not only his own Destruction, but also his whole
Families. Revenge for the most part more hurts him that offers it, than him
against whom it is intended: It often ruins a Man before he has perfected it.

IX. When Cleomines had said in the presence of Aristides, that a man must do
good to his Friends, and hurt to his Foes; he turned the words, saying, a man
must benefit his Friends, and seek to be reconciled with his Enemies. Greater
by far is the pleasure of forgiving Injuries, than revenging them when it is in
our power: for the Man that renders Good for Evil, is like unto God. Julius
Caesar spared M. Marcellus his mortal Enemy; and set at liberty Petreius, who
was one of the Chief that opposed him. He received into Favor Cato's Son,
whose Father was his unchangeable Adversary. He Pardoned Ligarius at the suit
of his Friends: He spared also Cicero, and freely forgave all other Princes
that were in the Battle of Pharsalia. He set up the Images of Pompey, and
showed himself so generous and merciful, that Cicero both before and after his
death affirmed, he deserved better in point of Clemency than Pompey. How Nobly
did Adrian mittigate his Passion; for being made Emperor, and meeting his
Enemy, he said, Thou have escaped: declaring that as before he wanted Power to
be Revenged, so when he had it, he wanted Will.

X. It Is also to be considered there is nothing that more strengthens
Authority, than to forgive and pass by Injuries. And therefore Pelercus the
Lacedemonian complaining to his Brother, he was not so well beloved amongst the
Citizens as he was; he answered him, saying, the reason hereof is, Thou can
not suffer Injuries. It Is likewise to be remembered that, all those that aspire
to Greatness, do ever wink at many Wrongs. Although Alexander the Great knew the
Athenians hatred, and how zealously they Warred against him under Darius, yet
he endeavored not to be Revenged of them; which greatness of Mind Darius and
others understanding, they of Foes, became his Faithful Subjects and Friends.
Whereas had he given way to Passion, all the Flower of the Grecian Youth, yea,
and all India, had set themselves against him; which would certainly have put a
stop to his Projects. Pirrhus the Famous Captain took not the same course, for
he yielding to his Fury, made his designs Abortive, and died in Misery.

XI. When Julius Caesar was a private man, he was much abused by Cajus Calvus,
and Catullus; yet when he came to be Emperor, he Wrote first unto Calvus, and
Pardoned Catullus. Who was a greater Enemy to him than Clodius, who it was
thought made him a Cuckold; yet when he was apprehended, he would not only not
Condemn him, but saved him also from being Perjured: whereas Marius did
otherwise, for he thirsting after the Blood of his Enemies, was not only in the
prosecution of his Revenge destroyed by them, but likewise his whole Family.
When Fabius was constrained by the People, contrary to all Right, to admit of
Minutius to be his Master of Horse, and Equal, and in the Army, (who did
several things contrary to Fabius his Desires and his own Honor,) yet did the
former forget all Animosities, Joined with him against Hannibal, and saved him
from exceeding great danger; which wrought so upon Minutius, that he confessed
before all the People his unworthiness to Govern, and desired Fabius to take
upon him the Conduct of the whole Army.

XII. Cicero followed not this Example, when with cruel Invectives he
persecuted Clodius, but for his pains, was himself Bannished.

XIII. We disdain the injuries done us by bruit Beasts, but revenge the wrongs
offered by our Fellow Creatures. We also patiently endure the injuries which
Time does us, and yet cannot bear the wrongs offered by Men; whereas we have
greater reason to bear with the former, because Man is our Companion in Life,
and many times though we do not observe it, provoked by us.

XIV. What a Noble Act was that of Lucius Murena, who threw his Gown over Cato
and saved him from Death, who a little before had accused him. Publius Pulcher
being by the three Lentuli charged with Incest, did notwithstanding save one of
them from eminent Danger. The King Archelaus, when upon a time one threw Water
upon him, and being persuaded by them about him to inflict a grievous
Punishment upon him that did it, answered, I know he did not intend to cast it
upon me, but some body else. A Servant of Antius Restio's being long kept in
Prison by his Masters command, and often burnt with hot Irons, not only
followed his Master in a day of Triumph, but also rescued him from imminent
Danger. There is no readier way to Honor, Safety, and Quiet, than to contemn
Injuries.

Although the Dog be of far less use than the Ox or Horse, yet is he more beloved
of his Master, because he patiently suffers from him all kinds of wrong: if you
strike them, they Fawn; if you drive them away, they return; if you chide, they
flatter. And shall not we Men bear Injuries upon a better account; be patient a
while and thou shall see thy wrongs revenged by Nature, by Chance, or by some
other means; and he that with such perplexity and hazard of thy self thou
soughtest to harm, shall without any danger on thy part be destroyed. For the
Lives of all such as are disturbers of public Peace, are usually of short
continuance.

XV. But that which most troubles Men is the injury they receive from their
Wives; a grievous misfortune it is true, but very common. Pompey put away his
Wife for Adultery, and Caesar likewise his. The consideration of which great
Peoples mishap, may serve to mitigate the sowrness of thine. Septimius Severus,
and Marcus Aurel. Antoninus had also dishonest Wives, which did not at all
diminish their Authority among the People, or hinder them from living
Virtuously.

XVI. For in reference to this matter, the fault lying in others, the dishonor
and infamy cannot redound to thee. A Citizen of Sparta finding a Man in Bed
with his ill-favored Wife, cried out, Alas unhappy Man, what necessity has
drove thee to commit this wicked deed. Salethus Prince of Crotona made a Law
that Adulterers should be burnt alive; yet when afterward himself was taken
defiling his Brother's Wife, he made such an ingenuous Oration, that the People
were content to punish his offense only with Banishment: yet being sensible of
the greatness of his fault, he cast himself into the Fire and dyed. Whereby we
see he desired not Pardon, (though his words seemed to require it,) but rather
sought to show, that no offense could be so great but might deserve it.

CHAP. III. Of Imprisonment.
BUT we have said enough of Injuries, Speak we now of Imprisonment, which
seems the chief of all other Calamities: For in a Prison is darkness,
filthiness, solitariness, fetters, and all other kind of Miseries. But pray
what is this life, but an imprisonment of a Man's mind, much worse than that of
the Body. This would never seem any great Calamity to me, which so many
excellent Men have (as it were) desired. Demosthenes to the end he might be
forced to keep the House, cut off one side of his Beard.

A solitary life does greatly advance Contemplation, whereas Company hinders
it. What place so fit for Study, as that where there is quietness. Boethius
wrote nothing better than what he wrote in Prison. Did not Diogenes lurk a long
time within a Tub? Democritus separated himself a great while from all Company,
and voluntarily chose remote corners, for the convenience of Knowledge. Plato
tells us that Anaxagoras while he remained in Prison, wrote his Book de Circuli
Quadratura. To whom could Imprisonment be more grievous than to Socrates, when
it was to end in Death: yet did he sleep quietly, studied Philosophy, and wrote
Verses. St. Paul also sent the greatest part of his divine Epistles from Prison.

CHAP. IV. Of Servitude.
SErvitude ought patiently to be born, seeing Nature has not more liberally
bestowed her gifts on the Master, than the Servant: they are equally Wise,
Beautiful, and Healthful.

As to Contentment, it is the Servant's fault if in this particular he does not
outstrip his Master; for he has only one to serve, for which he has Meat,
Drink, Apparel, and all other necessaries; Whereas a Master has not only
himself to take care of, but also all others. Every Loss is a hinderance to the
Master, but none to the Servant.

We are all Servants to one common Master, namely God Almighty, and shall be
equally rewarded by him. What are Princes Favorites but Servants, tied to him
by Ambitious hopes? Servitude can be no hinderance to virtuous and honorable
actions: for Plato, Xenocrates, Calcedonius, Diogenes, Phaedrus, Epictetus, and
Aesop, were sometime Such.

CHAP. V. Of Sickness.
I. WHen Sickness is come upon thee, consider that even this condition is not
without its advantages; for hereby thou learnest thy self, that is to say, what
a weak, poor and silly Creature thou art, who in health art ready to say with
him in the Psalms, tush, I shall never be moved.

II. Now if thy Pains be moderate, they may be the more easily born; if
extreme, they cannot last long. Sickness is as necessary as Food or Raiment, or
any other of the things of this Life, which we cannot be without: It Is like
Sauce, making us relish the benefits of health. As to the Pains and
irksomeness thereof, they are not comparable to what Women endure in
Childbirth; for neither Stone, nor Gout, nor Cholick, are like them: and yet
do they soon forget 'um.

III. Possidonius the Philosopher being extremely Sick, said unto one that came
to visit him, That the greatness of Pain should never make him confess Sickness
to be an Evil. For that which is without us cannot hurt us. If bodily pains do
not conquer our Minds, they do us no harm. I remember when Antonius Cribellius
was condemned to be Torn in pieces, in preparing himself to be Executed, he
said, There was no Torment could make him discover his Accomplices, although he
acknowledged he had such. Pompeius showed by holding his Finger to the Candle
in sight of the King, that there was no hopes of wresting any thing from him.

IV. Quintilia a little Woman being suspected to be of the Conspiracy against
Caligula, and Racked with great torment, confessed nothing, and was therefore
set at liberty as Innocent. What should I speak of St. Barbara, with diverse
others, the number of which is incredible, and their Constancy so mavelous,
as they seemed not only patiently to have suffered Torments, but also to have
wished for them.

V. The end of all Grief, either by Death or Recovery, becomes pleasant. It Is
also to be considered, that all such as suffer great Torments, being persuaded
of the Immortality of the Soul, ought therefore (were there no other reason) to
be comforted. It is too much to punish both Body and Mind at one time.

VI. In short, Sickness puts us in mind of another life, it renders us sober
and thoughtful, and capable of harkening to that good counsel, which when in
Health we could not abide. Were it not for Sickness a Man would become more
hard-hearted than a Tiger, and more cruel than a Lioness.

CHAP VI. Of general Calamities.
LET us consider whether in common Miseries, we ought to lament? as in times of
Pestilence, Famine, and destruction of Countries; which being General, make Men
suffer them with less impatience: For nothing seems dishonorable that is
common. But you will say our Country is falling into Ruin, and therein our
Friends, Relations, and Estates: be it so. But do thou account only those thy
Neighbors, that inhabit thy Country? Surely we are all descended from one
Line, and if we look back to our great Grandfathers, our Assinity is the same.
And as to the losing of our Estates, perhaps they are but our hindrances to
Virtue. There is nothing in this World can hurt any man but Vice. I am he, says
Diogenes, upon whom all misfortunes are fallen; I have no House, no Town, a
Banished Man, a Vagabond and Beggar. But he had a great Mind, which he thought
of far more value.

II. Man's condition is like to a Garment, which the more rich and beautiful it
is, the more does a Spot fully it. It Is also to be remembered that no Man is
miserable all his lifetime, for Sleep causes forgetfulness of Sorrow, and is
as pleasant to those in Affliction, as those that live at ease. Likewise the
delights of our Senses, be to all men the same, as Taste, Sight, Hearing and
Smelling: So that all things which be delightful do not fail a Man at the same
instant.

Were all Mortals asleep at the same time, then would none of them be more
happy than his fellows. But we are certain not only all of us to sleep, but to
dye, and how soon, is to us unknown. Being once entered into the World, we are
to expect and be prepared against all Chances; but not dismayed at the thoughts
of any, seeing there is none of 'um that can be truly said to be against us.
And therefore Homer feigned Aten the Goddess of Calamities to be bare Footed,
as one that could not touch any thing sharp or hard, but walked lightly over
the heads of Men: Meaning that Adversity dared not come near any but
mean-spirited People. Wherefore lift up thine Eyes toward Heaven, where an
everlasting Rest is prepared for thee.

IV. Men in this world are like Trees, some slender, some great, some
flourishing, some bearing Fruit, some withering, some growing, some blown down,
and some fruitful, which in one Harvest are brought together and laid upon one
Stack. Neither is there afterward any difference seen amongst them, all being
cut down, never more to grow again. So all Pride, Ambition, Riches, Authority,
Children, Friends, and Glory, do in short space grow old, and Perish: Neither
will it signify any thing whether thou were Irus, or Galba, or Artaxerxes, or
Noble Hercules. Only Virtue and Honesty can make a Man happy: only a guilty
Conscience can make him miserable. The worst that good Men can fear, is the
best that Evil can wish for, which is the destruction of the Soul in Death. But
God has given us a sufficient proof of our Immortality, by raising up his Son
from the Dead. Were it not for this hope, our Lives would not be worth our
care: So fluctuating and foolish a thing is Life. But our Creator has put us
into this World in order to our translation to a better; and secretly observes
how we acquit our selves toward our Senses, how we resist the torrent of bad
Examples, and what daily progress we make toward the Heavenly Canaan, which is
our native Country; for here we are but Pilgrims and Strangers.

FINIS.

