THE HISTORY OF WALES.

Comprehending the Lives and Succession OF THE PRINCES of WALES, FROM
CADWALADER the last King, to Lhewelyn the last Prince, of British Blood.

WITH A short Account of the Affairs of WALES, under the Kings of England.

Written originally in British, by Caradoc of Lhancarvan; and formerly
published in English by Dr. Powel.

Now newly augmented and improved by W. WIN, A. M. and Fellow of Jesus
College, Oxon.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for the Author, and are to be sold by R. Clavell,
at the Peacock at the West End of S. Paul's. 1697.

TO THE Right Revd Father in GOD, HUMPHREY Lord BISHOP of BANGOR.
My Lord,
WHEN I had finished the following Book, I was not long to determine under whose
Patronage I should make it public; your Lordship's Extraordinry Knowledge in
all the British Antiquities, especially that Part which relates to the Welsh,
justly claiming what I now make bold to offer to your Favor. For it seems to
be as Natural a Design of a Dedication, to present one's Labors to the
greatest Judge, as to him who is the greatest Encourager of his Writings; and
if so, my Lord, this single Reason would sufficiently justify me from any
Presumption, in submitting the following Papers to your Lordship's Protection.
But where the Obligation is corroborated by an equal Engagement; and since your
Lordship has been pleased to encourage and promote the Design before it came to
any Growth, I hope, I may safely present now in its perfect Strength and Vigor,
what you were then pleased to receive in its Infancy.

The History of our Country, my Lord, has been so much neglected, that there
seems a very great Necessity of reviving, what to the generality of the
Kingdom, is almost lost; and there are too many, otherwise very Learned
Persons, nay, some of our own Nation, who are so great Strangers to this
Subject, that they are almost ignorant, that there is such a History in being.
We have hopes indeed, that from your Lordship's Excelling Knowledge in the
Welsh History, and other British Antiquities, with those Curious Collections,
you have with great Labor made toward that Matter, and from others now
Traveling the same good Way; we may expect, that the World shall receive such
Information relating to our Country, that they who have hitherto despised our
History, will be ready to Light that Candle which they now purposely
extinguish, and ignorantly undervalue. In the mean time, if by the following
History, I can revive the Memories of the several Princes therein contained,
which in the English Histories, are either totally omitted, or but partially
interwoven, and render our History more generally Known, I have my Aim; and
especially, since I gain the Opportunity of Acknowledging my self,

Your Lordship's most humble Servant, W. WIN.

THE PREFACE.
THE History of the Britains, may not improperly be distinguished into two
Periods; the former comprehending the interval from Brute to Cadwalader, whilst
the Britains are thought to have enjoyed a general Possession of the whole
Island; the other containing the Memoirs and Transactions of the Britains,
under their several Princes, after their recession to that part of the Island,
since called Wales. The former of these has been generally accounted of late,
absolutely false and unhistorical; and it is undoubtedly concluded that all the
Passages in Geoffrey of Monmouth (the only remaining Monument of the Affairs of
the ancient Britains) which are not consonant to, and agreeable with the Roman
Historians that speak of Britain, are absolutely fabulous and unsincere. The
History of the Princes of Wales, has indeed met with better fortune, and the
Author Caradoc of Lhancarvan is accounted just and authentic; so that there
need no other Apology for the following Work, than that it is for the best part
the genuine History of that Author. But because the History of Wales has no
small dependence upon, and relation to the History of the ancient Britains
published by Geoffrey, I think it necessary to make some general reflection, in
relation to the Truth and Authority of that Copy.

And here in the first place, I must take notice of two sorts of Opinions, most
widely repugnant, and as I may say, diametrically opposite to each other; and
both in my opinion, equally deviating from the right apprehension of the matter
in debate. The one, perfectly rejecting the whole foundation and process of
Geoffrey's History, will not believe so much as one passage relating to the
ancient Britains, but what is delivered by Roman Writers; as if nothing
remarkable could happen in Britain, but what must needs fall under their
special Cognizance and Observation. The other, without any allowance to the Age
when these British Affairs were transacted, (not to mention the utmost
Antiquity of some part of this History, cotemporary with which, nothing is
certain among the more civilized Greeks and Romans) will believe the whole
Frame, and all the Circumstances of Geoffrey's History, be they never so
ridiculous and extravagant. But not to insist on so bigoted an Opinion, as to
think that the British History is universally true, and altogether authentic;
I will confine my self to the examination of the other Extreme, to see whether
that History published by Geoffrey, be so absolutely fabulous as is frequently
represented, and generally believed. Now they who discredit this History,
either wholly attribute the Frame and Invention of it to Geoffrey, or else
granting him to be a faithful Translator, assure themselves that the Copy he
received was fictitious, and perfectly owing to the unwarrantable Forgeries of
the fabulous Monks. So that the subject of my present enquiries, will naturally
fall under those two Disquisitions; 1. Whether Geoffrey be the real Contriver
and Composer of this History? And 2ly, Supposing him to be innocent of this
Suspicion, whether the History published by him, be perfectly fabulous, and in
all respects a Monkish Legend?

1. As to what relates to Geoffrey, though methinks there need no greater
Argument to evidence his Innocence from so suspected an Imposture, as his being
the Contriver of this History, than that be professedly owns the receipt of the
British Manuscript from Walter, Arch Deacon of Oxford; yet because the
Prejudice of some Men oftentimes obscures their Understanding, in things
otherwise very clear and open, it will be requisite to dwell somewhat more
particularly upon that Subject: or if the World be once persuaded, that the
whole Invention is owing to Geoffrey, and that there was no such Account of the
Britains in being, before he published his, History; the whole series of
British Affairs not mentioned in the Writings of the Roman Authors, and all
that long continued Succession of British Kings for so many Ages, must of
necessity be accounted fabulous, and a perfect Legend. But before that Geoffrey
should be so unreasonably attainted of such notorious Forgery, and his History
be so generally condemned; one might expect that such evident Proofs could be
produced to evince so absolute a Position, as to render it past all Dispute and
Contradiction. For to charge any one with Insincerity, for no other reason,
than because it is the common Vogue and Sentiment of the World, is in my
opinion a greater Argument of Partiality and Prejudice, than of solid and
judicious Reasoning.

Now the greatest reason that I can think of, why the British History is
attributed to the invention of Geoffrey, is, that almost upon its first
appearance in the World, William of Newborough and Geraldus Cambrensis exclaim
against it, and seem to lay the whole Imposture to the charge of Geoffrey. The
words of Newborough are these; At contra quidem (speaking before of Gildas)
nostris temporibus pro expiandis his Britonum maculis scriptor emersit,
ridicula de iisdem figmenta contexens, eosque long supra virtutem Macedonum
and Romanorum impudenti vanitate attollens. Gaufridus hic dictus est, Agnomen
habens Arturi, pro eo quod fabulas de Arturo ex priscis Britonum figmentis
sumptas, and ex proprio auctas per superductum Latini sermonis Colorem, honesto
historiae nomine palliavit. Qui etiam majori ausu, cujusdam Merlini
divinationes fallacissimas, quibus utique de proprio plurimum adjecit, dum eas
in Latinum transfunderet, tanquam Authenicas, and immobili veritate subnixas
prophetias vulgavit.

From this Passage it is apprehended, that Newborough thought that the British
History was solely owing to the Contrivance and Invention of Geoffrey; whereas
nothing is more evident, than that the only thing he lays to Geoffrey's charge,
is, that he augmented, and of his own head made Additions to the Copy he
received. And seeing that Newborough expressly mentions Geoffrey's translating
into Latin, some ancient Figments of the Britains concerning King Arthur, and
unwarrantably adding to the same; it is manifestly apparent, that be never took
Geoffrey to be the Contriver of the whole of what he published, otherwise it is
hardly conceivable, that such an inveterate Enemy of that History, would
conceal any thing that might derogate from the Truth and Authority of it.
Besides, Newborough throughout his whole Preface, wherein be endeavors to
invallidate, and render the British History fabulous, chiefly insists upon the
Life of King Arthur, and the Prophecies of Merlyn; not a word of Brutus and his
Trojans, which, tho ^ince accounted as notorious a piece of Romance ^^s any at
all; it seems he had Faith to swallow. Indeed, the Passages in King Arthur's
Life, and ^he Prophecies of Merlyn tending much to the same purpose, were too
great and extravagant ^o be credited by him, (who by his Character of them,
seems to have bore but very slender Affection toward the Welsh) by reason that
they ^erogated much from the Fame and Valor of ^he Saxons; so that I am
afraid, that the ^dium which Newborough bore to Geoffrey and his History,
depended more upon National Honor and Reputation, than the Truth and Sin^erity
of History. For surely he could never be (...) warmly exasperated against a
fabulous History, ^ad he but the Candor to consult his own, unless here had
been some other motive to raise and fo^ent his Passion. As to the scurrilous
Language ^e casts upon the British History, and his un^annerly treatment of the
Translator; he therein ^xpresses his Ignorance and Malice, rather than any Love
and Regard to Truth and Ingenuity, ^or who but an ignorant and an unskilful
Pre^^nder, would confidently assert the Britains never ^^d any Metropolitans or
Archbishops, and would ^^oduce this as an invincible Argument for the ^^lsity
of the British History; whereas it is notoriously manifest, that the Britains
had their Archbishops long before the arrival of Augustine the Monk, whom
Newborough pretends to have been the first who underwent that Dignity in this
Island. But as his Arguments against Geoffrey's History are weak and invalid,
and his whole Preface more an Invective than a Confutation, so his Credit
should be rejected and undervalued, for charging another History with falsehood,
when his own seems wholly interwoven with ridiculous Legends and Monkish
Fictions.

But be the occasion of Newborough's dislike of the British History what it
will, it is evident, that nothing can be concluded from the above quoted
Passage, more than that Geoffrey made Additions to the British Copy be received
of the Archdeacon of Oxford. And this is no more than what may easily and
safely be granted; for the Life of King Arthur, and the Prophecies of Merlyn,
the main Subjects of Newborough's Discontent, may probably be inserted into the
History by Geoffrey, at least they were augmented, and several Traditions were
added by him. Bale, assures us, that he writ the Life of King Arthur in a
distinct Treatise and himself owns in the Preface to his fourth Book, which
comprehends the Prophecies of Merlyn, that upon the Request of Alexander Bishop
of Lincoln, he had translated Merlyn's Prophecies out of British into Latin,
before the British Copy came to his Hands. Now, when Geoffrey had received the
Manuscript from the Archdeacon, and was engaged in translating it into Latin,
it is no strange matter to imagine, that as occasion required, he might amplify,
and add to it, out of his former Tracts. F^^ it is obvious to suppose, that the
several things concerning Arthur and Merlyn, might be preserue^ in the Island
of great Britain, which were long ago obsolete among the Britains of Armorica,
from whence the British Copy is said to have been brought over.

But supposing that Newborough had attributed the whole Frame of the British
History to Geoffrey, which is evident he does not, his Authority cannot
balance with far more authentic Historians, such as H. Huntington, R. Hovedon,
Matthew of Westminster and others, but more particularly Matthew Paris, who in
express Terms, calls Geoffrey, Ad Ann. 1151.
The Faithful Translator of the British History. And seeing then, that it was
in those times apprehended to be an ancient Manuscript, and none of Geoffrey's
Contrivance, when the Cheat might he best discovered, and there wanted not good
Inclinations to detect so notorious a Forgery; how in these latter times, it
could be so luckily found out, that Geoffrey was the sole Inventor and Composer
of the History, I cannot possibly divine.

The other Reason, Camb. Descript. Cap. 7.
why Geoffrey is thought to be the Author of the British History, is grounded
upon a Passage in Giraldus Cambrensis, who speaking of the Etymology of Wales,
rejects the Denomination of it from either Duke Wallo, or Queen Wendolen, sicut
fabulosa Galfredi Arturi mentitur Historia. Now this is thought an invicible
Argument against Geoffrey, and a palpable detection of his insincerity, since
Giraldus, his own Countryman strikes at him, and accuses him of Forgery;
whereas upon nicer examination, we may easily discover how that Giraldus
quarrels only with the History which Geoffrey published, and which upon that
account bore his Name. For had Giraldus though it to be only a Contrivance of
Geoffrey's, had he suspected that Geoffrey falsely pretended to have received an
ancient British Manuscript, and by that means to have imposed upon the World;
Can it be supposed that upon so plain Conviction of falsehood, he would believe
and give Credit to an History, which he was satisfied was altogether a Fable?
But on the contrary, we find him assenting to the Story of Brutus, and the
division of the Island betwixt his three Sons; and in short, excepting in this
one place, he expresses himself to be an absolute Votary of the British
History, whence it is evident, he apprehended Geoffrey to be no more than a
faithful Translator of an ancient British Copy.

I need not take notice of William of Malmsbury, because that by the best
account, he is supposed to have been dead before Geoffrey published his
History, and consequently he could never see it; so that this Expression in
him, Lib. I.
Hic est Arthurus de quo Britonum Nuge hodicque delirant, must likely refer to
the then present Traditions and Accounts of the Welsh concerning King Arthur,
which probably might be too great and extravagant. For it is certain that a
traditional Account of any Person or Action, the farther it recedes from the
Spring and Original, the more corrupt and imperfect it still proceeds; and like
a Ball of Snow, it gathers and augments in its journey; so that it may be
reasonably supposed, that the vulgar Account which the Welsh in Malmsbury's
time delivered of King Arthur, was too far incredible and surprising.

But since the Reasons produced for proving Geoffrey to be the Author of the
British History, seem not to be satisfactory and evincing; let us see whether
the contrary assertion can be more reasonably maintained. And first, it is
manifest that Geoffrey could not be the total Inventor of the British History,
by reason that several things, and some of the most material Passages therein
contained, are agreeable with the Histories of Gildas and Nennius, the Poetical
Fragments of Taliessyn, not to mention the Saxon Manuscript, Notes upon Bid.
quoted by Mr. Wheelock, and other Authors far more ancient than Geoffrey. It Is
owned indeed Geoffrey might borrow the ground and Platform of his Romance from
Merlyn or Taliessyn, or rather from Nennius, in whose Writings there is some
slight Account of the Britains being descended from the Trojans; but the
superstructure is all his own, who living in an ignorant Age, and well knowing
he could not well be disproved, took the Liberty to make what Invention he
pleased, and then recommended it to the World, for a true, undoubted History.
But notwithstanding all this concession, I think there is as little reason to
attribute the Frame and Composition of this History to Geoffrey, as there can
be, to think him Contriver of the Ground and Plot of it. For it seems to me
very unaccountable, that if Geoffrey was to invent and compose this History,
why in this account of the Transactions betwixt the Britains and Romans, he
should so widely disagree with, and deviate from the Writings of the Roman
Historians. For certainly, nothing could add more Authority to a Fable, than
exactly to follow the steps of creditable Authors, in those things they both
had occasion to treat of. This in all probability, would not only render that
part of the History unsuspicious, but likewise Credit and Authorize the rest,
of which there was no account in Roman Authors. And this disagreement betwixt
the British History, and the Writings of the Roman Historians, though frequently
produced to overthrow the Authority of it, induces me to believe, not only that
Geoffrey was not the Author, but likewise that the Manuscript was ancient, and
much elder than the time, in which it was first made public.

But besides, Geoffrey dedicates his Translation to Robert Earl of Gloucester,
Son to King Henry the First, which in all likelihood he would never have
ventured to do, had the Original been of his own Contrivance, for fear least
that the Cheat being discovered, he should be found, to put upon a Person of
Eminent Quality, with whom the British History was then in great Esteem. For to
him it is that Geoffrey owns the Receipt of this Manuscript from the Archdeacon
of Oxford, which he affirms to be very ancient, and by his Request was
persuaded to translate it into the Latin Tongue. It was a very easy matter for
the Earl of Gloucester to find out Geoffrey's Integrity, by enquiring of the
Archdeacon (who by all Accounts is reckoned his co-temporary) whether he had
delivered such an ancient British Copy into Geoffrey's hands, and whether the
Translation justly answered the Original. These Enquiries were natural, upon
the publication of any new History, which made such considerable noise and
clamor in the World, and which gave such an Account of the ancient Britains,
as was never before thought or heard of among the English Nation. And supposing
the Earl of Gloucester to have omitted these Enquiries, yet it is scarce
conceivable, but that in case of so open a Forgery, the Archdeacon would
discover the Cheat, unless it can be thought that he was privy to, and had a
hand in the Contrivance. But he was so far from detecting Geoffrey's Imposture,
that he himself owns too, to have translated the British History first into
Latin, and then in his latter days, to British again from the Latin, as may he
still seen in the Archives of Jesus-College Library. Now if there be any heed
to, or dependence upon this, if it be true, that the Archdeacon did translate,
and consequently allow of this History, it appears very evident to me, that
Geoffrey can be in no wise the Author or Contriver of it.

But that Robert of Gloucester took a fancy to Geoffrey's Translation, more upon
the account that his Father had lately subdued the Welsh, and therefore seemed
to add to his Father's Glory, than that he did credit and believe the History,
does not seem to be so true and evincing. For wherein could the publication of
this History contribute to the advancement of his Father's Name? Was it because
he had Conquered a People, whose Ancestors appeared by this History, to be
formerly Valiant and Warlike? This was performed by others before him, and I
can conceive no great addition to any Man's Fame, to Conquer a handful of
People with a numerous Army, though their Forefathers had been Stout and
Victorious. This is surely too slight a Pretense for the reception of the
British History by the Earl of Gloucester, and too weak an Argument to destroy
the Truth and Authority of it. It Is certain, that it took exceeding well in the
World at that time, nor was it opposed till after Robert's Death, when William
of Newborough more out of Malice and Discontent, than any Love he bore to
Truth, began to charge both the Original and Translator with insincerity. I
cannot see, upon the whole, the least Reason, why the Contrivance and Invention
of this History should he attributed to Geoffrey, or that the Authority of it
depends any way upon him, more than the Fidelity of his Translation. I shall
therefore conclude this Subject with the Character bestowed upon Geoffrey, and
the History by him published by Ponticus Virunnius, who flourished in the Year
1^90. a Man of great Reading, and excellent Learning of his time, who did not
think it lost Labor to draw an Epitome of the British History: Giraldus (says
he) Historicus egregius and Cardinalis, magnae vir auctoritatis apud Robertum
Claudiocestriae Ducem, Henrici Regis filium, ac patriae suae curiosissimus
Fautor, ex summa Philosophia atque Archivis, Historiam antiquissimam continua
serie ab ipsis Trojanis collectam transtulit. Verissimas esse Britannorum
Historias arguit Regum Occidentalium consuetudo; quae erat, secum semper habere
eos, qui veritate praecipua eorum gesta notarent.

2. But supposing Geoffrey to be innocent from this suspected Imposture, and
that he did no more than faithfully translate a British Manuscript he received
of the Archdeacon; it may be farther objected, that seeing it abounds with so
many unwarrantable matters of fact, and so extravagant Fables and Prodigies, it
appears extremely suspicious, and sensibly smells of a Monkish production. For
how is it possible, you will say, that any Account, excepting what is found in
the Roman Histories, could be had of the Britains, and that not only before,
but even after their subjection to the Romans since there is much reason to
doubt, whether the Britains, as well as other unlattered Nations, had any means
to convey any Knowledge to Posterity, for want of the Art of Writing? For if
the Affairs and Transactions of the Britains were only handed down by
Tradition, and they had no other way or method to preserve their Memories, then
certainly all Pretenses to ancient Records, and consequently to this British
Manuscript, supposed to have been translated by Geoffrey, must of necessity be
vain and groundless.

And thus it is supposed, that the Britains had no Writing among them, neither
before nor after the Roman Conquest; whence it follows, that there is no true
nor certain account of any matter translated among them, but what is recorded
in Roman Histories. But though this be frequently insinuated, yet I think, the
contrary can with greater ease and perspicuity, be made to appear. As to the
Britains having no Writing among them, during their subjection to the Roman
Empire, the contrary is so evident and notorious, that I conceive it lost time
to go about to disprove it. It Is sufficient to lay down the Words of Tacitus,
an Author of unshaken Reputation; Vita Agric.
Jam vero Principum filios liberalibus Artibus erudire, and ingenia Britannorum
studiis Gallorum ante^erre, and qui modo linguam Romanorum abnuebant,
eloquentiam concupiscerent. Inde etiam habitus nostri honor, and frequens tog^;
paulatimque discessum ad deliniamenta Vitiorum, porticus and balnca, and
conviviorum elegantiam. Now, can any one suppose, that when the British Youths
were instructed in all the Arts and Sciences of the Romans, when they began to
ape and imitate them in their Habits, Buildings, and other necessary fooleries,
they should neglect so necessary a Qualification, as that of Writing? And can
we imagine, that among so many Able and Learned Persons, as the Britains must
in reason be, when educated in the Roman way, and owned to be very tractable in
their Education, not one should prove so affectionate to his Country, as to
note down the State and Transaction^ of it? Certainly, if they learn all the
Civilities and Sciences of the Romans, History was not so slight and trivial a
subject of their Industry, as to be undervalued; and I know not where they
could better employ their Skill, than in Writing the History of their Native
Country. It was natural for them being once civilized, to enquire into the
Origin and Antiquity of their Nation, the State and Condition of their Country
before the Roman Conquest, and having made the best search they could, whether
by ^ral or written Tradition into these Enquiries, they ^ould in all reason,
according to the Custom and manner of the Romans, commit all to Writing.

But allowing the Britains to have learnt the Art of Writing from the Romans,
after their subjection to the Empire, yet it is certain they had no such thing
among them, before the discovery of this Island by Julius Caesar, and
consequently, that all the former Part of the British History which precides
that Epoch, must be false and fictitious. And that this is no precarious
Objection, a Passage (...) of Caesar's Commentaries is produced to strengthen
it, which in my Opinion, evidently proves the contrary. The Words of Caesar are
these: De Bell. Gall. Lib. VI.
Magnum ibi numerum (speaking of the Druids) versuum ediscere dicuntur, itaque
annoe nonnulli viceno^ in disciplina permanent; neque fas esse existimant ca
literis mandare, c^m in reliquis fere rebus, publicis-privatisque rationibus,
Graecis literis utuntur. Why any one from hence should conclude, that the
Superstition of those ancient Philosophers the Druids, forbad the Britains to
commit to Writing the Transactions of their Country, much more that they had no
Writing at all among them, does I confess, very far exceed my comprehension.
Caesar, truly does intimate, that the Doctrine and Mysteries of their Religion,
the Druids did not think fit to commit to Writing but in all Matters besides,
whether private or public (among which History, may be reasonably accounted)
they used the Greek Characters for so I understand those words, Graecis literis
u^^^tur. For it may not be supposed that all public and private Affairs of the
Britains were ^^^nslated in Greek, when they had a different Language of their
own, and which in all reason must be the common Tongue of the Country; but only
that when the Britains had occasion to put any thing in Writing they used the
Grecian Character, which probably was the only Letter, they then were
acquainted with. But to confirm this matter the more, Caesar makes mention of
the like Custom among the Gauls; In castris Helvetiorum tabulae repertee sunt
literis Graecis confectae. Now if he concluded from hence, Lib. I.
that the Gauls (for the Helvetians were a Gaulish People) made use of the
Greek Language, rather than the Grecian Characters; I would fain be informed,
why Caesar should write in Greek to Quintus Cicero, Ne intercepta Epistola sua,
Lib. V.
a Gallis consilia noscerentur; lest that his Letter being intercepted, all his
measures and martial Intrigues, be discovered by the Gauls. Certainly, if he
had known (as well he might, in case the Helvetians understood, and writ in
Greek) that the Gauls were not ignorant of the Greek Language, he would not
make use of so mean a stratagem to conceal his Counsels. But suppose it be
acknowledged that the Gauls and Britains used, not only the Greek Characters,
but the Language too (one of which must be allowed) it is evident that they had
the Art and use of Writing, before Caesar made any Invasion to either Country,
and consequently the Britains might have some written memorials of their
Country, which might be afterward easily handed down to Posterity. For it
seems to me very strange, that Men of such reputed Learning and Knowledge, and
so well versed in the Mysteries of Philosophy, as the Druids are acknowledged
to have been, should be ignorant of so necessary and useful a Qualification, as
Writing. And since it is affirmed, that their Religions Superstitions were
interdicted to be committed to Writing, we may rationally conclude, by the Rule
of contrariety, that all other things besides their Religion, were allowed to
be written, and consequently, that they had the Art and Use of Writing among
them.

But supposing the Britains to have recorded the Transactions of their Country,
both before and after be Roman Conquest, yet when the Saxons prevailed in the
Island, all the Monuments and Writings of the ancient Britains were utterly
lo^^ so that this pretended History of the Britains, must be modern and
fabulous, built upon vulgar and uncertain Traditions. For how was it possible
that any one could write a true and a faithful Account of the ancient Britains,
and be so particular in the Transactions of those times, whenas there was not
the least Light to guide him to the Knowledge of those obscure Ages. This is
expressly acknowledged by Gildas, who lived long before Geoffrey, and openly
declares, that all the Records and Monuments of his Country were lost in his
time; and that in writing those small Fragments of the History of Britain, he
was forced to abstract his Materials out of the Writings of Foreigners. Excid.
Brit.
Illa tantum proferre conabor in Medium, quae temporibus Romanorum Imperatorum
and passa est, and aliis intulit Civibus, and long positis male: quantum tamen
potuero, non tam ex scriptis Patriae, Scriptorum monimentis; quippe quae ^el si
sucrint, aut ignibus Hostium exusta, aut Civium exulum class longius deportata
non compateant; quam transmarina relatione, quae crebris interrupta
intercapedinibus non satis claret.

I shall here by the by, observe the levity of Aylet Sames's Objection against
the History of Brute; Britan. p. 158.
namely, because Gildas makes no mention of Brute and his Trojans, he concludes
that the British History must be a real Fiction; whereas Gildos in this place
manifestly declares his design only of writing the History of the Britains,
during their subjection to the Roman Empire. But as to this passage in Gildas,
if in his time, there were no remains of his Ancestors left in writing; I would
fain learn upon what Ground and Authority, he could so positively assert that
the Britains from their first Plantation in this Island, were proud and
irreligious, and their Kings cruel and tyrannical. For a little before the
above quoted passage, he says of Britain, Haec erecta Cervice and mente ex quo
inhabitata est, nunc Deo, interdum Civibus, nonnunquam etiam transmarinis
Regibus ingrata consurgit. And a little after, Tacens vetustos immanium
Tyrannorum annos, qui in aliis pofitis regionibus vulgati sunt. Here he passes
his Judgment very liberally upon the State and Condition of Britain from all
Antiquity; and yet by and by, be confesses, that he had no guide to direct him
to the Knowledge of those times he so freely censures; so that if he had not
the Spirit of Divination, he may falter in his conjectures, or else he was
guided by some British Light, of which he was not willing to own the perusal.

But allowing that Gildas, in composing that small Fragment of the British
History, received no Light from any British Record, but was constrained to
borrow out of the Writings of Foreigners; it concludes no farther, than that he
had not the good Fortune to meet with British Manuscripts, not that there were
none really remaining in Britain. And farther, supposing that in Gildas his
time, there were no remains of the ancient Britains left in this Island, but
were all utterly lost; yet according to Gildas his own acknowledgment, and upon
the Saxons prevailing in the Country, they might be carried over by the exuled
Britains to Armories, from whence the Archdeacon of Oxford is said to have
brought over the British Copy be delivered to Geoffrey. But if there was no
written Account of the former State of Britain, in the Age of Gildas, how comes
it to pass, that any such thing should be discovered and brought to light in
succeeding Ages. And not to insist upon the Authority of the British Manuscript
translated by Geoffrey, we have good reason to presume, that the ancient
Britains before Gildas had has Ecclesiastical and Civil Histories of their
Country.

As to the former, B^de, whose Authority I presume, will not be questioned,
expressly affirmed it. For in his Preface to his Ecclesiastical History, he
says, A principio itaque Voluminis hujus, usque ad tempus quo Gens Anglorum
fidem Christi percepit, ex priorum maxim scriptis hinc inde collectis, ea quae
promemoramus, didiscimus. Here Bid plainly declares, that in Writing a Church
History of Britain, he extracted all his matter, before the conversion of the
Saxons to Christianity, out of ancient Authors. But who can these former
Writers be? Surely they were not Saxons, for we read of no Saxon Writer before
Bid; besides, that several things contained in this History, were translated
before the Landing of the Saxons, and as to the Ecclesiastical part, betwixt
the arrival and the conversion of the Saxons to Christianity that cannot be
extracted out of their Writings. For in the first place they were no
Christians, and it is very unreasonable to suppose, that they would (...) the
History of a Church, of which they were at that time very fatal and implacable.
Euen^^^s; not to question, whether the Saxons before their Conversion had any
Writing or Learning at all among them. For though it be pretended, that the
Irish, who use the same manner of Writing, borrowed their Characters from the
Saxons; yet it is extremely suspicious, that these received them from the Irish,
if not rather from the Britains. As to the former, it is well known, that
during the Disturbances betwixt the Britains and Saxons here in Britain, the
Incursions of the Goths, Vandals, and other Northern Nations into other
Countries; all the Learning of these Western Parts of the World, fled into
Ireland, which for a considerable time remained to be the Nursery of Learning
and learned Men.

And that the Saxons, long after their Conversion to Christianity, retired to
Ireland for this purpose, we have the Testimony of their ancient and most
authentic Historian; so that, I think, Bed. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. chap. 27.
it is no Presumption to suspect, that as the Saxons borrowed their Learning
from the Irish, they might for the same reason, receive their Characters and
form of writing from them. But it is again to be doubted, whether both the
Saxons and the Irish did not primarily derive their Characters from the
Britains: For though the British Language ^he now writ in a different Character
from the Irish and Saxon, yet upon ancient British Monuments and Inscriptions,
most of the Saxon Letters, different from the present Roman Alphabet, are
plainly to be seen. Nor was this Character originally British, the same being
used in the first Age of the Roman Empire, De Re Diplo. p. 345.
if we can lay any stress on Julius Cesar's Will and Testament, represented by
Mabillon. But farther yet; if the Irish Character be originally Saxon, the
Saxons must either bring it along with them from Germany, or else they must
have invented it after their arrival and settlement in Britain: If the first,
it may seem wonderful, how it came to be quite lost and forgotten in all parts
of Germany; unlese we can suppose, that it was limited only to the Saxons, and
that they to a Man came and settled in this Island: For no body can be
ignorant, that not only the Germans, but the Swedes and Danes too, use the
Latin Character; which, if we suppose them to have but lately borrowed, yet in
all probability, their former Letter was Gothic or Runick, to which the Saxon
bears no great resemblance. But if ^t be said, that the Saxons invented this
Character after their coming to Britain; I cannot well conceive, why they
should put themselves to such unnecessary trouble, when with far greater ease
and facility they might copy and borrow from the Britains; unless the odium
betwixt both Nations made them scorn to ape and imitate an Enemy. But be it so,
that the Saxons invented this Character in Britain; it will follow, that they
had no Letters nor Learning before they came over; and consequently, that these
Authors which Bid mentions to have transcribed out of, could not be Saxons.

As to the civil part of the British History, that the Transactions of State
were recorded, and that Copies thereof came to the hands of Posterity, we have
the express Testimony of Nennius, who flourished about Three Hundred Years
after Gildas For in his Preface to his History of the Britains, he openly
declares, that he composed his History, Partim majorum Traditionibus, partim
Scriptis, partim etiam Monumentis veterum Britanniae Incolarum. Here Nennius
says, that he partly extracted his History out of the Writings of the Ancient
Britains. And what could these Writings be? Certainly, they were not the Works
of Gildas, the only British Author we read of before Nennius; upon the account
that the History of Nennius is much larger, and far more complete than that of
Gildas; this latter, besides the Names of a few British Kings, having left
nothing Historical to Posteritty; the main, it seems of his design being to
rail, and to inveigh against his Country, to which he had taken some
Displeasure. From whence then else could Nennius extract the Materials of his
History? Why, it is reasonable to suppose, that from some British Records, which
possibly might be recovered since the time of Gildas; And if then, why might
not more be discovered since Nennius, and that delivered to Geoffrey by the
Archdeacon of Oxon, be one?

But besides, That the Britains kept Memorials of their Transactions, we may
rationally gather from the Constitution and Profession of the Bards. Diodorus
Siculus says, (...); The Bards singing to an Instrument like a Harp, repeat the
Praises and Commendations of some, the Faults and Dispraises of others. And in
like manner Marcellinus; Lib. 15.
Bardi quidem fortia virocum illustrium facta heroicis composita versibus, cum
dulcibus lyrae modulis cantitarunt. And above the rest Lucan; Pharsal. lib. 1.
Vos quoque qui fortes Animas, belloque peremptas
Landious in longum vates emittitis aevum,
Plutima securi fudistis Carmina Bardi.


But that the Bards did not only commit to memory the famous Deeds of their
Princes and Heroes, and so recite and repeat them upon occasions; but also that
they wrote down and recorded what they repeated, we have the ample Testimony of
Giraldus Cambrensis. Cambr. Descrip. cap. 3.
Hoc etiam mild notandum videtur, quod Bardi Cambrenses, and Cantatores seu
Recitatores, genealogiam habent Praedictorum Principum in libris eorum antiquis
and authenticis, sed tamen Cambrice scriptam, eandemque memoriter tenent a
Roderico Magno usque ad Belinum magnum, and inde usque ad Silvium, Ascanium,
and AEneam; and ab AEnea usque ad Adam, Generationem linealiter producunt.

Now that the Genealogies here mentioned by Giraldus, were not only a bare
account of the several Descents and Successions of the British Kings, but also
some Memorials of their Lives and Actions, may be easily gathered from the
abovesaid Manners and Customs of the Bards. And seeing these Bards did preserve
not only in Memory but in Writing too, the lineal Succession and most famous
Transactions of their Kings; I see no reason why the History of Geoffrey may
not, as to a great part of it, pretend to greater Authority than is generally
attributed to it. And if it be objected, that the Bards, by a Poetical Liberty
out did the Truth of History, in the Praises of those Princes they were to
celebrate; yet thus far it may reasonably be acknowledged, that the Names and
Succession of the several Kings are real, and consequently that Geoffrey could
never be the Inventer of so large a List of Nicknames, as he is generally
thought to be. For it is very probable, that the History of the Britains
translated by Geoffrey, was composed partly out of these Genealogies peculiar
to the Bards, and partly out of any other Records and Monuments of the
Britains; both which I have shown to have been preserved, and used among them
anciently.

But to descend to the particulars of this History, the first and most
suspicious Relation, is that of the landing of Brute with a Colony of Trojans,
the several Crosses and Encounters he sustained in his Voyage; and then of this
Island receiving its Name from him. Should we indeed reflect upon the
particular Circumstances of this Story, we might upon good reason be satisfied
of the Vanity and falseness of them; but therefore to conclude, that because
the Building is suspicious, the Foundation consequently must be fabulous, and a
perfect Contrivance; does, I think, deserve some better Examination: For if we
do but reflect upon the contemporary Histories of the Greeks and Romans, those
more polite and literate Nations, we may with equal pretense of Reason affirm,
that there is no foundation for any matter of Fact before the Olympiads; or
that the relation of Aeneas's coming to Italy, and all that History, to the
Building of Rome, are altogether groundless and impertinent, because they are
intermixed with Fables and impossibilities. Livy assures us, that all the
Transactions before the Building of Rome, are rather owing to Poetical Fancy
and Extravagancies, than to any true and certain Matter of Fact; and therefore
be declined to give either his Assent or Dissent, to any thing related of those
Times: Praefat.
Quae ante conditam condendamve Urbem, poeticis magis decora fabulis, quam
incorruptis rerum gestarum monumentis traduntur, ea nec affirmare, nec
refellere in animo est. And Plutarch goes farther, and tells us, that the
Original and Etymology of Rome, that famous City, so well known afterward over
all the World, could not be agreed upon among the diversity of Authors, and
consequently must be very obscure and uncertain. Vita Romans
(...).

But for all their own Historians do allow that the History of those Times are
fabulous and uncertain; yet there are none that question the being of Aeneas,
and that the Romans were descended from him. The like may be urged for the
History of Brutus, and the landing of the Trojans in this Island; that though
many particular Circumstances are fabulous, and entirely poetical, yet it does
not thence necessarily follow, that there is no manner of ground or foundation
for such a Relation. Neither is it sufficient Conviction, to urge, that the
very being of Brute is all a Fiction, by reason that the Roman Historians make
no mention of such a Person to be the Son of Silvius; because, that through the
whole Succession from Aeneas to Romulus, the Histories of those Times take
notice only of the Son that was to succeed; it being unreasonable to suppose,
that all the Kings of Latium during that period, should beget each of them, but
one Son. And therefore, what by the obscurity of those Ages, and what by
bearing regard only to the Line of Succession, many collateral Princes escaped
the Cognizance of future Historians. Nor is it enough to affirm, that the
History of Brute is but lately known and discovered to the World, whereas the
fabulous Roman History has been recorded from Antiquity; because, that though
we are not certain that the British History has been handed down to Posterity
in Writing; yet we are sure, that it was an ancient Tradition, long before
Geoffrey's publishing of it; and one should think, that an ancient National
Tradition, might require a stricter Examination, than hastily to throw it
aside, as fabulous and of no Consequence.

But the Question is not, Whether the British History, as related by Geoffrey,
be, as to all the Circumstances of it, true and real Matter of Fact; for that,
no Man, I presume, can reasonably maintain; but whether there be any ground or
foundation of Truth couched under these Poetical and fabulous Narratives. Now
the first thing we meet with in the British History, is, an Account of Brutus
his Pedigree, how he was descended from the Trojans, and having accidentally
slain his Father Silvius, how he was forced to flee into Greece, whence, after
several Scuffles with Pendrasus, a petty Prince of that Country, he thought fit
to retire, and to seek his Fortune by Sea. But he had not wandered long, when
he met with Corinaeus, with another Party of desolate Trojans, with whom having
joined his Forces, he followed the Counsel of the Oracle, and at last arrives
in this Island, from him afterward called Britain. Now as to the particular
Circumstances related in the Life of Brutus, they may properly be placed in the
same Class with Homer's account of the Travels of Ulysses, or Virgil's
Description of Aeneas his Adventure to Italy; that is to say, that they are
Poe^ical Fictions, and perfectly consonant to the humor ^f that fabulous Age.
But the Question in hand will be, whether there be any probability for the
^round of this Story, that Brute should bring over a Colony of Trojans, and
seat himself in this Island. Now what is most materially urged against it, is
the Novelty of this Discourse, that none of the Roman Historians make the least
mention of such a Person as Brutus; and that Caesar and Tacitus, who seem to
have enquired more narrowly into the Original of ^he Britains, found no such
Tradition in their time; otherwise in giving their opinion whence the Bri^ains
were derived, they would never have omit^ed such an ancient National Tradition,
of their being descended from the Trojans. Besides, that Gildas, who was a
Britain, takes no notice of such a Tradition, which in all probability be would
never have omitted, had there been such an account of their Origin in his time.

As to what is objected against the Antiquity of this Tradition, is certainly
very erroneous; for it is so far from being first known to the World, at the
publication of Geoffrey's History, that Nennius, long before that time, and
Merlyn, much antienter then he, speak of the Britains being descended from
Troy. Nay the Saxons themselves before Geoffrey, were not unacquainted with
this Tradition, as plainly appears, from the ancient Saxon Poet, mentioned by
Mr. Wheelock, whom he thus translates; Notes on Bid.
-- Haec unica Foemina prima
Ante omnes saevit Trojani semina belli,
Hanc Britones dixere Helenam, sed Dardanus ille
Excelsus Bruti pater exutit, unde Britanni
Heroum sumpsere genus; fortissimis idem
Hunc orbem primus regere, and dominatier ausus.
And again; Insula dicta fuit Britannia nomine Bruti.

That Gildas should make no mention of this British Tradition, is no great
wonder, and as little to the purpose, to invallidate the Antiquity of it; for
we must not regard the Intent and Purport of Gildas's Writing, which was not to
give an account of the History and Antiquity of the Britains, a^ much as to
inveigh against the Profaneness and licentiousness of the Age; wherein his
Zeal and Passion carried him so far, that he did not spare either Princes or
the greatest Persons; and therefore he might well omit to give an account of
the Origin of the Britains, seeing it was remote from, and exclusive of his
purpose. Caesar indeed seems to have been somewhat more inquisitive about the
ancient State and Descent of those People he invaded; b^^ his stay in Britain
was so short, and his knowledge of the Country so defective, being he had no
Communication with the Ireland Britains, whom he own himself to be the ancient
Inhabitants, that it can b^ no great wonder he should be ignorant of this
Tradition: for if this curious Person had had the opportunity of a free
Conversation with the Britains, he would in all likelihood have left a large
Discovery of their Manners and Customs, and given a more perfect Description of
Britain; which at that time would have been a very acceptable Performance, to
all the Persons of Learning and Curiosity in Rome, who as yet had but very
shallow knowledge of the Island. Or if we suppose that he made the strictest
enquiry about the state of the Britains, which he might probably have learnt
from Mandubratius the Son of Imanuentius, King of the Trinobantes, who for fear
of Cassibelan, had come over to him to Gaul, and sided with him during the
British Wars it is very possible he might be ignorant that the Britains were
descended from the Trojans, and that to be an ancient and a current Tradition
among them.

Tacitus was never in Britain, but from the relation of his Father in Law,
Julius Agricola, and others, he made a Guest, that from the different Shapes
and Color, they were descended from different Nations; some from Germany, some
from Gaul, and others from Spain; but yet, as to the Primitive Britains, those
who seemed to be the ancient Inhabitants of the Island, he concludes after the
usual Pagan manner, In vita Agric.
Britanniam qui mortales initio coluerint, Indigenae an Advecti, ut inter
Barbaros parum compertum. The Britains, indeed, in Tacitus his time, were well
known to the Romans, and consequently these latter might have been easily
instructed, as to what knowledge the Britains had of their Antiquity; but it
does not therefore necessarily follow, that because this Historian does not
mention any such Tradition, there was none really among them; because possibly
he might never have heard of it; or if he did, he might have omitted inserting
of it in his History: For what he has delivered relating to the Antiquity of
the Britains, was but contingent to his purpose, the whole scope of his design
being to describe the Actions of his Father in Law, during his Lieutenancy in
this Island; and therefore was not at all wonderful, that he has given but a
slight and an imperfect account of what he never designed to make a narrow
inspection into. Besides, if we suppose him to have made a diligent enquiry
into the matter, and to have mind to know the ancient State and Origin of the
Britains; yet since he wanted the opportunity of conversing with them, having
been never in Britain; and none of the Britains that we know of, ^^ing at Rome,
o ^ept those who from their youth were educated there, and cons^quently were in
all probability ignorant of the Traditions of their own Country; he might very
well at such a distinct have been never made acquainted with such a National
Tradition, which for all that might have been current and prevailing among the
Britain^ themselves. As to other Roman Historians, who have writ of the
Antiquity and Primitive State of Rome, that they have made no mention of any
such Person as Brutus the Son of Sylvius; I have already observed, is not of
that force as to overthrow this Tradition, by reason that, from Aeneas down to
Romulus, there is regard only had to the Line of Succession, and those only
recorded who succeeded in the Throne.

Let us consider now, in the next place, what probable Reasons may be assigned
to vindicate this supposed Trojan Origin from an utter Fiction; and whether the
History of Brutus have any probable dependence upon some real Foundation. And
not to insist on the Antiquity of this Tradition, nor the Authority of the
British History published by Geoffrey, nothing gives greater Confirmation to
assert some real Foundation for this supposed Fable, than the near Alliance and
Affinity betwixt the Britains and the Grecians. All Learned Men allow that the
Greek was the ancient Language of the Trojans, and that their Customs were not
much different; and whoever will compare the Manners, Religion and Customs of
the Britiains with those of the Grecians, will easily discover a palpable
Conformity betwixt both Nations, but more especially in the Language; in which,
as Mr. Camden says, Maximum est disputationis firmamentum and certissimum
originis gentium argumentum. Qui enim ((...) he goes on) linguae societate
conjuncti sunt, originis etiam Communione fuisse conjunctos, homo opinor nemo
inficiabitur.

I shall not, at present, trouble the Reader with a particular annumeration of
that Affinity; but will refer him to Sir John Price's Defen^io Historiae
Britannicae, and Mr. Sheringham's Treatise De G^ntis Anglorum Origin. Now,
since there is such demonstrable Affinity betwixt the Britains and the Grecians
in all these respects; we must either suppose, with Mr. Camden, that they are
of the same Origin, at least that a Colony of either Greeks or Trojans came
over to this Island; or else, that the Britains had Correspondence, Traffic
and Communication with the Grecians. Now, that the Grecians had no knowledge of
the Britains till very late, may be gathered from hence, that even the Name of
Britain is not so much as mentioned by any Greek Author before Polybius, who
lived less than two hundred years before the Roman Invasion, and by him but
just named, as betokening a very remote and distant Country, wherein indeed it
was reported that there was plenty of Tin. Nay, Britain was so far unknown to
the Eastern parts of the World, long after this, that even Caesar himself, when
he intended an Invasion, was perfectly ignorant of the State of the Island; and
tho he made what Enquiry he could of the British Merchants in Gaul, yet for all
that, as he says himself, Bell. Gall. Lib. 4.
Neque quanta esset Infulae magnitudo, neque quae aut quantae Nationes
incolerent, neque quem usum belli haberent, aut quibus institutis uterentur,
neque qui essent ad majorum navium idonei portus, reperire poterat: and
therefore he was forced to send Cajus Volusenus before him, to search into the
State and Condition of the Island. Such Strangers were the Romans at this time
to the Isle of Britain. And can it be supposed, that the Grecians had a better
knowledge of it, since, in all probability, if they had had a Commerce with the
Britains, the Romans, who were Masters of the Sea long before this, would have
quickly discovered their Merchandising; which if as profitable as is imagined,
they were no such Enemies to Gain but they would share in the Booty. At least,
had the Grecians had any Correspondence with the Britains, the Romans would in
all probability have known it, and consequently they must needs have received
better Intelligence of the Island than what they seem to have had at Caesar's
Landing. But Dion Cassius seems to put this matter out of dispute, and gives as
a very plain account of what knowledge the Greeks and Romans had of this
Island, which I will set down in the Latin Translation, Lib. 39.
Primis Graecorum Romanorumque ne esse quidem Britanniam compertum fuit,
posteriores in controversiam adduxerunt, continens ea terra, an vero insula
esset; multaque de utraque opinione conscripta sunt ab iis, qui certi quidem
nil noverant (quippe qui nec vidissent, nec ab ^ndigenis qualis esset
accepissent) sed conjecturis tantum, quantum vel otii vel studii singulis
aderat uterentur. And the ancient Poet, in Eustathius upon Dionysius, reckoning
up the greatest Islands of the World in his time, makes no mention of Britain,
which shows it was not then known. And that Britain was the ancient
Cassiterides of the Grecians, from whence they received their Tin, is
altogether uncertain; for Herodotus, making mention of those Islands of
Cassiterides, fairly declares he knew not where they were; which cannot well be
supposed, if the Grecian Merchants traded thither in his time; it being
rational to imagine that, in treating of any Country, such a Learned Historian
would endeavor to get the best intelligence he possibly could; and Learning
being at the highest pitch in Greece at this time, it is very strange we had not
a better account of this Island, which is supposed to be so well known to those
who had a constant Trafick here. But indeed, all Authors who have mentioned
these Cassiterides do not seem to have known where they were situated, only
Dionysius, in his (...), makes them plainly to be the same with the Hesperides,
those Islands lying in the Atlantic Ocean, far enough from Britain, concerning
which the Poets have invented so many Fables.

-- (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
But admitting the Grecians to have been ignorant of any such Place as Britain,
and that there never was, any Traffic or Communication betwixt these two
Nations; yet since the Gauls spoke Greek, it is not very improbable but that
the Britains might borrow from them. That the Gauls used the Greek Tongue, we
have the Testimony of Caesar; and it is very certain, that all the Grecian
Learning flourished at Marseils, which was an ancient and famous University,
and is very much celebrated by all almost, both Greek and Latin Writers. And by
this means, it may be reasonably concluded, how the British and Gaulish Druids
became acquainted with the Grecian Philosophy, which being as to all the
different Sects and Opinions of it, taught at Marseils, the Druids more
particularly adhered to the Pythagorean, to which the Druid Philosophy hears a
very near resemblance, both as to the Doctrine of the (...), or the
Transmigration of the Soul, and the rest of their Mystical Cabala, which they
so superstitiously kept secret and close from the People.

But in opposition to this, it may be with greater certainty urged, that
neither the Gaulish nor British Druids had any Correspondence with the
Grecians, and consequently could not borrow their Philosophical Mysteries from
them. For if Caesar may be believed, The Art and Learning of the Druids was
first found out in Britain, Lib. VI.
and from thence is thought to be brought into Gaul; and at this time, as he
goes on, such as will attain to the perfect knowledge of that Discipline, do
for the most part tra^el thither to learn it. Now if this be true, that the
(...) Druids were the Inventors of this kind of Learn^^g, and that the Gauls
came over hither to be instructed in the Way and Method of it; I can see no
reason, why they should have any communication with the Grecian Academy at
Marseils, much less that they borrowed it from the Disciples of Pythagoras,
especially since they accounted their Mysteries so Sacred, that they would
communicate them to none, besides those of their own Order. Nay, it may be
better questioned, whether Diuidism be not much ^ntienter than Pythagoras, and
antecedent to that Era, when the Grecians began to Philosophize. And for the
same reason, that the Druids of Britain did not derive their Philosophy from
Marseils, it will follow, that they could not borrow their Language; for if we
suppose, which is the most we can, that the Gauls had some communication with
those Grecians, and upon that account that their Language was in some measure
mingled with the Greek; yet in their travel to Britain, they came not to
communicate, but to borrow; and it is not likely that the Britains should be
affected with the Language of those who came to learn of them. Besides, of all
the number of Gaulish Words collected by Cambden, which agree with the British,
few or none seem to be of Greek Derivation; so it is highly improbable, as for
as we can see into this Matter, that the Gauls should ever communicate the
Greek Tongue to the Britains. And therefore, since this difficulty cannot be
removed by any other way, it is not unreasonable to suspect, that there is some
real Foundation lodged in the Ruins of the Story of Brutus, and that the Truth
is disfigured by the boundless accession of Poetical Invention.

I should tire the Reader, and exceed the just bounds of what I at first
proposed, if I should take a particular view of the British History published
by Geoffrey, and therefore I shall now only take notice of the Life of King
Cadwalader, where the History of Wales begins, and where a palpable Mistake, I
may call it Forgery, has been committed by one side or another. For the very
same things, which the British History relate of Cadwalader, the Saxon Writers
attribute to Ceadwalla King of the West Saxons, how he was driven by a Famine
out of his Dominions, came afterward to Rome, and was received by Pope
Sergius, with other particulars too tedious here to relate. But that which
seems to charge the Fault upon Geoffrey, or whoever else was the Author of the
British History, is, that Bid an Author of established Credit, and one who
lived near those times, says that it was the West Saxon King Ceadwalla that
went to Rome in Pope Sergius's time. But then on the other side, it is hardly
conceivable, supposing the British History a perfect Contrivance, that Geoffrey
or any other should be so grossly over seen, as to borrow the Transaction of a
real King, and one so well known, to make up the Life of a fictitious one
cotemporary with him. Bede's Reputation was too firm, to be shaken by an
upstart History, and therefore it cannot well be supposed that the Author of
the British History was so unwary, in case he designed a Cheat, as to let
himself open to so easy a detection of Forgery. All then that can be said, is,
that the agreeableness of the Names and time that these two Princes lived in,
and possibly their both going to Rome, which was not unusual in those days,
might without any design of putting upon the World, make a confusion in their
Histories. But whether the Life of Cadwalader be a Fable, the Reader is at his
own liberty to judge; it being prefixed to the History of Wales, not as it is
more Authentic, or any way of greater certainty than the rest of Geoffrey's
History, but only because the Author Caradoc of Lhangarfan, began his
continuace of the British History with it.

This Caradoo of Lhangaifan, an Author of undoubted Integrity, was cotemporary
with Geoffrey, who taking his rise from the place where the British History
concluded, made a continuation of it through the Reigns of several of the Princes
of Wales, till the Year 1157. about which time he flourished. After him, all
things of moment that happened in Wales, were kept and recorded in the Abbeys
of Conwey in North Wales, and Ystratflur in South Wales, where the Princes and
Noblemen of Wales were buried, as appears by the Testimony of Gutryn Owen, who
lived in the time of Edward IV. and writ the most exact and perfect Copy of the
same. All the most notable Occurrences being thus Registered in these Abbeys,
were most generally compared together every third Year, when the Beirdh or
Bards belonging to these two Houses went their ordinary Visitations, which was
called Clera. And this continued until the Year 1270. a little before the Death
of the last Prince Lhewelyn, who was slain at Buelht. Humphrey Lloyd Gent. who
flourished in the Reign of Henry VIII. and one greatly skilled in the British
Antiquities, continued this History to the Death of Prince Lhewelyn; and
afterward having translated the whole into English Language, had designed to
commit it to the Press. But his Death prevented what he purposed, and stopped
the publication of this History for a long time after, until David Powel D. D.
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, having met with Humphrey Lloyd's Transtation,
collected what he could out of English Historians, which he added by way of
Annotations, and so published it in the Year 1584. This being the sole History
of the Princes of Wales, and the only Edition of this History, I was moved to
prepare it for another Impression by a new modelling the Language, making the
Body of the History entire, without troubling the Reader to see the same thing
by way of Annotation, Dr. Powel's Notes being for the greatest part but a
repetition of the same matter of Fact out of the English Historians, with what
other Improvements could be made. The Additions which I made to the former
History, I chiefly, took out of the Notes of that late great Antiquarian Mr.
Robert Vaughan of Hengwrt; by whose help also I have corrected, supplied and
continued the Chronology. Sir John Price's Description of Wales will pretty
well answer the Geographical part of this History, til we shall be able to
recover and fix several of those places whose Names are only left to us at
present, which we have great hopes, will be successfully perfected, by the
unwearied Labors of my ingenious Friend Mr. Edward Lhwyd, in his intended
Etymological Dictionary. I have added by way of Appendix, the several Records
belonging to this History, and chose rather to insert the Articles of Peace
betwixt Prince Lhewelyn, and John Peckam Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
Original, with reference thereunto, than to insert all the Grievances which the
Welsh then made in the English Languge, which do not so bandsomly bear a
Translation.

A DESCRIPTION OF CAMBRIA, Now Called WALES: Drawn first by Sir John Price
Knight, and afterward augmented and made perfect by Humphrey Lloyd Gentleman.
THE Three Sons of Brutus having divided the whole Isle of Britain into Three
Parts; that part contained within the French Seas, with the Rivers of Severn
(called in British Hafren) Dea and Humber, fell to the eldest Son Lorinus,
which was after his Name called Lhoyger, which Name it has in the British
Tongue to this Day, and in English now it is called England, and (...)
augmented Northward to the River Tweed. The ^econd Son Albanactus had all the
Land Northward from Humber to the Sea Orkney, called in the British Tongue Mor
Werydh, and in the Latin Mare Calodonioum. The third Son Camber had to his
part, all that which remained undivided, lying within the Spanish and Irish
Seas, Cambria.
and separated from England, with the Rivers Severn and Dee; and this part was
after his Name called Cambria, and the Inhabitants thereof Cambry, and their
Language Cambera^c, and so are at this Day. So that they have kept the same
Country and Language this 2700 and odd years, without commixtion with any other
Nation, especially in North Wales, as it shall hereafter appear.

And because the Name of this Country is changed, or rather mistaken by the
Inhabitants of England, and not by them called Cambry, but Wales: I think it
necessary to declare the occasion thereof, which is, that where the Saxons a
People of Germany were the first that after the Britains inhabited and ruled
the greatest part of this Isle, and drove the Britains to that Corner, which
according to the manner of their Country they called Wales, and the People
Welch-men, and the Tongue Welsh, that is to say, Strange, or not of them
understood. For at this Day the Inhabitants of the Low Countries call their
next Neighbors Language of Henegaw, or other that speak French, Walsh, as a
Language to them unknown. Likewise the dwellers of Tyroll and other the higher
Countries of Germany do Name the Italian their next Neighbor a Welch-man, and
his Language Walsh. And this is an evident Proof, that they which harped upon a
Queen Gwalaes, and of a Prince Wala (of whom neither British, Latin, nor
English History makes mention) were foully deceived; and so likewise was a
great Historiographer of late Days, which says, that it was called Wallia,
quasi Italia, because the rest of the Romans which remained in the Isle were
driven thither. Neither is this any new invention, although Polydore Virgil
with an Italian brag does glorify himself to be the first that espied it out,
for diverse ancient Writers do allege the same cause of the Name of Wales, of
whom Sylvester Gyraldus is one, who wrote in the time of Henry the Second,
after the Conquest, before 380 years passed; which is an ^vident Token, that
the said Polydore did either never see nor read the ancient Histories of this
Realm, ^r dissembleth the same to the Advancement and Praise of himself and his
Country; which to the ^earned and indifferent Reader shall appear to be the
^nly occasion he took that work in hand, for all his ^ook redoundeth only to
the Praise and Honor of ^he Romans as well Spiritual as Temporal, and to ^lase
forth their Acts and Deeds within this Realm: and upon the other part does
either openly slander, ^r else privily extenuate, or shamefully deny the
mar^ial prowess and noble Acts, as well of Saxons, Danes, and Normans, as of
the Britains, all Inhabiters of this ^sle. Which thing he that lift to prove,
let him read and confer Caesar's Commentaries, Cornelius Tacitus, Herodianus,
and other ancient Writers, as well in Latin as in Greek, with his Work. As for
the anti^ent Writers of the British History, as the British Chronicle, the
History of Gildas, Ponticus Vorunnius, ^ea the Golden Work of Matthew Paris
Monk of St. Alban, which wrote from William Bastard, to the ^ast years of Henry
the Third; I dare well say he ^ever saw them, they be in diverse places to be
had, ^o that the truth may be easily proved. To make ^n end I say, that he
being first a Stranger born, and ^lso ignorant as well in the Histories of this
Realm, as ^f those Tongues and Languages wherein the same were written, could
never set forth the true and perfect Chronicle of the same. But he having a
good Grace, and a pleasant Style in the Latin Tongue, and finding himself in a
Country where every Man either ^acked Knowledge or Spirit to set forth the
History of their own Country, took this Enterprise in hand, to their great
shame, and no less dispraise, because he a blind Leader shall draw a great
Number of undiscreet and rash Followers, as well Geographers and Cosmographers,
as Chroniclers and Historiographers, to the Hark Pit of Ignorance, where I
leave them at this time, remitting the Reader to the Apology of Sir John Price
Knight and his British History, written by him of purpose, against the envious
Reports, and slanderous Taints of the said Polydore, where he shall see a great
number of his Errors confuted at large. And to return to my former matter of
the Name of Wales, Wales.
which Name to be given of late by a strange Nation may be otherwise proved:
for the Welch-men themselves do not understand what these words Wales and Welsh
do signify, nor know any other Name of thee Country or themselves but Cambry,
nor of their Language but Cambraec, which is as much to say as Camber's
Language or Speech, So likewise they know not what England or English means,
but commonly they, call the Country Lhoyger, the English Men Saison, A Lo^rino.
A Saxon.
and the English Tongue Saisonace. Which is an evident token that this is the
same Language which the Britains spoke at the beginning; for the Works of
Merdhyn and of Taliessin, who wrote above 1000 years past, are almost the same
words which they use at this day, or at the least easy to be understood o^
every one which knows perfectly the Welsh Tongue especially in North Wales.

Beside this, where at this day, there do remain three remnants of the
Britains, divided every one from other with the Seas, which are in Wales,
Cornwall (called in British Cerniw) and little Britain yet almost all the
particular words of these three People are all one, although in pronunciation
and Writing of the Sentences they differ somewhat, which is no marvel, seeing
that the pronunciation in one Realm is often so diverse, that the one can
scarce understand the other. But it is rather a wonder, tha^ the Welch-men
being separated from the Cornish, well nigh these 900 years, and the Britains
from either of them 290 years before that, and having small Traffic or
Concourse together since that time, have still kept their own British Tongue.
They are not therefore to be credited, which deny the Welsh to be the old
British Tongue. And here I cannot pass over what one of these fine Chroniclers
wrote of late, of the Name of Britain, affirming that it should be so called of
Britanie in France, as the Elder of that Name. But surely he had either never
seen Ptolomy nor Caesar, nor any other ancient Writer, or read them with small
Judgment and Memory. For there he might have learned, that when this Land was
called Britain, the other was called Armorica, Rob. Caenal. lib. 2. Per. 2.
and how in Maximus's time, Conan Meriadoc was the first that gave it that
Name, and inhabited it with Britains out of this Isle. Other derivations of
these words Britannia and Albion, out of Greek and Latin, I am ashamed to
rehearse; for unto such Errors do they commonly fall, that either puffed up
with vainglory of their own Wits, or pinched with despite and envy at other
Men's Works, or blinded with Igorance, do go about to write and set forth any
History or Chronicle. But passing over this matter until another time, I will
return to the Description of Wales, The mears and bounds of Wales.
which (as I said) was of old time compassed almost about with the Irish Seas,
and the Rivers Dee and Severn, although afterward the Saxons wan by force from
the Britains all the plain and champion Country over the Rivers, and specially
Offa King of Mercia, who made a Ditch of great breadth and depth, to be (...)
Mear betwixt his Kingdom and Wales, which Ditch began at the River Dee, by
Bassingwerk, between Chester and Ruthlan, and ran along the Hills sides to the
South Sea, a little below Bristol, reaching above a hundred Miles in length,
and is in many places to be seen at this day, bearing the Name of Clawdh Offa,
that is to say, Offa's Ditch, and the Country between it and England is
commonly called in Welsh, Y Mars, although the great part of it be now
inhabited by Welch-men, namely in North Wales, which yet keeps the ancient
limits to the River Dee, and in some places over it. Other (as Sylvester
Giraldus) make the River Wy, called in Welsh Gwy, to be the Mear between
England and Wales, on the South part, called South Wales, who measures the
breadth of Wales, from Salow or Willoweford, called Rhyd yr helig upon Wy, to
St. David's in Menevia 100 Miles, and the length from Caerlheon upon Ysc in
Gwentland, to Holybead, called Caergybi in Anglesey, in Welsh, called Mon,
above 100. Miles and these be the common Mears at this day, although the Welsh
Tongue is commonly used and spoken in England, beyond these old Mears a great
way, as in Hereford-shire, Gloucestershire, and a part of Shropshire. And thus
for the general Description of Wales, which afterward about the Year of Christ
870. Rodericus Magnus, King of Wales, divided into three Territories which they
called Kingdoms, which remained until of late days.

These three were Gwynedh, in English North Wales, Deheubarth, in English
South Wales, and Powys-Land; in every of the which he ordained a Princely Seat
or Court for the Prince to remain at, most commonly, as in Gwynedh (which some
old Writers call Venedo^^^ for Gwynethia) Aberffraw in the Islle of Mon or
Anglesey. Aberffraw.
In Deheubarth, called in Latin Demetia, Ca^mardyn, from whence it was
afterward removed to Dynefowr, Dynefowr. Mathrafal.
eight Miles thence. In Powys, Pengwern called Y Mwythic, and in English
Shrewsbury from whence it was removed to Mathrafal in Powys-Land And because
this History does as well entreat of Wars betwixt these three Provinces, as
betwixt them and the Saxons, Normans and Flemings, I think it good to set forth
the particular Description of every part by it self. And first of North Wales
as the chiefest part, which he gave his Eldest Son, ordaining that either of
the other two should pay him yearly 200 l. of Tribute, North Wales.
as it appears in the Laws of Howel Dha, which are to be had in Welsh, and
also in Latin. Therefore Gwynedh (called North Wales) had upon the North-side
the Sea, from the River Dee at Basing-werke to Aberdyfi, and upon the West and
South-West the River Dyfi, which divides it from South Wales, and in some
places from Powys-Land. And on the South and East, it is divided from Powys,
sometimes with Mountains, and sometimes with Rivers, till is come to the River
Dee, again. This Land was of old time divided to four parts, of which the
chiefest was Mon, Mon.
in English called Anglesey, where the Prince's chief House was at Aberffraw,
which is an Island separated from the main Land, with an Arm of the Sea called
Maenai, and had in it self three Cantreds or Hundreds, which were subdivided to
six Comots, as Cantref Aberffraw to Comot Lhion, and Comot Malhera^th, Cantref
Cemais, to the Comots Talibo^ion and Twr Celyn; Cantref Rossyr to the Comots
Tyndaethwy and Maenai. And at this day there is a ^ine Town in that Isle called
Bewmoris, and a common Passage to Ireland at Caergybi, called in English,
Holyhead. But here I cannot wink at that notable Error of Polydor, which (after
his accustomed fashion) denies this Isle to be called Mona, but Anglesia, or
Anglorum Insula, because it is called in English Anglesey, and gives this Name
Mona to Man, and so has lost the Names of both Isles: which ignorance and
forgetfulness might be forgiven him, if he had not drawn a great number to this
Error with him, which in their Charters do daily wrong Name these Isles, which
may be easily proved. First, because the Inhabitants of the Isle do know none
other Name but Mon; and it is called through all Wales, Tir Mon, that is to
say, the Land of Mon, unto this day. So that neither by memory of Man, neither
by any Monument in Writing in the British Tongue can it appear, that ever it
had any other Name but Mon, yet there be manifest Monuments for these ^000
years. It is also grown to a Proverb through Wales, for the fertility of the
ground, Mon mam Gymry, that is to say, Mon Mother of Wales.

The ancient History of Cornelius Tacitus (which be like Age had beaten out of
Polydor's Head) says, that the Soldiers of Paulinus Suetonius, and afterward
of Julius Agricola, after they had passed through North Wales, then came over
against Mona, where they did swim over an Arm of the Sea of 200 paces, and so
by force won the Isle. Now whether it is more reasonable thus to swim over 200
paces, or 20 miles? I know there is no Man that believes Polydor in this
point; I see all Men therefore judge the rest. As for that which he says of
the great Woods, it is nothing; for both the Romans, and after when the
Christian Faith took place in this Realm, the Christians did fall and root them
out, for the Idolatry and absur^ Religion which was used there; that the King
(...) Man sent for Timber to Mon; read the Life of Hug^ Earl of Chester, which
also is evident by the great Beeches and other Trees found in the Earth at
these days. His other reason is, because it is called Anglesey in the English
Tongue: so is Lhoyger England and Cambry Wales; Are those therefore the old
Names? No surely. And what if the Inhabitan^ called it so? (as they did not)
had it not a Nam^ before the Angles won it? Yes, I warrant you, b^ he had
forgotten that. Now to the Name of Man, (...) was ever, or at the least these
1000 years named i^ British Manaw, of which comes the English Name Man. The
Inhabitants thereof call it so, and (...) Nation about it did ever call it Mon,
no nor any Writer but Polydor, which was too young a God father to name so old
a Child. For Gildas who wrote above 900 years passed, whose Writings Polydor
never saw, but untruly Fathers upon him his own devise; Giraldus in his
Description of Ireland to Henr^ the Second, and Henry Huntington, do plainly
ca^^ Man in Latin Eub^nia, adding thereto either Man^^ or Man, for the better
understanding of the Name. Will you believe them or Polydor? Other Argument^
there are which I will pass over, till I have more leisure and occasion to
write of this Matter.

Arfon.
The second part of North Wales was called Arfo^ which is as much as to say,
over against Mon; an^ had in it four Cantreds, and ten Comots.

Cantref Aber had in it three Comots, Y Lhechwedh-uchaf, Y Lhechwedh-isaf, and
Nant-Conway.

Cantref Arfon had two Comots, Ywch Gwyrfai, and Isgwyrfai.

Cantref Dunodic had two Comots, Ardudwy and Efionyth.

Cantref Lhyn contains three Comots, Cy^nytmay^, Tinlhayn, and Canologion.
This is now called Caernarvon-shire, as Mon is called Anglesey-shire, and have
the same division at this day. In this Shire are ^nowden-Hills, called Eryri,
neither in height, ferti^ity of the Ground, Wood, Cattle, Fish and Fowl, ^iving
place to the Famous Alps, and without Con^roversy the strongest Country within
Britain.

Here is the Town of Caernar^on, called in the old ^ime Caersegonce; and there
is also Conwey called Caer^yffyn. And the Sea of Bang^r, with diverse other
^ntient Castles and Places of Memory, and was the ^ast part of Wales that came
under the Dominion of ^he Kings of England. It has on the North the Sea ^^d
Maenai, upon the East and South East, the River ^onwey, which divides it from
Denbigh shire, although ^t now pass the River in one place by the Seashore. And
on the South-West and West, it is separated from Merionyth by high Mountains
and Rivers, and other Mears.

The third part of Gwynedh was Merionyth con^aining three Cantreds, Merionyth.
and every Cantred three Co^ots.

As Cantref Meyreon has three Comots, Talyhont, Pennal, and Ystumaner.

Cantref, A^ustly had these, Vwcho^ed, Iscoed, and ^warthrenion.

Cantref Pa^lhyn had these, Vwchmeloch, Ismeloch, and Micu^ins, and this
keeps the said Name till this ^ay, but not within the same Mears, and is full
of Hills and Rocks, and has upon the North the Sea, notable ^t this day for
the great resort and number of People that repair thither to take Herrings. It
has upon ^he East, Arfon and Denbigh-Land, upon the South, Powys, and upon the
West, Dyfi and Cardigan-shire.

In this Country stands the Town of Harlech, Tegyd.
and (...) great Lake called Lhyn-Tegyd through which the River Dee runs,
and mingleth not with the Water of the Lake, which is three Miles long, and
also the ^almons, which are commonly taken in the River ^ard by the Lake, are
never seen to enter the Lake. Likewise a kind of Fish called Gwyniaid, which
are like ^o Whitings, and are full in the Lake, are never taken ^n the River.
Not far from this Lake is a place called Caergay, which was the House of Gay,
Arthur's Foster-Brother. This Shire as well as Arfon, is full of Cattle, Fowl
and Fish, with great number of Red Deer and Roes; but there is great scarcity
of Corn.

y Berfedhwlad.
The fourth part of Gwynedh, was called y Berfedhwlad, which may be Englished,
the inland or middle Country, which contained five Cantrede and thirteen
Comots, as Cantref Rhyfonioc had in it these Comots, Vwchalet and Isales.

Cantref Ystrad had Hiraetho^ and Cynineiroh.

Cantref Rhos these, Vwchdulas, Isdulas and Crouthyn, all which are in the
Lordship of Denbigh, saving the Creuthyn which is in Caernarvon shire, wherein
the Castle of Dyganwy did stand, which was the Earls of Chester, and is
commonly called in the Latin and English Chronicle, Gannoe.

Dyffryn Clwyd.
The fourth Cantref was Dyffryn Clwyd, which may be Englished the Valley of
Clwyd, and now is called the Lordship of Rhuthyn, and has these Comots,
Coleigion, Lhannerch and Dogueilyn.

The fifth Cantref is Tegengl, and now is a part of Flint-shire, having these
Comots, C^n^syshe, Prestatyn, and Ruthlan. And in this part is one of the
fairest Valleys within this Isle, containing 18 miles in length, and 4, 5, 6,
or 7 in breadth, as the Hills either draw inward together, or backward asunder,
which high Hills do enclose it on the East, West, and South parts, and
Northward the Sea. It is plentiful of Cattle, Fish and Fowl, Corn, Hey, Grass,
and Wood, and divided along in the midst with the River Clwyd, to whom runs
Clywedoe, Ystrat, Whilar, Elwy, and a great number of other Rivers from the
Hills. In this Valley two miles from the Sea, is the Town and Castle of
Ruthlan, Ann. 12. Edw. 1.
where sometimes a Parliament has been kept. And two miles above it is the Se^
of Sr. Asaph, between the Rivers Clwyd and Elwy, called in the old time the
Bishop's See of Dhan-Elwy. Four miles thence, and two miles from the River, is
situate upon a Rock the Town and Castle of Denbigh, where is one of the
greatest Markets in the Marches of Wales, and one of the fairest and strongest
Castles within this Realm, which being the House of David Brother to Lhewelyn,
the last Prince of the Welch-Blood, was enlarged and strengthened by Henry Lacy
Earl of Lincoln, to whom King Edward gave the same Lordship; it is also the
Shire-Town of that Shire. Five miles above this, is the Town of Ruthyn with a
fair Castle, which sometimes belonged to the Lords Gray Earls of Kent. This
part of North Wales, has upon the North the River Dee, and the Sea. Upon the
West, Arfon, and the River Conwey. South and East, Merionyth, and the Country
then called Powys. And these be the Mears and Bounds of Gwynedh or Venedotia,
for the Name of North Wales contains besides this all Powys at these days. So
there was und r the Territory of Aberffraw fifteen Cantreds, and in them thirty
eight Comots.

The second Kingdom was Mathrafal, Mathrafal or Powys.
which in right order was the third, as that which came to the third Brother,
yet for the better understanding of the History following, I have placed it
here. To this Kingdom belonged the Country of Powys, and the Land betwixt Wy
and Severn. Which part had upon the South and West, South Wales, with the
Rivers Wy and Tywy, and other Mears. Upon the North, Gwynedh, and upon the East
the Marches of England, from Chester to Wy, a little above Hereford; and
therefore it was most troubled with Wars, as well of the Saxons, as afterward
of the Normans, Lords Marchers, who daily wan some part thereof, and by that
means it was the first part that served the Kings of England, and therefore
less esteemed of all the ^est. This part called Powys, was divided again into
Powys Fadoc, and Powys Wenwynwyn. Powys Fadoc ^ontained in it self five
Cantreds and fifteen Co^ots.

Cantref Y Barwn, which had three Comots, Dyn^ael, Edeyrneon, and Glyndourdwy,
which are now in Merionyth shire (saving Dinmael which is in Denbigh-^ire.)

Cantref Y Rhiw, whose Comots were these, Yal ^ow in Denbigh-shire; Ystratalyn
and Hop now in Flint-^^ire.

Cantref Vwchnant has these Comots, Merfforth in Flint-shire, Maelor Gymraeg,
in English Bromfield, now in Denbigh-shire, and Maelor Saesneg in Flint-shire.

Cantref Trefred contains these Comots, Croesfain, Tref y Wayn, in English
Chirke, and in Denbigh-shire. Croesoswallt, in English Oswestrey, and in
Shrop-shire.

Cantref Rhaiyder with his Comots Mochnant Israiyder, Cynlhaeth and Nanheudwy
all in Chirke-Land, and in Denbigh-shire. Also the Lordship of Whytington now
in Shrop-shire, was in this part of Powys, which part at this day has lost the
Name of Powys, and is situated in diverse Shires, as it appears by the
Discourse before passed. In this part is the Castle of Holt in Bromfield, and
the Castle of Chirke in Chirke-Land. Likewise the Lordship and Castle of
Whytington, which came by marriage to Foulk Fitzwarren. There is beside these,
the Lordship of Oswestry, of the which the Fitzalans have been Lords these 300
and odd years, and of diverse other Lordships in those Marches, as Shrarden, the
eleven Towns, Clun and many others, which are all now in Shrop-shire.

The second part called Powys Wenwynwyn, had likewise five Cantreds, and twelve
Comots.

Cantref Y Fyrnwy had these Comots, Mochnant ^wch Rayader, Mechain Iscoed and
Lbannerch Hudol.

Cantref Ystlyc had these, Deuthwr, Gorthwr Isaf, and Ystrat Marchelh.

Cantref Lhyswynaf had these, Caerneon, and Mechain Vwchcoed.

Cantref Cydewen had Comot Conan and Comot Hauren.

Cantref Conan had Cyfeilioc and Mouthwy, which is now in Merionyth-shire. Of
all these, the three first Cantreds do only at this day bear the Name of Powys,
which are upon the North-side of Severn, and are all five (saving the Comot of
Mowthwy) in Mongomery-shire.

This is a Country full of Woods, Hills, and Rivers, and has in it these
Towns, the Poole, New-Town, and Machynlhaeth. Arustly was in old time in this
part, but afterward it came to the Princes of Gwynedh. These Lordships came by
just descent from the Princes thereof, to a Woman named Hawys, the Daughter of
Owen ap Gruffydh. Arustly and Cyfeilioc came to the Baron of Dudley, and
afterward it was sold to the King.

The third part belonging to Mathrafal, was the Land between Wy and Severn,
containing four Cantreds, and thirteen Comots.

Cantref Melienyth has these Comots, Ceri, Swydhygre, Rhiwalalht, and Glyn
Ieithon.

Cantref Elfel has these, Vwchmynydh, Ismynydh, and Lhechdhyfnog.

Cantref y Clawdh these, Dyffryn Teyfediat, Swydhynogen, and Pennwelht.

Cantref Buelht has these, Swydh y Fam, Dreulys, and Isyrwon. Of this part
there is at this day some in Montgomery-shire, some in Radnor-shire, and some
in Brecknock-shire. In this part, and in the Lordships marching to it, which
although at the time of this division, which was in the time of the last Prince,
were not in his subjection, yet to this day speak Welsh, and are called Wales,
and in these Comots are these Towns and Castles. Montgomery called in Welsh
Trefaldwyn, a pretty Town and a fair Castle. The Castle of Clun, called
Colunwy, which is the Earls of Arundel. The Town of Knighton, in Welsh
Trefyclawd. The Castle of Cymaron. Presteyn in Welsh Lhanandras. The Town and
Castle of Radnor in Welsh Maesyfed, at this day the Shire Town. The Town of
Kington and the Castle of Huntingdon, called in Welsh Y Castelh Mayn, which
were the Bohuns Earls of Hereford, and after the Dukes of Buckingham. Castle
Pain, Hay, Lhanfair in Buelht. These Lordships with Brecknock and
Abergefenny, were belonging to the Bruces Lords of Brecknock, and after came
diverse times, and by sundry means to the Bohuns, Nevils, and Mortimers. And so
(as I have rehearsed) in this Territory or Kingdom were found fourteen
Cantreds, and forty Comots. Two of these parts, which are Powys and Gwynedh,
are at this day called North Wales, and divided into six Shi^es. Mon called
Anglesey, Caernarvon, Merionyth, Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomery-shire, and are
all on the North-side Severn, saving a piece of Montgomery-shire.

And here I think it good to let the Reader understand what the British
Chronicle says of North Wales, which affirms that three times it came by
Inheritance to Women. First to Stradwen, Daughter to Cadfan ap Conan ap Endaf,
and Wife to Coel Godeb^e, Mother to Genaw, Dyfyr and Gwawl. The second time to
the same Gwawl Wife to Edeyrn ap Padarn, and Mother to Cunetha Wledic; which
Cunetha inhabiting in the North parts of England, about the year 540. after the
Incarnation of Christ, and hearing how the mingled Nations of Irish-Scots, and
Picts, had overrun the Seashore of Cardigan, which was part of his
Inheritance, sent his Sons thither to enjoy their Inheritance, of whom Tibiaon
his eldest Son died in Man, which Land the said Irish-Scots had won. For Gildas
says, that the Children of Glam Hector, which peopled a great part of Ireland,
Yscroeth with his People inhabited Dalrieuda, which is a part of Scotland:
Builke with his People came to Man. But I think it good to put in Gildas words,
which says; Builke cum filiis suis inhabitavit Euboniam insulam v^lgo Manaw,
quae est in meditullio maris inter Hyberniam and Britanniam; that is to say,
Bui^ke with his Children inhabited the Isle Eubonia, commonly Manaw (for so it
was and is named in British) which lies in the middle of the Sea, between
Ireland and Britain. This was not called Mona, as Polydor faineth. The Children
of Bethoun inhabited Demetia, which is South Wales, with Gwyr and Cydweli, till
they were chased thence by the Children of Cunetha. Thus far Gildas. Therefore
the Sons of Cunetha, being arrived in North Wales (as well I think being driven
by the Saxons, as for their Inheritance) divided the Country betwixt them. And
first Meireaon the Son of Tibiaon, the Son of Cunetha, had Cantref Meireaon to
his part. Arustel ap Cunetha had Cantref Arostly. Caredic ap Cunetha, had
Caerdigion, now called Cardigan-shire. Maelor the Son of Gwran. Son to Cunedha
had Maeloron, that is the two Maelo^, Maelor Gymbraeg, called Br. and Maelor
S^esneg.
Dunod had Cantref Dimodic. Edeyrn had Edeyrnion. Mael had Dynmael. Coel had
Col^yon. Doguael had Dogueilyn. Rhyfaon had Rhyfonioc now Denbigh-land. Eineon
Yrch had Caereneon in Powys. Vssa had Maesuswalht now Oswestry. For surely that
they say commonly of Oswald King of Northumberland, to be slain there, and of
the Well that sprung where his Arm was carried, is nothing so. For Beda and all
other Writers testify that Peanda slew Oswald at Maserfelt, in the Kingdom of
Northumberland, and his Body was buried in the Abbey of Bradney, in the Province
of Lhyndesey. But to my former matter. These Names given by the Sons of
Cunetha, remain to this day. After this the Irish-Picts or Scots, which the
Britains called Y Gwydhyl Phictiaid, which is to say, the Irish-Picts, did
overrun the Isle of Mon, and were driven thence by Caswalhon Lhawhir, that is
Caswalhon with the long hand, the Son of Eineon Y^ch ap Cunedha, who slew
Serigi their King with his own hands, at Lhan y Gwydhyl, which is the Irish
Church at Holyhead. This Caswalhon was Father to Maelgon Gwynedh, whom the
Latins call Maglocunus, Prince and King of Britain.

In his time was the Famous Clerk and great Wiseman Taliessyn Ben Bei^d^, that
is to say, the chiefest of the Beirdh or Wisemen; for this word Bardh in
Caesar's time, signified (as Lucan bears Witness) such as had knowledge of
things to come, and so it signifies at this day. This Maelgon had a Son called
Run in whose time the Saxons invited Gurmond into Britain from Ireland, who had
come thither from Affric, who with the Saxons was the utter destruction of the
Britains, and flew all that professed Christ, and was the first that drove them
over Severn. This Run was Father to Beli, who was Father to Iago (for so the
Britains call James) who was Father to Cadfa^^, and not Brochwel called
Brecyfal (as the English Chronicle says) for this Brochwel called Ysgi^hroc,
that is, long toothed, was chosen Leader of such as met with Adelred alias
Ethelbertus Rex Cantia^, and other Angles and Saxons, whom Augustine had moved
to make War against the Christian Britains, and these put Brochwel twice to
flight, not far from Chester, and cruelly slew a 1000 Priests and Monks of
Bangor, with a great number of lay-Brethren of the same House, which lived by
the Labor of their Hands, and were come barefooted and woolward to crave
Mercy and Peace at the Saxons Hands. And here you shall understand that this
was not Augustine Bishop of Hippona the great Clerk, but Augustine the Monk,
called the Apostle of England.

Then this Brochwel retired over Dee, hard by Bangor, and defended the Saxons
the Passage, till Cadfan King of North Wales, Meredyth King of South Wales, and
Bled^us or Bletius Prince of Cornwall, came to succor him, and gave the Saxons
a sore Battle, and slew of them the number of a 1066, and put the rest to
flight. After the which Battle, Cadfan was chosen King of Britain, and was
chief Ruler within the Isle; after whom his Son Cadwalhon, who was Father to
Cadwalader, the last of the British Blood, that bare the Name of King of
Britain, was King.

The third time that North Wales came to a Woman, was to Esylht the Daughter of
Conan Tindaythwy, the Son of Edwal Ywrch, the Son of Cadwal^d^r. She was Wife
to Merfyn Frych, and Mother to Rhod^ric the Great, as shall be hereafter
declared By this you may understand, that North-W^les has been a great while
the chiefest Seat of the last Kings of Britain, because it was, and is the
strongest Country within this Isle, full of high Mountains, Craggy Rocks, great
Woods, and deep Valleys, strait and dangerous Places, deep and swift Rivers, as
Dyfi, which springs in the Hills of Mer^onyth, and runs North-West through
Mowthwy, and by Machynlaeth, and so to the Sea at Aberdyfi, dividing N^r^h and
South Wales asunder. Dee, called in Welsh Dourdwy, springing also on the other
side of the same Hills, runs East through Penlhyn, and the Lake Tegyd, (...)
and Lhangolhen, between Chirke-Land and Bromfield, where it boweth Northward
toward ^angor, to the Holt, and to Chester, and thence North-West to
Flint-Castle, and so to the Sea.

There is also Conwey, rising likewise in Merionyth-^^ire, and dividing
Caernarvon from Denbigh-shire, ^^nneth under Snowden North-East, by the Town of
^berconwey to the Sea.

Also Clwyd, which rising in Denbigh Land, run^eth down to Ruthyn, and plain
North, not far from ^enbigh to St. Asaph, and so by Ruthlan and to the Sea.
There be many other fair Rivers, of which some run ^o the Sea, as Mawr at
Traethmawr, and Afon y Saint at ^aernarvon, and other that run to Severn, as
Murnwy (...) Powys, and to Murnwy, Tanat; some other to Dee, ^s Ceirioc betwixt
the Lordships of Chirke and Whit^ington; Alyn through Yal and Molds dale, and
Hope ^ale, and so to Dee, a little above Chester. And this ^^all suffice for
the perfect Description of that which (...) old time was called Gwynedh and
Powys, and at ^hese days the six Shires of North Wales.

Now remains the last Kingdom of Wales, Dynefawr.
called Dynefawr, which although it was the greatest, yet was (...) not the
best, as Giraldus witnesses, chiefly because it was much molested with
Flemings and Normans, and also that in diverse parts thereof, the Lords would
not obey their Prince, as in Gwent and in Morganwe, which was their own
confusion, as shall ^ereafter appear. This was divided into six Parts, of the
which Caredigion was the first, Caredigion.
and contained ^our Cantreds and ten Comots, as Cantref Penwedic had ^n it
these Comots, Geneurglyn, Perfedh and Creuthyn.

Cantref Canawl had these, Mefenyth, Anhunoc, and Pennarth.

Cantref Castelh had these Comots, Mabwynion and Caerwedros.

Cantref Syrwen had these, Gwenionyth and Iscoed; and this part is at this day
called in English Cardigan-shi e, and in Welsh Swydh-Aberteifi. This is a
Champion Country without much Wood, and has been diverse times overcome with
Flemings and Normans, which builded many Castles in it, and at the last were
beaten out of them all. It has on the East North Wales with the River Dyfi and
part of Powys, upon the South Caermardhyn shire, upon the West Pembroke shire,
with the River Teifi, and upon the North the Irish Sea. In this part is the
Town of Cardigan upon Teifi, no^ far from the Sea. The Town of Aberystwyth upon
the River Ystwyth, by the Sea, and Lhanbadarn Fa^^ which was a great Sanctuary,
and a place of Religious and Learned Men in times past. And in the Shire were a
great number of Castles, as the Castl^ of Ystratmeyric, of Walter, of
Lhanrysted, of Dynert^ of the Sons of Wyneaon, of Aber-Reidol, and a gre^^
number more, with the Town of Tregaron, and Lh^^dhewibrefi.

Dyfet.
The second part was called Dyfed, and at this da^ Pembroke-shire, and had in it
eight Cantreds, an^ twenty three Comots, which were these. Cantre^ Emlyn had
these Comots, Vwchcuch, Iscuch an^ Lefethyr.

Cantref Arberth had these, Penrhyn ar Elays, Ester^lef and Talacharn.

Cantref Daugledheu had these, Amgoed, Penna^ and Efelfre.

Cantref Y Coed had these, Lhanhayaden and Caste^ Gwys.

Cantref Penfro has these, Coed yr haf, Maenor by^ and Penfro.

Cantref Rhos has these, Hulfforth Castelh Gwalch may and Ygarn.

Cantref Pubidioc has these, Mynyw, Pencaer an^ Pebidioc.

Cantref Cemais has these, Vwchnefer, Isnefer an^ Trefdraeth.

In this part are diverse Towns and Havens at thi^ day, as Pembroke, Tenby, in
Welsh Dynbegh-y-pysc^^ Hereford-West, in Welsh Hulfforth, with the fair Haven
of Milford, called in Welsh Aberdaugledhe^ St. David's or Menevia, called in
Welsh Mynyw, the chiefest See in all Wales. Then Fiscard called Abergwayn; and
Newport, named Trefdraeth; these be along the Seacoast, or not very far off.
Besides these ^^ere be diverse Castles, as Cilgerran, Arberth, Gwys,
^^anhayaden, Walwyn, and diverse others. This part was ^on first by the
Montgomery's Earls of Shrewsbury, and ^^ter given to the Marshalls, and so to
Valence, and from ^ence were the Princes of Wales most troubled with ^^e
Normans and Flemings, who do remain and in^^bit about Tenby, Pembroke and Rhos
to this day, which can neither Welsh nor good English as yet. ^^fed (for so
will I call it hereafter) has on the ^^e West and North the Irish Sea, upon
the South the ^anish Sea, and upon the East Caermardhyn-shire, ^^d on the
North-East Cardigan-shire. The third ^^rt was Caermardhyn-shire, having four
Cantreds, Caermardhyn.
^^d fifteen Comots, as Cantref Fin^oc with the Co^ots of Harf^yn, Derfedh, and
Isgeneny.

Cantref Eginoc with these Gwyr, now in Glamorgan^^^re, Cydweli, and
Carnwilheon.

Cantref Bachan with these, Malhaen, Caeo, and ^^aenor Deilo.

Cantref Mawr with these, Cethineoc Comot mabElfyw, ^omot mabVchdryd and
Wydigada. In this Shire are the ^owns and Castles of Caermardhyn, Dynefowr,
which was ^^e Prince's Seat of the Country, Newtown, Lhandeilo, ^^anymdhyfri,
Emlyn, Swansey, now in Glamorgan^^^re, called in Welsh Abertawy upon the Sea,
the ^^stle of the Sons of Vchtryd, of Lhanstephan, and ^^^ers. It has upon the
West Dyfed or Pembroke-shire, (...) the North Cardigan-shire, upon the
South-West (...) Sea, and upon the South-East Glamorgan, and on the East
Brecknock-shire. This is counted the ^^^ongest part of all South Wales, as that
which is ^^l of high Mountains, great Woods, and fair Rivers, ^^ecially Tywy.
In this, and in the other two parts (...) South Wales, were the notablest Acts
that this Hi^^^ry treats of, achieved and done.

The fourth called Morganwe, now Glamorgan-shire, Morganwc.
^^ntaining four Cantreds, with fifteen Comots. As ^^ntref Croneth, with these
Comots Rwngneth ac Afan, (...) yr Hwndrwd, and Maenor Glynogwr.

Cantref Pennythen with these, Meyscyn, Glynrhodny, ^aenor Talafan, and Maenor
Ruthyn.

Cantref Brenhinol with these, Cibowr, Senghennyth, Vwchcaeth, and Iscaeth.

Cantref Gwentlhwg, which is now in Monmouthshire, with these Comots, y Rhardh
Ganol, and Eithafdylygion. In this part are these Towns and Castles, Lhandaf
the Bishop's See, Caerdyffe, called Caerdhyf, Cowbridge, called in Welsh Y bont
faen, which is as much as to say, Stone Bridge, Lantwyd, Caerffyli, and others,
and has diverse Rivers which run to the South Sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth,
Afan, Ogwr, and Lhychwr; it has on the South, the Sea of Severn, which
divides it from Devon-shire and Cornwall; upon the West and North-West,
Caermardhyn-shire; upon the North East, Brecknock-shire; and upon the East.
Monmouth-shire. Of this you shall read very little, for one Iestyn being Chief
of the Country, and having War with his Neighbors, called one Robert Fitzham^^
with a great number of Strangers to his succors which after they had achieved
the Enterprise, liked so well the Country, that they found occasion to fal^ out
with Iestyn, and inhabited the Country themselves and their Heirs to this day.

The fifth part was called Gwent and now in Monmouth shire, which had three
Cantreds, and ten Comots, as Cantref Gwent, which has these Comots, Y mynyth,
Iscoed Lhefnydh, and Tref y grug.

Cantref Iscoed these, Brynbuga, Vwchcoed, y Teirtref, and Erging ac ewyas, now
in Hereford-shire.

Cantref Coch was the seventh Cantred of Morganwc, which is now in
Gloucestershire, and is called the Forest of Dean.

In this part was the ancient City of Caerlheon upon Vsk, where was the
Archbishop's See of Wales; here are also diverse Towns and Castles, as Chepstow,
Gly^ Strigul, Rhos, Tyntern upon the River Wy; there is also Newport, called y
Castelh Newydh. Vysc called Brynbuga Grosmont, Raglan, White-Castle,
Abergefenny, and many others. This is a fair and a fertile Country, o^ which
likewise the Gentlemen were never obedient to their Prince, which was the cause
of their own destruction. It has on the West Glamorgan and Brecknock-shires,
upon the North Hereford-shire, upon ^^e East Gloucestershire, with the River
Wy, and upon ^^e South and South-East Severn.

Last of all comes Brecheinoc, now Brecknock-shire, Brecheinoc.
which has three Cantreds, and eight Comots. As ^antref Selef which has these
Comots, Selef and ^rahayern.

Cantref Canol these, Talgarth Ystradyw and Brwyn^ys or Eglwys Yail.

Cantref Mawr these, Tir Raulff, Lhywel and Cerrig^owel. In this part is the
Town of Brecknock upon ^^e meeting of Vsk and Honddi, and is called Aber^onddi,
and Hay called y Gelhy, with Talgarth, Buelht, ^hangors; it has West
Caermardhyn-shire, with the River Tywy, upon the North Radnor-shire with Wy,
upon the East Herefordshire and Monmouth, upon the ^outh Glamorgan. This for
the most part is full of Mountains, Woods and Rivers, especially Buelht. And
^he Lords of this Country called Bruces with the Mor^mers, most of all others
Lords Marchers, sometimes by Might, but oftener by Treason, have molested and
grie^ed the Princes of Wales. This Land came after the Bruces to the Bohuns
Earls of Hereford, and so to the ^taffords Dukes of Buckingham.

These six Shires being subject to the Territory of Dynefawr with Radnor-shire,
which was belonging to Mathrafal, are now commonly called South Wales, which
Country is both great and large, with many ^air Plains and Valleys for Corn,
high Mountains and Rocks full of Pasture for Cattle; great and thick Woods,
with Forests and Parks for Red Deer and Fallow; clear and deep Rivers full of
Fish, of which Severn is the Chiefest, which with Wy and Rheidol ^pring out of
a high Mountain called Pymlhymon, in the edge of Cardigan-shire, and are called
commonly the three Sisters. Severn runs full East through Cydewen by the
Pool, and under the Castle of Shraden to Shrewsbury, from whence it turns
Southward and runs to Bridgenorth, Bewdley, Worcester, Gloucester, and ^o to the
Sea by Bristol. The second Sister is Gwy, in English Wy, which took her Journey
South-East, by Rayader Gwy to Buelht, where Irwon meets her, thence to
Glasbury, and so to Hereford and Monmouth, and to the Sea of Severn at
Chepstow; for so they call Mor Hafren the Sea which severeth Wales from
Somersetshire, Devon shire and Cornwall. The third Sister named Rheidol, ran
Northward to the Sea being not far off, at Aberystwyth. There be other fair
Rivers as Vsk, which rising in a high Mountain called y Mynydh die in the South
part of Brecknockshire runs to Brecknock, and so through Monmouthshire to
the Town of Vsk, Caerlheon and Newport, and so to the said South Sea. Tywy also
rising, not far from Wy, runs South to Lhanymdhyfri, and thence South-West
by Lhandcilo and Dynefawr to Abergwily and Caermardhyn, and so by Lhanstephan
to the Sea.

Teifi likewise which rises in the edge of Caermardhyn shire, and runs
North-West by Emlyn, Ci gerran, Cardigan, and so to the North Sea. In Teifi
above all the Rivers in Wales, (...) Greek, Fiber, Lat. Beaver English, Afanc
British, Giraldus in Itiner.
were in Giraldus's time a great number of Castors, which may be Englished
Bevers, and are called in Welsh Afanc, which name only remains in Wales at
this day, but what it is very few can tell. It is a Beast not much unlike an
Otter, but that it is bigger, all hairy saving the Tail, which is like a Fish
Tail, as broad as a Man's Hand. This Beast uses as well the Water as the Land,
and has very sharp Teeth, and biteth cruelly, till he perceives the Bones
crack, his Stones be of great efficacy in Physic. He that will learn what
strong Nests they make, which Giraldus calls Castles, which they build upon
the face of the Water with great Boughs which they cut with their Teeth, and
how some lie upon their Backs, holding the Wood with the fore-Feet, which the
other draws with a cross stick, the which he holds in his Mouth to the
waterside, and other particularities of their Natures, let him read Giraldus
in his Topography of Wales. There be besides these a great number of Rivers, of
which some run to the South, and some to the West and North Sea, as Tywy in
Glamorgan-shire, Taf also in Caermardhyn shire, which runnenh to Cledheu, two
Rivers either called Cledheu, which do give Milford the name of Aberdaugledheu
in Pembroke-shire, Arth, Aeron, and Ystwyth, in Cardigan. There be also diverse
Lordships which be added to other Shires, and were taken here^ofore for parts
of Wales, and in most part of them at this day the Welsh Language is spoken, as
Oswestry, Knocking, Whittington, Elsmer, Masbroke, Chirbury, Caurs, Clun, which
are now in Shrop-shire, Ewyas-Lacy, Ewyas-Haroald, Clifford, Winsorton,
Yardley, Hun^ingdon, Whitney, Loghardneys in Hereford-shire. Also this Country
of South Wales as all the rest of Britain, was first inhabited by the Britains,
which remain there to this day, saving that in diverse places, especially along
the Seashore, they have been mingled with Saxons, Normans (which the Welsh
History calls Frenchmen) and Flemings; so that the Princes of Wales, since
the Conquest of the Normans, could never keep quiet possession thereof, but
what for Strangers, and what for disloyalty of their own People, vexation and
War, were for the most part compelled to keep themselves in Caermardhyn-shire.

THE HISTORY OF WALES.
WHEN the Roman Empire, under Valentinian the Younger, began to decline, and
became sensibly unable to repress the perpetual Incursions of the Goths, Huns,
Vandals, and other barbarous Invaders; it was found necessary to abandon the
remotest Parts of that unwieldy Body, and to recall the Roman Forces that
defended them, the better to secure the Inward, and the Provinces most exposed
to the Depredations of the Barbarians. And in this Exigency of the Roman
Affairs, Britain, as lying far remote from the Heart of the Empire, was
deprived of the Roman Garrisons; which, being transported into Gaul upon more
urgent Occasions, left it naked and exposed to the inveterate Cruelty of the
Scots and Picts: for no sooner had they understood of the Romans Departure out
of Britain, and that the Britains were to expect no further Help from the
Empire; but they descend in greater Number than formerly, and with greater
Courage and Expectation, being how rid of the Fear they entertained of the
Roman Legions, who always used to hinder their Progress, and to prevent their
Incursions into the Roman Province. The Britains perceiving their ancient and
implacable Enemies to fall upon them, and finding themselves far too weak to
repel their Endless Devastations; with a lamentable Narrative of their own
Miseries, and the cruel Oppressions of their Enemies, they sent over to Gaul,
imploring Aid of Aetius Prefect of that Province; who, being moved with the
deplorable Condition of the Britains, dispatched over a Legion under the
Command of Gallio, which unexpectedly surprising the Picts and Scots, forced
them, with great Loss and Destruction, to retire over the Seas or Friths to
their own Habitations. Then helping then to build a Wall of Stone cross the
Land, for a Bulwark against any future Irruptions; the Romans, at their
Departure, told them, they could not any more undertake such dangerous
Expeditions for their Defense, and therefore admonished them to take Arms and
like Men vindicate their Country, their Wives Children and Liberties from the
Injuries of their barbarous Enemies.

But as soon as the Roman Legion was transporte^ into Gaul, back return the
Picts and Scots; and, having by a desperate Assault passed the Wall, pursue the
Britains with a more dreadful and bloody Slaughter than formerly. The Britains,
perceiving their Condition most desperate, once more send their miserab^^
Complaints to AEti^s in these Tragical Words; (...) Aetius thrice Consul, the
Groans of the Britains: the Ba^barians drive us to the Sea, and the Sea drives
us b^^^ to them; and so, distracted betwixt two Deaths, we (...) either
drowned, or perish by the Sword. But they so^^cite to no purpose, the Romans
having already bid a^solute farewell to Britain, and the Empire being cru^ly
oppressed by the Goths, and other Barbarous Na^^ons, was not in a Condition
possible to assist the^ The Britains therefore finding themselves absolute
forsaken by the Romans, and conceiving it utterly i^practicable to drive away
the Barbarians by their ow^ Strength; saw it urgently necessary to call in the
(...) of some Foreign Nation, whose Labor in repelli^^ their Enemies should be
gratefully and satisfactorily Rewarded.

The Reason that the British Nation was at this time so weak and impotent, and
so manifestly unable to withstand these barbarous Enemies, who were far
inferior as to extent of Country, and probably in number of People, may in
great measure be attributed to the Ease and Quietness the Britains enjoyed
under the Roman Government. For whilst the Roman Legions continued in Britain,
they ever undertook the Security and Preservation of it; so that the Britains
heretofore were little concerned at the Incursions of the Scots and Picts,
depending wholly upon the Strength and Valor of the Romans, insomuch, that
within a while, they fell into a fit of Luxury and Effeminacy, and quickly
forgot that Martial Prowness, and Military Conduct which their Ancestors so
Famously excelled in. For after their entire Subjection to the Roman Empire,
they had little or no Opportunity to Experience their Valor, excepting in some
homebred Commotions, excited by the aspiring Ambition of some male-contented
General, which were quickly composed and reduced to nothing. And after the
Scots and Picts grew Formidable, and durst venture to make Incursions into the
Roman Province, the Britains were the least concerned in Opposing them, leaving
that to the Care and Vigilance of the Roman Garrisons. And this Easiness and
Supinity of the Britains, may not be untruly attributed to the Policy of the
Roman Constitution: For when the Britains were brought subject to the Empire,
the first thing the Romans effected toward the Confirmation of their
Obedience, was to take the Sword out of their Hands. They were sensible how
Bold and Valorous the Britains naturally were, how unlike to submit their Necks
to a Foreign Yoke, and therefore they found it impracticable to obtain a quiet
Possession of this Province, as long as the Britains had Power and Opportunity
to Oppose them. This Course they found very effectual, and when they had once
lulled them asleep, they were not over solicitous to rouse and awaken them.

The Britains also might possibly be too much taken with this sedentary and
unactive Life; and as long as they lived Secure under the Protection of the
Roman Empire, they little feared their Country would become a Prey to any
barbarous Nation. No one would have imagined that that Glorious Empire would be
so soon crushed to pieces, which could not otherwise be effected, than by the
insupportable pressure of its own Weight. This apprehension of the Greatness
and Strength of the Romans, made the Britains probably less solicitous of
enabling themselves to Defend their Country, not thinking they would ever
forsake and relinquish the Province of Britain. But to their Sorrow they
experienced the contrary, the Affairs of the Empire elsewhere requiring the
Help of the British Legions, so that they were left exposed to the Cruelties of
the Northern Invaders, having not as yet recovered any Power or Conduct to
oppose them. For had not the Scots and Picts come on so forcibly at first, but
had given time to the Britains to shake off that Lethargy they had for many
Years been buried in, and to renew their Ancient Discipline and Vigor, there
had been no need of calling in the Saxons, seeing they would in all probability
been able to Maintain their Ground against any Opposition, and likely had been
in Possession of their whole Country to this time. But next to the Decree of
Heaven, the Ruin of the British Nation must be attributed to its too much
Luxury and Effeminacy, and to the universal Lapse of the Nobility and People
into an aversion of an Military Action and Martial Discipline. For though a
continued Peace be in it self desirable, yet oftentimes nothing tends more to
the future Ruin and Downfall of a Nation. For Peace begets in Men generally a
habit of Looseness and Debauchery, is the occasion of many notorious
Extravagancies and vicious Practices, which weakens their Hands, and cools
their Courage and Greatness of Mind, so that in case of any open Danger, they
are incapable to Defend their Country, and unfit to Oppose the Common Enemy.
Scarce any Kingdom or Nation was subverted, but the Ruin of it was ushered in
by these means; witness the Assyrian under Sardanapalus, the Persian under
Darius, and the Egyptian under Cleopatra; so that it was most prudently urged
by a Roman Senator, that Carthage might not be demolished, lest that for want
of an Enemy abroad, the Valor of the Romans might degenerate, and their
Conduct be forgotten. Had the Britains had the Fortune to be continually in
action, and not exchanged their Courage and Discipline for Ease and Laziness,
they had had no reason to dread the Incursions of the Scots and Picts, nor any
need of the Aid and Assistance of a foreign Nation; but the condition of their
Affairs then required it, and Help must be had, or else their Country must
unavoidably become a Prey to those Northern Invaders.

To prevent therefore and repel their Violence, King V^rtigern held a Council
of his Great Men and Nobles, where it was concluded to be most advantageous to
the Britains, to invite the Saxons out of Germany to their aid, who in all
probability would gladly embrace the opportunity, by reason that their own
Country was grown too scanty for their superfluous Numbers. This Message of
the Britains, however originally delivered, is by an ancient Saxon Writer
repeated in this manner; Most noble Saxons, the miserable Britains, shattered
and quite worn out by the frequent Incursions of their Enemies, upon the news
of your many signal Victories, have sent us to you, humbly requesting that you
would assist them at this juncture. A Land large and spacious, abounding with
all manner of Necessaries, they give up entirely to your disposal. Hitherto we
have lived happily under the Government and Protection of the Romans; next to
the Romans we know none of greater Valor than your selves, and therefore in
your Arms do now seek refuge. Let but that Courage and those Arms make us
Conquerors, and we shall refuse no Service you shall please to impose. To this
Message the Saxons returned this short Answer: Assure your selves, the Saxons
will be true Friends to the Britains, and as such, shall be always ready both
to relieve their Necessities, and to advance their Interest.

The Saxons being thus happily courted to what themselves had a thousand times
wished for, arrived soon after in Britain, in three Galleys, called in their
own Language Kiules, under the Conduct of two Brethren Hengist and Horsa. Being
honorably received by the King, and affectionately treated by the People,
their Faith was given of both sides; the Saxons stipulating to defend the
Britains Country, and the Britains to give the Saxons a satisfactory Reward
for all the Pains and Dangers they should undergo upon their account. At first
the Saxons showed themselves very diligent in their Employment, and
successfully repelled the Scots and Picts; who being probably ignorant of the
landing of the Saxons, and fearing no opposition, boldly advanced to the Heart
of the Country. But when the Saxons became better acquainted with the Island,
and happily discovered the Weakness and Inability of the Britains; under
pretense that their Pay was not answerable to their Service and Deserts, they
quarrelled with the Britains, and instead of supporting them according to Oath,
entered into a League with their Enemies the Scots. Moreover, Hengist
perceiving with whom he had to do, sent over to acquaint his Countrymen with
the Beauty and Fertility of the Island, the Infirmity and Effeminacy of the
Inhabitants; inviting them to be Sharers of his future Success and
Expectations. To his Invitation they readily comply, and sailing over in great
Numbers, they thought to take possession of that Country, which Fortune
promised should be their own: But they must fight for it first; the Britains
being resolved to the last to defend themselves and their Country against these
treacherous Practices of the Saxons; and if possible, to drive them to their
primitive Habitations. For when the Britains became sensible of the undermining
aim of the Saxons, how they secretly endeavored the total extirpation of the
British Nation, they presently betook themselves to their Swords, and in a
short time became signally famous for their Valor and Conduct. This the Saxons
afterward grievously felt, though the total recovery of Britain proved
impracticable for want of Power; the Saxons having by Massacres and other
treacherous means, most unmercifully lessened the Force and Number of the
Britains. King Vortigern loved his Ease too well to observe their Practices;
and besides, became so foolishly enamored with the Daughter of Hengist, which
purposely was laid to entrap him, that the Saxon upon the strength of their
Marriage began to carve for himself, and during Vortigern's Reign, laid so firm
a Foundation for the Saxon Conquest, that the succeeding British Kings; though
famously valiant, could never undermine it. This Sottishness of his Father,
young Vortimer could not at length endure; to see himself and his Country so
openly and shamefully imposed upon by Strangers; and therefore he resolved to
take the British Government upon himself, and to endeavor the universal
Expulsion of the Saxons. With him the British Nobility willingly join, and
after several famous Victories over the Saxons, he was unhappily poisoned by a
Saxon Lady. After him the Britains bravely defended themselves against the
prevailing Greatness of the Saxons, under these valiant Princes, Aurelius
Ambrosius, Vter Pendragon, Arthur, Constantine II. Aurelius Conanus, Vortiper,
and Maelgon. To him succeeded Careticus; in whose time the Saxons aspiring to a
total Conquest of Britain, invited over one Gurmundus, a Norwegian Pyrate, who
had lately signalized himself in Ireland, and obtained a Conquest over that
Kingdom. Him they employ to march against Careticus, who being overcome and
vanquished by him, the Britains were forced, some to retire beyond the Rivers
Severn and Dee, some to Cornwall, and the rest to Little Britain in France. The
British Affairs were now brought very low, and their Government reduced within
a very narrow compass; so that the Title of the Kings of Britain, can be but
superficially attributed to the succeeding Princes, Cadwan, Cadwallan, and
Cadwalader.

Cadwalader.
Cadwalader, surnamed Bbendiged, or the Blessed, was the last of British Race,
that enjoyed the Title of King of Britain; after him, the Welsh, who were the
most numerous remains of the Britains, disdaining to own any Subjection to the
oppressing Saxons, set up a new Government among themselves, and altered the
Style of British Kings, to that of Princes of Wales. But whilst Cadwalader
ruled in Britain, a very severe Famine, attended with a raging Pestilence,
which assuredly sprung from the continued War, which was so eagerly carried on
betwixt the Britains and Saxons, happened in the Island, which occasioned a
most lamentable Mortality among his Subjects; insomuch that he was compelled,
together with a great Number of his Nobility and others, to retire for Refuge
to his Cousin Alan, King of Lhydaw, or Little Britain in France. There he was
sure, to meet with all Civility suitable to his Quality and Condition, as well,
because of his own near Relation and Consanguinity to Alan; as upon the account
that their Subjects were originally one and the same People: For the Britains
of France, about the year of Christ 384. went over out of this Island under the
Command of Conan, Lord of Meriadoc, to the aid of Maximus the Tyrant, against
the Emperor Gratianus. For this Service Maximus granted to Conan and his
Followers the Country of Armorica, where the Britains having driven out the
former Inhabitants, seated themselves, and erected a Kingdom, which lasted for
many Years under several Kings, whose Names and Succession are as follows: The
Catalogue of the Armorican Kings.
1. Conan Meriadoc. 2. Gradlonus. 3. Solomon I. 4. Auldranus. 5. B^^^ous I. 6.
Ho^^lus Magnus. 7. How^lus. II. 8. Al^m^ I. 9. Ho^^lus III. ^0. Cil^u^llus. ^1.
Solomon II. ^2. Alan^^ II. 13. Conobertus. 14. Budicus II. 15. Theodoricus. 16.
Rubalhonus. 17. Daniel Dremrost, i. e. rubicunda facie. 18. Aregstanus. 19.
Maconus. 20. Neomenius. 21. Haruspogius. 22. Solomon III.


Alan II. then reigned in Little Britain, when Cad^alader was forced to forsake
his own Dominions, and to retire beyond the Seas. He was descended ^^om Ru^^
the Son of Mailgon Gwyneth, King of Great Britain, by a Daughter married to
Howel the Second King of Little Britain. This Kingdom remained ^^rm, till
Solomon III. who was treacherously slain ^y his own Subjects; upon which
unlucky Accident, ^he Kingdom was converted to an Earldom, whereof ^ne Alan was
the first, a valiant and warlike Prince, who stoutly resisted the Normans, and
frequently van^uished and overcame them.

But after that Cadwalader had continued some time with Alan, the Plague being
abated in Britain he ^urposed to return, and if possible, to recover that ^art
of his Kingdom which the Saxons were now in ^ossession of. He received frequent
Intelligence of their Number and Increase, how they fairly bid for ^he Conquest
of that Country, which had been go^erned by British Kings for the space of
1827. Years. This troubled him exceedingly, and tho he had little hopes of
prevailing by the Strength and Num^er of his Forces, yet he made the best
preparation that the Opportunity would permit, and dispatched his Fleet for the
transportation of his Army, which consisted partly of his own Subjects, and
partly of such Succors as he received from Alan. Whilst he vigorously
prosecuted this Design, and was ready to strike sail for Britain; his Voyage
was prevented by a Message from Heaven; which counseled him to lay aside the
thoughts of recovering his Kingdom, because it was already decreed above, that
the Britains should no longer enjoy the Government of Britain, till the
Prophecy of Merlyn Ambrose was fulfilled. And instead of a Voyage to Britain,
he is ordered to take his Journey to Rome, where he should receive Holy Orders
at the hands of Pope Sergius, and instead of recovering the British Crown, have
his own Crown shaved off, and be initiated into the Order of the Monks. Whether
this Vision was signified to him in a Dream, or by the impositious Illusion of
some wicked Spirit; or whether it may be a fantastical Conceit of his own,
being a Man of a mild and easy temper, wearied with Troubles and Miseries, is
very dubious: Only this is certain, tha^ he never returned again to Britain,
after he had gone over to Alan. But Cadwaladar had no sooner received this
Vision, but immediately he relates the whole to his Friend Alan, who presently
consults all his prophetical Books, chiefly the famous Works of the two
Merlins, Ambrose and Silvester: The first is said to be begotten on a Spirit,
and born in the Town of Carmarthen, whence he received the Name of Merli^ and
to flourish in the Reign of King Vortigern. The latter called Caledonius, from
the Forest Caledon in Scotland, and Silvester or Merlyn Wylbt, by reason he
fell mad, and lived desolately after that he had seen a monstrous shape in the
Air, prophesied in the time of King Arthur, and far more full and intelligible
than the former. Both these were in great Reverence and Reputation among the
Britains, and their Works very religiously preserved, and upon any considerable
occasion most venerably consulted. They were of opinion, that nothing could
escape their Knowledge; and that no Accident of moment or revolution could
happen, which they did not foretell, and was to be ^^covered in their Writings.
In the consultation ^^erefore of their Prophesies, and the Words which (...)
Eagle is said to have spoken at the building of ^^er Septon, now Shaftsbury;
namely, that the Bri^^ns must lose the Government of Britain till the ^^nes of
King Cadwalader were brought back from ^^me. Alan found out that the time was
now come, ^hen these Prophesies were to be accomplished, and ^^e Britains
forced to quit their native Inheritance to ^^^angers and Invaders. Upon this he
advised Cad^lader to obey the Commands, and follow the Coun^^^ of the Vision,
and to hasten his Journey for Rome. ^^is he was willing to submit to, being
desirous to ^^end the remainder of his Days in Peace and Quiet^^ss, which
before he had no opportunity to enjoy. ^o Rome therefore he hastens, where he
was kindly ^^ceived by Pope Sergius; and after eight Years spent ^ere in Piety
and Devotion, he died in the Year ^^8. and with him the Kingdom and total
Government of the Britains over this Island.

King Cadwalader is said to have been a considera^^e Benefactor to the Abbey of
Clynnoc Vawr in Arvon, ^^on which he bestowed the Lordship of Grayanoc. ^his
place was primarily founded by S. Beuno, to whom it is dedicated, who was the
Son of Hywgi ap ^wynlliw ap Glywis ap Tegid ap Cadell, a Prince or lord of
Glewilig. Brothers Son to S. Cadoc ap Gwyn^^^w, sometime Bishop of Beneventum
in Italy. He (...) by the Mothers side Cousin German to Laudatus ^^e first Abbot
of Enlli, or the Island of Bardsey; ^^d to Kentigern Bishop of Glascow in
Scotland, and (...) Lhanolwey, or S. Asaph in Wales; which last was ^on to Owen
Regent of Scotland, and Grandson to ^rien King of Cumbria. The building of a
Mona^^ry at Glynnoc happened upon this occasion: Baeuno ^aving raised to life,
as the Tradition goes, S. Weni^^yd, who was beheaded by one Caradoc, a Lord in
North Wales, upon the account that she would not ^ield to his unchaste Desires,
became in very great ^steem with King Cadvan, who bestowed upon him ^ertain
Lands whereon to build a Monastery. Cadwallon also, Cadrans Son, gave him the
Lands o^ Gwareddoc, where beginning to build a Church, (...) certain Woman with
a Child in her Arms prevente^ his further progress, assuring him, that those
Land^ were the proper inheritance of that Child. Be^^^ was so exceedingly
troubled at this, and without any more consideration on the matter, taking the
Woman along with him, he went in all haste to Ca^ Sevant (called by the Romans
Segontium, now C^^narvon) where King Cadwallon then kept his Court when he was
come before the King, he told him wit^ a great deal of Zeal and Concern, that
he had n^^ done well to devote to God's Service what was another Man's
Inheritance, and therefore demand^^ back of him the Golden Scepter he had given
him (...) lieu and consideration of the said Land, which the King refusing to
do, was presently excommunicated b^ Beuno, who thereupon departed and went
away. B^ a certain person called Gwyddeiant, the King's Cosin-German, hearing
what had happened, immediatel^ pursued after Beuno; whom when he had overtake^
he bestowed upon him (for the good of his own So^ and the Kings) the Township
of Clynncovawr, being his undoubted Inheritance; where Beuno built a Church,
about the Year 616. about which time King Cadvan dyed, leaving his Son
Cadwallon to succeed him. And not long before this time, Eneon Ehre^^, or
Anianus King of the Scots, a considerable Prince in the North of Britain,
leaving all his Royalty i^ those Parts, came to Lhyn in Gwyneth, where he built
a Church, which is still called from him, Lha^ Eingan Bhrenin; where he is said
to have spent the remainder of his Days in the Fear and Service of God. He was
Son to Owen Danwyn, the Son of Eneon Yrth, Son to Cunedha Wledig King of
Cambria, and a great Prince in the North, and Cosin-German to the great Maelgwn
Gwyneth King of Britain, whose Father was Caswallon law-hir, the Brother of
Owen Danwyn; and his Mother Medif the Daughter of Voylda ap Tal^ Traws of
Nanconw^y. This Maclywn died about the Year 586.

Ivor and Edwal Ywrch.
WHen Cadwalader was departed for Rome, Alan began to reflect upon the state
and condition Great Britain; he imagined with himself that the ^ecovery of it
was not impracticable, but that a con^^^erable Army might regain what the
Saxons now ^^ietly possessed. Therefore he was resolved to try ^^e utmost, and
to send over all the Forces he was ^^le to draw together; not doubting the
Conquest of ^^me part of Britain, in case the whole should prove ^ecoverable.
He was the more encouraged to this ^xpedition, by reason that the Advantage was
like to (...) his own, and no one could challenge the Government of Britain, in
case Fortune should deliver it to ^^s Hands. Cadwalader was gone to Rome, and
in all ^^obability never to return; his Son Edwal Ywrch, or ^^e Roe, was young
and under the Tuition of Alan; (...) that the event of this Expedition must of
necessity ^ll to himself, or by his Concession to his Son Ivor, ^ho was to be
chief in the Undertaking. Having ^ised a considerable Army, consisting chiefly
of his ^wn Subjects, with what remained of the Britains ^^at came over with
King Cadwaladar, he dispatched (...) for Britain, under the Command of his Son
Ivor, ^^d his Nephew Ynyr: They safely landed in the Western Parts of Britain,
which put the Saxons in^^ so great a Fright, that immediately they drew up ^^l
their Power to oppose them, and to hinder their ^rogress into the Country. The
Britains, tho some^hat fatigued with their Voyage, however gave them Battle,
and after a very great slaughter of the ^axons, possessed themselves of the
Countries of ^ornwal, Devon, and Somersetshires. This proved a ^ortunate
beginning for the Britains, and gave them ^reat hopes of farther Success in the
recovery of their Country; but that could not be expected without great
Opposition, and several hot Engagements w^^^ the Saxons. This they were
immediately made se^sible of; for they had scarce time to breath, and to
^^cover their Spirits after the last Battle, but Kentwi^^ King of the
West Saxons marched against them wi^^ a powerful Army, consisting of Saxons and
Angl^^ The Britains resolved to fight them; but whilst bo^^ Armies were in view
of each other, they though^ more advisable, to cease from any Hostility, and
(...) enter into Articles of Composition. Ivor seem already satisfied with his
Conquest, and willin^^^ agreed to marry Ethelberga, Kentwyn's Cousin, a^^
peaceably to enjoy for his life so much as he was a^ready in possession of.
This he faithfully observed ^^ring the Reign of Kentwyn, and his Nephew Cad^^
who, after two Years, resigned the Kingdom of (...) West Saxons to his Cousin
Ivor. And now Ivor w^^^ become unexpectedly powerful, being King as w^^^ of the
Saxons, as Britains that inhabited the W^stern parts of the Island. He was now
able to ^^dertake somewhat considerable, and therefore beg^^ to fall foul upon
his Neighbors the Kings of K^^^ the West Saxons, and Mercia, whom he
vanquish^^ in several Battles. But being at length tired with t^^ Weight of
Government, he went to Rome, after t^^ Example of Cadwalader, and resigned the
Rule of (...) Saxons to his Cousin Adelred, leaving the Britains (...) the care
of Roderick Molwynoc, the Son of Edwal Yw^^

This Ivor founded the Abbey of Glastenbury, call^^ in the British Tongue Ynys
Avalon; where there (...) been a Christian Church for several Years before, a^^
the first that was ever erected in Britain, For Jos^^^ of Arimathea being sent
by Philip the Apostle in t^^ days of Arviragus, An. Chr. 53. to preach the
Gos^^^ in Britain, seated himself here, and built a Chu^^^ for the British
Christians. This Church afterwa^^^ Ivor converted into an Abbey, which he
endow^^ with very large Possessions; being famous for t^^ Burying-place of
Joseph of Arimathea, and Ki^^ Arthur. He bestowed also some Lands upon t^^
Church of Winchester.

But there happened several Casualties in his time. Bryth^, a Subject to
Egfride King of Northumberland, ^assed over to Ireland, and wasted and
destroyed a great part of that Kingdom. In the Fourth Year of ^is Reign their
happened a remarkable Earthquake ^n the Isle of Man, which much disturbed and
an^oyed the Inhabitants; and the year following it rained Blood both in Britain
and in Ireland. This occasioned the Butter and Milk to resemble the color of
Blood; and two Years after the Moon also appeared all bloody. These Accidents
of Nature might probably presage ^ome Tumults and Disturbances in the Kingdom;
which were very great in his time. For he was almost in perpetual Hostility
with the Kings of Kent, West-Sex, and Mercia; which occasioned great Blood^hed
and Slaughter in Britain. His Journey to Rome ^ut an end to all these
Commotions, from whence he ^ever did return, but ended his Days there in the
practice of Piety and Religion.

Roderick Molwynoc.
THE Government of the Britains Ivor resigned Roderick Molwinoc the Son of
Edwal Ywrch, who began his Reign An. 720. But Adelred, King of the West Saxons,
was displeased that Ivor had not bestowed upon him his whole Kingdom; and upon
that account he is resolved to trouble and plague Roderick and his Britains. He
raised immediately a powerful Army, and with all his Forces marched to
Devonshire, which he destroyed with Fire and Sword. From whence he proceeds to
Cornwall, intending to make that Country sensible of the same Misery; but he
came far short of his Expectation; for upon his entrance into the Country, the
Britains opposed him, and gave him Battle, where he was vanquished, and forced
to retire with all speed to his own Dominions. This Victory the Britains called
Gwaeth Heilyn, from the Britains again obtained two notable Victories over the
Saxons, the one at a place called Ga^^ Maclawch in North Wales, the other at
Pencoct in South Wales. But the Joy and Satisfaction which the Br^tains
entertained of these Successes, was somewh^^ abated by the Death of Belin the
Son of Elphin, (...) Man of noble Birth, and great Worth among the^

About the same time Celredus King of Mercia die^ and was succeeded by
Ethelbaldus, who being ve^^desirous to annex that fertile and pleasant Countr^
lying between the Rivers Severn and Wye to h^^ Kingdom of Mercia, entered Wales
with a puissa^^ Army. He destroyed and ravaged the Country before him, to
Carno, a Mountain lying not far from Abergavenny, where he was met with by the
Britain^ between whom a bloody and sore Battle was foug^^ in the Year 728. but
the Victory proved very dub^table.

Bid, who was ^ducated and brought up in the Abbey of Wyrnetham (...) Iarewe; a
Man of great Learning and extensi^^ Knowledge; who wrote several Books, one of
which entitled, The Ecclesiastical History of the English N^tion; he dedicated
to Cleolwolfe King of Northumbe^land. The same time Adeired King of the
West-S^xons, and Ethelbald King of Mercia, united their Fo^ces, and jointly
marched to fight against the Brita^^^ The Welsh were now put to very hard
Streights, an^ forced to oppose the numerous Armies of two powe^ful Kings.
However, fight they must, or suffer th^^ Country to be miserably overrun by
their inveter^^ Enemies. Both Armies being engaged, a very di^mal Battle ensued
thereupon, and a very great slaughter happened on both sides; but the Saxons
prevailing by the number of their Forces, obtained a very bloody Victory over
the powerless Britains. B^^ Adelred, who was shortly followed by Edwyn King
(...) the Picts, did not long survive this Battle; and Cud^^ took upon him the
Government of the West Saxons The Welsh found themselves unable to cope with
the Saxons, and too weak to repress their endless Incursions 3. therefore they
apply themselves to Cudred and joined in league with him, who upon some
occasion or other, was actually fallen out with Ethelbald King of Mercia. But
Ethelbald was so proud with the success Cudred, he must needs again fall upon
the Welsh. He advanced as far as Hereford, where the Britains, by the help of
Cudred, gave him a signal Overthrow, and caused him to repent of his rash and
precipitous Expedition. But shortly after, Cudred and Ethelbald were unluckily
reconciled, and made Friends together, and Cudred relinquishing the Welsh,
joined his Forces to Ethelbalds. Hereupon ensued another Battle, in which the
Welsh being greatly overpowered, were vanquished by the Saxons; after which
Victory, Cudred shortly dyed. To him succeeded Sigebert, a Kenulph was chosen
King of the West Saxons, Ann. 750. in whose time dyed Theodore the Son of
B^lin, a Man of great Esteem and Reputation among the Britains. And about the
same time, a remarkable Bar^el was fought between the Britains and the Picts,
^t a place called Magedawc; in which the Picts were ^ut to a total rout, and
Dalargan their King casually ^lain. But the Britains did not succeed so well
against the Saxons; for Roderic Molwynoc was at length forced to forsake the
Western Countries of Britain, and ^o claim his own Inheritance in North Wales.
The Sons of Bletius or Bledericus Prince of Cornwall and Devonshire, who was one
of them that vanquished Adelred and Ethelbert at Bangor on the River Dee; had
enjoyed the Government of North Wales ever since Cadfan was chose King of
Britain. Roderic therefore demanded the Government of this Country as his
^ight, which he was now willing to accept of, seeing ^he was forced to quit
what he had hitherto possessed. But he did long enjoy it, but dyed in a short
time, leaving behind him two Sons Conan Tindaythwy and Howel; after that he had
in all reigned over the Britains Thirty Years.

Conan Tindaythwy.
ROderic Molwynoc being dead, his Son Conan Tindaythwy took upon him the
Government and Principality of Wales, in the Year 755. He was scarce settled in
his Throne, but the Saxons began to make in-Roads into his Country, to spoil
and destroy what they conveniently could meet with. They were animated hereto
by the bad Success of Roderic; and having forced the Britains out of Cornwall
and Devonshire, they thought it practicable to drive them out of Wales too, and
so to reduce the Possession of the whole Island to themselves. This was their
Aim, and this they endeavored to put in execution; but they were met with at
Hereford, where a severe Battle was fought between them and the Welsh, in which
Dyfnwal the Son of Theodor a stout and valiant Soldier was slain. And shortly
afterward dyed Athelbe^^ King of Northumberland, and was succeeded by O^wald.

About the same time happened a religious Quarre^ between the Britains and
Saxons, concerning the observation of the Feast of Easter, which Elbodius (...)
learned and a pious Man, endeavored to rectify (...) Wales, and to reduce it
to the Roman Calculation which the Saxons always observed. The Britains di^
differ from the Church of Rome in the celebration o^ this Feast; and the
difference was this. The Church of Rome according to the order of the Council
of Nic^ always observed Easter Day the next Sunday after the 14th. day of the
Moon; so that it never happen'^ upon the 14th. day it self, nor passed the
21th. The Britains on the other hand, celebrated their Easter upon the 14th.
and so forward to the 20th. which occasioned this Difference, that the Sunday
observed as Easter Day by the Britains, was but Palm Sunday with the Saxons.
Upon this account the Saxons did most uncharitably traduce the Britains, and
would scarcely allow them the Name and Title of Christians. Hereupon, about the
Year 660. a great Contest happened, managed on the one part by Colman and
Hylda, who defended the Rites and Celebration of the Britains; and Gilbert and
Wilfride on the part of the Saxons. Hylda was the Niece of Edwine King of
Northumberland, educated by Pauline and Aedan. She publicly opposed Wilfride
and other superstitious Monks, as to such Trifles and Bigotry in Religion,
alleging out of Polycrates, the Fact of Irenaeus, who withstood Victor Bishop
of Rome upon the same account; and the custom of the Churches of Asia observed
by S. John the Evangelist, Philip the Apostle, Polycarpus and Melito; and
likewise observed in Britain by Joseph of Arimathea, who first preached the
Gospel here.

Offa was made King of Mercia, and Brichtrich of West Saxons; about which time
dyed Fermael the Son of Edwal and Cemoyd King of the Picts. The Saxons did
daily encroach upon the Lands and Territories of the Welsh beyond the River
Severn, but more especially toward the South part of the Country. These
Enchroachments the Welsh could not endure, and therefore were resolved to
recover their own, and to drive the Saxons out of their Country. The Britains
of South Wales, as receiving the greatest Saxons, presently took up Arms and
entered into the Country of Mercia; which they ravaged and destroyed with Fire
and Sword. And shortly after, all the Welsh joined their Forces together, fell
upon the Saxons, and forced them to retire beyond the Severn, and then returned
home, with a very considerable Spoil of English Cattle. The Welsh finding the
Advantage of this last Incursion, and how that by these means they gauled and
vexed the Saxons, frequently practiced the same; and entering their Country by
stealth, they killed and destroyed all before them; and driving their Cattle
beyond the River, ravaged and laid waste the whole Country. Offa King of
Mercia not being able to endure these daily Incursions and Depredations of the
Welsh, entered into a League with the rest of the Saxon Kings, to bend their
whole Force against the Welsh; who having raised a very strong and numerous
Army, passed the Severn into Wales. The Welsh being far too weak to oppose and
encounter so great an Army, quitted the even and plain Country, lying upon the
Banks of Severn and Wye, and retired to the Mountains and Rocks, where they
knew they could be most safe from the inveterate and revengeful Arms of the
Saxons. But as soon as the Saxons decamped, being not able to effect any thing
against them in these strong and natural Fortifications, the Welsh still made
In-roads into their Territories, and seldom returned without some considerable
Booty and Advantage. The Saxons were heartily nettled at these bo-peeping
Ravagers, and would compliment them still to their Holes, but durst not pursue
them further, for fear they should be entrapp'd by such as defended the
Streights and Passages into the Rocks. King Offa perceiving that he could
effect nothing by these Measures, annexed the Country about Severn and Wye to
his Kingdom of Mercia, and planted the same with Saxons. And for a farther
security against the endless Invasions of the Welsh, he made a deep Ditch,
extending from one Sea to the other, called Clawd^ Offa, or Offa's Dike; upon
which account, the Royal Seat of the Princes of Powys was translated from
Pengwern, now Shrewsbury, to Mathraval in Montg^meryshire.

Danes began to grow powerful at Sea, and durst venture to land in the North of
England; but without doing any great hurt, being forced to betake themselves to
their Ships again. Within Six Years after, they landed again in greater numbers
and proved much more terrible; they ravaged and destroyed a great part of
Linsey and Northumberland, overran the best part of Ireland, and miserably
wasted Rechreyn. At the same time a considerable Battle was fought at Ruthlan,
between the Saxons and the Welsh, wherein Caradoc King of North Wales was
killed. The Government of Wales was as yet green, and not firmly rooted, by
reason of the perpetual Quarrels and Disturbances between the Welsh and the
Saxons; so that the chief Person or Lord of any Country assumed to himself the
Title of King. Caradoc was a Person of great Esteem and Reputation in North
Wales, and one that did very much contribute toward the Security of the
Country, against the Incursions of the Saxons. He was Son to Gwyn, the Son of
Colhoyn, the Son of Ednowen, Son to Blethyn, the Son of Blecius or Bledericus
Prince of Cornwall and Devonshire. Offa King of Mercia did not long survive him,
and was succeeded by his Son Egfert, who in a short time left his Kingdom also
to Kenulphus, a year after that Egbertus was created King of the West Saxons.
About the same time dyed Arthen Son to Sitsylht, the Son of Clydawc King of
Cardigan; and sometime after, Run King of Dyfed, and Cadelh King of Powys: who
were followed by Elbodius Archbishop of North Wales, before whose Death
happened a very severe Eclipse of the Sun. The Year following, the Moon was
likewise Christmas Day. These Fatalities and Eclipses did portend no Success to
the Welsh Affairs; the laying of S. David's in Ashes by the West Saxons being
followed by a general and a very grievous Murrain of Cattle, which was like to
impoverish the whole Country. The following Year Owen the Son of Meredith, the
Son of Terudos, dyed; and the Castle of Deganwy was ruined and destroyed by
Thunder.

But these several Losses which the Welsh sustained could not reconcile Prince
Conan and his Brother Howel; but they must needs quarrel and contend with one
another, when they had the greatest occasion to embrace and unite their
endeavors against the common Enemy. Howel claimed the Isle of Anglesey, as
part of his Father's Inheritance, which Conan would by no means hearken to, nor
consent that his Brother should take possession of it. It was the custom of
Wales, that a Fathers Estate should be equally distributed between all his
Sons; and Howel by virtue of this Custom, commonly called Gavelkind, from the
word Gafel to hold; claimed that Island, as his Fathers Estate. This Custom of
Gavelkind has been the occasion of the Ruin and Diminution of the Estates of
all the ancient Nobility in Wales; which being endlesly divided between the
several Sons of the same Family, were at length reduced to nothing. From hence
also proceeded several unnatural Wars and Disturbances between Brothers; who
being either not satisfied with their Portions, or displeased with the Country
they were to possess; disputed their Right by Dint of the Sword. This proved
very true in this present instance; for Howel would not suffer himself to be
cheated out of his paternal Inheritance, and therefore he would endeavor to
recover it by Force of Arms. Both Armies being engaged, the Victory fell to
Howel, who immediately thereupon possessed himself of the Island, and valiantly
maintained it against the Power and Strength of his Brother Conan.

The Welsh being thus at variance and enmity among themselves, and striving how
to destroy one another; had yet another Disaster added to their Misfortune. For
the following Year they received a very considerable Loss by Thunder, which
very much spoiled and annoyed the Country, and laid several Houses and Towns in
Ashes. About the same time, Gruffith the Son of Run a Person of considerable
Quality in Wales, dyed; and Griffri the Son of Ky^gen, was treacherously
murdered by the Practices of his Brother Elis.

But Conan could not rest satisfied with his Brother Howels forcible possession
of the Island of Anglesey; and therefore he was resolved to give him another
Battle, and to force him to restore and yield up the Possession of that
Country, which he had now violently kept in his hands. Howel on the other hand,
being as resolutely bent to maintain his Ground, and not to deliver up a foot
of what he was now upon a double respect, viz. his Fathers Legacy, and his late
Conquest, Owner of; willingly met his Brother, put him to flight, and killed a
great number of his Forces. Conan was cruelly enraged at this shameful
Overthrow, and therefore made a firm resolution, either to recover the Island
from his Brother, or to sacrifice his Life and his Crown in the Quarrel. Having
drawn up all Anglesey to seek his Brother Howel; who being too weak to
encounter and oppose so considerable a Number, was compelled to make his Escape
to the Isle of Man, and to leave the Island of Anglesey to the mercy of his
Brother. But Conan did not live long to reap the satisfaction of this Victory,
but dyed in a short time, leaving Issue behind him, one only Daughter called
Esylht, married to a Nobleman of Wales named Merfyn Frych. He was Son to
Gwyriad or Vriet, the Son of Elidure, who lineally descended from Belinus the
Brother of Brennus King of the Britains. His Mother was Nest, the Daughter of
Cadelh King of Powys, the Son of Brochwel Yscithroc; who together with Cadfan
King of Britain, Morgan King of Demetia, and Bledericus King of Cornwall, gave
that memorable Overthrow to Ethelred King of Northumberland, upon the River
Dee, in the Year 617. This Brochwel by the Latin Writers named Brecivallus and
Brochmaelus, was a very considerable Prince in that part of Britain, called
Powys-land; as also Earl of Chester, and lived in the Town then called Pengwern
Powys, now Salop; in the House where since the College of S. Chad stands. He
was a great Friend and a Favourer to the Monks of Bangor, whose part he took
against the Saxons that were set on by Augustine the Monk, to prosecute them
with Fire and Sword, because they would not forsake the Customs of their own
Church, and conform to those of Rome.

Merfyn Frych and Esylht.
COnan being dead, Merfyn Frych and his Wife Esylht, who was sole Heir to
Conan, took upon them the Government or Principality of Wales. This Merfyn was
King of Man, and Son to Gwyriat and Nest the Daughter of Cadelh ap Brochwel ap
Elis King of Powys. Howel being forcibly ejected out of Anglesey by his Brother
Conan Tindaethwy, and escaping to the Island of Man, was honorably and kindly
received by Merfyn; in return of whose Civilities Howel used such means
afterward that Merfyn married Esylht, the Daughter and Heir of his Brother
Conan, (tho others say, that he died presently after his Escape to Merfyn.)
Howel after that he had for about five years enjoyed the Isle of Man, and other
Lands in the North, given him by Merfyn to hold under him, dyed about the year
825; after whose Death, they again returned to Merfyn, whose Ancestors had
always held the same, under the Kings of the Britains; and so, upon his
Marriage with Esylht, the Isle of Man was annexed to the Crown of Wales.

In the first year of their Reign, Egbert, the powerful King of the West
Saxons, entered with a mighty Army into Wales, destroyed and wasted the Country
as far as Snowden Hills, and seized upon the Lordship of Rhyvoniec in
Denbighland. About the same time a very sore Battle was fought in Anglesey,
between the Saxons and the Welsh, called, from the place where this Fight
happened, the Battle of Lhanvaes. Welsh, and their Affairs succeeded very ill;
for shortly after that Egbert had advanced his Colors as far as Snowden,
Kenulph King of Mercia wasted the Country of West Wales, overran and destroyed
^owis-land, and greatly disturbed and incommoded ^he Welsh Nation. Soon after
this, Kenulph died, and was succeeded by Kenelm; and he in a short ^^me by
Ceolwulph, who, after two years Reign, left ^he Kingdom of Mercia to Bernulph.

Egbert King of the West Saxons was grown very ^trong and powerful, able to
reduce all the petty King^oms in Britain, under one single Monarchy; upon ^he
thoughts of which, he set upon Bernulph King of Mercia, and vanquished him at
Elledowne; and afterward brought under Subjection the Countries of Kent and of
the West Angles. But the Britains could ^ot be so easily subdued; for after a
long and a cruel ^ight at Gavelford, between them and the West Saxons of
Devonshire, in which several thousands were ^^ain on both sides, the Victory
remained uncertain. He had better Success against Wyhtlafe King of Mercia,
Humber, he quickly ^educed that Country to his Subjection. The Saxon Heptarchy
was now become one Kingdom, and Eg^ert sole Monarch of all the Countries that
the Saxons ^ossessed in Britain; which Name he ordered should ^e changed to
England, his People to be called En^lishmen, and the Language English.

They who came over out of Germany into this ^sland to aid the Britains against
their Enemies the Picts and Scots, were partly Saxons, Angles, and ^uthes; from
the first of which came the People of Essex, Suffex, Middlesex, and the
West Saxons; from ^he Angles, the East Angles, the Mercians, and they that
inhabited the North side of Humber; from the Juthes, the Kentishmen, and they
that settled in the Isle of Wight. These Germans, after that they had drove ^he
Britains beyond Severn and Dee; erected seven Kingdoms called the Heptarchy in
the other part of ^he Island; whereof, 1. Kent. 2. Of the South Saxons
containing Sussex and Surrey. 3. The East Angles, in Norfolk Suffolk, and
Cambridgshire. 4. The Kingdom of the West Saxons, comprehending Berkshire,
Devonshire, Somersetshire and Cornwall. 5. Mercia, containing Gloucester,
Hereford, Worcester, Shropshire, Stafford, Cheshire, Warwick, Leicester, Darby,
Nottingham, Lincoln, Northampton, Oxford, Buckingham, Bedford, and half
Hartfordshire. 6 The East Saxons, containing Essex. Middlesex, and the other
part of Hartford. 7. Of the Northumbrians, taking in all the Country beyond
Hamber, which was divided into two parts, Deyra and Bernicia; the first from
Humber to Tyne, the other from Tyne to the Scottish Sea.

Egbert King of the West Saxons having severally conquered these Kingdoms,
annexed them together and comprehended them under one Monarchy which was called
the Kingdom of England, 96^ years after the coming of Brute to this Island 383
Years after the landing of Hengist; and 149 after the Departure of Cadwalader
to Rome.

Egbert having thus united under one Governme^^ these several Kingdoms, which
used continually molest, and to incroach upon each others Territories might
reasonably have expected to enjoy his ne^^ England, but the Danes began (...)
threaten new Commotions, and landed in great numbers, and in diverse places of
the Kingdom. Egber^ fought several Battles with them, and with vario^^ Success:
at length the Danes landed in West-Wales marched forward for England, being
joined by a great number of Welsh and met Egbert upon Hengist do^^ where a
severe Battle was fought, and the Danes p^^ to a total Rout, The Welsh suffered
severely f^^ this; Egbert, being highly incensed that the Dan^^ were supported
by them, laid siege to Caer Lheon (...) Dhyfrdwy, or Chester, the chief City of
Venedoti^^ which hitherto had remained in the hands of the Welsh; took the
Town, and, among other Toke^ of his Indignation, he caused the Brazen Effigies
o^ Cadwalhon King of Britain to be pulled down and defaced, and upon pain of
Death forbad the erecting (...) such again. He issued out also a Proclamation,
by the ^nstigation of his Wife Redburga, who always bore an ^^veterate Malice
to the Welsh; commanding all that ^ere any ways extracted from British Blood,
to de^art, with all their Effects, out of his Kingdom, within ^^x Months, upon
pain of death. These were very ^^vere and insupportable Terms; but he did not
live ^ong to see them put in execution; for dying shortly after the Battle of
Hengestdown, he was succeeded by ^on Ethelwulph. This King Ethelwulph married
his Daughter to Berthred, who was his tributary King of Mercia, by whose help
he successfully opposed the ^ruel Incursions of the Danes, who miserably
destroyed the Seacoasts of England, with Fire and (...). These Danish
Commotions being indiffe^ently well appeased, Berthred King of Mercia set upon
the Welsh, between whom a remarkable Battle ^as sought at a place called
Kettell; where Merfyn ^rych King of the Britains was killed, leaving, to
^^cceed him in the Government of Wales, his Son Ro^eric Mawr, or the Great.

Roderic the Great.
MErfyn Frych having lost his Life, and with it his Kettell; his Son Roderic,
surnamed the Great, without any Opposi^ion or Contest, succeeded in the
Principality of Wales. The first thing he effected after his Advancement to ^he
Crown, was the dividing of Wales into several Provinces, which he distinguished
into these three; Aberffraw, Dinevowr, and Mathraval. Berthred King ^f Mercia,
being animated by his late Success against Merfyn Frych, purposed to perform
the like Exploits against his Son Roderic. And having gained the Aid and
Assistance, of King Ethelwulph, he entered North Wales, with a strong Army, and
advanced as far as Anglesey, which he cruelly and miserably destroyed. Roderic
met him several times, and the Welsh did at length so gaul and torment him,
that, in fine, he had little or nothing to boast of; only Meyric, one of the
chiefest Princes among the Britains, was slain.

But he was soon forced to quit his Expedition against the Welsh, and to
convert his Forces another way; his own Dominions requiring their constant
Residence, being severely threatened by a foreign Invasion. Danes were by this
time grown so very powerful, that they overran a great part of England, fought
with Athelstan King of Kent, Brother to Ethelwulph; and obtained so much
Conquest that whereas before they returned to their own Country when the
Weather grew too cold for Action they now took up their Winter Quarters in
England.

The Welsh, in the mean time, being secure from any Violence, which might
otherwise be expected from the English; began to quarrel and fall out amongst
themselves. Ithel King of Gwent or W^ntland for what occasion not known, fell
foul upon the Me^ of Brecknock, who were so resolute as to fight him; and the
Event proved very unfortunate to Ithel, wh^ was slain upon the spot. It is the
Unhappiness of a Nation that is governed by several Petty States, when it is
apprehensive of no Danger from an outward Enemy that it will fall at variance,
and create Disturbances among it self.

Had the Britains, instead of falling upon one another, taken the Advantage of
this opportunity, when the Saxons were altogether employed in opposing and
repelling the Danes, to increase and strengthen their Number, and to fortify
their Towns; they might a^ least securely have possessed their own Dominions,
(...) not extended their Government to a great part of England. But a sort of
an Equality in Power, begat a^ Emulation between the several Princes, and this
Emulation for the most part ended in Blows and Contention; so that instead of
strengthening themselves whilst they had respite from the English, they rather
weakened their Power by inward Differences.

Kongen King of Powys was gone to Rome, there to Cemoyth King of the Picts, and
Jonathan Lord of Abergeley. It was now become Customary for Princes wearied
with Government to go to Rome, and the Pope willingly dispensed with the
Resignation of their Crowns, by reason that his Holiness seldom lost by it.
King Ethelwulph paid very dear for his Entertainment there, made his Kingdom
tributary to the Pope, and paid the Peter Pence to the Church of Rome. The
Saxon Genealogists bring the Pedigree of Ethelwulph for several Successions and
Generations, up to Adam, as may be seen in Matthew of Westminster, who in like
manner derives the Pedigree of Offa King of Mercia. This has been the Custom of
most Nations, both ancient and modern; and is always practiced by them whose
Families are any thing Ancient and Honorable; so that it is a very great
mistake to scoff at, and deride the Welsh because they keep up this ancient and
laudable Custom.

Berthred King of Mercia became at length far ^oo weak to repel the daily
increasing Power of the Danes, who so numerously poured upon him, that at last
he was forced to relinquish his Kingdom and fly to Rome, where in a short time
he sorowfully ended his days. Ethelwulph shortly followed, and left his Sons
Athelbald King of the West Saxons, and Athelbright King of Kent and the
East Saxons. Ethelwulph is reported to be so Learned and Devout, that the
Church of Winchester elected him in his youth Bishop of that See, which
Function he took upon him about seven years before he was made King. He is said
also to have Conquered the Kingdom of Demetia or South Wales, which together
with the Kingdom of the South Saxons he bestowed upon his Son Alfred, upon
Condition he would bring a Thousand Men out of Wales to Winchester, to the Aid
of his Brother Ethelbert against the Danes. Athelbald succeeding his Father in
the Kingdom of the West Saxons, kept his Mother-in-Law the Wife of Ethelwulph
for hi^ Concubine, and afterward married her in the City of Chester. But he
did not live long to enjoy the unnatural Conjunction, but dying without Iss^
after that he had reigned Eight Years, left his Kingdom to his Brother
Athelbright.

About the same time the Danes began again to be stir themselves and fell upon
the City of Winchester and destroyed it, which Athelbright perceiving, after a
long Fight forced them to quit the Land, and t^ betake themselves to Sea again.
But the Danes quickly returned to the Isle of Thanet, where they remained for
that Winter, doing much Mischief upon the Seacoast, and destroying all places
near the shoa^ of England. The English were very glad that they durst venture
no further, and the more, because the Welsh began again to be troublesome,
against who^ an Army must be speedily dispatched, otherwise they would
certainly advance to the English Country. Both Armies met at Greythen, where a
fierce Battle was fought, and a great Number slain on either side but the
Victory was not plainly discoverable. B^^ the Welsh not long after, received a
considerable Lo^ by the Death of Conan N^rit Nifer, a Stout and Skilful
Commander, who oftentimes had Valiantly repulsed the English Forces, and
obtained many sign^^ Victories over them.

The Danes had been for some time quiet, being ^^able to venture upon any
considerable Action, an^ therefore they thought it advisable to secure only wh^
they had already won, and to expect a re-inforcement from their own Country.
This was quickly sent them, under the Command of Hungare and Hub^^^ who landed
in England with a very considerable Arm^ of Danes. King Athelbright, whether
terrified with a dismal apprehension of these Invaders, or otherwis^ being
indisposed, quickly afterward gave up the Ghost, leaving the management of his
Kingdom, together with that of his Army against the Danes, to his Brother
Ethelred. The Danes in the mean time ^ot sure footing, and advanced as far as
York, which ^hey miserably destroyed, killing Osbright and Elba ^wo Kings of
Northumberland that opposed them. from hence they proceeded, and overrun all
the Country as far as Nottingham, destroying and spoil^^g all before them, and
then returned back to York. ^ut having once tasted how sweet the Spoil of a
Country, much more fertile than their own was, ^hey could not rest satisfied
with what they had al^eady obtained, but must needs make a farther Pro^ress
into the Country, and fall upon the Kingdom ^f the East Angles. Edmund King of
that Country ^eing not able to endure their Insolences, endea^oured to oppose
them, but in the Undertaking was ^nfortunately slain. And now after the same
man^er that the Saxons had formerly attained to the Conquest of Britain, the
Danes proceeded to the Con^uest of England. For the Saxons having found out ^he
Sweetness of this Island, and withal, discovered ^he weakness and inability of
the Britains to oppose them, brought over their Numbers by degrees, and ^n
several Companies, by which they wearied and ^ired out the British Armies. For
it is certain that nothing can conduce more to the Conquest of an ^sland, than
the landing an Army at several Places and at several Times, which distracts the
Counsels and Proceedings of the Inhabitants, and which at ^his time for want of
sufficient Power at Sea, could ^ot be prevented. And so the Danes being
informed of the good Success of Hungare and Hubba in England, sent over another
Army under the Command of Basreck and Alding, who landed in West-Sax, and
^ought five Battles with King Ethelred and his Brother Alfred, namely at
Henglefield, Estondown, Redding, Basing and Mereton, in which two first the
English overcame, and the three last the Danes got the Victory.

Soon after this Ethelred died, leaving his Kingdom to his Brother Alfred, who
no sooner had taken the Government upon him but considered with himself what a
heavy Burden he was to sustain, and therefore he began to enquire after the
Wisest and Learned est Men that he could hear of to be directed by them whom he
worthily Entertained, making use of their Advice as well in the Public
Government of the Kingdom, as in his Private Studies and Conference of
Learning. He sent for two Men famously Learned out of Wales, the one called
John de Erigena, Surnamed Scotus; the other Asserius, Surnamed Menevensis. D^
Erigena was born at Menevia or St. David's, and was brought up in that College;
who for the sake o^ Learning having traveled to Athens, and bestowed there
many Years in the Study of the Greek, Hebre^ and Caldaick Tongues, and the
secret Mysteries o^ Philosophy, came to France; where he was well accepted of
by Carolus Calvus, or Charles the Bald, an^ Ludovicus Balbus, or Lewis the
Stammerer; and ther^ translated the Works of Dionysius Areopagita, D^ Coelesti
Hierarchia out of the Greek into the La^^ Tongue. Being returned home to Wales,
he w^^ sent for by this King Alfred, who was then foundin^ and erecting the
University of Oxford, of which Erigena became the first Professor and public
Reader. But King Alfred bore so great a respect t^ Learning, that he would
suffer none to bear any considerable Office in his Court but such as were
Learned; and withal, exhorted all Persons to embrac^ Learning, and to Honor
Learned Men. But though (...) Love to Learning be seldom reconcilable with a
Warlike and a Military Life, King Alfred was also force^ to regard the
Discipline of War to defend his Kingdom against the increasing Power of the
Danes. For he was scarce settled in his Throne, but this restles^ and ever
troublesome People began to molest and destroy his Country, insomuch that he
was of necessity forced to oppose them, which he did twice upon the South Side
of the River Thames, in which Engagements he slew of the Danes one King, nine
Earls, together with an innumerable multitude of inferior Soldiers. About the
same time Gwgan ap Meyric (...) Dunwal ap Arthen ab Sitsylht Prince of Cardigan
died being as some say, unfortunately drowned. But the ^ate Victories which
Alfred had obtained over the Danes, did not so much weaken and dishearten them,
^ut that in a short time they recovered their Spirits and began again to look
terrible and threatening. For (...) soon as they could reunite their scattered
Forces, ^hey set upon and destroyed the Town of Alclyde, wan ^he City of London
and Redding, overran all the in^^nd Country, and the whole Kingdom of Mercia.
another Army of Danes at the same time proved ^ery successful in the North, and
possessed themselves of ^he Country of Northumberland, which Action did ^ot so
much grieve the English, as trouble and vex ^he Picts and Scots, who were
incessantly gauled, and ^^equently beat off by these Danish Troops. The ^ext
Year three of the Danish Captains marched ^^om Cambridge toward Warham in
Dorset-shire, of which Expedition King Alfred being informed, pre^^ntly
detached his Forces to oppose them, and to ^ffer them Battle. The Danes were so
startled at ^^is, that they immediately desired Peace, and wil^^ngly consented
forthwith to depart out of the Coun^y, and to forswear the sight of English
Ground. according to which Capitulation, the Horse that ^^ght marched for
Exeter, and the Foot being shipped ^ff, were all of them drowned at Sandwich.
The Danes having thus abjured England, were not willing ^o return home empty,
but thought it Prudent to ^end their Course against Wales. They fancied that
^^ey were like to meet with no great opposition from ^^e Welsh, and therefore
could carve for themselves according as their Fancy directed them. But having
^nded their Army in Anglesey, they quickly experi^nced the contrary; Prince
Roderic opposing them, ^ave them two Battles, one at a place called Bengole,
Menegid in Anglesey. At the same time another Army of Danes under the Command
of ^alden and Hungare landed in South Wales, overran ^^e whole Country,
destroying all before them, nei^^er sparing Churches nor Religious Houses. But
^^ey received their due Reward at the hands of the ^est-Saxons, who meeting
with them on the Coasts of Devonshire, slew both Halden and Hungare, with 1200
of their Men. The same Year Einion Bishop of St. David's died, and was the
following Year succeeded by Hubert, who was installed in his place.

English being rid of their powerful and ever restless Enemies the Danes, began
now to quarrel with the Welsh, entering into Anglesey with a numerous Army,
fought a fore Battle with Roderic, who together with his Brother (or as others
say his Son) Gwyriad, was unhappily slain in the Field, which Battle is called
by the Welsh, Gwaith Duw Sul y Mon. This Roderic had Issue by his Wife
Angharad, Anarawd, Cadelh and Merfyn, the last of which, Giraldus Cambrensis,
contrary to the vulgar and received Opinion, will have to be the eldest Son of
Roderic, upon whom was bestowed the Principality of North Wales. For it is
unanimously granted that Rode^^^ was undoubted Proprietor of all the Dominions
o^ Wales, North Wales descending unto him by his Mother Esylht the Daughter and
sole Heir of Conan Ty^daethwy; South Wales by his Wife Angharad the Daug^ter of
Meyric ap Dyfnwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht K^^^ of Cardigan; Powis by Nest the
Sister and Heir o^ Congen ap Cadelh King of Powis his Father's Mother These
three Dominions Roderic divided between h^^ three Sons, appointing North Wales
for his eldest So^ Anarawd, South Wales to Cadelh, who shortly after (...)
Father's Death, forcibly seized upon his Brother M^^fyn's Portion, upon whom
Roderic had bestowe^ Powis-Land. Wales being thus divided between the three
Princes, they were called Y Tri Tywysoc Ta^^thioc, or the three crowned
Princes, by reason th^^ each of them did wear on his Helmet a Coronet (...)
Gold, being a broad Head-band indented upwar^ set and wrought with Precious
Stones, which in (...) British Tongue is called Talaeth. To each of the Princes
Roderic built a Royal Seat, for the Prin^^ of Gwyneth or North Wales, at
Aberffraw; of Sou^^Wales, at Dinefawr; for the Prince of Powis, at M^thrafel.
Roderic had Issue also, besides these thre^ Roderic, Meyric, Edwal or Tadwal,
Gwyriad a^^ Gathelic.

But Roderic having divided his Principality betwixt his eldest Sons, namely,
Aberffraw with the fifteen Cantreds thereunto belonging to Anarawd; Dinefawr
with its fifteen Cantreds extending from the mouth of the River Dofi, to the
mouth of Severn to Cadelh; and Powis with fifteen Cantreds from the mouth of
the River Dee to the Bridge over Severn at Gloucester to Merfyn; ordained that
his eldest Son Anarawd and his Successors should continue the payment of the
ancient Tribute to the Crown of England; and the other two, their Heirs and
Successors should acknowledge his Sovereignty, and that upon any Foreign
Invasion, they should mutually Aid and Protect one another. And he farther
appointed, that when any Difference should arise betwixt the Princes of
Aberffraw and Cardigan or Dynefawr, the three Princes should meet at Bwlch y
Pawl, and the Prince of Powys should be Umpire. But if the Prince of Aberffraw
and Powys fell at Variance, they should meet at Dol Rhianedd, probably Morva
Rhianedd, on the Bank of the River Dee, where the King of Cardigan was to
adjust the Controversy; and if the Quarrel happened betwixt the Princes of
Powys and Cardigan, the meeting was appointed at Llys Wen upon the River Wye,
and to be decided by the Prince of Aberffraw. And the better to frustrate any
attempt of the English, he ordained moreover, that all Strongholds, Castles and
Citradels should be fortified and kept in repair; that all Churches and
Religious Houses should be re-edified and adorned, and that in all ages the
History of Britain, being faithfully registered and transcribed, should be kept
therein.

Anarawd.
THE Welsh had often sorrowfully felt the unnatural Effects of inward
Seditions, and of being governed by several Princes, which were now unavoidably
to be renewed by reason of Roderic's imprudent Division of his Dominions
between his three Sons. For the several Principalities being united in him, it
was certainly the most politic means for the preservation of the Country from
the inveterate Fury of the English, to compose the inward Differences which
would otherwise happen, by perpetuating the whole Government of Wales in one
Prince. For it was impossible effectually to oppose the Common Enemy by
separate Armies, and where a different Interest interfered, as if the Safety of
the same Country, and the Honor of the same Prince were unanimously regarded.
This was the unhappiness of the ancient Britains when the Romans invaded their
Country; domestic Broils and inward Dissentions being sown^ among themselves,
they could not agree to unite their Powers, and jointly to oppose the Common
Enemy; so that Tacitus wisely concludes, dum singu^^ pugnant universi
vincuntur. There are few Nation^ but have experienced the folly of being rent
into several Portions, and the downfall of that great Body the Roman Empire, may
not be absurdly attributed to Constantine's dividing of it between hi^ Sons.
But the Welsh at this time presently felt the unhappiness of it; Cadelh Prince
of South Wales being dissatisfied with his Portion, and desirous to feed his
Ambition with larger Territories, could not spare his Brother Merfyn's
Country, but must needs forcibly dispossess him of his lawful Inheritance, and
so involve the Welsh in a Civil War.

But the Succession of the Princes of Wales proceeds in Anarawd the eldest Son
of Roderic, who began his Reign over North Wales, in the Year 877. Rollo with a
numerous Army of Normans descended into France, and possessed themselves of the
Country of Neustria, which from them has since received the Name of Normandy.
But the treacherous Danes in England, who had retired to the City of Exeter,
quickly violated the Capitulation which they had lately sworn to observe, and
upon that account were so warmly pursued by King Alfred, that they gladly
delivered up Hostages for the performance of the Articles formerly agreed upon
between them. But it was not their Intention to keep them long, for the next
Year they again broke lose, possessed themselves of all the Country upon the
North-side of Thames, and passing the River, put the English to flight, and
made themselves Masters of Chippenham in West-Sax. But their whole Army did not
succeed so well, for Alfred meeting with a Party of them, slew their Captain
and took their Standard, which the Danes called Raven. After this he vanquished
them again at Edendown, where after that the Danes had given Hostages for their
peaceable behavior; Godrun their Commander received the Christian Faith, and
so reigned in East-Angle. But this opportunity seemed to threaten a great Storm
upon Wales; for besides the Death of Aedan the Son of Melht, a Nobleman of the
Country, the Articles of Composition between the English and the Danes,
occasioned these last to join their Power with the People of Mercia to Fight
against the Welsh, between whom a severe Battle was fought at Conwey, wherein
the Welsh obtained a very signal Victory, which was called Dial Rodri, or the
Revenge of the Death of Prince Roderic. The Reason why the Mercians were so
irreconcilably enraged against the Welsh at this time, was this. After the
Death of Roderic the Great, the Northern Britains of Stratelwyd and Cumberland
were mightily infested and weakened through the daily Incursions of the Danes,
Saxons and Scots, insomuch that as many of them as would not submit their Necks
to the Yoke were forced to quit their Country, and to seek for more quiet
Habitations. Therefore toward the beginning of Anarawd's Reign, several of
them came to Gwyneth under the Conduct of one Hoberet, whose distressed
Condition the Prince commiserating, granted them all the Country betwixt
Chester and Conwey to seat themselves in, in case they could drive out the
Saxons who had lately possessed themselves of it. The Britains having returned
their thanks to Anarawd presently fell to work, and Necessity giving edge to
their Valor, they easily dispossessed the Saxons who were not as yet warm in
their Seats. For some time they continued peaceably in this part of Wales; but
Eadred Duke of Mercia, called by the Welsh Edryd Wallthir, not being able any
longer to bear such an ignominious ejection, made great Preparations for the
re-gaining of the said Country. But the Northern Britains, who had settled
themselves there, having intelligence of his Design, for the better security of
their Cattle and other Effects, removed them beyond the River Conwey, Prince
Anarawd in the mean time was not idle, but drawing together all the Strength he
could raise, encamped his Army near the Town of Conwey at a place called
Cymryt, where himself and his Men having made gallant Resistance against the
pressing Efforts of the Saxons; obtained a very complete Victory. This Battle
was by some called Gwaeth Cymryt Conwey, by reason that it was fought in the
Township of Cymryt near Conwey. But Prince Anarawd would have it called Dial
Rodri, because he had there revenged the Death of his Father Rodri. In this
Battle Tadwal Rodri's Son received a wound in the Knee, which made him be
denominated Tudwal Gloff ever after; but for his signal Service in this Action
his Brethren bestowed upon him Vchelogoed Gwynedd. But the Britains pursuing
their Victory, chased the Saxons quite out of Wales into Mercia, where having
burnt and destroyed the Borders, they returned home laden with rich Spoils, and
so took possession of the Country betwixt Chester and Conwey, which for a long
time after they peaceably enjoyed. But Anarawd to express his thankfulness to
God for this great Victory, gave very considerable Lands and Possessions to the
Collegiate Churches of Bangor and Clynnoc Vawr in Arfon. After this, those
Danes that lay at Fulhenham near London, crossed the Sea to France, and passing
to Paris along the River Seyn, spoiled the Country thereabouts, and vanquished
the French that came against them; but in their return toward the Seacoast,
they were met with by the Britains of Armorica, who slew the greatest part of
them, and the rest confusedly endeavoring to escape to their Ships, were all
drowned. One should think that the several Misfortunes the Danes sustained,
first at Sandwich, then by King Alfred, and now in France, would have quite
drained their Number, and utterly have rid Britain from so troublesome an
Enemy. But like ill Weeds, the more you root them, the faster they will grow;
the Danes were still supplied from abroad, and if an Army was vanquished here,
another was sure to come in their room. This the Welsh found too true, for not
long after this famous Defeat by the Armorican Britains, the Danes not able to
venture upon these, were resolved to revenge themselves upon their Friends of
Wales, and therefore landing in North Wales, they cruelly harassed and
destroyed the Country. Nor is it strange to consider from whence such a
wonderful Number of Danes and Normans could come. For the Kingdom of Denmark
had under it, not only Denmark, which is a small Country divided by the Sea
into Insulas and Peninsulas, as that which joins upon Saxony and Holsatia,
called Cymbrica Chersonesus, with the Islands of Zealand and Finnen, but also
Normay and the large Country of Sweden, reaching to Muscovy, and almost to the
North Pole This Country being then scarce known to the World, did of a sudden
pour out such a multitude of People, which like a sudden Storm unexpectedly
overran all Europe, with a great part of the Country of Africa. From hence
proceeded these Danes who annoyed England; And the Normans, who conquered
France; both Nations being originally derived from the same Stock.

Danes had not appeared in England for some time, and therefore are now
resolved to take so sure a footing, as they cannot easily be repulsed. Two
Hundred and Fifty Sail being landed at Lymene in Kent, hard by the great Forest
of Andreslege, they built the Castle of Auldre or Apledore. The same time
Hasting with a Fleet of Eighty Sail ventured to the Thames mouth, and built the
Castle of Mydlton; having first made an Oath to King Alfred, not to molest him
or any of his Subjects: But having built the Castle of Beamfleet, he thought
himself to have obtained so great a Strength, that there was no necessity of
observing the Oath lately sworn to King Alfred, and therefore invaded the
Country round about him. But he soon found his Mistake, and was forced to
betake himself back to his Castle, which was quickly pulled down upon his Head,
and his Wife and two Sons taken Prisoners; who being christened, were again
restored to their Father. Upon this Hasting and his Danes departed from
England, and made their way for France; where laying siege to the City of
Limogis, and despairing of a speedy surrender of it, betook himself to his
usual way of dealing sinistrously, and devised this Trick to win the Town. He
feigned himself to be dangerously sick, and sent to the Bishop, and the Consul
of the City, desiring of them most earnestly, that he might be admitted to the
Christian Faith, and be baptized before his departure out of this World. The
Bishop and Consul suspecting no Deceit, were very glad, not only to be
delivered from the present danger of being besieged, but also to win so great a
Person to the Congregation of Christ. Whereupon a firm Peace being concluded
betwixt both Nations, Hasting is baptized, the Bishop and Consul being his
Godfathers; which being ended, he was carried back by his Soldiers to his
Ships, in a very infirm condition, as he outwardly pretended. About midnight he
caused himself with his Arms about him to be laid on a Bier, and commanded his
^oldiers to carry their Weapons with them under ^^eir Coats, and so to be ready
when he should give ^^em the word. The next day, all things being in readiness,
he was solemnly brought by his Soldiers ^ith great Clamor and counterfeit
Mourning, to be ^terr'd in the chief Church of the City; where the shop and
Consul, accompanied with all the most ^^nourable Members of the Town, came to
honor ^^e Funeral. But when the Bishop had made himself ^^ady to bury the
Body, and all the Citizens being (...) the Church, up starts Hasting with his
Sword ^^awn, and killing first the Bishop and the Consul, af^^rwards fell in
with his armed Soldiers upon the na^ed People, putting all to the Sword, and
sparing neither Age, Sex, nor Infirmity. Having ransacked ^^e Town, he sent
Messengers to Charles the French ^ing, to mediate for Peace, which he easily
obtained, ^^gether with the Town of Chartres toward the de^aying of his
Charges.

At this time Hennith ap Bledric, a Baron of Wales, Anarawd Prince of North
with a considerable number of English, mar^ed against his Brother Cadelh, and
spoiled the ^ountries of Cardigan and Ystradgwy. At the same ^^me the Danes
laid siege to the City of Excester; and when Alfred had marched to oppose them,
they ^^at continued in the Castle of Auldre passed over to ^ssex, and built
another Castle at Scobrith, and from ^ence marched to Budington, seated upon
the Severn. When Alfred came near to Excester, the Danes pre^ently raised the
Siege, and betaking themselves to their Ships, sailed toward Wales, and
spoiled the ^ea-Coast thereof, and advanced as far as Buellt.

But the Danes at Budington being informed that King Alfred marched against
them, fled back to their Castle in Essex: So that the King was fain to al^er
his march, and to convert his Forces against Ley^ester; where a Party of Danes
was so warmly be^^eged, that at length they were reduced to that Ex^^remity, as
to feed upon their Horses. But the Season ^f the Year for Action being ended,
and the Extremity of the Weather being advanced, Alfred (...) forced to raise
the Siege, and to wait the next Oppo^tunity Danes fairly quitt^^ it, and
together with those in Northumberland, pass^^ by the North-Sea to Meresige, an
Isle in Essex. The Thames, and built a Ca^^^^ twenty Miles distant from London;
upon the streng^^ of which, they ventured to spoil and wast the Co^^trey
thereabouts; but paid very dear for their Co^rage, being accidentally met with,
they received (...) bloody Overthrow, having four of their Princes sl^^ upon
the Spot, and the rest very glad to make their ^scape to the Castle. Upon this
Alfred divided the Ri^^^ into three Streams, by which Stratagem the Wa^ became
so diminished in the Thames, that the Dan^^^ Ships could not return back into
the Sea. When t^^ Danes perceived this, and found it impracticable (...) them
to escape in their Ships, they left their Wi^^^ and Children and all their
Effects in Essex; and (...) passed by Land to Enadbryge upon the Severn, a^^
then passing the River, spoiled the Countries (...) Brecknock, Gwentland, and
Gwentlhwg. Some of the at the same time passed over to France; and anoth^^
Company coasting about Devonshire, destroyed t^^ maritime Countries; but being
met with by the E^glish, Ireland suffered e^tremely by Locusts, who consumed
all the Corn a^^ the Grass through the whole Country; but were (...) length by
continued Prayers and Fasting quite destro^ed. These are common in Afric, and
other hot R^gions, but seldom seen in colder Climates; and wh^^ they happen to
travel so far, they are always ve^^ pestilentious and destructive to that
Country th^^ come to.

Igmond, with a great number of Dan^^ landed in Anglesey, and was met with by
the Wel^^ at a place called Molerain, where Merfyn was slai^ Though others call
it Meilon, and from the Bat^^^ fought there, Maes Rhos Meilon. The same Ye^^
King Alfred dyed, who translated the ancient Laws (...) ^yfnwall Moelmut King
of Britain, and the Laws (...) Queen Marsia, out of British into English, and
^^^^d it Marsian Law, which was afterward called ^^^st Saxon Law, and observed
in part of Mercia, ^^^h all the Countries on the South of Thames: The ^^^er
part of the Country having another Law called ^^^e Lex, both which remained to
the time of ^^^ard the Confessor, who of these two made one (...). It is very
observable, what is related of King ^^^^ed, concerning his division of the
Natural Day in^^ ^hree parts; the one he set apart for Devotion and ^^^^dy, the
next for the Affairs of the Common^^alth, and the third for his own Rest and
Refresh^^^t.

^lfred being dead, Edward his eldest Son took upon ^im the Crown, which so
displeased the ambitious ^^^it of his Brother Adelwulph, that presently he
rais^^ a cruel War against him, and flying to Northum^^^^and, stirred up the
Danes against his Brother ^^^ard. The Danes were glad of the opportunity,
^^^ing now a fair pretense to render themselves ^^sters of the whole Island;
and therefore Adel^^ph is made King, as well of the Angles as of the ^^^es, who
by this time were grown to be one Peo^^^ Marching then proudly with a very
considerable ^^^y at his heels, he subdued the East Saxons, spoil^^ the Country
of Mercia; and passing over the Thames ^rickland, destroyed Brythend, and
returned home ^^^h very great Booty. At the same time Euneth (...) slain in
Arwystly. But Edward being informed of Brothers retreat, pursued him very
eagerly; but ^^^sing of him, overran and destroyed all the Coun^^^ betwixt
Ouse and the Dike of S. Edmund, and a returned home with his whole Army; saving
the ^^^tish Men, who being too greedy of Plunder, rash^^ ^arried behind. For
the Danes perceiving the Bo^^ of the Army to be returned, and that a small ^^^y
still continued to ravage the Country, present^^ ^^t upon them, slew a great
Number of them, and (...) the rest to a shameful Flight. Nor were the Danes
only powerful in England, but molested an^ Ireland: For this Year they ent^^^^
that Kingdom, slew Carmot King and Bishop of (...) Ireland, a religious and a
virtuous Person, the Son (...) Cukeman; and Kyrnalt Son of Murgan King of
L^gines. Asser Archbishop of S. D^vids, Uncle to the famous and learned Asser
surna^ed Menevensis; who being Chancellor to his Unc^^ the Archbishop, was
sent for by King Alfred to i^struct his Children; whose Life he afterward
wro^^ and was made Bishop of Shireburn.

Edward, to force his Brother from his Countr^ and to revenge the death of the
Kentishmen, d^^patch'd an Army to Northumberland; which havin^ spoiled the
Country, returned home: Upon whi^^ the Danes, to return their Kindness,
destroyed a gre^^ part of Mercia. But within a while after, Edw^^^ having
raised a very considerable Army, gave t^^ Danes battle, overthrew them, and
slew their Kin^^ Alden and Edelwulph, with a great number of the Nobles. This
added very much to his Dominion^ which were the more increased and strengthened
(...) the Addition of the Cities of London and Oxford which upon the death of
Edelred Duke of Mer^^^ Edward seized into his own hands, permitting (...) Wife
Elfleda to enjoy the rest of his Dukedo^ Cadelh Prince of South Wales di^^
leaving behind him three Sons; Howel Dha, or t^^ Good, who succeeded his Father
in the Kingdom (...) South Wales; Meyric and Clydawe. King Edward ^^ving
obtained so signal a Victory over the Danes, a^^ rendered his Kingdom for some
time quiet, began (...) build places of strength, which might be serviceab^^
against a future Storm: He built a Castle at Hartfor^ betwixt the Rivers
Benefic, Minier, and Lige; an^ also erected the Borough of Wytham in Essex;
an^ continued sometime in Wealdyne, to keep those Countries in awe. But in
spite of all this precaution, the Danes of Leycester and Hampton, began the
followin^ Year to be very troublesome, slew a great number (...) English at
Hotchnorton; and in their return hom^ ^ard, destroyed the Country of Oxford.
About the ^^me time a considerable Fleet from Tydwike, under ^^e command of
Other and Rahald, sailed by the We^^ern Sea to Wales, and destroyed S. David's;
where ^as fought the Battle of Dinarth, and Mayloc the ^on of Peredur Gam was
slain. After this they en^^^ed Herefordshire, where they were fought with^^,
and Rahald was slain, and the rest compelled to ^^swear the King's Land, and
never to return any ^ore to England. King Edward, to prevent any fu^^re
Disturbance from such open Invaders, caused a ^^rong Army to be quartered upon
the South side of ^^vern; but the Danes, for all he could do, entered ^^vice
into his Country, once at Werd, and then at ^ortogan; but were both times
overthrown by the ^nglish. From thence they departed to the Isle of ^^epen,
whence they were forced by Hunger to sail to ^outh Wales, intending to make a
considerable Prey of that Country; but failing of their aim, they were
^onstrained to make the best of their way for Ireland. But the next Year, a
Party of Danes fought a very ^evere Battle with the Kentish-men at Holm; but
which of them obtained the Victory, is not certainly ^eported. About the same
time Anarawd, Prince of North Wales, died, leaving behind him two Sons, Edwal
Foel, and Elis; and some say a third named Meyric.

Edwal Foel.
AFter the death of Anarawd, his eldest Son Edwal Foel took upon him the
Government of Northwales; Howel Dha holding the Principality of Southwales and
Powis: At what time, a terrible Comet appeared in the Heavens. The same Year
the City of Chester, which had been destroyed by the Danes, was, by the
procurement of Elfleda, new built and repaired, as the ancient Records of that
City do ^^stifie. This in the ancient Copy is called Leycest^^ by an easy
mistake for Legecestria or Chester, call^^ by the Romans, Legionum Cestria. The
next Su^mer the Men of Dublin cruelly destroyed the Isle (...) Anglesey; and
soon after, Clydawe the Son of Ca^^^ was unnaturally slain by his Brother
Meyric, about t^^ same time that the Danes received a cruel overthro^^ by the
English, at Tottenhale. But Elfleda did (...) long survive the rebuilding of
the City of Chester a Woman of singular Virtues, and one that grea^^^
strengthened the Kingdom of Mercia, by buildin^ of Towns and Castles against the
Incursions of t^^ Danes; as Strengat and Bruge, by the Forest (...) Morph,
Tamworth, Stafford, Edelburgh, Cherenburg^ Wadeburgh, and Runcofe. After this,
she entered w^^ her whole Army into Wales, wan Brecknock, (...) took the Queen,
with 33 of her Men Prisoner^ which in Welsh is called Gwaith y Ddinas Newydh,
(...) the Battle of the new City. From hence she marched for Derby, which she
took from the Danes, los^ only four of her chief Commanders in the Actio^ The
occasion of these two Expeditions, according (...) some, was this: Huganus,
Lord of West Wales, pe^ceiving King Edward to be unavoidably busy in the
Danish War, gathered an Army of Britains, and ^^tring into England, destroyed
the Kings Count^^ Upon the News of this, Elfleda came to Wales wit^ a great
Army, fought with the Welsh at Breek^^ and putting Huganus to flight, took his
Wife an^ some of his Men Prisoners; whom she carried wi^^ her to Mercia.
Huganus being thus defeated, fled (...) Derby, and being there kindly received,
joined himself with the Kings Enemies, the Danes. Elfleda being certified of
that, followed him with her Army but in storming the Gates of the Town, had
Four (...) her best Officers killed by Huganus. But Gwyane Lo^ of the Isle of
Ely, her Steward, setting fire to the Gates, furiously ran upon the Britains,
and entere^ the Town; upon which Haganus perceiving himse^^ to be over-match'd,
chose rather to fall by the Sword ^^an cowardly to yield himself to a Woman.
The ^ext Year Elfleda laid siege to the City of Leicester, which was quickly
surrendered, and the Danes there^^ perfectly subdued. The Fame of these several
A^tions being noised abroad, her Neighbors became somewhat fearful and
timorous; and the Yorkshire^^n voluntarily did her Homage, and proffered their
Service. She died at Tamworth, after Eight Years ^ule over Mercia; and lies
buried at Gloucester by S. Peter's.

After the death of Elfleda, King Edward most ungratefully disinherited her
Daughter Alfwyen; and ^ntering into Mercia, seized all the Land into his own
hands; upon pretense that she, without his knowledge, (whom her Mother had
appointed her Guardian) had privily promised and contracted Mar^iage with
Reynald King of the Danes. But this un^ust and unnatural Action of King
Edwards, might possibly bring upon him those vehement Troubles, which presently
ensued upon it. For Leofred a Dane, and Gruffydh ap Madoc Brother in Law to the
Prince of West Wales, came from Ireland with a great Army to Snowdon, and
minding to bring all Wales and the Marches thereof to their subjection,
overran and subdued all the Country to Chester, before King Edward was
certified of their arrival. Whereat being sore offended, and loath to trouble
his Subjects for help, vowed that himself and his Sons, with their single
Forces, would be revenged upon Leofred and Gruffydh; and thereupon marching to
Chester, forced the City from them. Then he divided his Army into ^wo Battles,
whereof he and his Son Ethelstan lead the first, Edmund and Edred the second;
and followed them so close, that he overtook them at the Forest of Walewode
(now Sherwode) where Leofred and Gruffydh set upon them so fiercely, that the
King at first was in some danger; until Athelstane stepped in and wounded the
Dane in the Arm in that manner, that being no longer able to hold his Spear,
the was taken Prisoner, and committed to the custody of Atholst^ne. In the mean
time Edmund and Edred encountering with Gruffydh, slew him, and brought his Head
to their Father; and Leofreds Head being likewise cut off, they were both set
up upon the Town of Chester; and then Edward, together with his Sons,
victoriously returned home. But King Edward, having Glademutham, soon after
this dyed at Farandon, and his Son Alfred the same time at Oxford, and were
both buried at Winchester.

Edward being dead, his base Son Athelstane, for many excellent Virtues
appearing in him, was preferred to the Crown; the worthiest Prince of the Saxon
Blood that ever reigned. He overcame Cudfryd the Father of Raynald King of the
Danes at York; and being invaded by Hawlaf King of Ireland, who with all the
Power of the Scots and Danes marched against him, gave him battle at
Brimestbury, and obtained a very notorious Victory; King Hawlaf, together with
the King of the Scots, five Kings of the Danes and Normans being slain upon the
spot: so that the whole Country of England and Scotland became subject to him,
which none of his Predecesso^^ Owen the Son of Gruffydh was slain by the Men of
Cardigan: And then Athelstane entering with his Army into Wales, forced the
Princes thereof to pay a yearly Tribute of 20 l. in Gold, 300 l. in Silver, and
200 Head of Cattle, which notwithstanding was not observed, as appears by the
Laws of Howel Dha, wherein it is appointed, that the Prince of Aberffraw should
pay no more to the King of London, than 66 l. Tribute; and that the Princes of
Dinefawr and Powis should pay the like Sum to the Prince of Aberffraw. But King
Ethelstane was not less terrible abroad, than he was awed and feared at home;
the Kings of France and Norw^^ sending him very great and costly Presents, to
obtain his Favor, and to gain his good Will.

Euneth the Son of Clydawe, and Meyri^ the Son of Cadelh died. The same time
King Athelstane removed the Britains who lived at Excester and the neighboring
Country to Cornwall; bounding the^ with the River Cambria (now Tamar); as the
Britains of W^les, with the Wey. Not long after, the Athelstane dyed, to the
great and inexpressible sorrow of all his Subjects, and was buried at
Malmesbury; and succeeded by his Brother Edmund, not inferior to him in
Courage; but preferable by right of Nativity, being born in Wedlock. In the
first Year of his reign, he gave a very considerable blow to the Danes; took
from them the Cities of Leycester, Darby, Scafford, Lincoln, and Nottinham.
Then Aulafe King of the Danes, finding it impracticable to withstand the force
of King Edmund, desired peace, and withal to be initiated in the Christian
Faith; which being granted him, he and all his Danes received Baptism, King
Edmund standing Godfather at the Font: after which both Parties concluding a
firm and a lasting Peace, Edmund honorably returned to West-Sex. The same Year
dyed Abloic chief King of Ireland: And the Year following, Cadelh the Son of
Arthuael a Nobleman of Wales, was, for what reason not discovered, imprisoned
by the English. To revenge which Indignity, Edwal Foel and his Brother Elis
gathered their Forces together, and fought against the English and Danes, but
were both unhappily slain. This Edwal ^oel had six Sons, Meyric, Ievaf, Iago,
Conan, Edwal Fychan, and Roderic: And his Brother Elis had Issue Conan, and a
Daughter named Trawst, the Mother of Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffydh ap Sitsylht,
and Blethyn ap Confyn, which two last were afterward Princes of Wales.

Howel Dha.
HOwel Dha had been for a considerable time Prince of South Wales and Powis; in
which Government Edwal Foel, he was worthily preferred to the Principality of
Wales: Notwithstanding that Edwal had left behind him several Sons, who at
first seemed to murmr at and resent the Election of Howel Dha. The first
thing he took care of, was to enact good and wholesome Laws for the benefit of
his Country; which held in force in Wales, till the time of Edward the First,
when the Welsh received the Laws of England, yet not so generally, but that in
some places they continued long after, and are still to be seen in the Welsh
and Latin Tongue: For Howel Dha perceiving the Laws and Customs of his Country
to have grown to great abuse, sent for the Archbishop of Menevia, with the rest
of the Bishops and chief Clergy, to the number of 140. and all the Barons and
Nobles of Wales, and ordered that Six of the wisest and best esteemed Persons
in every Commote should be cited before him, at his Palace called y Ty Gwyn ar
Taf, or the white House upon the River Taf. Thither coming himself, he remained
with his Nobles, Prelates, and Subjects for all the Lent, in Prayers and
Fasting, imploring the assistance and direction of Gods Holy Spirit, that he
might reform the Laws and Customs of the Country of Wales, to the Honor of
God, and the peaceable Government of his Subjects. Toward the end of Lent, he
chose out of that Assembly Twelve of the wisest and gravest, and Persons of the
greatest Experience, to whom he added Blegored, a Man of singular Learning, and
one exquisitely versed in the Laws. To these he gave commission to examine the
ancient Laws and Customs of Wales, and to collect out of them what was
requisite toward the Government of the Country; according to which Charge they
retained those that were wholesome and profitable, expounded those that were
doubtful and ambiguous, and abrogated them that were superfluous and hurtful:
And so these Laws were distinguished into three sorts; The first concerned the
Order and Regulation of the King's Household and Court; The second the Affairs
of the Country and Commonwealth; and the last had regard to special Customs
belonging to particular Persons and Places. All which being publicly
proclaimed and generally allowed of, Prince Howel ordered three Copies to be
written; one for his own use, another to be laid up at his Palace of Aberffraw,
and the third at Dinefawr; so that the three Provinces of Wales might have
easy recourse to either of them, when need required. And for the better
observation of these Laws, he caused the Archbishop of S. David's to denounce
Sentence of Excommunication against all such of his Subjects as would not obey
the same. Within a while after, Howel, to omit nothing that might procure any
Countenance or Authority to these his Laws, accompanied with Lambert Archbishop
of S. David's, Mordaf Bishop of Bangor, and Chebur of S. Asaph, and Thirteen of
the most prudent and learned Persons in Wales, took a Journey to Rome, where
the said Laws being recited before the Pope, were by his Holiness ratified and
confirmed: After which, Howel, with all ^his Retinue, returned home to his
Country. The particulars of these Laws are too numerous to be here ^nserted;
only it is observable, that all matters of Inheritance of Land were determined
and adjudged by the Prince in Person; or if sick, by his special Deputy: And
that upon view of the same Land, citing together the Freeholders of that place,
two Elders of his Council, the chief Justice always attending in the Court, the
ordinary Judge of the Country where the Land lay, and the Priest. The Method of
their proceeding was in this manner; the Prince sat in his ^udicial-Seat above
the rest of the Court, with an ^^lder on each hand, next to whom the
Freeholders on both sides, who upon that account were probably called Vchelwyr.
Below the Prince at a certain distance, sat the chief Justice, having the
Priest on his ^ight hand, and the ordinary Judge of the Country concerned upon
the left. The Court being thus sat, ^he Plaintiff with his Advocate, Champion
and Rhingylh or Sergeant, stood on the left side of the Court, as did the
Defendant in like manner on the ^ight. And lastly the Witnesses on both sides
appear^d, and stood at the lower end of the Hall, directly opposite to the
chief Justice, to testify the best of their knowledge in the matter in debate.
After the taking the Depositions of the Witnesses, and a full pleading of the
Cause in open Court, upon notice given by the Sergeant, the chief Justice, the
Priest, and the ordinary Judge, withdrew themselves for a while, to consult of
the matter; and then secundum allegata and probata, brought in their Verdict.
Whereupon the Prince, after Consultation had with the Elders that sat next
him, gave definitive Sentence; excepting the Cause was so obscure and
intricate, that the Justice of it could not appear; and then the two Champions
put an end to the Controversy by Combat.

Whilst Howel Dha is thus regulating the Customs, and meliorating the Laws and
Constitutions of Wales; Aulafe and Regnald Kings of the Danes forcibly entered
the Country of King Edmund, who being vexed with their incessant Hostility,
gathered his Forces together, and (as some say) by the help of Lhewelyn ap
Sitsylht, who was afterward Prince of Wales, followed them to Northumberland;
and having overcome them in a pitched Battle, utterly chased them out of his
Kingdom, and remained a whole Year in those Parts, to regulate and bring that
Country to some quiet order. But finding it impracticable to reduce the
Inhabitants of Cumberland to any peaceable Constitution, having spoiled and
wasted the Country, he gave it up to Malcolme King of Scotland, upon condition
that he should send him Succors in Welsh had but little occasion to rejoice;
Hubert Bishop of S. David's, Marclois Bishop of Bangor, Vssa the Son of Lhafyr
being dead: And shortly after the English entering into Wales with a very
strong Army, put the Country into a great consternation; but being satisfied
with the Destruction and Spoil of Strat Clwyd, they returned home without doing
any more Mischief. The same time Conan the Son of Elis was like to be
treacherously put to death by Poison; and Everus Bishop of S. David's dyed. The
next Year Edmund King of England was unluckily slain upon S. Augustines day;
but the manner of his Death is variously delivered; some say, that discovering
a noted Thief who was out-lawed, sitting among his Guests, being transported
with Indignation against so confident a Villain, ran upon him very furiously,
who expecting nothing less than Death, thought to dye not unrevenged, and
therefore with a short Dagger gave the King a mortal Wound in the Breast.
Others report, that as the King would have rescued a Servant of his from an
Officer who had arrested him, he was unwittingly and unhappily slain by the
same. But however his Death happened, he lies buried at Glastenbury; in whose
place his Brother Edred was crowned King of England, who no sooner had entered
upon his Government, but he made an Expedition against Scotland and
Northumberland, which being subdued, he received Fealty and Homage by Oath of
the Scots and Northumbrians, which they did not long observe. Shortly after
Howel Dha, after a Wales, dyed, much lamented and bewailed of all his Subjects,
being a Prince of a religious and a virtuous inclination, and one that ever
regarded the Welfare and Prosperity of his People. He left Issue behind him,
Owen, Run, Roderic, and Edwyn, betwixt whom and the Sons of Edwal Foel, late
Prince of North Wales, great Wars and Commotions arose afterward about the
chief Rule and Government of Wales.

But the Sons of Howel Dha, as some Writers record, were these, viz. Owen, who
did not long survive his Father, Eineon, Meredyth, Dyfnwal, and Rodri, the two
last whereof, as is conceived, were slain in the Battle fought near Lhanrwst,
in the Year 952. by the Sons of Edwal Foel; Run Lord of Cardigan, who was slain
before the death of his Father; Conan y Cwn, who possessed Anglesey; Edwin, who
was also slain, as is supposed, in the forementioned Battle. There was also
another Battle fought betwixt Howel and Conan ap Edwal Foel for the Isle of
Anglesey, wherein Conan fell; and Gruffydh his Son renewing the War, was
likewise overcome; and so Cyngar, a powerful Person, being driven out of the
Island, Howel enjoyed quiet possession thereof, and of the rest of Gwynedh. It
is supposed that this Howel Dha was chosen Governor of Wales, during the
minority of his Uncle Anarawd's Sons, who, at the death of their Father, were
too young to manage the Principality; which he kept till his return from Rome,
at which time Edwal Foel being come of age, he resigned to him the Kingdom of
Gwynedh or North Wales, together with the Sovereignty of all Wales: Before
which time Howel is styled Brenhin Cymry oll, that is, King of all Wales, as is
seen in the Preface to that Body of Laws compiled by him.

Ievaf and Iago, the Sons of Edwal Foel.
AFter the death of Howel Dha, his Sons divided betwixt them the Principalities
of South Wales and Powis; laying no claim to North Wales, though their Father
had been a general Prince of all Wales. But Ievaf and Iago the Sons of Edwal
Foel, having put by their elder Brother Meyric, as a Person incapable of
Government, and being dissatisfied with the Rule of North Wales only, imagined
that the Principality of all Wales was their Right, as descending from the
elder House; which the Sons of Howel Dha denied them. Indeed, they had been
wrongfully kept out of the Government of North Wales during the Reign of Howel;
in whose time the recovery of their own was impracticable, by reason that for
his Moderation and other good Qualities, he had attracted to himself the
universal Love of all the Welsh. But now, he being gone, they are resolved to
revenge the Injury received by him upon his Sons; and upon a small pretense,
endeavor to reduce the whole Country of Wales to their own subjection. Ievaf
and Iago were indeed descended from the elder branch; but since Roderic the
great conferred the Principality of South Wales upon his younger Son Cadelh, the
Father of Howel Dha, it was but just his Sons should enjoy what was legally
descended to them by their Father: But Ambition seldom gives place to Equity;
and therefore, right or wrong, Ievaf and Iago must have a touch for
South Wales, which they enter with a great Army; and being opposed, they
obtained a very opportune Victory over Owen and his Brethren the Sons of Howel,
at the Hills of Carno. The next Year the South Wales, destroyed and wasted
Dyfet, and slew Dwnwalhon Lord of the Country. Shortly after which, Roderic
the third Howel Dha dyed. But his Brethren perceiving the Folly of standing
only upon the defensive, mustered North Wales, marched as far as Lhanrwst upon
the River Conwy; where Ievaf and Iago met them. A very cruel Battle ensued upon
this, and a very great number were slain on both sides, among whom were Anarawd
the Son of Gwyriad, the Son of Roderic the Great; and Edwyn the Son of Howel
Dha. But the Victory plainly favored the Brothers Ievaf and Iago; so that the
Princes of South Wales were obliged to retire to Cardiganshire, whither they
were warmly pursued, and that Country cruelly harrass'd with Fire and Sword.
The next Year Merfyn was unhappily Congelach King of Ireland was slain.

The Scots and Northumbrians having lately sworn Allegiance to King Edred, he
was scarce returned to his own Country, but Aulafe, with a great Army, landed
in Northumberland, and was with much rejoicing received by the Inhabitants. But
before he could secure himself in the Government, he was shamefully banished
the Country; and so the Northumbrians elected one Hircius, the Son of Harold
for their King. But to show the Inconstancy of an unsettled Multitude, they
soon grew weary of Hircius, and after Three Years space expelled him, and
voluntarily submitted themselves to Edred, who after he had reigned eight
Years, dyed, and was buried at Winchester. To him succeeded Edwin the Son of
Edmund, a Man so immoderately given to Venety, that he forcibly married another
Man's Wife; for which, and other Irregularities, his Subjects, after four Years
reign, set up his Brother Edgar, who was crowned in his stead; with Gwgan the
Son of Gwyriad the Son of Roderie dyed. At this time, Ievaf and Iago forcibly
managed the Government of all Wales, and acted according to their own good
Pleasures, no one daring to confront or resist them. But for all their Power,
the Sons of Abloio King of Ireland, ventured to land in Anglesey; and having
burnt Holyhead, wasted the Country of Lhyn. Also the Son of Edwyn the Son of
Colhoyn, destroyed and ravaged all the Country to Towyn, where they were
intercepted and slain. About the same time dyed Meyric the Son of Cadfan,
Rytherch Bishop of S. David's, and Cadwalhon ap Owen. Not long after, the
Country of North Wales was cruelly Edgar King of England; the occasion of which
Invasion was the non-payment of the Tribute that the King of Aberffraw, by the
Laws of Howel Dha, was obliged to pay to the King of London. But at length a
Peace was concluded upon these Conditions, that the Prince of North Wales,
instead of Money, should pay to the King of England the Tribute of 300 Wolves
yearly; which Creature was then very pernicious and destructive to England and
Wales. This Tribure being duly performed for two Years, the third Year there
were none to be found in any part of the Island; so that afterward the Prince
of North Wales became exempt from paying any Acknowledgment to the King of
England. English, being by these means vanished; there threatened another Cloud
from Ireland; for the Irish being animated by their late Expedition, landed
again in Anglesey; and having slain Roderic the Son of Edwal Foel, they
destroyed Aboffraw. And this danger being over, Ievaf and ^ago who had jointly
and agreeably, till now, managed the Government of Wales from the death of
Howel ^ha, began to quarrel and disagree among themselves; and Iago having
forcibly laid hands upon his Brother (...), confined him to perpetual
Imprisonment. These Heats and Animosities between the two Brothers, Owen Prince
of South Wales to carve for himself, who presently ^eized to his hands the
Country of Gwyr. And to Welsh at this time, Mactus the Son of Harold, with an
Army of Danes, ^ntered the Isle of Anglescy, and spoiled Penmon. King Edgar was
so indulgent to these Danes, that he permitted them to inhabit through all
England; inso^uch that at length they became to be as numerous and as strong as
the English themselves; and fell into ^uch lewd courses of Debauchery, and such
horrid Drinking, that very great Mischief ensued thereupon. The King to reform
this immoderate Sottishness, enacted a Law, that very one should drink by
measure, and so stamped a Mark upon every Vessel, how ^^at it should be filled.
But Harold having taken Pennon, Anglesey, which however he did not keep long,
being forced to quit the same, and to return home; as did the Fleet of King
Alfred, which he had sent to sub^ue Ca^rlheon upon Vsc. And now being rid of
the English and Danes, the Welsh begin to raise Commotions among themselves.
Ievaf continued still in Prison, Howel raised his Power, and marched against
his Uncle Iago, who being vanquished in sight, was forced to quit the Country,
to ^ave himself. Howel having won the day, took his eldest Uncle, Meyric the
Son of Edwal Prisoner, and pulled out both his Eyes, clapped him in Prison, where
in a woeful condition he shortly dyed, leaving behind him two Sons, Edwal and
Ionafal; the first of which lived to be afterward Prince of Wales, and to
revenge upon the Posterity of Howel, that unnatural Barbarity showed to his
Father. But though Howel delivered his Father from his long and tedious
Imprisonment, yet he did not think fit to restore him to his Principality; for
whether by Age or Infirmity he was incapable, Howel took upon him the sole
Government of Wales, which he kept and maintained for his lifetime, but
afterward it descended to his Brethren. For Ievaf had Issue besides this
Howel; Meyric, I^vaf, and Cadwalhan; all three Men of great Repu^^ and Esteem.

About this time dyed Morgan Hen, in his younger days called Morgan Mawr, being
an Hundred Year^ old, having lived Fifty Years after the death of h^^ Wife
Elen, Daughter of Roderic the Great, by who^ he had one Son called Owen. Morgan
was a valiant an^ a victorious Prince, and well beloved of his Subjects (...)
but sometime before his death, Owen, the Son o^ Prince Howel Dha, laid claim to
Ystradwy and E^y (called the two Sleeves of Gwent Vwchcoed) being the Right of
Morgan, and seized upon them to his ow^ use. But the matter, through the
mediation of the Clergy and Nobility, being by both Parties referred to the
decision of Edgar King of England, it was by him adjudged, that the said Lands
did of right belong to Morgan, and to the Diocese of Lhandaff; and that Owen ap
Howel Dha had wrongfully possessed himself of them. The Charter of the said
Award wa^ made before the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons of England and
Wales; at may be seen at Lhandaff, in an old Manuscript called y Cwtta
Cyfarwydd (...) Forgannwg. And there is somewhat to the same purpose in the old
Book of Lhandaff; only the mistake in both is, that they make Howel Dha the
Intruder into the said Lands, who had been dead at least Twenty Years before
King Edgar began his Reign.

Howel ap Ievaf.
HOwel, after that he had expelled his Uncle Iago, and forced him to quit his
own Dominions, ^^ok upon himself the Government of Wales, in ^^ght of his
Father, who tho alive, yet by reason of ^^s Years, was willing to decline it.
About the same (...) Dwnwalhon Prince of Stradclwyd, took his Jour^^y for Rome;
and Edwalhon Son of Owen Prince ^f South Wales died. But the English received a
^^eater Blow by the Death of King Edgar, who was Prince of excellent Qualities,
both warlike and re^^gious, and one that founded several Monasteries and
^^ligious Houses, and particularly at Bangor.

For Iago ap Edwal having fled to King Edgar, pre^^iled so far with him, that
he brought an Army in^^ North Wales to restore him to his Right. Being ^^vanced
as far as Bangor, he was honorably received (...) Howel, who, at his request,
was contented his Un^^^ Iago should have a share in the Government, as he ^^d
in his Father Ievaf's time. Then Edgar founded (...) new Church at Bangor, on
the South Side of the Ca^^edral, which he dedicated to the Blessed Virgin ^ary;
and confirmed the ancient Liberties of that ^^^e, and bestowed Lands and Gifts
upon it: And ^^en with Howel and Iago in his company, he march^^ toward
Chester, where met him, by appointment, ^^x Kings more, viz. Keneth King of the
Scots, Mal^^ King of Cumberland, Macon King of Man, and ^^fnwal, Sifrethus, and
Ithel, three British Kings. ^hese Eight Princes having done Homage, and sworn
^ealty to him, entered with him into his Barge, and ^wed him, four of each side,
from his Palace to the church or Monastery of S. John Baptist, and Divine
^ervice being ended, in like state rowed him back ^gain. To King Edgar
succeeded his Son Edward, surnamed the Younger; who after four Years reign, w^
treacherously slain through the Treason of his Stepmother Elfrida, to make room
for her own Son Edelred upon pretense of whose minority, being a Child only of
Seven Years, she might have the manageme^^ of the Kingdom in her own hands. But
whilst the English were in this waving and unsettled condition Eineon, the Son
of Owen King of South Wales, t^^ second time entered the Country of Gwyr, and
hav^^^ spoiled and wasted it, returned home again. Th^^ though an unsufferable
Affront to Howel Prince (...) North Wales, yet he thought it most convenient
(...) pass by and wink at it; being then warmly engag^^ against the Aiders and
Abettors of his Uncle Iag^ and marching against them with a numerous A^^^
consisting of Welsh and English, pursued them to L^^^ and Kelynnoc Fawr, the
very extremity of Wal^^ where after cruel ravaging and miserable harassing
(...) the Country about, Iago was at last taken Prisone^ but so generously
received by Howel, that he gran^ his Uncle to enjoy his portion of the Country
pe^^ably for his Life. But he did not deal so kindly w^^^ his Uncle Edwal
Fychan the Son of Edwal Foel; w^^^ Iago, he was apprehensive that Edwal Fychan
wo^^^ put in his Pretense for the Principality; and theref^^^ he judged it
convenient to remove this Obstacle (...) time, and to send him to seek for it
in another Wo^^^ For nothing can be the cause of greater Injustice a^^
Inhumanity in Princes, than the jealousy and app^^hension of Rivals and
Pretenders to their Governme^^ to prevent which, they will sacrifice any thing
t^^^ is just and legal, so that the Person offending be (...) moved out of the
way. But though Howel had ^^thered his Uncle Edwal Fychan, yet he could not
(...) move all Disputes and Pretenses to North Wale^ For at the same time that
he was employed in t^^ unnatural Action, Cystenyn Dhu, or Constantine (...)
Black, Son to Iago then Prisoner to Howel, having ^^red an Army of Danes, under
the command of Godf^^^ ^^e Son of Harold, marched against his Cousin Howel, ^^d
entering North Wales, destroyed Anglesey and Lhyn. ^hereupon Howel having drawn
his Forces together, (...) upon them at a place called Gwayth Hirbarth, ^here
the Danes received a very shameful overthrow, and Constantine the Son of Iago
was slain. But ano^^er Army of Danes fared better in England, who ha^^ng landed
at, and spoiled Southampton, overran the ^ountries of Devon and Cornwall, burnt
the Town of ^odman, whereby the Cathedral Church of St. Pe^kes, with the
Bishop's Palace, were laid in Ashes; ^y reason of which Disaster, that Bishop's
See was ^^anslated to St. Germains, where it continued till the ^^iting thereof
to Crediton. Within a while after, (...) Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury died,
a Pious and Religious Person, who foretold of very great and ^^supportable
Calamities, the English should endure ^y the cruel Outrages of the Danes.

But Godfryd the Son of Harold being highly disgu^^ed Howel in the Quarrel of
Constantine, was resolved to recover his Credit, and to revenge himself of the
Welsh. And ^ccordingly he landed with a powerful Army in West-Wales, where
after that he had spoiled the Land of ^yfed, with the Church of St. David's, he
fought the ^^mous Battle of Lhanwanoc. But Harold being forced upon this to
retire and forsake the Country, the fol^owing Alfred with a considerable number
of English came to supply his room, and to conquer ^he Welsh. But he received
as little Advantage or Honor as Harold in this Expedition; for after that ^e
had laid waste and destroyed the Town of Brec^^ck, with some part of
South Wales, he was shame^ully vanquished, and his Army almost totally cut off
by the Troops of Eineon the Son of Owen Prince of South Wales, and Howel Prince
of North Wales, who had joined their Forces against him. And now Welsh having
quite disabled the Danes and the English, began to fall to their old Courses,
to make ^^fe of their Prosperity and Quietness from abroad, for quarrelling and
creating Disturbances at home. The Inhabitants of Gwentland imagined themselves
very Strong and Powerful, and therefore must need endeavor to shake off their
Allegiance to their Prince and to set up one of their own making. Owen Princ^
of South Wales to pacify the rebellious Humor o^ these seditious and turbulent
People, sent his So^ Eineon to persuade them to Obedience. But a di^stracted
multitude got loose, is not to be worked upon by Arguments, which Eineon
fatally experience^ who was so far from persuading them in their Allegiance by
fair means, that they presently set upon him, and thinking that they had the
Bird in the fist, who was next to succeed, put him to prese^^ Death. And thus
most ignobly fell this worthy Prince, who in his Father's time was the only
Support of his Country, being a stout and a valia^^ Commander, and one famously
experienced in the Art and Discipline of War. He had Issue two Son^ Edwyn and
Tewdor Mawr, or Theodor the Great, o^ of whose Loins several Princes of
South Wales we^^ Howel Prince of North Wal^^ did not regard this Dissension and
Rebellion in South Wales, and therefore took opportunity to strengthen and
multiply his Army, with which he marched the next Year for England, intending
to revenge the ^^cursions and Invasions of the English upon Wales, and to
destroy and waste their Country. But having entered into England, he was
presently fough^ with, upon which, being resolved either to retur^
Victoriously, or to die Courageously, he fell in among them, but in the Action
was slain, leaving no Issu^ behind him to succeed in his Principality, though
(...) some ancient Genealogies he is reputed to have a So^ called Conan y Cwn.

Cadwalhon ap Ievaf.
HOwel the Son of Ievaf had for a long time enjoyed the Principality of
North Wales, more by ^ain Force and Usurpation, than any right of Suc^ssion he
could pretend to it. For Ionafal and Edwal ^^e Sons of Meyric, the eldest Son
of Edwal Foel, ^ere living, and though their Father had been rejected (...) unfit
for Government, yet that was no reason to ^eprive them of their Right. Indeed,
Howel could ^^etend to no other Right or Title, than that his Fa^^er Ievaf had
been Prince of North Wales before (...), and this he thought sufficient to
maintain his ^ossession against the rightful Heir, who was far un^^le to oppose
or molest his wrongful Usurpation. ^^^t he being slain in this rash Expedition
against the English, and leaving no Issue to succeed him in the ^rown, his
Brother Cadwalhon thought he might right^^lly take upon him the Government of
North Wales, ^eing his Father and his Brother had without any ^olestation
enjoyed the same. However to make his ^itle secure, he thought fit to remove
all manner of ^^bs which might create any Dispute concerning his ^^ght of
Succession, and to that end, concluded it ^ecessary to make away his Cosins
Ionafal and ^dwal the lawful Heirs; the first of which he ^xecuted accordingly,
but Edwal being aware of his ^ntention privately made his escape, and so
prevented ^is wicked Design. This unnatural Dealing with his Cousins Ionafal
and Edwal cost Cadwalhon not only ^is Life, but the loss of his Principality
and the utter ^uin of his Father's House. For he had scarce enjoy^d Meredith
the Son ^f Owen Prince of South Wales entered into North Wales, slew Cadwalhon
and his Brother Meyric the ^nly remains of the House of Ievaf, and under the
pretense of Conquest, possessed himself of the whole Country. Here we may
observe and admire the Wisdom of Providence, in permitting Wrong and Oppression
for some time to flourish and wax great and afterward by secret and hidden
Methods, in restoring the Posterity of the right and lawful Heir (...) the just
and pristine Estate of his Ancestors. For after the Death of Edwal Foel, Meyric
who by righ^ of Birth was legally to succeed, was not only deprived of his just
and righful Inheritance, but had (...) Eyes most inhumanly put out, and being
condemne^ to perpetual Imprisonment, for grief of being so barbarously treated,
quickly ended his Days. But th^^ his Brothers Ievaf and Iago, and Howel and
Ca^walhon the Sons of the former successively enjoy^^ the Principality of
North Wales; yet not one di^ naturally or free from the Revenge of Meyric's
ej^ction. For Ievaf was imprisoned by his Brother Iag^ and he with his Son
Constantine, by Howel the S^^ of Ievaf, and afterward Howel fell by the hands
o^ the English, and his Brethren Cadwalhon and Mey^^ were both slain by
Meredith ap Owen. On the other side, Edwal ab Meyric who was right Heir of
North Wales after the Death of his Brother Ionafal, escap^^ the snare intended
by Cadwalhon; and Meredith (...) Owen after some time leaving North Wales
expose^ to the Enemies, by reason he had enough to do to preserve South Wales,
Edwal was received of the North Wales Men as their true Prince.

Meredith ap Owen.
MEredith having won the Field and slain Cadwalh^^ and his Brother Meyric, the
only seeming Pretenders to the Principality of North Wales, took upon himself
the Rule and Government of it. But before ^e could be well confirmed in his
Dominions, Godfry^ ^he Son of Harold, the third time entered into the ^sle of
Anglesey, and having taken Lhyarch the Son of Owen with 2000 Men Prisoners,
most cruelly put out ^is Eyes; which so startled and struck such a Terror unto
Prince Meredith, that with the rest of his Army ^e forthwith made his escape
and fled to Cardigan. This loss to the Welsh was the same Year seconded ^y
another, but of another sort; for there happened ^uch a dismal and unusual
Murren, that the best part ^f the Cattle of Wales perished. Neither were the
^nglish at this time free from Adversities and Trou^les, for the Danes landed
again in England with se^eral Armies, and at Westport and W^test, gave two
^nglish Lords, Godan and Britchwould such a blow, that the King was forced to
buy his Peace, with the ^ayment of 10000 Pound, which was termed. Dane ^elt.
But within a while after, King Edelred violated and brake the Peace himself,
and prepared a great ^eet, thinking to vanquish the Danes at Sea: But (...)
proved far otherwise, and much contrary to his ex^^ctation, all his Ships being
either destroyed or taken, together with the Admiral, Alfric Earl of Mercin.
The Danes being animated with this Victo^y, failed up to the Mouth of the
H^mber, and land^^g in York shire, spoiled and destroyed the City of ^^rk and
Lindsey; but in their march through Nor^humberland, were routed and put to
flight by Godwyn and Fridgist, two English Generals who were sent to ^ppose
them. The same time An^^f King of Norway, and Swane of Denmark with 94 Galleys
sailed up the Thames and besieged London, which the Citizens to ^ravely
defended, that at length the Danes thought ^est to raise and quit the Siege.
But though they ^ould effect nothing upon the City, yet the Country ^as at
their mercy, and therefore leaving their Ships, ^hey landed and wasted with
Fire and Sword all Kent, Essex, Sussex, Surry and Hampshire. Wherefore King
Edelred instead of manly opposition in the Field, ^ends Ambassadors to treat
about another payment, and so the Danes being satisfied with a great Sum of
Money and Victuals, lay quiet that Winter at Southampton. Upon this
Composition, Anlaf was invited by Adelred, and Royally entertained, and being
dismissed with very many rich Presents, he promised upon Oath to depart the
Kingdom and never to molest it any more, which he faithfully performed.

English and the Danes were thus for a^ time agreed, Ievaf the Son of Edwal
having spe^^ for several Years a retired and a private Life, died: And was
quickly followed by Owen the Son of Ho^^^ Dha Prince of South Wales. This Owen
had thr^^ Sons, Eineon who in his Father's time was slain by the Rebels of
Gwentland, and Lhywarch who had (...) Eyes put out by Godfryd the Son of Harold
the D^^ and Prince Meredith, who had already Conquere^ North Wales, and now
upon his Father's Death taken possession also of South Wales, without any
regard had to Edwyn and Theodore the Sons of Eineon his elde^^ Brother. But
upon his advancement to his new Principality, he was like to meet with no very
small troubles; for the Danes at Hampton quickly broke t^^ League with King
Adelred, and sailing toward the West mightily annoyed the Coasts of Cornwall
and D^vonshire, and at last landed in South Wales. Havi^^ destroyed St David's,
Lhanbadarn, Lhanrhystyd, Lha^dydoch, and several other Religious places; the
Country was so cruelly harassed and weakened, that Princ^ Meredith was forced
to compound with them, and (...) Welsh was called Glwma^ otherwise, the Tribute
of the Black Army. An^ Ireland too at this time received no inconsiderabl^ blow
from the Danes, who slew Elwmaen the Son (...) Abloic King of the Country, and
so spoiled and r^vaged that Kingdom, that a great Number of the Na^tives
perished by Famine.

Owen the Son of Dyfnwal a Man of a considerable Note and Reputation among the
Welc^ was slain; besides which nothing remarkable happe^ed this year. But the
next year Edwyn ap Eineon, wh^ was right Heir to the Principality of
South-Wale^ having drawn to his help a great Army of English Danes hostibly
entered into Meredith's Country, ^poiled all the Land of Cardigan, Dyfed, Gwyr,
Kyd^ely and St. David's, and received Hostages of the Chief Persons of those
Countries to own him as their rightful Prince. To return these Outrages upon
Edwyn, Meredith destroyed the Town of Radnor, spoil^d Glamorgan, and carried
the Chiefest Men therein Prisoners, who paying, their Ransom, were set at
Liberty. But while Wales was in this tottering Con^ition, and scarce any place
free from Hostility; it happily fell out, that Meredith and Edwyn were made
Friends, and the Differences composed between them, ^o that the English and
Danes who came in with Edwyn, and who expected to fare best by these Civil
Disturbances of the Welsh were unexpectedly cashiered and sent home. And soon
after this agreement, Cadwalhon the only Son of Meredith died, which rendered
the Composition between Meredith and Edwyn more firm, by reason that this
latter thought now, without any Dispute to succeed Meredith in his
Principality. But this fell short of his aim, for Meredith being very much
disturbed in South Wales, had ^o much work upon his hands to defend that
Coun^ry, that he left North Wales open and exposed to the Common Enemy, which
the Danes were quickly acquainted with, and so landing in Angles^y, they
ravaged and laid waste the whole Island. The North Wales Men finding themselves
thus forsaken by Meredith, and their Country like to be overrun by the Danes,
if not timely prevented, set up Edwal the Son Meyric, the indisputable Heir of
North Wales, though long kept from it, and owned him for their Prince. But
those incessant Wars and Commotions in South Wales, occasioned a very dismal
Famine and Scarcity in the Country, of which a very considerable number of
People perished. And thus Meredith who had once conquered North Wales, and for
a long time had got possession of South Wales, without any Right or Title to
either, was now obliged to relinquish the one, and was scarce able to maintain
the other.

Edwal ap Meyric.
EDwal after a long and tedious expectation, being now joyfully received by the
North Wales Men for their Prince, endeavored the first thing to defend his
Subjects from the Injuries and Depredations they received from the Danes. And
having in a measure effected that, he was accosted by another Enemy; for
Meredith being resolved to Revenge the Indignity and Disgrace put upon him by
the North Wales Men, in depriving him of the Government of their Country,
gathered and mustered together all his Power, intending to recover again that
Principality. Being advanced as far as Lhangwm, Edwal met him, and in plain
Battle routed his Army; in which Action, Theodor or Tewdor Mawr, Meredith's
Nephew was slain, leaving behind him two Sons, Rhys and Rytherch, and a
Daughter named Elen. But it is probable that it was not Tewdor Mawr, but his
Brother Edwyn that was slain in this Battle, which also seems rather to have
been fought at Hengwm in Ardudwy in Merioneth shire, than at Lhangwm, for in
that place there are to this Day certain Monuments of Victory to be seen, as
heaps of Stones, Tomb-Stones and Columns, which they call Carneddi Hengwm.
Edwal returning home triumphantly after this Victory, thought he had now
secured himself in his Government, and expected to enjoy his Dominions quietly,
and without any molestation. But he had scarce recovered the Fatigue of the
last Engagement, when Swane the Son of Harold having lately pillaged and wasted
the Isle of Man, landed in North Wales, whom Edwal endeavoring to oppose, was
slain in the Encounter, leaving one Son behind him, called Iago. Within a while
after, the Danes returned again against St. David's, and destroying all before
them with Fire and Swords, slew Morgency or Vrgeney, Bishop of that Diocese.
Prince Meredith being highly concerned at the Mischiefs these Barbarous People
continually did to his Country, and the more, because he was not able to ^epel
their Insolences, out of Grief and Vexation died; having Issue one Only
Daughter, named Angharad, who was twice Married; first to Lhewelyn ap Sitsylhe,
and after his Death to Confyn Hirdref, or ^as others think, to Confyn ap
Gwerystan. She had Children by both Husbands, which occasioned afterward great
Disturbances and Civil Commotions in Wales, the Issue of both Adventures
pretending a Right of Succession to the Principality of South Wales.

Aedan ap Blegorad.
EDwal Prince of North Wales being killed in the Battle against Swane, and
having no other Issue ^han Iago, who was a Minor, and too young to take upon
him the Government; and Meredith Prince of South Wales dying without any other
Issue than a Daughter, caused very heavy Quarrels and Contentions among the
Welsh, several without any color of Right, putting in their Claims and
Pretensions to the Government. In North Wales, Conan the Son Howel, and Aedan
the Son of Blegorad were the chief Aspirers to that Principality; and because
they could not agree who should be the Man, they fairly consented to try the
matter in open Field, where Conan had the misfortune to be slain; and so Aedan
was Victoriously proclaimed Prince of No^th Wales. But who this Aedan was
descended from, or what Color or Pretense he could lay to this Principality,
cannot be as much as guessed at, there being none of that Name to be met with
in any Welsh Records, excepting that Blegorad who is mentioned in the Lire of
Howel Dha, whose Estate and Quality was too mean, that his Posterity should lay
any Claim to the Principality of Wales. But be that how it will, Aed^ after his
Victory over Conan ap Howel, was owned Prince by the North Wales Men, over whom
he bore Rule for the space of twelve Years; though besides his Conquest of Conan
ap Howel, there be nothing recorded of him, excepting his being slain, together
with his four Sons by Lhewelyn ap Sitsylhe.

But whilst the Welsh are in this inconstant and unsettled Condition, the Scots
in Ireland began to grow powerful, and having destroyed the Town and Country of
Develyn they took Gulfath and Vbiad, two Irish Lord prisoners, whose Eyes they
most inhumanly put out. The Danes also, who had lately made their Incursio^
into South Wales, began now to molest the English and having landed in the
West, passed through the Counties of Somerset, Dorset, Hamp-shire and Sussex,
destroying and burning all before them. Having advanced without any Opposition,
as far as the River Medway, they laid Siege to Rochester, which the Kentish-men
endeavoring to preserve, assembled themselves together, and gave the Danes
Battle, b^^ were vanquished in the Undertaking. King Edel^^ was then in
Cumberland, where the Danes were more numerously planted, which Country he kept
quie^ and in subjection. But in the mean time another Army of Danes, landed in
the West, against who^ the Country People of Somersetshire assembling
themselves, showed their readiness to attack them, bu^ wanting a Head to direct
them, were easily put (...) their Heels, and the Danes ruled and commanded the
Country at their pleasure. The King being sorely vexed at the Insolences and
restless Depredations of the Danes, thought convenient to strengthen himself by
some powerful Affinity, and to that end, send^ Ambassadors to Richard Duke of
Normandy, desiring his Daughter Emma in Marriage, and Succors to ^epel the
Danish Incursions. Here it is observable, that as the Saxons being formerly
called over as Friends and Allies to the well-meaning Britains, violently and
wrongfully possessed themselves of the greatest part of the Island; so now the
Normans being invited to Aid the English against the Danes, ^ook so good a
liking to the Country, that they never gave over their Design of gaining it,
till at ^ast they became Conquerors of the whole Island. The Mischief of
calling in the Normans, though foretold to King Adelred, he was so far concerned
about the present Calamities received by the Danes, that he was deaf to all
futurities, how dangerous and mischievous soever they might prove. And
therefore being puffed up with hopes of Increase of Strength by this new
Affinity, he sent private Letters to all Cities and Towns throughout his
Dominions where the Danes were quartered, requiring them all upon St. Brice's
Night to Massacre the Danes, which was accordingly performed with much
Unanimity and Secrecy. This cruel Disaster was so far from discouraging the
Danes, that they now began to Vow the Eradication of the English Nation, and to
Revenge that unmanly Massacre of their Countrymen; to which end they landed in
Devon-shire, and overrunning the Country with Fire and Sword, spared nothing
that had the least spark of Life in it. The City of Exeter they razed to the
ground, and slew Hugh the Norman, whom the Queen had recommended to the
Government of it. To prevent their further Incursions. Almarus Earl of Devon
gathered a great Army out of Hamp-shire and Wilt-shire, and the Country
thereabouts, and marched with a Resolution stoutly to oppose the Danes, who put
Almarus to Flight and pursued him to Wilton and Salisbury, which being
ransacked and plundered, they carried the Pillage thereof triumphantly to their
Ships.

Swane, a Prince of great repute in Denmark, landed upon the Coast of Norfolk
and laid siege to Norwich, and wasted the Country thereabouts. But Wolfkettel
Duke of that Country, being too weak to oppose him, thought it most convenient
to make a Peace, with the Dane; which was quickly broke; and then Swane marched
privately to Therford, which after he had spoiled and ransacked, he returned
with his Prey to his Ships. Wolfkettel hearing this, privately drew up his
Forces, and stoutly marched against the Enemy; but being far inferior in
number, the Danes got the day, and afterward sailed to their own Country.
Within Two Years after, the Danes returned again, bringing with them their
usual Companions, the Fire, the Sword, and the Spoil and landed at Sandwich;
which after they had burnt and pillaged, they sailed to the Isle of Wight,
where they took up their Winter Quarters till Christmas: And then coming forth
thence, they overran, by several Parties the Countries of Hamshire and
Barkshire, as far as Reading, Wallingford and Colsey; devouring up, for want of
other Plunder, all the Provisions and Victuals they found in the Houses, and
retributed the same with Fire and Sword at their departure. In their return
they met with the Army of the West Saxons near Essington, but this consisting
only of a raw and unexperienced Rabble, they easily broke through, and passing
triumphantly by the Gates of Winchester, they got safe with great Booty to
Wight. King Adelred all this while lay at his Mannor-House in Shropshire, much
troubled and concerned at these uninterrupted Devastations of the Danes. But
the Nobility of England, rather to save some than lose all they possessed,
bought their Peace of the Danes for the Sum of 30000 l. during which interval,
King Adelred rousing his drooping Spirits, ordained, that every three Hundred
Hides of Land, one Hide being as much as one Plough can sufficiently till,
through his Dominions, should man out a Ship, and every Eight Hides a Corslet
and a Helmet; beside which the King had no inconsiderable Navy sent him from
Normandy. ^his Fleet when rendezvous'd at Sandwich seemed ter^^^le in those
days, and was the greatest that ever ^ore then rode upon the British Sea. And
now, one ^^ght have thought, that all things would go well ^^th the English,
when of a sudden another Cloud ^^pears; for one Wilnot, a Noble Man of Sussex,
be^^g banished by King Adelred, got to Sea with a small ^^mber of Ships, and
practiced Pyracy along the ^^asts of Britain, and mightily annoyed all
Mer^^ants and Passengers. Brightrych, Brother to the Edric Earl of Mercia,
thinking to advance (...) Reputation by some signal Exploit, promised to ^^ng
Wilnot dead or alive before him: To which ^^d, he sets forth with a
considerable Fleet; which ^^eeting with a terrible Storm, was by the Tempest
^iven back, and wrecked upon the shoars; so that great number of the Ships were
drowned, and the (...) burnt by Wilnot and his Company. Brightrych be^^g
abashed with this unfortunate beginning, return^^ ingloriously by the Thames
back to London; so ^^at this great Preparation against the Danes, was ^^sh'd to
pieces, and came to nothing.

The Danes were not ignorant of the Misfortune the ^^glish received by this
Storm, and without any fur^^er enquiry, landed at Sandwich, and so passed on
Canterbury, which they intending to destroy, was (...) the Citizens bought off
for 3000 l. Passing from ^^ence, through Kent, Sussex and Hampshire, they came
(...) Burkshire, where King Edelred at length met with ^^em, and purposing
resolutely to set upon them, was the cunning Insinuations and subtle Arguments
of ^^ytor Edric dissuaded from fighting. The Danes be^^g thus delivered from
the danger which they certain^^ expected, passed on joyfully by the City of
London, ^^d with great Booty returned to their Ships. The (...) Year they
landed again at Ipswich, upon Ascension^^ where Wolfkettel entertained them
with a sharp ^^counter; but being overpowered by Number, he ^as forced to give
back, and yield the day to the ^anes. Passing from thence to Cambridge, they
met ^ith Ethelstan, King Edelred's Nephew by his Sister, who with an Army was
come to oppose them; but the Danes proving too powerful, he with many other
Noblemen were slain; among whom were Duke Oswyn and the Earls Edwyn and
Wolfrike. From hence they passed through Essex, leaving no manner of Cruelty
and Barbarity unpractised, and returned laden with Booty to their Ships, which
lay in the Thames. But they could not contain themselves long in their Vessels;
and therefore sallying out, they passed by the River side to Oxford, which they
ransacked over again; adding to their Prey Buckingham, Bedford, Hartford, and
Northamptonshire; and having accomplished that Years Cruelties, at Christmas
they returned to their Ships. Yet the Prey of the Country from the Trent
Southward, would not satisfy these unmerciful Barbarians; but as soon as the
Season Canterbury, which being delivered up by the Treachery of Almarez the
Archdeacon, was condemned to Blood and Ashes, and Alfego^ the Archbishop
carried Prisoner to the Danish Fleet, where he was at length most cruelly put
to death Swane, King of Denmark, came up the Humber, and landed at Gainesborow;
whithe^ repaired to him Vthr^d Earl of Northumberland, with his People, the
Inhabitants of Lindsey, with all the Countries Northward of Watling-street,
being a highway crossing from the East to the West Sea, and gave their Oath and
Hostages to obey him. Whereupon King Swane perceiving his Undertaking to prove
(...) fortunate beyond expectation, committed the care o^ his Fleet to his Son
Cnute, and marched himself (...) to Oxford, and then to Winchester; which
Citie^ whether for fear of further Calamities, readily acknowledged him for
their King. From thence h^ marched for London, where King Edelred then lay^ and
which was so stoutly defended by the Citizens, that he was like to effect
nothing against that Town and therefore he directed his course to Wallingfor^
and Bath, where the principal Men of West-Saxo^ yielded him Subjection. The
Londoners too, at last, ^earing his Fury and Displeasure, made their peace, and
sent him Hostages; which City being received to ^ercy, Swane, from that time
was accounted King of ^ll England. King Edelred perceiving all his Astairs ^n
England to go against him, and his Authority and Government reduced to so
narrow a compass, having sent his Queen, with his two Sons Edward and Alfred,
^o Normandy, he thought convenient within a while after to follow himself.
Being honorably received by his Brother in Law Richard, he had not been there
^ong but News arrived of the death of Swane, and that he was desired by the
English to return to his Kingdom. Being animated and comforted with this
surprising News, he set forward with a great Army ^or England, and landing at
Lyndsey, he cruelly har^ssed that Province, by reason that it had owned
Subjection to Cnute the Son of Swane, whom the Danes ^ad elected King in his
Fathers stead. King Cnute being at Ipswich, and certified of the arrival of
King Edelred, and the Devastation of Lyndsey; fearing that ^is Authority was
going down the wind, barbarously cut off the Hands and Noses of all the
Hostages he received from the English, and presently struck sail for Denmark.
And whilst England was in this general Confusion, there fell out no less a
storm in Ireland; for Brian King of that Island, and his Son Mur^th, with other
Kings of the Country subject to ^^rian, joined their Forces against Sutric the
Son of A^loic King of Dublin, and Mailmorda King of Lago^es. Sutric being of
himself too weak to encounter so numerous a Multitude, hired all the Pirates
and Rovers who cruised upon the Seas, and then gave Brian battle, who, with his
Son Murcath, was slain; and on the other side, Maihnorda, and Broderic General
of the Auxiliaries.

But Cnute, though he was in a manner forced to England upon the recalling of
King Edelred, yet he did not abandon all his pretense to the Kingdom; and
therefore the next year he came to renew his Claim, and landed with a strong
Fleet in West-^ex, where he exercised very great Hostility. To prevent his
Incursions, Edric and Edmund Bastard-Son to Edelred, raised their Forces
separately; b^^ when both Armies were united, they durst not, whither for fear,
or the Dissension of the two Generals fight with the Danes. Edmund therefore
passed to the North, and joined with Vthred Duke of Northumberland, and both
together descended and spoiled Stafford, Leicester, and Shropshire. On the
other side, Cnute marched forcibly through Buckingham, Bedford,
Huntingtonshire, and so by Stafford passed toward York whither Vthred hastened,
and finding (...) other remedy, submitted himself, with all the Northumbrians,
to Cnute, giving Hostages for the performance of what they then agreed upon.
But nevertheless this Submission, Vthred was treacherously slain, not without
the permission of Cnute, and hi^ Dukedom bestowed upon one Egrick a Dane;
whereupon Edmund left them, and went to his Father, wh^ lay sick at London.
Cnute returning to his Ships presently followed, and sailed up the Thames
toward London; but before he could draw nigh the City King Edelred was dead;
having prolonged a long and troublesome Reign for Thirty Seven Years. After his
decease, the English Nobility chose his base Son Edmund, for his eminent
strength and hardiness in War, surnamed Ironside, for their King. Upon this
Cnu^^ brought his whole Fleet up the River to London, and having cut a deep
Trench round about the Town, invested it on all sides; but being valourously
repulsed by the Defendants, he detached the best part of his Army to fight with
Edmund, who was marching to raise the Siege; and both Armies coming to battle
at Proman by Gillingham, Cnute with his Danes were put to flight. But as soon
as time and opportunity would give him leave to increase his Forces, Cnute gave
Edmund a second Battle at Caerstane; but Edric, Almar, and Algar underhand
siding with the Danes, Edmund was hard put to it, to maintain the fight
obstinately, till Night and Weariness parted them. Both Armies having
sufficiently suffered in this action, Edmund went to West-Sex to reinforce
himself, and the Danes returned to the siege of London, where Edmund ^^ickly
followed, raised the siege, and forced Cnute ^^d his Danes confusedly to betake
themselves to their ^^ips, and then entered triumphantly into the City. ^wo
days after, passing the Thames at Brentford, he ^^ll upon the Enemies backs; by
which lucky oppor^^nity obtaining a considerable Victory, he returned ^gain to
raise Recruits among the West Saxons. Cnute, ^^on Edmund's removal, appeared
again before Lon^^n, and invested it by Land and Water; but all in ^^in; the
besieged so manfully and resolutely defen^^ng themselves, that it was
impracticable to master ^^e Town before Edmund could come to the relief of
(...) And this they presently experienced; for Edmund, ^^ter having augmented
his Forces, crossed again the ^hames at Brentford, and came to Kent in pursuit
of ^nute, who upon engaging, was so shamefully defeat^d at first, and his Men
put to that terrible flight, that ^ere wanted nothing of a full and absolute
Victory, ^^t the true Loyalty of the Traitor Edric, who per^^iving the Victory
to incline to Edmund, and the ^anes like to receive their mortal and final
Blow, ^^yed aloud, Fled Engle, Fled Engle, Edmund is dead, and thereupon fled
with that part of the Army under ^^s command, leaving the King overpowered
with ^umber. By this Desertion the English were at the ^^st overthrown, and a
great number slain; among whom were Duke Edmund, Duke Alfric, Duke God^yn, and
Vlfkettel, the valiant Duke of the East-An^^es, together with all the English
Cavalry, and a ^^eat part of the Nobility. After this Victory, Cnute ^arched
triumphantly to London, and was crowned King; but Edmund preparing to try his
Fortune in another Field, mustered together all the Forces he could, and
meeting with Cnute in Gloucestershire, intended ^o give him battle; But
considering what cruel and ^nnatural Bloodshed had already happened, both
ge^erally agreed to put an end to this tedious Quarrel by ^^ngle Combat; and
the place being appointed, Edmund and Cnute fell to it very vigourously, till
at last Cnute ^erceiving it impracticable to vanquish a Man of Iron Sides, laid
down his Weapon, moving this Composition, to divide the Kingdom fairly betwixt
them* Edmund was not displeased at the Offer, and therefore both Parties
submitted to this Decision, that Edmund should rule the West Saxons and the
South; Cnute in Mercia and all the North; and so they parted Friends, Cnute
moving to London, and Edmund to Oxford. But Edric was not pleased, that Edmund
should have any share at all of the Government, and therefore he is resolved to
conspire against his Life* and to deliver the whole Kingdom of England into the
hands of Cnute; of whom he might reasonably expect for this, and other
traitorous Services, a very ample and an answerable return. This he committed
to one of his own Sons to put in execution, an (...) of the old stock, and one
early versed in wicked and traitorous Designs; who perceiving the King to go
(...) stool, thrust up a sharp Knife up his Fundament, (...) which Wound he
presently dyed. Edric being quickly certified of the Fact, posted it up to
London, and with great Joy and loud Acclamations came to Cnut^ greeting him as
sole King of England, and withal telling him in what manner, and by whose means
h^^ old Enemy King Edmund was assassinated and killed at Oxford. Cnute, though
pleased at the death of Edmund, was a Person of greater Honor than to commend
so horrible a Deed, though done to an Enemy and therefore told Edric, that he
would without fa^^ take care to reward him, as his Deserts required, an^ would
advance him above all the Nobility of England which was quickly performed, his
Head being place^ upon the highest Tower in London, for a Terror (...) such
villainous Traitors to their King. Edric being thus deservedly disappointed of
the mighty Though^ he entertained of Greatness, upon the Advancemen^ of King
Cnute; this generous Dane scorned his Bas^ness, and so having paid him a
Traitors Reward, caused Execution to be done upon all Edric's Compl^ces, and
those that consented to the base Murder o^ that brave Prince King Edmund.

About the same time there happened no small Disturbance Wales; Lhewelyn ap
Sytsylht having for some Years sat still and quiet, began now to bestir
himself; and having drawn all his Forces together, marched against Aedan, who
^orcibly and without any legal Pretense, had entered upon, and for all this time
had kept himself in the Government of North Wales. Aedan would not easily
^eject himself from what had been so long in his possession; to maintain which,
he gave Lhewelyn Battle: But the day going against him, himself, with his four
Sons, were slain upon the spot; upon which, Lhewe^yn, without any regard had to
Iago the Son of Edwal the right Heir, took upon himself the Title and Authority
of Prince of all Wales. His pretense to North Wales was, as being descended
from Trawst Daugh^er to Elis, second Son to Anarawd, who was the eldest Son of
Roderic the Great; and to South Wales, as having married Angharad the only
Daughter of Meredith Prince of South Wales; by virtue of which Pretensions he
assumed to himself the Government of all Wales.

Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht.
LHewelyn having, as is said, taken upon him the general Government of Wales,
managed his Charge with such Prudence and Moderation, that the Country in a
short time became very flourishing and prosperous; Peace and Tranquillity being
established produced plenty and increase of all things necessary to humane
Subsistence: For there was none that could ^ay any Claim or Pretense to either
of the Principalities, excepting Iago the Son of Edwal, who was indeed lawful
Heir of North Wales; but either too weak to withstand, or unwilling to disturb
Lhewelyn's Title, he lay quiet for a time, expecting a better opportunity to
recover his Right. In the mean time, Cnute being crowned King of all England,
marrie^ Emma the Widow of King Edelred; and for the better securing the English
Crown to himself and his Heirs, he thought it expedient to dispatch Edmund and
Edward the Sons of Ironside out of the way. But lef^ such an execrable Fact
should seem too black to be done in England, he sent the two Youths to Solom^n
King of Hungary, willing him to use some convenient opportunity to take away
their Lives; which seemed to Solomon so very unnatural, that instead of
complying with Cnute's Request, he educated and brought them up as his own
Children. But Cnute imagined now that his Fear was over, and his bus^ness
effectually finished; so that he could the more boldly demand of his Subjects,
what either his Necessity or Curiosity would prompt him to. And reflecting with
himself, what excessive Expense he had been at in the Conquest of England, was
resolved that the English should repay him; and therefore required a Subsidy of
Seventy Two Thousand Pounds, beside Eleven Thousand, which the City of London
contributed. The same time Meyric the Son of Arthfael, a Person of Quality in
Wales, rebelled, and raised a^ Army against Prince Lhewelyn, who no sooner
appeared in the Field to quell this male-contented General, but manfully slew
him with his own hand, and easily discomfited his Followers. The same time
Cnute sailed over into Denmark, and made War upon the Va^dals, who, for all
that they had a greater Army (...) the Field, were overcome by the imcomparable
Valor of Earl Godwyn; for which famous Action Cnut^ had the English in great
esteem ever after.

Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, though he had lately quelled the Rebels headed by
Meyric, was now to encounter with another Difficulty, which seemed to threaten
greater Disturbance and trouble to him: For a certain Person of a mean Quality
in Scotland, coming to South Wales, assumed the Name of Run, and pu^ out that
he was the Son of Meredith Prince of South Wales; to whom joined a great Number
of the Nobility, who had no great Affection to Lhewelyn, and proclaimed Run
Prince of South Wales. Lhewelyn being then in North Wales, and certified of
this famous Impostor, drawing his Army together, marched to meet him; who with
the whole strength of South Wales then lay at Abe gwili, where he abode the
arrival of Lhewelyn. When both Armies were ready to join battle, Run makes a
vaunting Speech to his Soldiers, assuring them of Victory; and so persuading
them courageously to fall on, privately himself retired out of harms way; there
one might have observed on the one side a valiant Army under a cowardly
General, and on the other part a valiant and a noble Commander engaging with a
slow and a faint-hearted Army; for Lhewelyn, like a bold and courageous Prince,
ventured into the midst of his Enemies, whilst Run pri^^tely sneaked off out
all danger; and the South Wales Men were more fierce and eager in the Cause of
a Pre^ender than the North Wales Men, to maintain the Q^^rrel of a Prince of
their own Blood. But after great slaughter on both sides, the North Wales Men
calling to mind the several Victories they had obtained, and withal being in a
very great measure animated by the incomparable Valor of their Prince, fell on
so warmly, that they put their Enemies to flight, and pursued R^^ so close,
that notwithstanding his several shifts, he was at last overtaken and slain.
Lhewelyn, after this Victory, returned laden with Spoil into North Wales, and
for some time lived peaceably and without Disturbance* But the next Year Howel
and Meredith, the Sons of Ed^yn, conspired against him and slew him, ^aving
beh^nd him a Son called Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn, who afterward, though not
immediately, ascended to the Principality of North Wales.

Iago ap Edwal.
AFter the death of Lhewelyn, Iago the Son of Edwal, the true Heir to the
Principality of North Wales, who had been all his time wrongfully kept from it;
thought this the best opportunity to enter upon his Right, by reason of the
minority of Gruffydh the Son of Lhewelyn; upon which pretense likewise Rytherch
the Son of Iestyn forcibly assumed the Principality of South Wales. About the
same time Cnute King of England sailed over to Denmark and Sweden, against Vlf
and Alaf, who had moved the Finlanders against him; whom he subdued with the
loss of a great part of his Army, as well English as Danes. Within a while
after his return to England, he made (...) very pompous and magnificent Journey
to Rome; more to satisfy his ambitious Temper, and to signify to the World
his Greatness and Might, which he expressed by his costly Presents and princely
Behavior, than any way to make atonement for the Oppression and Bloodshed by
which he had established himself in his Kingdom: For what Holiness and
Mortification he had learnt at Rome, presently appeared upon his return to
England; for upon no provocation he marched with an Army into Scotland, and
forced Malcolm the King thereof, together with Molbea^^ and Jermare, the Kings
of the Orkners and Ewist, to do him Homage.

Wales were at this time very turbulent and uneasy; for Howel and Meredith,
after the Murder of Prince Lhewelyn, expected to enjoy some part of his
Principality themselves; but finding Iago to have seized upon North Wales, and
Rytherch upon South Wales, and withal perceiving their own Power too weak to
oppose their Designs, they invited over the Irish-Scots to their aid against
Rytherch ap Iest^^, Prince of South Wales. By the help of these, Howel and
Meredith prevailed over Rytherch, who being at length slain, they jointly took
upon them the Rule and Government of South Wales. But this was not a sufficient
title to establish them so firmly in it, that their Usurpation would not be
called in question; for R^therch presently after their Fathers death, gathered
their Forces together to fight with the Brothers Howel and Meredith, who met at
Irathwy, where a cruel Battle was fought, called Gwaith Irathwy; and at last
the Sons of Rytherch were put to flight. But though these Victories, the one
over Rytherch, and the second over his Sons, seemed in a great measure to
favor Howel and Meredith's pretense to, and establishment in the Principality,
yet, so unpardonable a Crime, as the murder of ^hewelyn, a Prince of so Conan
the Son of Sitsylht, Prince Lhewelyn's Brother, were resolved to return their
Uncles Murder upon the two Usurpers, which in a short time they effected
against Meredith, who met with the same end from the Sons of Conan, that he had
formerly inflicted upon Lhewelyn. But these civil Wales were quickly discovered
by the English, who taking advantage of so fair an opportunity, entered with a
great Army into the Land or Gwent, where after they had committed considerable
Wastes for some time, Caradoc the Son of Rytherch ap Iestyn, gave them battle,
but was in that Engagement unhappily slain. And shortly afterward dyed King
Cnute, Sweden, from Germany almost to the North Pole; together with the
Kingdoms of Norway and Denmark, and the noble Island of Britain. To him
succeeded his Son Harold, for his Swiftness surnamed Harefoot, begotten upon
Alwyn the Daughter of Duke Alselyn; though several stickled firmly for
Har^^enute, his other Son by Emma, who was then in Denmark. But Harold being
once advanced into the Throne, took care to establish himself as firmly as he
could in it; and to that end, thought it expedient to banish out of his
Dominions his Mother in Law Emma, who was restless to promote the Interest of
her own Son Hardycnute, and to bring him to the Crown of England.

Harold was by these measures settled in his Throne, Iago ap Edwal was just
upon the point of losing his Principality of North Wales: For Gruffydh the Son
of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, sometime Prince of North Wales, having once hinted a
Rebellion against Iago, was so generally encouraged, and universally followed
by all People, for the love they bore to his Father; that in a short time his
Army mounted to an invincible number. However, Iago was not so thoroughly
affrighted, that he would deliver up his Principality without drawing Sword for
it; but providing for himself as well as he could, and drawing together what
Forces he was able, he gave Gruffydh battle: But his number being far too weak
to oppose so great an Army as sided with Gruffydh, was presently overpowered
and put to the rout, and himself slain, leaving after him a Son called Conan,
by his Wife Afandred, Daughter to Gweir the Son of Pylh.

Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn.
IAgo ap Edwal being killed, Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn was received with loud
Acclamations, and joyfully saluted Prince of North Wales; who treading in his
Father's steps, behaved himself in his Government with that Prudence and
Conduct, that he manfully defended his Country from the frequent Invasions of
the English and Danes: For he was scarce settled in his Throne, when these
inveterate Enemies of the Welsh entered in an hostile manner into Wales, and
advanced as far as Crosford upon the Severn, where Gruffydh met them, and
forced them shamefully to fly, and retire back to their own Country. From
thence Gruffydh passed to Lhanbadarn Vawr in Cardiganshire, which he laid in
Ashes; and afterward marched through all the Country of South Wales, receiving
of the People Oaths of Fidelity and Subjection to him. In the mean time, Howel
ap Edwyn Prince of South Wales fled to Edwyn Brother to Leofric Earl of
Chester, and prevailed with him to come with an Army consisting of English and
Danes, to his aid against Gruffydh, who meeting his Enemies in the Field,
easily overcame them, Edwyn being slain upon the spot, and Howel forced to
preserve his Life by flight. After which Victory, Gruffydh having reduced all
the Country of Wales to subjection, returned again to North Wales. But Howel as
soon as he could recover himself, and South Wales, intending the recovery of
that Principality, which he was now so well assured of, that he brought his
Wife with him to the Field, to let her see how easily he could conquer and
overcome Prince Gruffydh. (...) too great an assurance of Victory seldom proves
prosperous, which Howel presently experienced; for Gruffydh meeting with him at
Pencadair, gave him so warm an Entertainment, that he was forced presently to
take his Heels, which however could not so well secure him, but that he was
narrowly pursued, and his Wife who was to be entertained with the Conquest of
Gruffydh, on the contrary, saw her self taken Prisoner by him, and forced to
comply so far to his humor, as to be his Concubine.

The same time Harold King of England died, and was succeeded by his Brother
Hardycnute, a Prince very famous for Hospitality, and a great lover of good
Cheer, having his Table covered four times a day, with great plenty and variety
of Dishes, with other Superfluities for all Comers. But he likewise dying at
Lambeth after two Years reign, the English agreed to send for Alfred the eldest
Son of Edelred from Normandy, and to make him King. This Message by no means
pleased Earl Godwyn, a Man of great sway now in England; who knowing Alfred to
be a person of greater spirit than to permit him to domineer as he pleased,
endeavored all he could to dissuade the English from sending for Alfred. He
showed them how dangerous it was to permit a warlike Nation to take root in
their Country, and how well Alfred was accompanied with Normans, to whom he had
promised the chief Places and Rule of the Kingdom; by which and other like
Insinuations he so disgusted the English Nobility against the Normans, that to
diminish their number, they put every tenth Man to death. But seeing this was
not sufficient, they acted the same part over again, and tythed them the second
time; and being highly enraged against the Normans, they lead Alfred, who had
brought them over, from Gilford, where this Execution was committed, to
Gillingham, where having put out his Eyes, they removed him to Ely, and there
at length pitifully murdered him. Then they sent for Edward out of Normandy,
and made him King, who according to his promise to Earl Godwyn, married ^is
Daughter Edith, a Lady much commended not only for Beauty, Modesty, and other
feminine Qualifications, but also beyond what is requisite for a Woman,
Learning. But King Edward did not deal so favorably with her Brother Swane,
Son to Earl Godwyn, who upon some Distaste was banished England, and thereupon
forced to betake himself to Baldwyn Earl of Flanders, by whom he was very
honorably received.

England were succeeded by others of no less consequence in Wales. For Howel,
not brooking to be kept so shamefully out of his Kingdom, returns again the
third time into South Wales, where he had not continued long, but a great
number of Strangers landed in the West of Wales, and advancing farther into the
Country, pillaged and destroyed all places they came to Howel, tho desirous to
reserve his Army to fight with Prince Gruffydh, yet could not behold his
Country so miserably wasted and overrun by Strangers; and thinking moreover,
that by so charitable an Action he should win the universal Love of the
South Wales Men, drew up his Forces against them, and overtaking them at Pwll
Fynach, forced them with much loss, to retire to their Ships; which Action was
called in Welsh, Gwaith Pwll Fynach. At the same time Conan the Son of Iago ap
Edwal, who was forced for fear of Prince Gruffydh to flee to Ireland, with the
Forces of Alfred King of Dublin, whose Daugher named Ranulph he had married,
landed in North Wales; and having by some treacherous Stratagem taken Gruffydh,
triumphantly carried him Prisoner toward his Ships. This unhappy accident
being discovered, and publicly known, the North Wales Men did rise on a
sudden, and so unexpectedly overtook the Irish, that they easily recovered
their Prince, and drove his Enemies with great slaughter to their Ships; who,
without any farther consultation, were glad to strike sail with Conan for
Ireland. And now Wales, both North and South, is free from all foreign
Invasion, and Howel, as yet too weak to dispute his Title with Gruffydh; so
that Howel the Son of Owen Lord of Glamorgan, a Man of great Quality and Esteem
in Wales. But as Howel could call in his Danes, to whom he added all the Forces
he could raise in South Wales; he intended presently to march against Prince
Gruffydh. But he being aware aforehand to what end those Levies were designed,
prepared against the ensuing storm; and to avert the War from his own Country,
marched courageously to South Wales, not fearing to face an Enemy whom he had
shamefully vanquished twice already. Both Armies being joined, Gruffydh easily
overcame, and pursued Howel as far as the Springhead of the River Towy, where
after a long and a bloody Fight, Howel was at last slain, and his Army so
universally routed, that few escaped with their Lives. But though Howel was
dead, yet there remained still more Pretenders to the Principality of
South Wales; so that Gruffydh was in no great prospect to enjoy the same
peaceably: For as soon as it was published that Howel's Army was defeated, and
himself slain; Rytherch and Rhys the Sons of Rytherch ap Iestyn put in their
claim to South Wales in right of their Father, who had once enjoyed the
Sovereignty of that Country. And in order to the recovery of the same, they
drew together a great Army, consisting partly of Strangers and partly of such
as they could raise in Gwentland and Glamorgan, and marched to fight with
Gruffydh. The Prince according to his usual manner detracted no time, but
animating and solacing his Soldiers with the remembrance of their former
Victories and Conquests, bid the Enemies battle, which proved so very bloody
and terrible, that nothing could part them beside the darkness of the Night.
This Battle so tired and tamed both Armies, that neither was very desirous of
another Engagement, and so one being unwilling to set upon the other, they both
agreed to return to their own Habitations. The same time Joseph Bishop of Teilo
or Llandaf died at Rome. But both Armies being separated, Prince Gruffydh
enjoyed a quiet and unmolested Possession of all Wales for about Two Years;
after which, the Gentry of Ystrad Towy treacherously slew 140 of the choice of
his Army, which he took in so high an indignation, that to revenge their death
he destroyed all Dyfed and Ystrad Towy.

About the same time, Lothen and Hyrling two Danish Pirates, with a great number
of Danes, landed at Sandwich, and having plundered the Town, returned again to
their Ships, and sailed for Holland, where they sold the Booty they had taken,
and then returned to their own Country. Shortly afterward Earl Swayn came out
of Denmark with Eight Ships, and returned to England, and coming to his Fathers
House at Pevenese, humbly requested of him, and his Brothers Harold and Tostie,
to endeavor his reconciliation with the King. Earl Beorned too promised to
intercede for him, and going to Swayn's Fleet to sail to Sandwich, where the
King then lay, he was by the way most treacherously and ungratefully murdered,
and his Body cast upon the shore, which lay there exposed, till his Friends
heating of the Fact, came and carried it to Winchester, and buried it by the
Body of King Cnute, ^eorned's Uncle. Swayn having committed this most testable
Murder, put himself again under the Pro^^ction of the Earl of Flanders, not
daring to show (...) Face in England, till his Father by earnest Medi^^on
wrought his Peace with the King.

This Year Conan the Son of Iago raised again an ^^my of his Friends in
Ireland, and sailed toward ^ales, purposing to recover his Inheritance in
(...) Country. But when he was come near the ^^lch Coast, there suddenly arose
such a violent ^^^rm, that his Fleet was presently scattered, and ^^st of his
Ships drowned, which rendered this Expe^^^ion ineffectual. About the same time,
Robert Arch^^^hop of Canterbury impeached Earl Godwyn and his (...) Swayn and
Harold of Treason, and the Queen (...) Adultery, and upon the account of their
non-^^^earance when cited before the Peers at Gloucester, (...) Queen was
divorced, and Godwyn and his Sons ^^nished, who with his Son Swayn fled to
Flanders, (...) Harold to Ireland. But these unlucky Clashings, ^^d the many
Troubles that ensued thereupon, hap^^^ed upon this occasion. Eustace Earl of
Bologne be^^^ Married to Goda the King's Sister, came over this ^a^ to England
to pay King Edward a Visit, and in (...) return to Canterbury, one of his
Retinue forcibly ^^manding a Lodging, provoked the Master of the ^^use so far,
as by Chance or Anger to kill him. Eu^^^e upon this Affront returns back to the
King, and (...) the insinu^tions of the Archbishop, makes a loud ^^mplaint
against the Kentish-men; to repress whose ^^olencies, Earl Godwyn is commanded
to raise For^^^, which he refusing to do, for the Kindness he bore (...) his
Countrymen of Kent, the King summons a ^^rliament at Gloucester, and commands
Godwyn to ^^pear there. But he mistrusting either his own ^use, or the Malice
of his Adversaries, gathered a ^^werful Army out of his own and his Sons
Earl^^ms, and marched toward Gloucester, giving out ^^^t their Forces were to
go against the Welsh, who ^^^ended to invade the Marshes. But King Edward ^^^ng
satisfied by the Welsh that they had no such Design in hand, commanded Godwyn
to dismiss his A^my, and to appear himself to answer to the Articles exhibited
against him. Godwyn refusing to obey, the Ki^^ by the Advice of Earl Leofrick,
summoned an Asse^bly at London, whither a great Number of Forces a^rived from
Mercia, which Godwyn perceiving, and wi^^al, finding himself unable to
withstand the King*^ proceedings, privately retired with his Sons out (...) the
Kingdom, and fled into Flanders. Whereupon the King issued out an Edict,
proclaiming Godw^^ and his Sons Outlaws, and then confiscating th^^^ Estates,
bestowed them upon others of his Nobili^^ And to pursue his Displeasure the
farther, he Div^^ced his Queen Edith, Earl Godwyn's Daughter, a^^ committed her
to a Cloister, where in a mean Condition she spent some part of her Life. In
the dist^^bution of the forfeited Estates, Adonan obtained (...) Earldoms of
Devon and Dorset, and Algar the S^^ of Leofrick, that of Harold. But Godwyn
could (...) patiently behold his Estate bestowed upon another and therefore
having hired some Men and Ships (...) Flanders, he sailed to the Isle of Wight,
where a^^^^ that he had made a sufficient havoc, he put in (...) Portland,
which he treated after the same man^^^ The same time Harold having sailed from
Ireland (...) length met with his Father, and then with their un^^^^ Navy, they
burnt Preveneseny, Romney, Heath F^^^ston, Dover and Sandwich, and entering the
Th^^^^ they destroyed Cheppey, and burnt the King's Ho^^ at Middletown. Then
they sailed up the River ^^wards London, where the King's Army being rea^^ to
oppose them, a Treaty of Peace was by the me^ of Bishop Stigand agreed upon,
which proved so ^^fectual of Godwyn's side, that the King received (...) again
to his Favor, restored him and Sons to all the Estates, re-called the Queen,
and banished the Ar^^bishop, with all the Frenchmen who had been p^^moters of
that unhappy Suspicion the King had en^^^tained of them.

About this time, Rhys Brother to Gruffydh Pr^^^^ of Wales, who by several
Irruptions upon the Borde^^ (...) considerably gauled and damaged the English,
^^s taken and put to Death at Bulendun, whose ^^^d being cut off, was presented
to the King, then Gloucester. But he received better News some time (...) from
the North, for Siward Earl of Northumber^^^d having sent his Son against
Macbeth King of ^^gland vanquished the Scots, tho not without the (...) of his
Son, and many others both English and ^^nes. But Siward was not cast down at
his Son's ^^^th, but enquiring whether he received his Death's ^^nd before or
behind, and being assured that it (...) before, replied, He was very glad of
it, for he ^^d not wish his Son to die otherwise. After this ^tory, King Edward
marched in Person to Scotland, and having again overcome Macbeth in Battle,
made the whole Kingdom of Scotland Tributary the Crown of England. The next
year, Earl ^^^^yn sitting with the King at Table, sunk down ^^d of a sudden,
being choked, as it is thought, in ^^llowing a morsel of Bread; whose Earldom
the ^^ng bestowed upon his Son Harold, and his upon ^^gar Earl of Chester.

To this time is referred the Original of the Ste^^rds in Scotland, which being
a remarkable passage, (...) in a great measure dependant upon the Affairs (...)
the Welsh, is requisite to be here recorded. Mac^^^h King of Scotland having
caused Bancho a Noble^^n of that Kingdom to be inhumanly murdered; ^ence
Bancho's Son, to avoid the like Cruelty to ^^^self, fled to Gruffydh ap
Lhewelyn Prince of Wales. ^o taking a very great liking to his Person, and
^^thal commiserating his Condition, showed him all ^^e Respect and Kindness
possible. But Fleance had (...) continued long with Gruffydh when he fell
ena^^red upon the Prince's Daughter, and having ob^^^ed: her Good Will, without
any regard had to ^^r Father's Civility toward him, abused her so far (...) to
beget her with Child. Gruffydh being ac^^ainted with the Matter of Fact, so
hainously re^^^ted the Affront, that he occasioned Fleance to be ^^^in, and
treated his Daughter most servilely for prostrating her Chastity, especially to
a Strang^^ However, she was in a short time delivered of a S^^ whose Name was
Christened Walter; a Child, w^^ in his Youth expressed very great hopes, and in
(...) probability like to make a very considerable M^^ which happened according
to expectation. But (...) first Original of his future Greatness happened upon
a very accidental occasion; being reproached of (...) stardism by one of his
Fellow Companions, he (...) it in so unpardonable a dudgeon, that nothing (...)
satisfy his Revenge, but the Life of the Aggre^^^^ Being upon this Mischance
afraid to undergo the ^^nishment of the Law, he thought it safe to fly (...)
Scotland, where falling in Company with ce^^^^^ English Men who were come
thither with Qu^^^ Margaret Sister to Edgar Edeling, he behaved him^^^^ so
soberly and discreetly, that he won the Favor (...) good Character of all that
knew him. But his (...) daily increasing, he grew at length to that height
(...) Reputation, as to be employed in the most inw^^^ Affairs of the
Commonwealth, and at last was ma^^ Lord Steward of Scotland, from which Office
(...) Posterity retained the Surname of Steward, the Ki^^ of Scotland of that
Name, with several other F^^lies of Quality in that Kingdom being descended
(...) him.

But to return to England, Siward the worthy (...) of Northumberland died about
this time of the Bloo^ Flux, a Man of a rough Demeanor, and a m^^^ Soldierly
Temper, as he plainly manifested at (...) point of Death. For bewailing his
Misfortune (...) had escaped so many dangerous Engagements (...) withal
disdaining to die so effeminately in Bed, (...) caused himself to be completely
Armed, and a^^^ (...) were in Defiance of Death, presently expired in Martial
Bravery. But his Son being too young, (...) King bestowed his Earldom upon
Tosty the Son (...) Earl Godwyn.

Wales had been now a long time quiet, and (...) of all troubles both abroad
and at home, but it co^^^ not be expected that such a Life should prove du^^b^^
(...), but something or other would create New Com^^tions and Disturbances.
Gruffydh Son to Rytherch ap ^^yn having recruited and recovered himself after
the (...) Blow he received from Prince Gruffydh, must needs ^^^ture another
trial for the Principality of South Wales. (...) Prince protracting no time,
speedily marched a^^^ him, and both Armies being joined, Gruffydh (...)
Ry^herch was easily vanquished, and in fine, slain. (...) the troubles of the
Welsh did not end with him, (...) Alg^^ Earl of Chester being convicted of
Treason* (...) thereupon banished the Kingdom, fled to Gruffydh (...) of Wales,
requesting his Aid against King ^^^ard who repeating the frequent Wrongs he had
(...) at the hands of the English, by upholding (...) Enemies, against him,
gladly embraced the Op^^^tunity, and promised him all imaginable Support, ^^d
thereupon assembling his Forces, he entered with (...) into Hereford shire, and
advancing into the ^^^^try, within two Miles of the City of Hereford, (...)
were opposed by Randulph Earl of that Coun^^^ (...) boldly gave them Battle.
The Fight con^^^^^^ very dreadful and dubious for some hours, till (...)
Gruffydh so encouraged his Soldiers with the ^^^^mbrance of their former
Victories over the (...), that they fell on a main, and easily dis^^^^red
Randulph, and slew the best part of his Army. ^^terwards they pursued their
Chase to the Town, (...) having made all the waste and havoc they were ^^^e,
they laid the Town it self in ashes, and so re^^^ned home triumphantly, laden
with rich Booty (...) Plunder. King Edward receiving notice of this (...)
presently gathered a great Army at Gloucester ^^der the Conduct of Harold Earl
Godwyn's Son, ^o courageously pursuing the Enemies, entered into ^ales, and
encamped beyond Stradelwyd. But Gru^^dh and Algar dreading to oppose him,
retired fur^^^r into South Wales, of which Harold being certified, (...) one
part of his Army behind with Orders to ^^ght, if occasion offered, and with the
other passed (...) Hereford, which he fortified with a strong Wall ^^^^nd the
Town. Gruffydh perceiving his undaunted Industry, after many Messages concluded
a Pe^^^ with Harold at a place called Biligelhag, by w^^^^ Articles Algar was
pardoned by the King, and ^^stored to his Earldom of Chester. But he did (...)
continue long in the King's Favor, for about (...) years after, upon
Conviction of Treason he was ^gain banished the Land, so that he was forced to
(...) take himself to his old Friend Gruffydh Prince (...) Wales, by whose Aid,
and a Fleet from Norway, (...) spite of the King he was restored to his
Earld^^ But King Edward was sore offended with the Pri^^^ of Wales for
harboring Traitors, and therefore (...) be Revenged upon him, he dispatched
Harold (...) with an Army to North Wales, who coming (...) Ruthlan, burnt the
Prince's Palace there, and his (...) that lay in the Harbor, and then returned
to (...) King at Gloucester.

This year Edward the Son of Edmund Ironside, (...) was sent for out of
Hungary, being designed Succession the Crown came to England, but in a short
time (...) his coming died at London, leaving behind him (...) Son called Edgar
Edeling, and a Daughter na^^^ Margaret, who was afterward Queen of the (...)
and Mother to Maud the Wife of Henry the f^^^^ Roderic Son to Harold King of
Denmark came with a considerable Army (...) Wales, and being kindly received by
Prince Gruff^^^ united his Power with the Welsh, and so entered (...) England,
which they cruelly harassed and destroy^^ But before they could advance any
considerable ^^stance, Roderic was compelled to Sail for Denmark and so
Gruffydh returned laden with Spoils (...) Wales. The same time Harold Earl
Godwyn's (...) sailing to Flanders, was driven by force of Wea^^^ to Land at
Poytiers, where being seized upon, (...) was brought before William Bastard
Duke of N^^mandy, to whom he declared the reason of his V^^age, that it was
purposely to tender him his Ser^^^^ in the Affairs of England; and so taking an
Oath, (...) to Marry the Duke's Daughter, and after the Death (...) Edward to
secure the Kingdom of England for h^ (...) was honorably dismissed. Upon his
return to England, by the persuasions of Caradoc the Son of ^ruffydh ap
Rytherch, himself with his Brother Tosty, ^iled a great Army and entered into
South Wales, which they destroyed after that manner, that the Welsh were glad
to deliver up Hostages for the ^ayment of the ancient Tribute, which afore-time
^hey were used to pay. Gruffydh hearing of the In^lencies of the English in
South Wales, made all pos^^ble haste and preparation to oppose them, but all
(...) no purpose; Harold having already treacherously ^^ed some of Gruffydh's
nearest Friends to Murder (...), who watching their opportunity, executed their
^icked Design and brought his Head to Harold. Gruffydh being dead, Harold by
King Edward's Orders, ^^pointed Meredith Son of Owen ap Edwyn Prince (...)
South Wales, and the Government of North Wales (...) Blethyn and Rywa^hon the
Sons of Co^fyn, Brothers (...) the Mother side to Prince Gruffydh, and who
pro^ably for the desire of Rule, were accessory to the Murder of that Noble
Prince. This Gruffydh ap Lhe^^^yn enjoyed the Principality of Wales for the
space of thirty four years; a Prince of incomparable Ver^^^ both Wise and
Valiant, Beloved of his Subjects and Formidable to his Enemies, in all his
Actions he ^ehaved himself Great and Princely; and having Demanded his Country
so bravely against all Foreign Opposition; he was far unworthy of that
treacherous and cruel Death, which his unkind Subjects and un^atural Friends
bestowed upon him. He left Issue ^ut ^^e Daughter called Nest, abused first by
Flea^ce ^on of B^ncho, and afterward married to Trahaern ^p Caradoc Prince of
North Wales.

Blethyn and Rywalhon.
AFter the deplorable Murder of Prince Gruffy^^ Meredith the Son of Owen ap
Edwyn, who a^cording to some, was Son to Howel Dha, did take (...) on him, as
it is said, the Government of South-Wa^^^ and Blethyn and Rywalhon the Sons of
Confyn, h^^ Brothers to Gruffydh, as descended from Augbo^ Daughter to Meredith
sometime Prince of Wal^^ entered upon the Principality of North Wales; C^^^^
the Son Iago ap Edwal the right Heir to that Cro^^ being then with his
Father-in-Law in Ireland. T^^ partition of Wales fell much short of the
expectation of Caradoc ap Gruffydh ap Rytherch, who b^ing the chief promoter of
Harold's making an ^^pedition against Gruffydh ap Lhewolyn, made no q^stion to
attain to the Government of South Wales, ^^case Gruffydh got the worse. But it
happened othe^wise; Harold being sensible of Caradoc's Subtilty a^^ Knavery,
and doubting whether if he was ma^^ Prince of South Wales, he could obtain a
certain Lo^^^ship nigh Hereford, which he had a longing mind^ made a
Composition with Meredith ap Owen for (...) said Lordship, and created him
Prince of South-Wal^^ and on the contrary banished Caradoc out of (...)
Country. Harold having obtained his Request, bu^ a very magnificent House at a
place called Portas^^ in Monmouth-shire, and storing it with great quantity of
Provision, splendidly entertained the King who honored him with a Visit. This
was by a means pleasing to Tofty, to see his younger Brother in greater Esteem
and Favor with the King th^^ himself, and having concealed his displeasure for
(...) time, could not forbear at length but discover (...) grievance. For one
day at Windsor, while Har^^ reached the Cup to King Edward, Tosty ready to bur^
for Envy that his Brother was so much respected beyond himself, could not
refrain to run furiously upon him, and pulling him by the Hair, dragged him to
the Ground, for which unmannerly Action, the King forbad him the Court. But he,
with continued Rancour and Malice rides to Hereford, where Harold had many
Servants preparing an Entertainment for the King, and setting upon them with
his Followers, ^^opped off the Hands and Legs of some, the Arms and Heads of
others, and threw them into the Buts of Wine and other Liquors, which were put
in for the King's drinking, and at his departure charged the Servants to
acquaint him, That of other fresh Meats he might carry with him what he
pleased, but for ^ince he should find plenty provided ready for him; for which
barbarous Offense, the King pronounced a Sentence of perpetual Banishment upon
him. But Saradoc ap Gruffydh gave a finishing stroke to Harold's House, and the
King's Entertainment at Portascyth; for coming thither shortly after Tosty's
departure, to be revenged upon Harold, he killed all the Workmen and
Laborers, with all the Servants he could find, and utterly defacing the
Building, carried away all the Costly Materials which with great Charges and
Ex^ence had been brought thither to beautify and adorn the Structure. Soon
after which, the Northumbrians who could not endure the Insolences of the two
Brothers Harold and Tosty, who bearing an uncontroul^ble sway in the Kingdom,
were used to practice most hellish Villainies to encompass any Man's Estate that
displeased them,) in a Tumult at York, beset the Palace of Tosty, and having
pillaged his Treasure, ^^ew all his Family, as well Englishmen as Danes. Then
adjoining to themselves the People of Lincoln, Nottingham and Derby shire, they
elected Marcher the Son of Earl Algar their General, to whom came his Brother
Edwyn with a considerable number of Forces, and a great, party of Welsh men.
Then they marched in an hostile manner to Northampton, where Harold met them,
being sent by the King to know their Demands; to whom they laid open their
Grievances, and the Cruelty of Tosty's Government, and at last, with an
absolute refusal of admitting him again, desired that Marcher should be
appointed Earl over them, which the King upon the reasonable Complaints of
Injuries done by Tosty, easily granted, and willingly confirmed Marcher's
Title. Whereupon they peaceably returned back to the North, and the Welsh with
several Prisoners and other Booties got in this Expedition, returned to Wales.

Edward died, and was buried at Westminster, being the last King of the Saxon
Blood before the Conquest that Governed the Kingdom of England, which from
Cerdic King of the West Saxons had continued 544, and from Egbert the first
Monarch, 171 Years. Edward being dead, the next debate was about an Election of
a Successor, Edgar Edeling being set up by some, as lawful Heir to the Crown,
which Harold as being a Person of greater Power and Authority in the Kingdom,
much wealthier and better befriended, presently thwarted, and brought Matters
so cunningly about, that himself was chosen King, without any regard observed
to the Oath and Promise he had formerly made to William Duke of Normandy. Duke
William upon notice of Harold's advancement, how that he had accepted of the
Crown of England contrary to the Articles between them, convened together his
Nobles, and laid before them the several Wrongs and Affronts be had received at
the Hands of Harold, as the Death of his Cousin Alfred, the Banishment of
Archbishop Robert, Earl Odan and all the Normans, and lastly the Breach of his
Oath and Promise. Then he declared to them the Pretense he had to Claim the
Crown of England, that Edward had given him formerly an absolute Promise in
Normandy, that if ever he enjoyed the English Crown, William should be his
Heir; which Title, though in it self weak and insignificant served William's
purpose well enough to make an Expedition against an Intruder. Duke William's
Pretense seemed plausible enough to the Norman Nobility, but the Difficulty of
the Undertaking and the Danger of this Expedition was something perplexive, and
made them less inclinable to encourage so precipitous an Undertaking; which
they the more disliked upon the persuasion of William Fitzosbert the Duke's
Sewer, whom they pitched upon to deliver their thoughts as to the Expedition,
unto the Duke. But he instead of dissuading him from this Voyage, politickly
declared that himself with all his Power were ready to live and die with him in
this Expedition, which the rest hearing, could not but offer the Duke their
Service in the same manner; and so all things were prepared for an Invasion of
England. In the mean while Tosty full of Indignation at his Brother's
advancement to the Crown, entered the River Humber with forty Sail, but meeting
with Earl Edwyn who came to oppose him, he was forced after a considerable
Encounter to bear off, and secure himself by flight. But meeting with Harold
King of Norway upon the Coast of Scotland, coming for England with 300 Sail, he
joined his Forces with Harold, and so both together entering the Humber, they
landed their Army and marched to York, where the Earls Edwyn and Marcher
unsuccessfully gave them Battle. Having pillaged and destroyed that City, they
passed on to Stamford-Bridge, and there met with King Harold, who with a well
disciplined Army was come to stop their farther carreer. After a long and a
terrible Fight, and much bloodshed on both sides, the Norwegians began at last
to give back, which the English perceiving, sell on so manfully, that few or
none escaped with their Lives, Harold and Tosty being also slain upon the spot.
One of the Norwegians is deservedly recorded for his incomparable Exploits
performed in this Battle, who with incredible Valor maintaining the Bridge
against the whole Strength of the English Army for above an hour with his
single Resistance delayed their Victory, and having slain a great number of his
Enemies, he seemed invincible, till in the end, no one daring to grapple with
him fairly, he was run through with a Spear from under the Bridge, and so by
his fall, a Passage was opened for pursuit to complete the Victory. King Harold
over-joyed with this Success, triumphantly entered into York, and whilst he was
making merry with his Nobles at a sumptuous Feast, News came that Duke William
of Normandy was safely landed at, and began to Fortify himself in Hastings,
with which Tidings being no way dashed, as fearing nothing after his late
Victory, he forthwith marched toward him, and as soon as he was arrived in
Sussex, without any consideration of the Fatigue his Army had underwent in
their March, bid William Battle. The Duke dividing his Army into five
Battalions, made a long harangue to his Soldiers, wherein he repeated and
commended the Noble Acts of their Ancestors the Danes and Norwegians, who had
perpetually vanquished the English and French, and other Nations, as many as
they had to do with; how that themselves being well Horsed and Armed, were now
to engage with a People void of both, who had no other Defense to trust to than
the nimbleness and swiftness of their Heels. Both Armies being joined upon the
14th. of October, Duke William after some hours Engaging, ordered his Army so
to retire, as if they seemed to fly, which the English perceiving, broke their
Ranks in haste of pursuing the supposed Chase, which falling out according to
the Duke's expectation, he sent in a fresh supply of Normans, who falling upon
the confused Battalions of the English, easily overcame them, and Harold
receiving first a Wound by an Arrow, was at length slain, and then both the
Field and the Victory was left to the Normans. The day being thus won, William
from this time called the Conqueror, went strait to London, where he was
received with all possible Formality, and upon Christmas Day solemnly Crowned
King of England. This change and Alteration in England, was before
prognosticated by a Comet which appeared in the Spring of this Year, upon which
a certain Poet made the following Verses; Anno milleno, sexageno quoque seno,
Anglorum metae stammas censere Cometae.


King William having established himself in the England, passed over the next
Year to Normandy, so to settle Affairs there, as afterward they might have no
need of his presence. In the mean while Edgar Edeling taking Avantage of his
absence, returned from Scotland to York, being declared King by the Inhabitants
of that Country, who had already slain Robert, upon whom William had bestowed
that Earldom with 900 of his Men. But the King upon his return from Normandy,
presently marched to the North, and having sufficiently revenged himself upon
the Inhabitants, by wasting and destroying their Country, chased Edgar to
Scotland again. The like Advantage Edric Sylvaticus the Son of Alfric Earl of
Mercia embraced, who refusing to own any Submission to the Conqueror, took the
opportunity of his departure to Normandy to fall foul upon such as were
appointed Vicegerents and Governors of the Kingdom in his absence. Whereupon
Richard Fitzscrope Governor of the Castle of Hereford, with the Forces under
his Command so bitterly gauled him, by wasting and consuming his Lands, and
carrying off the Goods of his Tenants, that he was compelled to desire Aid of
Blethyn and Rywalhon Princes of Wales, by whose help, to recompense the Loss he
had received, he passed into Hereford, and after that he had overrun and
pillaged the Country to Wyebridge, returned back with exceeding great Booty.
But no sooner were Blethyn and Rywalhon arrived in North Wales, but they
received News of a Rebellion raised against them by Meredith and Ithel the Sons
of Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn, who had drawn together a considerable number of Men,
upon pretense of recovering the Principality of North Wales, which they said
was fraudulently detained from them. Blethyn and Rywalhon did not delay to
march to find the Enemies, and meeting with them at a place called Mechain,
without any farther Ceremonies, set upon the Rebels, who behaved themselves so
gallantly, that after a Fight of several hours, they wanted nothing but Number
to complete the Victory. There fell in this Battle on the one side Prince
Rywalhon, and on the other Ithel, who being slain, Meredith was forced to give
Ground, and endeavor to save himself by flight, which could not secure him, he
being narrowly pursued by Blethyn, that in fine, he was glad to escape to the
Mountains, where for want of Victuals and other Necessaries, he quickly
perished, leaving Blethyn ap Confyn sole Prince of North Wales and Powis.
During these Welsh Disturbances, Swane King of Denmark and Osburn his Brother
with 300 Sail came up the Humber, and being joined by Edgar Edeling and Earl
Waltelfe, marched to York, and taking the Castle, disposed of their Forces to
Winter Quarters, betwixt the Rivers of Ouse and Trent. The King understanding
the Matter, posted to the North; whose coming, so dashed the Confederates, that
they quickly dispersed their Power, and the Danes escaped to their Ships, and
the King having taken Vengeance upon the rebellious Inhabitants of the Country,
and upon his submission, having pardoned Earl Waltelfe, returned back to London.

Blethyn ap Confyn.
Caradoc Son to Gruffydh ap Rytherch ap Iestyn all this while being sorely
dissatisfied that he could not attain to the Principality of South Wales,
invited over a great Number of Normans to whom he joined all the Forces he
could raise out of Gwentland and other Parts of Wales. Then setting upon Prince
Meredith who was far too weak to Encounter so considerable an Army, gave him an
easy overthrow near the River Rymhy, where Meredith was slain, and so Caradoc
obtained the Government of South Wales, which for a long time he had
endeavored sinistrously to encompass. He had sometime before procured Harold to
make an Invasion upon Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn, purposely that himself might arrive
at the Principality of South Wales; and failing then of his expectation, he now
invites over the Normans, not being willing to trust the English any more, by
reason that he had so ungratefully been balked by Harold: So that it seems he
cared not by what course, or by whose means he should gain his point; though it
were by the Ruin and Destruction of his Country, which hitherto he had
earnestly promoted. Being at length advanced to his long expected Government of
South Wales, (which though not recorded, seems yet very probable, by reason
that his Son Rytherch ap Caradoc enjoyed the same very soon after) he did not
enjoy this Honor long, but dying in a short time after his Advancement, left
to succeed him, his Son Rytberch ap Caradoc. At the same time that Caradoc
carried on this Rebellion in Wales, the Earls Edwyn, Marcher, and Hereward
revolted from the King of England; but Edwyn suspecting the success of their
Affairs, and determining to retire to Malcolm King of Scotland, in his Journey
thither was betrayed, and slain by his own Followers. Then Marcher and Hereward
betook themselves to the Isle of Ely, which though sufficiently fortified, was
so warmly besieged by the King, that Marcher and his Accomplices were in a
short time forced to surrender themselves up Prisoners; only Hereward made his
escape to Scotland: But the King followed him close; and after he had received
Homage of Malcolm King of Scotland, returned back to England; and after a short
stay here, passed over to Normandy, where he received Edgar Edeling again to
Mercy.

The next Year, the Normans having already tasted Wales; and having spoiled and
destroyed Dyfed and the Country of Cardigan, returned home with very great
Spoil; and the following Year sailed over again for more Booty. About the same
time, Bleythyd Bishop of S. David's died, and was succeeded by one Sulien. But
this was not all the Misfortune that befell the Welsh; for Radulph Earl of the
East Angles, together with Roger Earl of Hereford and Earl Waltelpe, entered
into a Conspiracy against King William, appointing the day of Marriage between
Radulph and Roger's Sister, which was to be solemnized in Essex; to treat of
and conclude their Design. Radulph's Mother was come out of Wales, and upon
that account, he invited over several of her Friends and Relations to the
Wedding; meaning chiefly by this seeming Affection, by their help and
procurement to bring over the Princes and People of Wales, to favor and assist
his Undertaking. But King William being acquainted with the whole Plot, quickly
ruined all their Intrigues; unexpectedly coming from Normandy, surprised the
Conspirators; only Radulph, who either doubted of the success of their Affairs,
or else had intimation given him of the King's landing, before hand took
shipping at Norwich, and fled to Denmark Waltelpe and Roger were executed, and
all the other Adherents; more particularly the Welsh, some of whom were hanged,
others had Blethyn ap Confyn Prince of Wales was basely and treacherously
murdered by Rhys ap Owen ap Edwyn and the Gentlemen of Ystrad Tywy, after he
had reigned 13 Years: A Prince of singular Qualifications and Virtues, and a
great Observer of Justice and Equity toward his Subjects; he was very liberal
and magnificent, being indeed very able, having a prodigious and almost an
incredible Estate, as appears by these Verses made upon him; Blethyn ap Confyn
bob Cwys
Ei hun bioedh hen Bowis.
He had four Wives, by whom he had Issue, Meredith by Haer Daughter of Gylhyn,
his first Wife; Lhywarch and Cadogan by the second; Madoc and Riryd by the
third; and Iorwerth by his last.

Trahaern ap Caradoc.
BLethyn being, as is said, traitorously Murdered, there was no regard had to
his Issue, as to their fight of Succession; but Trahaern ap Caradoc his
Cou^in-German being a Person of great Power and Sway ^n the Country, was
unanimously elected Prince of North Wales, and Rhys ap Owen with Rytherch ap
Caradoc did jointly govern South Wales. Trahaern indeed had none of the least
Pretense to that Principality, as having married Nest the only surviving Issue
of that great Prince, Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn; his two Sons Meredith and Ithel
being lately slain in their attempt against Blethyn and Rywalhon. But his Title
could not secure him in his Government as much as his possession, since there
was one still living, though not much regarded, who without any Dispute, was true
Heir and Proprietor of the Principality of North Wales. And this was Gruffydh
Son to Conan, Son to Iago ap Edwal, who being informed of the Death of Blethyn
ap Confyn, and the Advancement of Trahaern, thought this a proper time to
endeavor the Recovery of what was truly his Right, and out of which he had
been all this time most wrongfully excluded. Wherefore having obtained help in
Ireland, where he privately sojourned during the Reign of Blethyn ap Confyn,
from Encumalhon King of Vltonia, Ranalht and Mathawn two other Kings of that
Country, he sailed for Wales, and landed in the Isle of Anglesey, which he
easily reduced and brought to subjection. At the same time Cynwric ap Rywalhon,
a Nobleman of Maeler or Bromfield was slain in North Wales, but how, or upon
what account, is not known. But whilst Gruffydh ap Conan endeavors to
dispossess Trahaern out of North Wales, Gronow and Lhewelyn the Sons of Cadwgan
ap Blethyn having united their Forces with Caradoc ap Gruffydh ap Rytherch,
intended to revenge the Murder of their Grandfather Blethyn ap Confyn, upon
Rys ap Owen and Rytherch (...) Caradoc, the joint Rulers of South Wales. And
the marching confidently to find them, both Armies me^ together and fought at a
place called Camdhwr; when after a sore Engagement, the Sons of Cadwgan at
length obtained a glorious Victory. In North Wales the same time, Gruffydh ap
Conan having established his Possession of the Isle of Anglesey, intended to
proceed farther in the Continent of Wales; to which end, having transported his
Forces over the River, incamp^^^ in the neighboring Country of
Carnarvonshire, pr^posing to reduce North Wales by degrees. Traha^^ ap Caradoc
being informed of this Descent of Gr^fydh's, made all possible speed to prevent
his farther progress; and having made all necessary Preparation that the
shortness of the Opportunity would permit he drew up his Forces to Bronyr Erw,
where he gave Gruffydh battle, and in fine put him to a shamefu^ flight; so
that he was glad to retire back safe t^ Anglesey.

Rytherch ap Caradoc Prince of South Wales dyed, being murdered through the
unnatura^ Villainy of his Cosin-German Meyrchaon ap Rhys ap Rytherch; after
whom Rhys ap Owen obtained the so^^ Government of South Wales: But his
enjoyment o^ the whole Principality was not very lasting, and scarc^ Caradoc,
the Sons of Cadwgan thinking they might easily now foil and vanquish one,
seeing they had sometime ago victoriously overcome both Princes together, with
all the Forces they could raise, set upon Rhys again at a place called
Gwanyffyd; who not being able to endure their Number, was rou^ed and forced to
flee; however the Blow was not so mortal, but that Rhys gathered together new
Levies, by the help of which he was emboldened still to maintain himself in his
Principality. But Fortune which had advanced him to the Crown, seemed now to
frown at and cross all his Endeavors and Undertakeings, and being reduced to a
very weak condition in the (...) Battle, he was set upon by a fresh Enemy,
before (...) could have sufficient time to recover and recruit ^^self. For
Trahaern ap Caradoc Prince of North-^ales, perceiving the Weakness and
Inability of Rhys make opposition against any foreign Enemy that ^^^aded his
Territories, thought it now very feasible (...) obtain the Conquest of
South Wales, and then (...) annex it to his own Principality of North Wales.
^^ing egged on by these pleasant Imaginations, he dis^^^ched his Army to
South Wales, to fight with Rhys, (...) so with all the Forces he could possibly
levy, as lay^^g his whole Fortune upon the event of this Battle, ^^dly met him
at Pwlhgwttic; where after a tedious ^^ght on both sides, Rhys having lost the
best part of his ^^my, was put to flight, and so warmly pursued, that ^^er long
shifting from place to place, himself with his ^^other Howel fell at length
into the hands of Caradoc (...) Gruffydh, who put them both to death, in
revenge (...) the base Murder of Blethyn ap Confyn, by them ^^merly
transacted. The Principality of South Wales ^^ing thus vacant by the death of
Rhys ap Owen; Rhys ^^n to Theodor, ap Eineon, ap Owen, ap Howel Dha, ^^lawful
Heir to that Government, put in his Claim, which being very plain and evident,
so prevailed with ^^e People of the Country, that they unanimously ^^ected him
for their Prince; much against the expe^^tion of Trahaern ap Caradoc Prince of
North Wales. ^he next Year S. David's suffered greatly by Strangers, Abraham,
Bishop of that Sea, ^^ed; and then Sulien, who the Year before had ^^linquished
and resigned up that Bishopric, was ^ompelled to resume it.

The Government of all Wales, both North and ^^uth, had been now for a long
time supplied by Usur^ers, and forcibly detained from the right and legal
^nheritors; but Providence would suffer Injustice to ^eign no longer, and
therefore restored the rightful Heirs to their Principalities. Rhys ap Theodor
had actual possession of South Wales; and there wante^ no more at this time,
but to bring in Gruffydh ap C^nan to the Principality of North Wales; both the
Princes being indisputably right and lawful Heirs (...) their respective
Governments, as lineally descende^ from Roderic the Great, who was legal
Proprietor (...) all Wales. Gruffydh ap Conan had already reduced the Isle of
Anglesey; but not being able to levy a sufficie^ Army from thence to oppose
Trahaern, he invited o^ a great Party of Irish and Scots, and then with (...)
whole Army joined with Rhys ap Theodor Prince (...) South Wales. Trahaern in
like manner associating* himself Caradoc ap Gruffydh and Mailyr the Sons (...)
Rywalhon ap Gwyn his Cosin-Germans, the greatest a^^ most powerful Men then in
Wales, drew up his F^^ces together, with resolution to fight them. Bo^^ Armies
meeting upon the Mountains of Carno, a te^rible and a cruel Battle ensued
presently thereupon which proved the more fierce and bloody, by reas^^ that
both Parties resolutely referred their whole Fo^tune to the success of their
Arms; and Life wo^^^ prove vain if the Day was lost. But after a dis^^^ Fight
on both sides, the Victory fell at last to Gruffy^^ and Rhys, Trahaern with his
Cosins being all slain (...) the Field; after whose death Gruffydh took
possess^^^ of North Wales; and so the Rule of all Wales, af^^^ a tedious
interval, was again restored to the rig^^ Line. About the same time, Vrgency ap
Sitsy^^^^ Person of noble Quality in Wales, was treacherou^ murdered by the
Sons of Rhys Sais, or the Englis^man; by which Name, the Welsh were accustom^^
to denominate all Persons, as either had lived any co^siderable time in
England, or could fluently and han^somly speak the English Tongue.

Gruffydh ap Conan.
GRuffydh ap Conan being confirmed in the Principality of North Wales, and Rhys
ap Theodor in ^^^t of South Wales; there was no body that could ^^^ate them any
Molestation or Disturbance upon the ^^count of Right, which was unquestionably
just; that they quietly enjoyed for some time their re^^^ctive Dominions,
without apprehension of any other ^^^^etender. Indeed, it had seldom been known
before, ^^^t that one of the Princes was an Usurper; and par^^^ularly in
North Wales, where from the time of Ed^^^ Foel, none had legally ascended to
the Crown, ^^^cepting Edwal the Son of Meyric, eldest Son to ^^wal Foel; in
whose Line the undoubted Title of ^^rth-Wales lawfully descended. And the right
Line ^^^ng now restored in Gruffydh ap Conan, the same le^^lly continued to
Lhewelyn ap Gruffydh, the last ^^ince of the British Blood. But during these
Revo^^tions in Wales, some things memorable were transa^^ed in England; Malcolm
King of the Scots descen^^ng into Northumberland, ravaged and destroyed the
^ountry without Mercy, carrying away a great num^^r of Prisoners; after which
the Northumbrians fell ^^on Walter Bishop of Durham, whom they slew, to^^ther
with a hundred Men, whilst he sat keeping of ^^ourt, not dreaming of any such
treacherous Villainy. ^^he same time Robert Curthoys the Bastards eldest Son,
^^eing for some reason disgusted against his Father, and ^^t on by the
instigation of the King of France, en^^red Normandy with an Army, and claimed
it as his ^^ight; which King William being acquainted with, ^^ssed over to
Normandy, and meeting with his Son ^and to hand in Battle, was by him
overthrown. ^ut being returned from Normandy, he entered with (...) great Army
into Wales, and marching after the manner of a Pilgrimage as far as S. David's,
he offered a^^ paid his Devotion to that Saint, and afterward ^^ceived Homage
of the Kings and Princes of the Co^^try. About the same time the Tomb of Walwey
Ki^^ Arthurs Sister Son, a most valiant Person in his ti^^ and Governor of
that Country, from him cal^^^ Walwethey, was discovered in the Country of (...)
nigh the Sea-shoar, whose Body proved monstrou^^^ prodigious, being in length
about fourteen foot.

Madawc, Cadwgan and Riryd, the Son (...) Blethyn ap Confyn sometime Prince of
Wales, raise^ (...) Rebellion against Rhys ap Tewdor; and having dra^^ together
a great number of licentious and maleconte^ted People, thought to eject him out
of the Princip^lity of South Wales. Rhys had not Power and f^^ces enough to
oppose them; the Rebels Army incre^sing daily by the addition of the
discontented Mu^^^tude, who always rejoice at any new Commotion (...)
Disturbance; and therefore he was compelled to (...) to Ireland, where he
obtained a very considerable p^^^ of Irish and Scots, upon promise of a
sufficient R^ward, in case he was restored again to his Principali^^ Having by
this measure got a very sensible increase his former strength, he landed in
South Wales; t^^ News of whose arrived being blazed abroad, (...) Friends from
all quarters presently retired to him; that in a short time his Army became
numerous, a^^ able to confront the Enemy. The Rebels were se^sible how the
Princes Forces daily multiplied, a^^ therefore to prevent any farther addition,
they man all possible haste to force him to a Battle, which i^ a short time
after happened at Lhech y Creu, where the Rebels were vanquished; Madawc and
Riryd being slai^ and Cadwgan glad to save his Life by flight. Rhys having won
so signal a Victory, and fearing no farther Disturbance, dismissed the Irish
and Scots with great Rewards, who honorably returned to their ow^ David's; the
Shri^^ belonging to the Cathedral, being feloniously conveyed out of the
Church, all the Plate and other Utensi^^ were stolen, and only the Shrine left
empty behind. ^he same Year a Civil-War broke out in England, ^^d several
Armies in several parts of the Kingdom ^ere up in Arms at the same time, and
among the ^^st the Welsh, who entering into Gloucester and Wor^^ster Shires,
burnt and destroyed all before them, to ^^e Gate of Worcester. The King having
drawn his ^rmy together, proceeded against his Enemies by de^^ees, and falling
upon their separate Parties, without ^^y great difficulty, reduced all to
Obedience. With^^ Sulien, the most pious ^^d learned Person in Wales, dyed, in
the Eightieth ^ear of his Age, and in the Sixteenth Year of his Bi^oprick;
presently after whose death the Town of (...) David's suffered a more sensible
Calamity, being first ^undered, and afterward burnt by a company of Py^^ts,
who sorely infested the British Coasts. About ^^e same time also dyed Cadifor
the Son of Calhoyn lord of Dyfed, whole Sons Lhewelyn and Eineon mo^^d Gruffydh
ap Meredith to take up Arms against his ^overeign Prince Rhys ap T^wdor, with
whom they ^yned all the Forces they couly levy among their ^enants and
Dependants; then passing with their Ar^y to Lhandydoch, boldly challenged Rhys
to fight; ^ho thereupon gave them battle, and after a resolute ^ngagement of
both sides, the Rebels were at length ^orsted, and put flight, and then so
narrowly pursued, that Gruffydh ap Meredith was taken Prisoner, and in ^ne
executed as a Traitor: But Eineon made his ^scape, and not daring to trust
himself with any of ^is own Kindred, he fled to Iestyn ap Gurgant, Lord ^f
Morganwc, who was then in actual Rebellion against Prince Rhys. And to
ingratiate himself the ^hore in Iestyn's favor, he promised, upon condition ^f
the performance of certain Articles, one of which more especially was, That he
should receive his Daughter in Matrimony; That he would bring over ^o his aid a
considerable Body of Normans, with whom he was singularly acquainted, as having
served a long time in England. These Articles being agreed to and recorded,
Eineon posted to England, and in a little time brought matters so about, that
he prevailed with Robert Fitzhamon and Twelve more Knights, to lev^ Normans,
and to come to Wales t^ the protection and aid of Iestyn. The beginning of the
following Year they landed in Glamorganshire and were honorably received by
Iestyn, who joining his Power to theirs, marched to Prince Rhys his
Domininions, where, without the least show of Mercy to his own Countrymen, he
encouraged the Normans, by his own Example, to spoil and destroy all that came
before them. Prince Rhys was mightily grieved to fin^ his Country so
unmercifully harassed; and though a^ this time very ancient, being above 98
Years of age, he could not refrain but meet his Enemies; and having with all
possible speed raised a convenient Army; h^ met with them near Brecnock, where
after a terrible Fight, and a great slaughter on both sides, he was unhappily
slain. With him fell the Glory and Grande^^ of the Principality of South Wales,
being afterward rent in pieces, and divided into several parts and piece-meals
among these Norman Captains, as shall be by and by more particularly related.
Prince Rhys less Issue behind him by the Daughter of Rywalhon ap Co^fyn, two
Sons, Gruffydh and Grono, the latter of which was detained Prisoner by the King
of England; th^^ the Author of the winning of the Lordship of Glamagan,
affirms, that he was slain, together with his Father, in this Battle against
the Normans.

The Normans having received a sufficient Reward from Iestyn, upon the account
of their Service against Prince Rhys, returned to their Ships, in order to
their Voyage homeward. But before they could loose Anchor to sail off, Eineon
recalled them, being ungratefully affronted by Iestyn, who absolutely refused
to make good to him the Conditions which they had agreed upon, before the
Normans were invited to Wales. Upon this account, Eineon was so irreconcilably
incensed against Iestyn, that to be revenged upon him, he was willing to
sacrifice his native Country into the hands of strangers; and therefore
endeavored to persuade the Normans concerning the Fatness and Fertility of the
Country, and how easily they might conquer and make themselves Masters of it.
But he needed not many Arguments to persuade a People that were willing of
themselves, especially being encouraged thereto by a Person of some esteem in
the Country; whereupon, without any more Questions, they presently fell to
their business; and from Friends became unexpectedly Foes. Iestyn was much
surprised to find the Normans, whom he had but lately honorably dismissed from
his service, and as he thought, with Satisfaction, so soon become his Enemies;
but ^erceiving a Serpent in the Hedge, and Eineon so ami^ably great among them,
he quickly guessed at the ^eason, of which there was no other remedy left but
^o bewail the unnecessary Folly of his own Knavery* The Normans easily
dispossessed Iestyn of the whole Lordship of Glamorgan; the most pleasant and
fertile ^art of which they divided among themselves; lea^ing the more
mountainous and craggy ground to the ^hare of Eineon. The Knights who
accompanied Fitzhamon in this Expedition were, William de Lon^res or London;
Richard de Grena villa, o^ Greenfield; Paganus de Turberville; Robert de S.
Quintino, or Quin^n; Richard de Sywarde; Gilbert de Humfrevile; Ro^er de
Berkrolles; Reginald de Sully; Peter le Soore; John le Fleming; Oliver de S.
John; William de Ester^ing, or Strading. These Persons having distributed that
fair and pleasant Lordship among themselves, and ^onsidering that they were
much better provided for ^ere than they could be at home, settled in Glamorgan,
where their Posterity have continued to this time. And ^ere we may observe,
what a Train of Circumstances ^oncurr'd together, in favor of the Normans,
having ^ossession of this Lordship: For had not Eineon, being vanquished by
Prince Rhys, fled to Iestyn, rather ^han to another; or had not Iestyn been so
vain as to ^ttempt the Conquest of South Wales, and to that end ^onsented to
the Advice of Eineon; there had been ^o necessity of inviting the Normans at
all to Wales. And then, the Normans being arrived, had not Iestyn ^^ngenteely
violated his Promise, and refused to perform the Articles agreed upon between
him and Eineon; or, had not Eineon pursued so desperate a Revenge, but
satisfied his Passion upon Iestyn, without prejudice to his Country; the
Normans would have returned home with satisfaction, and consequently could
never have been Proprietors of that noble Country they then forcibly possessed.
And now again the Welsh experienced the dangerous Consequence of calling in a
foreign Nation to their aid; the Saxons had already dispossessed them of the
best part of the Island of Britain, and now the Norman^ seized upon a great
part of that small Country, which had escaped the Sovereignty and Conquest of
the En^lish. But here it will be necessary to lay down the state and condition
of this Lordship of Morgannwe o^ Glamorgan, and what share each particular
Knight obtained in the distribution of it.

The Lordship of Glamorgan reaches in length 2^ Miles, even from Rymny-Bridge
to the East, to P^^^ Conan Westward; and in breadth from Aberth^^ otherwise
Aberdaon on the South-part, to the Confines of Brecnockshire above Morleys
Castle, 22 Miles This being a Royal Lordship, the Lords thereof owing no other
Subjection than Obedience only to the Crown, assumed to themselves all the
Privileges of (...) regal Court, excepting only the pardoning of Criminals in
case of Treason. And not only Glamorgan but the several petty Lordships of
which it consisted namely, Sengennyth, Myscyn, Ruthin, Lhanbleth^^ Tir Iarlh,
Glyn Rothney, Avan, Neth, Coyty, Talava and Lantuit or Boviarton; exercised the
same Privelege of Jura Regalia, with this difference only, that in case of
wrong Judgment in these Courts, appe^^ might be made in the County Court of
Glamorgan which being superior to the rest, had power to reverse any Judgment
given in them. Within the Lordship were 18 Castles, and 36 Knights Fees,
besides the Town and Castle of Kynfig, the Town of Cowbridge or Pont Vaen, and
the Town and Castle of Caerdaf; in the latter of which the Lord of Glamorgan
chiefly resided, wherein the County-Cou^^ was monthly kept. The annual Revenue
of this Lordship amounted to a Thousand Marks; whereof Four Hundred was allowed
for the Fees and Sallary of the several Officers belonging to the same. This
Lordship of Glamorgan Robert Fitzhamon kept to himself; and the others he
distributed between his several Followers; namely, to William de Londres he
gave the Castle and Manor of Ogmore; to Richard Greenfield the Lordship of
Neth; to Pain Turberville that of Coyty; to Robert S Quintine Lhan Blechyan;
to Richard Syward Talavan; to Gilbert Humfrevile the Castle and Manor of
Penmarc; to Reginald Sully the Castle and Manor of Sully; to Roger Berkrolles
that of East Orchard; to Peter le Scor that of Pe^erton; to John Fleming that
of S. George; to John S. John that of Fonmon or Fenvon; and lastly, to William
le Esterling or Stradling that of S. Donats. But that these Knights should have
dependence upon, and might seem to hold their several Lordships and Estate from
him; Robert Fitzhamon appointed them their several Apartments in his Castle of
Caerdaf, where they were obliged to give their attendance at every Court-day,
which was monthly kept upon Monday.

But about the same time that Robert Fitzhamon took the Lordship of Glamorgan,
Barnard Newmarch a Nobleman likewise of Normandy, obtained by Conquest the
Lordship of Brecknock; and Henry de Newburgh Son to Roger de Bellemont, by the
Conqueror made Earl of Warwick, the Country of Gower. But Barnard Newmarch
gave the People of Wales some small Satisfaction and Content, by marrying Nest,
the Daughter also of Nest, Daughter to Lhewelyn ap Gruffydh Prince of Wales, by
whom he had Issue, a Son called Mahael. This worthy Gentleman being legally to
succeed his Father in the Lordship of Brecknock, was afterward disinherited by
the Malice and Baseness of his own unnatural Mother. The occasion was thus,
Nest happening to fall in admiration of a certain Knight, with whom she had
more than ordinary Familiarity, even beyond what she expressed to her own
Husband; Mahael perceiving her dissolute and loose Behavior, counseled her to
take care of her Fame and Reputation, and to leave off that scandalous Liberty
which she took; and afterward meeting casually her Gallant coming from her,
fought and grievously wounded him. Upon this, Nest to be revenged upon her Son,
went to Henry the First King of England, and in his presence took her corporal
Oath, that her Son Mahael was illegitimate, and not begot by Barnard Newmarch
her Husband, but another Person; by virtue of which Oath, or rather Perjury,
Mahael was disinherited, and his Sister, whom her Mother attested to be
legitimate, was bestowed by the King upon Milo, the Son of Walter Constable,
afterward Earl of Hereford, who in right of his Wife enjoyed the whole estate
of Barnard Newmarch Lord of Brecnock. Of this Milo it is reported, that telling
King Henry of a strange Accident which had occurred to him by Lhyn Savathan in
Wales, where the Birds upon the Pond at the passing by of Gruffydh the Son of
Rhys ap Theodor, seemed by their chirping to be in a manner overjoyed; The King
replied, It was not so wonderful; for although, says he, we have violently and
injuriously oppressed that Nation, yet it is manifestly known, that they are
the lawful and original Inheritors of that Country.

But whilst the Normans were thus carving for themselves in Glamorgan and
Brecnock, Cadogan ap Blethyn ap Confyn toward the end of April, entered into
Dyved, and having ravaged and destroyed the Country, returned back. But within
Eight Weeks after, there succeeded him a more fatal Enemy; for the Normans
landing in Dyved and Cardigan, began to fortify themselves in Castles and
other strong places, and to inhabit the Country upon the Sea-shoar, which
before was not in their possession. Indeed the Normans having by the connivance
of the Conqueror already got into their hands all the best Estates in England,
began now to spy out the Commodities of Wales; and perceiving moreover how
bravely Robert Fitzhamon and Barnard Newmarch had sped there, thought they
might as well expect the like fortune. Wherefore having obtained a Grant from
King William (who readily consented to their Request, because by this means he
killed two Birds with one Stone, procured to himself their utmost Service upon
occasion, and withal provided for them without any Charge to himself) they came
to Wales, and so entered upon the Estates appointed them by the King, which
they held of him by Knight Service, having first done Homage and sworn Fealty
for the same. Roger Montgomery Earl of Arundel did Homage for the Lordships of
Powis and Card began; Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester for Tegengl and R^fonioc,
together with all the Land lying upon the Sea shore to the River C^nwey;
Arnulph a younger Son of Roger Montgomery for Dyved; Barnard Newmarch for
Brecnock; Ralph Mortimer for Eluel; Hugh de Lacy for the Land of Ewyas; Eustace
Omer for Mold and Hapredale; and several others did the like Homage for other
Lands. But Roger Montgomery, who by the Conqueror was created Earl of Arundel
and Shrewsbury, entered in an hostile manner into Powys-land, and having won
the Castle and Town of Baldwyn, fortified it in his own right, and called it
Montgomery after his own Name. King William of England was now in Normandy, and
busily engaged in a War against his Brother Robert; by the advantage of whose
absence, Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales, and Cadogan ap Blethyn, who
now ruled in South Wales, with joint Forces entered into Cardigan and slew a
great number of Normans, whose Pride and excessive Cruelties toward the Welsh,
were altogether intolerable. But after sufficient execution there, being
returned home, the Normans sent for more Aid from England; which being arrived,
they thought to make a private in-road into North Wales, and so to be revenged
upon the Welsh. But their Design being happily discovered to Cadogan, he drew
up his Forces to meet them, and then unexpectedly setting upon them in the
Forest of Yspys, after a very warm Resistment of the Normans side, forced them
to retire by slight, and then triumphantly marching through Cardigan and Dyved,
he destroyed all the Castles and Fortifications in the Country, besides
Pembrock and Rydcors, which proved too strong, and impregnable.

Normans who inhabited the Country of Glamorgan, fell upon and destroyed the
Countries of Gwyr, Kidwely: and Ys^^ad Tywy, which they harrassed in such a
cruel manner, that they left them bare of any People to inhabit. And to
increase, as it was thought, the Miseries of the Welsh, King William Rufus
being informed of the great slaughter which Gruffydh ap Conan, and the Sons of
Blethyn ap Confyn had lately committed upon the English, as well within
Cheshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire, as within Wales;
entered the Country at Montgomery, which place the Welsh having sometime since
demolished, King William lately rebuilt. But the Welsh kept all the Passages
through the Woods and Rivers, and all other Streights so close, that the King
could effect nothing considerable against them; and therefore when he perceived
that his labor was but lost, in continuing in those Parts, he forthwith
decamped, and returned with no great Honor back to England. But this retreat
of King William was not altogether so favorable to the Interest of the Welsh,
as the death of William Fitz-Baldwyn, who was Owner of the Castle of Rydcors,
and did the greatest mischief and hurt to the South Wales Men of any other. He
being dead, the Garrison of Rydcors which was wont to keep the Welsh in
continual a we, forsook that place, and by that means gave opportunity to the
Inhabitants of Gwyr, Brecnock, Gwent, and Gwentlhwe, to shake off that
intolerable Yoke the Normans forced upon them, who after they had robbed them of
their Lands, kept them in perpetual subjection. But now William Fitz-Baldwyn
being dead, and the Garrison of Rydcors scattered, they ventured to lay violent
hands upon the Normans, who thought themselves free from all fear; and
prevailed so successfully, that they drove them all out of the Country, and
recovered their own ancient Estates. But the Normans liked that Country so
well, that they were resolved not to be so easily befooled out of what they had
with a great deal of Pains and Danger once possessed; and therefore having
drawn a great number of English and Normans to their aid, they were desirous to
venture another touch with the Welsh, and to return, if possible, to their once
ac^uir'd Habitations. But the Welsh so abhorred their Pride and tyrannical
Dominion over them when they were Masters, that they were resolved not to ^e
subject to such Tyrants again; and therefore they ^oldly met them at a place
called Celly Iarfawc, and ^et upon them so manfully, the very apprehension of
Servitude whetting their Spirits, that they put them ^o flight with great
slaughter, and drove them out of ^he Country. The Normans however were not so
absolutely routed with this Overthrow, but like a Fly in the night which
destroys it self in the Candle, they must needs covet their own Destruction;
their greediness egging them on to venture with few what was not practicable to
be effected by many. Therefore they came as far as Brecnock, with this absolute
^ow and Resolution, not to leave one living thing remaining in that Country.
But they fell short of their Policy, the People of the Country being removed to
a narrow Straight, to expect their passing through; whither the Normans being
advanced, they fell upon them, and killed a great number of them. About the
same time, Roger Montgomery Earl of Salop and Arundel, William Fitzeustace Earl
of Gloucester, Arnold de Harecourt, and Neal le Vicount, were slain by the Welsh
between Caerdaf and Brecnock; and Walter Eureux Earl of Sarum, Rosmer, and
Manti^ake; Hugh Earl of Gourney, were wounded, who afterward dyed in Normandy.
The Normans finding that they continually lost ground, thought it not advisable
to stay any longer; and therefore having placed sufficient Garrisons in those
Castles which they had formerly built, they returned with what speed they could
to England. But all the haste they did make, could not secure them from the
Fury of the Welsh; for Gruffydh and Ifor, the Sons of Ednerth ap Cadogan,
expected them privately at a place called Aberlhech, where falling unexpectedly
upon them; they slew the greatest part of their number, the rest narrowly
escaping safe to England. But the Norman Garrisons which were left behind,
defended themselves with a great deal of Bravery, till at last, finding no
prospect of Relief, they were forced for their own safety to deliver them up to
the Welsh, who, from that time, became again Proprietors of those Places which
the Normans had dispossessed them from. And this encouraged the Welsh to
undertake other things against the English; for immediately after this, certain
of the Nobility of North Wales, Vchthed the Son of Edwyn ap Grono by name,
together with Howel ap Grono, and the So^^ of Cadogan ap Blethyn of Powys-land,
passed by Cardigan into Dyved (which Country King William had given to Arnulph
Son to Roger Montgomery, who had built thereon the Castle of Pembrock, and
appointed Gerald de Windsore Governor of the same) and destroying all the
Country with Fire and Sword, excepting Pembrock Castle, which was impregnable,
they returned home with a great deal of Booty. In recompense of this, when the
Lords of North Wales were returned, Gerald issued out of the Castle, and
spoiled all the Country about S. David's; and after he had got sufficient
Plunder, and taken diverse Prisoners, returned back into the Castle.

William being returned from Normandy, and having heard how that the Welsh had
cut off a great number of his Subjects in Wales, gathered all his Power
together, and with great Pomp and Ostentation entered the Marches, resolving
utterly to eradicate the rebellious and implacable humor of the Welsh Nation.
But after all this Boast and seeming Resolution, he durst venture no farther
than the Marches, where having built some few Castles, he returned with no
greater Honor Hugh de Montgomery Earl of Arundel and Salop, by the Welsh ^^med
Hugh Goch, and Hugh Fras, or the sat, Earl (...) Chester, being invited by some
disaffected Welsh ^^rds, came into North Wales with a very great ^^my. Prince
Gruffydh ap Conan, and Cadogan ap ^^^thyn, perceiving themselves to be too weak
to ^^pose so numerous an Army, and what was worse, ^^^ng very suspicious of the
Fidelity and Honesty of ^^^ir own Forces, thought it their best way to take
(...) Hills and Mountains for their safety, where they ^^re like to remain most
secure from the Enemy. ^^en the English Army marched toward Anglesey, (...)
being come over against the Island, they built (...) Castle of Aberlhiennawc.
But Gruffydh and Ca^^an could no longer endure to see their Country ^^er run by
the English, and therefore they descend^^ from the Mountains, and came to
Anglesey, think^^g, with what Succors they should receive from ^^^land, of
which they were disappointed, to be able (...) defend the Island from any
attempt that should (...) made upon it. And now the whole Treason, and (...)
occasion of the English coming to Wales was ^^^covered; for Owen ap Edwyn, the
Prince his chief^^^ Counselor, whose Daughter Gruffydh had mar^^^d (having
himself also married Everyth the Daugh^^^ of Confyn, Aunt to Cadogan) upon some
private ^^rudge or other, called in the English into Wales, ^^d at this time
openly joined his Forces with ^^eirs, and led the whole Army over into
Anglesey. ^ruffydh and Cadogan finding how they were be^^ayed by their dearest
Friend, as they thought; for ^^^r of farther Treachery, judged it prudent to
sail ^^^vately for Ireland; after whose departure, the Eng^^^h fell cruelly to
work, destroying all they could ^^me at, without any respect to either Age or
Sex. and whilst the English continued in Anglesey, Mag^^s the Son of Harold,
lately King of England, came ^ver with a great Fleet, intending to lay faster
hold upon that Kingdom, than his Father had done, and (...) recover the same to
himself. But whilst he steered ^is Course thitherward, he was driven by
contrary Winds to the Coasts of Anglesey, where he would fain have landed, had
not the English Army kept him off. But in this Skirmish Magnus accidentally
wounded Hugh Earl of Salop with an Arrow in the Face, whereof he dyed; and then
of a sudden both Armies relinquished the Island, the English returning England,
appointing Owen ap Edwyn, who invited them over Prince of the Country. But Owen
did not enjoy the Principality long; for in the beginning of the following
Spring, Gruffydh ap Conan and Cadogan ap Blethyn returned from Ireland, and
having concluded a Peace with the Normans, for some part of their Lands in
Wales; Gruffydh remained in Anglesey, and Cadogan had Cardigan, with part of
Powys. But though Cadogan recovered his Estate, yet in a little while after he
lost his Son Lhewelyn, who was treacherously murdered by the Men of Brecnock:
at which time also dyed Rythmarch Archbishop of S. David's, the Son of Sulien,
being in the 43 Year of his Age; a Man of the greatest Piety, Wisdom, and
Learning, as had flourished a long time in Wales, excepting his Father, under
whose William Rufus, as he was hunting in the new Forest, was accidentally
stain with an Arrow, which one Walter Tyrrell shot at a Stag; and his eldest
Brother being then engaged in the Holy War, Henry his younger Brother, whom in
his lifetime he had nominated his Successor, was crowned in his stead. The
same Year, Hugh Earl of Chester, Grono ap Cadogan, and Gwyn ap Gruffydh
departed this life.

England; Robert de Belesmo, the Son of Roger de Montgomery Earl of Salop, and
Arnulph his Brother Earl of Pembrock, took up Arms against King Henry; which he
being informed of, sent them a very gracious Message to come before him, and
declare their Grievances, and the reason of their rising up in Arms against his
Majesty. But the Earls instead of appearing in Person, sent him flight and
frivolous Excuses, and in the mean while made all necessary Preparations for
the War, both by raising of Forces, and fortifying their Castles and strong
Holds. And to strengthen themselves the more, they sent rich Presents, and made
large Promises to Iorwerth, Cadogan, and Meredith, the Sons of Blethyn ap
Confyn; for to bring them to their side. Robert fortified four Castles, namely,
Arundel, Tekinhil, Shrewsbury, and Brugge; which last, by reason that Robert
built it without the consent of the King, was the chief occasion of this War;
and Arnulph fortified his Castle at Pembrock. After this, they entered in an
hostile manner into the Territories of the King of England, wasting and
destroying all before them. And to augment their strength, Arnulph sent Gerald
his Steward, to Murkart King of Ireland, desiring his Daughter in Wedlock;
which was easily granted, with the Promise too of great Succors and large
Supplies. King Henry, to put a stop to their bold Adventures, marched in person
against them; and laying siege to the Castle of Arundel, wan it without any
great Opposition; and quickly afterward the Castle of Tekinhill; but that of
Brugge, by reason of the situation of the place, and the depth of the Ditch
about it, seemed to require longer time and harder service; and therefore King
Henry was advised to send privately to Iorwerth ap Blethyn, promising him great
Rewards if he forsook the Earl's part, and came over to him; urging to him,
what Mischief Roger, Earl Robert's Father, and his Brother Hugh, had
continually done to the Welch-Men. And to make him the more willing to accept
of his Proposals, he promised to give him all such Lands as the Earl and his
Brother had in Wales, without either Tribute or Homage; which was a part of
Powys, Cardigan, and half Dyfed; the other part being in the possession of
William Fitz-Baldwyn. Iorwerth receiving these Offers, accepted of them very
gladly, and then coming to the King, he sent all his Forces to Earl Robert's
Lands, who having received very strict Orders, destroyed without Mercy every
thing they met with; and what made the Spoil the greater, Earl Robert upon his
rebelling against King Henry, had caused his People to convey all their Goods
to Wales, for fear of the English; not thinking how his Father's Memory sounded
among the Welsh. But when the News of Iorwerth's Revolt reached the Ears of the
Earl, Cadogan and Meredith, Iorwerth's Brothers; their Spirits began to faint,
as despairing any longer to oppose the King, since Iorwerth, who was the Person
of greatest strength in Wales, had left and forsaken them. Arnulph was gone to
Ireland to fetch home his Wife, and to bring over what succor his Father in
Law, King Murkart, could afford to send him; but he not coming in time, some
other Method was to be tried, how to get some Aid against the English. A little
before this Rebellion broke out, Magnus, Harold's Son, landed the second time
in the Isle of Anglesey, and being kindly received by Gruffydh ap Conan, he had
leave to cut down what Timber he had need for; and so returning to the Isle of
Man, which he had got by Conquest, he built there three Castles, and then sent
to Ireland to have the Daughter of Murkart in marriage to his Son, which being
obtained, he created him King of Man. Earl Robert hearing this, sent to Magnus
for Aid against King Henry; but receiving none, he thought it now high time to
look to his own Safety; and therefore he sent to the King, requesting that he
might quietly depart the Kingdom, in case he should lay down his Arms; which
the King having granted, he sailed to Normandy. And then King Henry sent an
Express to his Brother Arnulph, requiring him either to follow his Brother out
of the Kingdom, or to deliver himself up to his Mercy; and so Arnulph went over
also for Normandy. When the King was returned to London, Iorwerth took his
Brother Meredith Prisoner, and committed him to the King's custody; his other
Brother Cadogan having reconciled himself beforehand, to whom Iorwerth gave
Cardigan, with a part of Powys. Then Iorwerth went to London, to put the King
in mind of his Promise, and the Service he had done him against Earl Robert;
but the King finding now all matters at quiet, was deaf to all such
Remembrances, and instead of promising what he had once voluntarily proposed,
against all Rules of Equity and Gratitude, he took away Dyfed from Iorwerth,
and gave it to a Knight of his own, called Saer; and Stratywy Cydwely, and Gwyr
he bestowed upon Howel ap Grono, and sent Iorwerth away more empty than he
came: Nor was this sufficient Reward for his former Services; but the next Year
King Henry must send some of his Counsel to Shrewsbury, and cite Iorwerth to
appear there, A. D. 1101.
under pretense of consulting about the King's Business and Affairs in those
Parts. But the Plot was laid deeper; and when without any suspicion of
Treachery he made his appearance, he was surprizedly attainted of High Treason,
and then contrary to all Right and Justice actually condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment; the true reason of this unparalled Severity being, the King
feared his Strength, and was apprehensive that he would revenge the Wrong and
Affront he received at his hands. And indeed, well had he reason to fear that,
when he so ungratefully treated him, whose Service he had experienced to be so
greatly advantageous to him. But the Policy of Princes is unaccountable; and
whether to value an eminent Person for his Service, or to fear him for his
Greatness, is a Subject that frequently disturbs their most settled
Considerations. But the Noblemen that were at this time sent by the King to
Shrewsbury, were Richard de Belmersh, who being chief Agent about Roger
Montgomery Earl of Salop, was preferred to the Bishopric of London, and
afterward appointed by this King, to be Warden of the Marches, and Governor
of the County of Salop. With him were joined in company, Walter Constable, the
Father of Milo, Earl of Hereford, and Rayner the King's Lieutenant in the
County of Salop. About this time, as Bale writes, the Church of Menevia or S.
David's, began to be subject to the Sea of Canterbury, being always before the
Metropolitan Church of all Wales.

Owen ap Edwyn, who had been Author of no small Mischief and Disturbance to the
Welsh, in moving the English against his natural Prince, and Son in Law
Gruffydh ap Conan, departed this Life, after a tedious and miserable Sickness;
of which he was so much the less pityed, by how much he had proved an Enemy and
a Traitor to his native Country. He was the Son of Grono, by his Wife Edelflede
the Widow of Edmund, surnamed Ironside, King of England; and had the Title of
Tegengl; though the English, when they had compelled Gruffydh ap Conan to flee
to Ireland for safety, constituted him Prince of all North Wales. After his
death, Richard Fitz-Baldwyn laid siege to, and took the Castle of Rydcors, and
forcibly drove Howel ap Grono, to whom King Henry had committed the custody of
it, out of the Country. But Howel quickly returned, and with a high Spirit of
Revenge, began to destroy and burn whatsoever he could meet with, and then
meeting a Party of the Normans in their return homewards, he fell upon the
flank of them with a very considerable slaughter; and so brought all the
Country to his subjection, excepting some few Garrisons and Castles which would
not surrender to him. The same time King Henry took away from Saer the
Government of Dyfed, which formerly was Iorwerth ap Blethyn's, and bestowed it
upon Gerald, who had been some time Earl Arnulph's Steward in those Parts; and
therefore by reason of his knowledge of the Country, was in all probability best
able to take upon him the Management of it. But the Normans in Rydcors Castle
being sensible that they were not able to effect any thing against Howel ap
Grono in open Field, after their accustomed manner, began to put that in
execution by Treachery, which they could not compass by force of Arms. And how
to make Howel a Sacrifice to those Normans he had lately slain, they could find
no safer way than by corrupting one Gwgan ap Meyric, a Man in great Favor and
Esteem with Howel, upon the account chiefly that one of his Children was nursed
by Gwgan's Wife. This ungrateful Villain, to carry on his wicked Intrigue the
more unsuspected, gave Howel a very earnest invitation to his House to a
Merriment, where, without any suspicion of Treachery, being come, he was
welcomed with all the seeming Affection and Kindness imaginable. But no sooner
was he settled, Gwgan gave notice thereof to the Norman Garrisons; and
therefore by break of day they entered the Town, and coming about the House
where Howel lay in Bed, they presently gave a great shout. Howel hearing the
noise, suspected something of Mischief, and therefore leaping in all haste out
of Bed, he made to his Weapons, but could not find them, by reason that Gwgan
had conveyed them away whilst he was asleep. And now being assured of Treachery
in the case, and finding that his Men had fled for their Lives, he endeavored
all he could to make his escape; but Gwgan and his Company were too quick for
him; and so being secured, they strangled him, and delivered his Body to the
Normans, who having cut off his Head, conveyed it to the Castle of Rydcors.
This most villainous Murder, so barbarously committed upon the King's
Lieutenant, was not in the least taken notice of; for King Henry was so
unreasonably prejudiced in favor of the Normans, that whatever Misdemeanour,
be it of never so high a nature, was by them committed, it was presently winked
at, and let fall to the ground; whereas, if the Welsh trespassed but against
the least injunction of the King's Laws, they were most severely punished:
which was the cause that they afterward stood up against the King in their own
defense, being by experience assured, that he minded nothing more than their
utter Destruction.

About this time Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, convened a Synod at London,
wherein among other Injunctions then decreed, the Celibacy of the Clergy was
enjoined; Marriage being before ever allowed of in Britain, to them in Holy
Orders. But this new Injunction created a great deal of Heat and Animosities
among the Clergy, some approving of it as reasonable and orthodoxical; others
condemning it, as an innovation, and contrary to the plain Letter of Scripture.
But during these Disputes between the Clergy, King Henry being now in the Fifth
Year of his Reign, sailed over with a great Army into Normandy where his
Brother Robert, together with Robert de Belesmo, Arnulph, and William Earl of
Mortaign, gave him battle; but the King having obtained the Victory, took the
Duke his Brother, with William of Mortaign, Prisoners; and carrying them into
England, he caused first his Brother Robert's Eyes to be plucked out, and then
condemned them Cardyff. About the same time Meyric and Gruffydh, the Sons of
Trahaern ap Caradoc were both slain by the means of Owen ap Cadogan ap Blethyn;
whose Uncle Meredith ap Blethyn, who had been Prisoner for a long time in
England, now brake open the Prison, wherein he was very narrowly confined; and
returning to his own Country, had his Estate restored, which afterward he
quietly enjoyed.

Welsh; for a great part of Flanders being drowned by the overflowing of the
Sea, the Inhabitants were compel d to seek for some other Country to dwell in,
their own being now covered with Water. And therefore a great many being come
over to England, they requested of King Henry to assign them some part of his
Kingdom which was empty and void of Inhabitants, where they might settle and
plant themselves. The King taking advantage of this charitable opportunity, and
being in a manner assured, that these Flemings would be a considerable Thorn in
the side of the Welsh, bestowed upon them very liberally what was not justly in
his power to give; and appointed them the Country of Ros, in Dyfed or
West-Wales, where they continue to this day. But Gerald the King's Lieutenant
in those Parts, was resolved to be aforehand with them, and rebuilt the Castle
of Pembrock, in a place called Congarth Fechan; whither he removed his Family
and all his Goods. A. D. 1106.
But here a very unfortunate accident happened to him; for Cadwgan ap Blethyn
having prepared a sumptuous Feast in the Christmas, invited all the Lords to
his Country House in Dyfed, and among the rest his Son Owen, who lived in
Powys. This young Gentleman being at his Father's House, and hearing Nest the
Wife of Gerald universally praised for her incomparable Beauty, was so smitten
with the rumor that went abroad of her, that by all means he must see the
Lady, who was by all so much admired. And forasmuch as Gwladys, Wife to Rhys ap
Theodore, and Mother to Nest, was the Daughter of R^walhon ap Confyn,
Cosin-German to Cadwgan his Father; under pretense of Friendship and Relation,
he made bold to pay her a Visit. But finding the truth far to surpass the Fame
that went of her, he returned home so inflamed with her Charms, that not being
able to keep the Mastery over himself, he went back again the very same night,
and being attended by a company of wild, headstrong Youths, they privily
entered into the Castle, and encompassing the Chamber about, where Gerald and
his Wife lay, they set the House on fire. Gerald hearing a noise, would fain go
out to know the meaning of such unseasonable Disturbance; but his Wife fearing
some Treachery, persuaded him to make as private an Escape as he could; and
then pulling up a Board in the Privy, let him go that way. Then returning to
her Chamber, she would fain assure those notorious Youths, that there was no
body besides her self and Children there; but this being not satifactory, they
forcibly broke in, and having searched every the most private Corner, and not
finding Gerald, they took his Wife and two Sons, with a Son and a Daughter born
by a Concubine, and carried them away to Powys; having first set fire to the
Castle, and destroyed the Country as they went along. Cadwgan, Owen's Father,
hearing of what outrageous Crime his Son had committed, was exceedingly
concerned and sorry, chiefly because hereby he was like to incur King Henry's
great Displeasure; and therefore he went with all speed to Powys, and desired
his Son with all Entreaties, to send home to Gerald his Wife and Children, with
whatever else he had taken away from him. But Owen was so amorously inexorable
with respect to the Woman, that he would by no means part with her; however,
upon her request he was willing to restore Gerald his Children back again,
which forthwith he performed. But when Richard Bishop of London, whom King
Henry had constituted Warden of the Marches, being now at Shrewsbury, heard of
this, he sent for Ithel and Madoc the Sons of Ryryd ap Blethyn, Persons of
great Power and Interest in Wales, promising them very considerable Reward,
besides the Government of the whole Country, in case they could bring Owen and
his Father Cadwgan either dead or alive, to him, that he might revenge that
heinous Affront which they had done to the King of England. With them he joined
Lhywarch the Son of Trahaern ap Caradoc, whose two Brethren Owen had slain, and
Vchtryd the Son of Edwyn; which Four undertook to answer effectually the
Bishop's Proposal to them. But when they had united their Forces, and began in
an hostile manner to destroy the Country as they passed along; Vchtryd sent
private notice before him, requiring all who were any way desirous of their own
Safety, to come to him; because no Quarters was to be given to any that was
found in the Country. The People being thus so opportunely forewarned, began to
bethink with themselves how they might best avoid so eminent a danger; and
thereupon some fled to Arustly, others to Melienyth, some to Stradtywy, and
some to Dyfed; but in this latter place they met with very cold welcome; for
Gerald, who was then very busy in exercising Revenge upon that Country,
falling in among them, cut off a considerable number of them. The like fate
befell them who escaped to Arustly and Melienyth; for Walter Bishop of Hereford
having raised an Army in defense of the Town of Caermyrdhyn, before he could
come thither, accidentally met with these straggling Fugitives, and knowing what
Country they belonged to, without any further Ceremony, he fell upon them, and
put most of them to the Sword. But they who fled to Stradtywy, were gently
received by Meredith ap Rytherch, and such as resorted to Vchtryd, were kindly
entertained by him; and so he marched with the rest of his Confederates to
Rydcors Castle; it being the general opinion, that it was best to enter the
Country by Night, and to take Cadwgan and Owen his Son by surprise. But Vchtryd
reflecting upon the Difficulty of the Country, and how easily they might be
entrapp'd by an Ambuscade, dissuaded them from any such nocturnal Undertakings;
and told them, that it was far more advisable to enter the Country in good
order, when the light gave the Soldiers opportunity to keep and observe their
ranks. But whilst they were thus considering of the most effectual way to carry
on their purpose, Owen got a Ship at Aberdyfi, bound for Ireland; and escaping
thither, avoided the narrow search that was the following day made for them.
But when neither Father nor Son could be found, all the fault was laid upon
Vchtryd, who had dissuaded them from falling upon the Castle unexpectedly; and
therefore all they could do, since their escape, was to burn and destroy the
Country; which they did effectually, excepting the two Sanctuaries of
Lhanpadarn and Lhandewi Brefi; out of which however they took several Persons
who had escaped thither, and carried them away Prisoners to their several
Countries. But Owen, with them who were accessory to the burning of Rydcors
Castle, being fled into Ireland, desired the Umbrage and Protection of King
Murcart; who received him very gladly, upon the account of their former
acquaintance; for Owen, during the War betwixt the Earls of Arundel and
Chester, and the Welsh, had fled to King Murcart, and brought him very rich
Presents from Wales. Cadwgan all this while lay privately in Powys; but
thinking it impossible to continue there long undiscovered, he adjudged it his
wiser way to send to King Henry, and to declare his Innocence and Abhorrence of
that Fact which his Son had committed. The King was easily persuaded that the
old Man was guiltless, and wholly ignorant of his Son's Crime; and therefore he
gave him permission to remain in the Country, and to enjoy the Town and Lands
he received by his Wife, who was the Daughter of a Norman Lord, called Pygot de
Say. But his Lands in Powys were otherwise distributed; for his Nephews Madoc
and Ithel, finding what Circumstances their Uncle Cadwgan lay under, upon the
account of his Son Owen; they divided betwixt themselves such Lands as he and
his Son possessed in Powys, though afterward they could never agree about the
equal distribution of it. To counter-ballance this, Cadwgan made such Friends
to the King of England, that upon paying the Fine of 100 l. he had a grant of
all his Lands in Cardigan, and a power to recall all the Inhabitants, who had
rubbed off upon the publication of the King's late Order, That no Welchman or
Norman should dwell in Cardigan. Upon information of this grant to Cadwgan,
several of them that retired to Ireland returned again privately to Wales, and
lurkingly remained with their Friends; but Owen durst not appear in Cardigan,
by reason that his Father had received that Country from King Henry, upon
condition that he would never entertain or receive his Son, nor by any means
succor him either with Men or Money. Nevertheless, Owen came to Powys, and
would fain be reconciled to the King, and make an Atonement for his late
Misdemeanour; but he could find no body that would venture to speak in his
behalf, nor make the King acquainted with his desire and willingness, to
submit. And thus being hopeless and full of Despair, he could not possibly
divine which way to turn himself; till at last, a very unexpected opportunity
offered him means and occasion to oppose the English. The matter was this,
there happened a Difference betwixt Madoc ap R^ryd and the Bishop of London,
Lieutenant of the Marches of Wales, about certain English Felons, who being
under the Protection of Madoc, he would not restore at the Bishop's request.
The Bishop being much offended at Madawc's denial, threatened him very severely;
and therefore to make all possible Preparations against an ensuing storm,
Madawc sent to Owen, who heretofore was his greatest Enemy, desiring his help
against the Bishop; and by this means being reconciled, they took their mutual
Oaths not to betray each other, and that neither should make a separate
Agreement with the English, without the Knowledge and Approbation of the other.
And so uniting their Power, they spoiled and ravaged all the Country about
them, destroying whatever they could meet with which belonged to those they had
no kindness or affection for, without the least distinction of English or Welsh.

Iorwerth ap Blethyn had been very unjustly detained Henry calling to mind what
Hardship he labored under, and that he committed him to custody upon no
pretense of Reason, sent to know of him, what he was willing to pay for his
Liberty. Iorwerth being now almost ready to sink under a fatigue of so long
Imprisonment, was glad to give any thing he was able, to obtain that which he
had so long in vain hoped for; and therefore he promised either 300 l. in
specie, or to the value of it in Cattle and Horses; for the payment of which,
Iorwerth and Ithel the Sons of his Brother Ryryd were delivered for Pledges.
Then the King released him out of Prison, and restored him all his Lands which
were taken from him; and of the due for his Liberty, the King bestowed 10 l.
upon Henry, Cadwgan's Son by the Daughter of Pygot de Say the Norman. Owen and
Madawc all this while committed all the wast and destruction possible, and
cruelly annoyed both the English and Normans; and always withdrew and retired
to Iorwerth's Estate, which so troubled him, by reason of the King's strict
Orders, not to permit Owen to come to his or Cadwgan's Territories, that at
length he sent to them this positive and peremptory Rebuke; Since it has
pleased God to place us in the midst of our Enemies, and to deliver us into
their hands; and has so far weakened us, as that we are not able to do any
thing by our own strength; and your Father Cadwgan and my self, are
particularly commanded, under Penalty of forfeiting our Lands and Estates, not
to afford you any Succor or Refuge during these your rebellious Practices;
therefore as a Friend I entreat you, command you as a Lord, and desire you as a
Kinsman, that you come no more to mine or your Father Cadwgan's Territories.
Owen and Madawc receiving such a presumptuous Message, were the more enraged,
and in the way of a malignant retribution, did more frequently than heretofore,
shelter themselves in Iorwerth's Country; in so much, that at last, since that
they would neither by Threats nor Entreaties desist from their wonted Courses,
he was forced to gather his Power, and to drive them out by force of Arms.
Being chased out hence, they made In-roads into Vchtryd's Country in
Merionythshire; but Vchtryd's Sons, being then in Cyveilioc, hearing of it,
they sent to the People of the Country, with positive Orders to oppose and
resist any offer they would make to enter the Country. The People, tho wanting
a skilful Commander, were resolved to do as much as lay in their power; and so
meeting with them by the way, they set upon them so furiously, that Owen and
Madawc, tho after a brave Defense, were forced to bear back, and to take the
heels; Owen to Cardigan to his Father Cadwgan, and Madawc to Powys. Yet all
this Misfortune could not suppress the restless Spirit of Owen; for as soon as
he could rally together his scattered Troops, he made diverse In-roads into
Dyfed, and carrying away several Persons to the Ships, that they came in from
Ireland; he first ransomed them, and then listing them under his own Command,
made such addition to his Army, that he ventured to set upon a Town in Dyfed
belonging to the Flemings, and having rased it to the ground, he returned to
Cardigan; having no regard to what Inconveniency might befall his Father from
the King of England, upon this account; which a little afterward unhappily
fell out. For it happened that some of Owen's Men having had intelligence, that
a certain Bishop called William de Brabant, was upon his Journey through that
Country to the Court of England, laid wait for his coming; who without any
apprehension of Treachery, passing through the Country, was unexpectedly slain,
he and all his Retinue. Iorwerth and Cadwgan were then at Court, to speak with
King Henry, concerning certain Business of their own; but whilst they
discoursed the King, in comes a Fleming, that was a Brother to the deceased
Bishop, and with a very loud Exclamation, complained how that Owen, Cadwgan's
Son, had slain his Brother and the rest of his Company; and that he was
succored and entertained in Cadwgan's Country. King Henry hearing this, was
wrathfully displeased at such cruel Barbarity, that a Person of that Quality
and Profession should be so treacherously murdered; and therefore he asked
Cadwgan what he could say to the matter; who answered, that what had so
unhappily fell out, was done without the least of his knowledge or approbation,
and therefore desired his Majesty to impute all the Blame and Guilt of that
unfortunate Action to his Son Owen. But King Henry was so far from being
satisfied with this Reply, that he told Cadwgan in a violent passion, That
since he could not keep his Son so, but that he was aided and continually
entertained in his Country, he would bestow it upon another Person, who was
better able and more willing to keep him out; and would allow him a Maintenance
upon his own proper Charges, upon these Conditions, That he should not enter
into Wales any more, without his farther Orders; and so granting him Twenty
Days for the ordering his Affairs, he gave him liberty to retire to any part of
his Dominions, excepting Wales. When Owen and Madawc were informed how Cadwgan
was treated by the King of England, and that Cardigan, which was their chiefest
place of refuge, was to be given to another Person, they thought that their
Condition by this time was desperate, and that they had not better stay any
longer in Britain; and therefore with all speed they took shipping for Ireland,
where they were sure to be honorably entertained by King Murkart. Then King
Henry sent for Gilbert Strongbow, Earl of Strygill, a Person of noted Worth and
Valor, and one who had often sued to the King for to grant him some Lands in
Wales, and bestowed upon him all the Lands and Inheritance of Cadwgan ap
Blethyn, in case he could conquer and bring the Country under. Gilbert very
thankfully accepted of the Proposal, and having drawn together all the Forces
he was able to raise, he passed to Wales, and being come to Cardigan, without
the least Trouble or Opposition, he reduced the whole Country to his
Subjection. The first thing he did, was the best he could to secure himself in
this new-purchased Inheritance; in order to which, he erected two Castles, one
upon the Frontiers of North Wales, upon the Mouth of the River Ystwyth, a Mile
distant from Lhanbadarn; the other toward Dyfed, upon the River Teifi, at a
place called Dyngerant; where, as some think, Roger Montgomery had sometime
before laid the Foundation of Cilgarran Castle. Owen and Madawc were all this
while in Ireland; but this latter being at length tired with the Country, and
not willing to endure the Manners and Customs of the Irish, came over for
Wales, and passed to the Country of his Uncle Iorwerth. Iorwerth being
acquainted with his arrival, was fearful to suffer the same Fate with his
Brother Cadwgan, by winking at his being there; and therefore without any
regard to Relation or Consanguinity, he presently issued out a Proclamation,
forbidding any of his Subjects under a great Penalty to receive him, but that
they should account him an open Enemy to their Country, and endeavor all they
could to secure him, and to bring him Prisoner before him. When Madawc
understood this, how that his Person was in continual danger whil^t he remained
there; having drawn to him all the Outlaws and Villains in the Country, he
kept in the Rocks and Mountains, devising all the ways and means he could to be
revenged upon Iorwerth; and so made a private League and Agreement with
Lhywarch ap Trahaern. who for a long time had been a mortal Enemy of Iorwerths.
These two Associates, having intelligence that Iorwerth lay one night at
Caereineon, gathered all their strength, and came and encompassed the House at
Midnight; which when Iorwerth's Servants perceived, they arose and defended the
House with all the Might they could; but the Assailants at last putting the
House on fire, they were glad, as many as could, to escape through the Flames;
the greatest part being forced to yield, either to the Enemies Sword, or the
more conquering Fire. Iorwerth seeing no remedy, but that he must undergo the
same Fate as his Men had done, chose rather to dye in the presence of his
Enemies, with his Sword in his Hand, than to commit his Life to the cowardly
Flames; and therefore rushing out with great Violence, he was received upon the
points of the Enemies Spears, and so being tossed into the Fire, he miserably
perished by a double death. As soon as King Henry heard of his Death, he sent
for Cadwgan to him, and gave him all his Brother's Estate, being Powys-land;
and promising his Son Owen his Pardon, upon condition he would demean himself
quietly and loyally hereafter, willed him to send for him back from Ireland.
King Henry also about this time, married his natural Son Robert to Mabil
Daughter and sole Heir to Robert Fiz-hamon Lord of Glamorgan, in whose Right
this Robert became Lord of Glamorgan, being before by the King created E. of
Gloucester; by whom the Castle of Cardaf was built.

But Madawc finding the matter nothing mended, and that his other Uncle
Cadwgan, who lay under the same Obligation to the King of England, ruled the
Country, hid himself in the most private and inaccessible places, watching only
an opportunity to commit the like Fact upon Cadwgan, and to murder him by one
treacherous way or another. And this he effected in a little time; for Cadwgan
having reduced the Country to some sort of Settlement and Quietness, and
restored the Courts of Judicature, where he sat in person to administer
Justice; came with the rest of the Elders of the Country to Trallwng, now Pool;
and having begun to build a Castle, he thought to make that the constant Seat
of his Habitation. Madawc understanding his Design, laid in ambush for him in
his way to Trallwng; and as Cadwgan unconcernedly passed by, without the least
suscicion of Treachery, he suddenly set upon him, and slew him, without
allowing him any time either to fight or escape. Then he sent presently a
message to Shrewsbury, to the Bishop of London, the King's Lieutenant in the
Marches, to put him in mind of his former Promises to him, when he chased Owen
out of the Country; because that the Bishop bearing an inveterate Enmity to
Cadwgan, and his Son Owen, granted Madawc such Lands, as his Brother Ithel was
possessed of. But Meredith ap Blethyn, being informed of the death of both his
Brothers, went in all have to the King, desiring of him the Lands of Iorwerth
in Powys, which he had lately granted to Cadwgan; which the King granted him,
till such time as Owen should return from Ireland. Owen did not stay long
before he came over; and then going to King Henry, he was honorably received,
and had all his Fathers Estate restored to him; whereupon, in gratitude of this
signal Favor, he voluntarily promised to pay the King a considerable Fine, for
the due payment of which, he gave very responsible Pledges. Madawc finding
himself alone to be left in the lurch, and that he had no seeming Power to bear
Head against the King, thought it also his wisest way to make what
Reconciliation he could; and therefore he offered the King a very great Fine,
if he should peaceably enjoy his former Estate, promising withal, never to
molest or disturb any one that was subject to the Crown of England. King Henry
willing to bring all matters to a settled condition, readily granted his
Request, and conferred upon him all he could reasonably ask for; only with this
Proviso, that upon his peril he should provide for the Relations of them whom
he had so basely murdered.

Wales; the next Year, Robert de Belesmo, who had been one of the chief
Instruments of these Welsh Disturbances, in that great Rebellion, which
himself, with Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Salop, and his Brother Arnulph Earl
of Pembroke had raised against the King; was taken Prisoner by King Henry in
Normandy, and committed to perpetual Imprisonment in Warham-Castle. The Year
following, Meredith detached a considerable Party of his Men, to make
Incursions into the Country of Lhywarch ap Trahaern ap Gwyn, who was an
inveterate Enemy of himself and Owen; by reason that by his Aid and
Instigation, Madawc was encouraged to kill his Uncles Iorwerth and Cadwgan.
These Men as they passed through Madawc's Country, met a Person in the
nighttime who belonged to Madawc; who being asked where his Master was, after
some pretense of ignorance, at last through fear confessed, that he was not far
from that place. Therefore lying quietly there all Night, by break of day they
arose to look out their Game; and unexpectedly surpizing Madawc, they flew a
great number of his Men, and took himself Prisoner; and so carrying him to
their Lord, they delivered him up, as the greatest Honor of their Expedition.
Meredith was not a little proud of his Prisoner, and therefore to ingratiate
himself the more with his Nephew Owen, he committed him to safe Custody, till
he was sent for; who coming thither straight, Meredith delivered Madawc up to
him. Owen, though he had the greatest reason for the most cruel Revenge, by
reason that both his Father and Uncle were basely murdered by this Madawc,
would not put him to death, remembering the intimate Friendship and Oaths that
had passed betwixt them; but however, to secure him from any future Mischief he
might practice, he pulled out his Eyes, and then set him at liberty. But least
he should be capable of any Revenge, by reason of his Estate and Strength in
the Country, Meredith and Owen thought fit to divide his Lands betwixt them;
which were, Caernarvon, Aberhiw, with the third part of Deuthwfyr.

These home-bread Disturbances being pretty well abated, a greater storm arose
from abroad; for the Henry prepared a mighty Army to enter into Wales, being
provoked thereto by the request of those who enjoyed a great part of the
Welchmens Lands, but would not be satisfied till they got all. For Gilbert
Strongbow Earl of Strygill, upon whom the King had bestowed Cardigan, made
great Complaints of Owen ap Cadwgan, declaring how that he received and
entertained such Persons as spoiled and robbed in his Country; and Hugh Earl of
Chester made the like of Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales, how that his
Subjects and the Men of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn Lord of Tegengl, unreproved,
wasted, and burnt the Country of Cheshire; and to aggravate the matter the
more, he added farther, that Gruffydh neither owed any Service, nor paid any
Tribute to the King. Upon these Complaints, King Henry was so cruelly enraged,
that he swore he would not leave one living Creature remaining in North Wales
and Powys-land; but having extirpated utterly the present Race of People, he
would plant a Colony of new Inhabitants. And then dividing his Army into three
parts, he delivered one to the conduct of the Earl of Strygill, to go against
South Wales, which comprehended the whole Power of the fourth part of England
and Cornwall: The next Battle was designed against North Wales, in which was all
the strength of Scotland and the North, and was commanded by Alexander King of
the Scots, and Hugh Earl of Chester: the Third the King led himself against
Powys, wherein was contained the whole strength of the middle part of England.
Meredith ap Blethyn hearing of these mighty Preparations, and being informed
that this vast Army was designed against Wales, was quickly apprehensive that
the Welsh were not able to make any great Defense; and therefore thought it his
safest way to provide for himself beforehand; and so coming to the King,
yielded himself up to his Mercy. But Owen fearing to commit himself to those
whom he knew so greedily to covet his Estate, and whom he was assured were far
more desirous to dispossess the Welsh of their Lands, than any other way to
punish them for former Crimes and Miscarriages, fled to Gruffydh ap Conan to
North Wales. Upon that, King Henry converted his whole Force that way, and came
himself as far as Murcastelh, and the Scotch King to Pennant Bachwy; but the
People flying to the Mountains, carried with them all the Cattle and Provision
they had; so that the English could not follow them, and as many as attempted
to come at them, were either slain or wounded in the streights. But Alexander
King of the Scots finding that nothing could possibly be effected against the
Welsh, as long as they kept the Rocks and Mountains, sent to Prince Gruffydh,
advising him to submit himself to the King, promising him all his Interest to
obtain an honorable Peace. But the Prince was too well acquainted with English
Promises, and therefore refused his Proposals; and so King Henry being very
unwilling to return without doing something in this Expedition, sent to Owen to
forsake the Prince, who was not able to defend himself, but was ready to strike
a Peace with the Scottish King and the Earl of Chester. But this cunning
Insinuation would not take effect; for Owen was for his life as distrustful of
King Henry as Prince Gruffydh; and therefore he would hearken to no Entreaties
for revolting from him, who had all this while afforded him Refuge, till at
length his Uncle Meredith, an old insinuating Politician, persuaded him, with
much a do, not to forsake the King of England's Proposals, who offered him all
his Lands without Tribute, in case he would come to his side; and therefore
Meredith advised him instantly to accept of his offer, before Prince Gruffydh
made a Peace with the King, which if it was once done, he would be glad upon
any score to purchase the King's Mercy. Owen being prevailed upon by such
Arguments, came to the King, who received him very graciously, and told him,
that because he believed his Promise, he would not only perform that, but
likewise exalt him above any of his Kindred, and grant him his Lands free from
any payment of Tribute. Prince Gruffydh perceiving how that Owen had submitted
to the King, thought it also his wisest way to sue for Peace; and so promising
the King a great Sum of Money, a Peace was then actually agreed upon, and
confirmed; which the King of England was the more ready to consent to, because
he found it impossible to do him any hurt, whilst he continued encamped in that
place. Some affirm, that the submission as well of Prince Gruffydh as Owen, was
procured by the Policy of Meredith ap Blethyn and the Earl of Chester; this
last working with Gruffydh, and assuring him that Owen had made his Peace with
the King before any such thing was in agitation, so that the Prince yielding
somewhat to the Earl's Request, if Owen had gone contrary to his Oath, which
they had mutually taken, not to make any Peace with the English, without one
another Knowledge, seemed to incline to a Peace. On the other hand, Meredith
going in Person to his Nephew Owen, affirmed for Truth, that the Prince and the
Earl of Chester were actually agreed, and that the Prince was on his Journey to
the King to make his Submission. And in the mean while Meredith took especial
care that all Messengers betwixt the Prince and Owen should be intercepted, and
by that means Owen wilfully submitted himself to the King.

King Henry having thus finished and brought to an end all his Business in
Wales, calling Owen to him, told him, that in case he would go over with him to
Normandy, and there be faithful to him, he would upon his return confirm all
his Promises upon him; and so Owen accepting of the King's Offer, went with him
to Normandy, where he behaved himself so gallantly, that he was made a Knight;
and after his return Griffri Bishop of St. David's died, and King Henry
appointed to succeed him one Barnard a Norman, much against the Good Will and
Inclination of the Welsh, who before this time were ever used to Elect their
own Bishop. And this Year the rumor of Gruffydh Son to Rhys ap Theodore was
spread throughout South Wales, who, as the report went, for fear of the King
had been from a Child brought up in Ireland, and having come over about two
Years before, past his time privately among his Relations, particularly with
Gerald Steward of Pembroke his Brother-in-Law. And now the noise of a new
Prince being spread abroad, it came at last to the Ears of the King of England,
that a certain Person appeared in Wales, who pretended to be the Son of Rhys ap
Theodore late Prince of South Wales, and laid Claim to that Principality, which
was now in the King's Hands. King Henry being somewhat concerned with such a
Report, and fearing lest that this new Starter should create him some greater
trouble, he thought to nip him in the bud, and sent down Orders to apprehend
him. But Gruffydh ap Rhys being aware of the Traps laid against him, sent to
Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales, desiring his Assistance, and that he
might have Liberty to remain safe in his Country, which Gruffydh for his
Father's account, readily granted, and treated him honorably. A little after,
his Brother Howel who was imprisoned by Ardulph Earl of Pembroke in the Castle
of Montgomery, where he had remained for a great while, made his escape and
fled to his Brother, then with Gruffydh ap Conan in North Wales. But King Henry
being informed that Gruffydh ap Rhys and his Brother Howel were entertained by
the Prince of North Wales, sent very smooth Letters to Gruffydh ap Conan,
desiring to speak with him, who being come, he received him with all the Tokens
of Honor and Friendship, and bestowed upon him very rich Presents, just after
the Norman Policy, who usually make very much of those whom they design
afterward to be serviceable to them. After some time's general Discourse, King
Henry came at length to the main Point, and promised the Prince even Mountains
of Gold, in case he would send Gruffydh ap Rhys or his Head to him, which the
Prince overcome by such fair Words and large Promises, promised to perform, and
so returned joyfully home, big with the expectation of his future Reward. But
some who wished better to Gruffydh ap Rhys and his Brother Howel, presently
suspected the occasion of the King's Message, and therefore they advised them
to withdraw themselves privately for some time, till Prince Gruffydh's mind be
better understood, and whether he had made any agreement with the King of
England to betray them to him. As soon as the Prince was returned to his Palace
at Aberffraw, he presently enquired for Gruffydh ap Rhys, and learning in a
little time where he was, he sent a Troop of Horse to re-call him to his Court;
but Gruffydh hearing of their approach, with all speed made his escape to the
Church of Aberdaron, and took Sanctuary there. But Prince Gruffydh was so
resolute to make his Promise good to the King of England, that without any
respect to the Religious place he had escaped too, commanded the same
Messengers to return, and to bring him away by Force, which the Clergy of the
Country unanimously withstood, protesting that they would not see the Liberties
of the Church in the least infringed. And whilst the Clergy and the Prince's
Officers were thus at debate, that same night, some who had Compassion upon the
young Prince, and seeing how greedily his Life was thirsted for, conveyed him
away out of North Wales to Straywy in South Wales. And so being delivered from
the treacherous and more dishonorable Practices of the Prince of North Wales,
he was forced for the Defense of his own Life, to bid open Defiance to the King
of England, and thereupon having raised all the Forces which the shortness of
the opportunity would permit, he made War upon the Flemings and Normans.

Arberth, and winning the same, made it plain with the Ground, and from thence
marched to Lhanymdhyfry Castle, belonging to Richard de Pwns, upon whom the
King had bestowed Cantref Bychan, but the Garrison commanded by Meredith ap
Rytherch ap Caradoc, so manfully defended it, that Gruffydh after killing only
some few of the Besieged, and burning the Outworks, was forced to remove with
no small Loss of his own Men. Finding this place impregnable, he came before
Abertawy-Castle, which was built by Henry Beaumont Earl of Warwick, but this
proving too strong to be quickly surrendered, after he had burnt some of the
outward Buildings, he returned to Stratywy, burning and destroying all the
Country as he went along. And now his Fame being spread abroad through all the
Country, all the wild and headstrong Youth, and they whose Fortunes were
desperate, resorted unto him from all Parts, by which means being waxed Strong
and Numerous, he made in Roads into Ros and Dyfed, spoiling and destroying the
Country before him. The Normans and Flemings were cruelly enraged with these
continual Depredations, and how to remedy this Mischief, was not easily
determined; but after long Consultation, they thought it the best way to call
together such Welsh Lords as were Friends to the King of England, such were
Owen ap Rhytherch, and Rhytherch ap Theodore, with his Sons Meredith and Owen,
whose Mother was Heynyth the Daughter of Blethyn ap Confyn, and Owen ap Caradoc
the Son of Gwenlhian another Daughter of Blethyn, and Meredith ap Rhytherch.
These protesting their Loyalty and Fidelity to King Henry were desired to
defend the King's Castle of Carmardhyn, and that by turns; Owen ap Caradoc the
first Fortnight, and then by succession by Rhytherch ap Theodore and Mered th
ap Rhytherch. Owen undertook the Defense of Carmardhyn Castle for the time
required of him, and Blethyn ap Gadifor had committed to him the Government of
Abercomyn, or Abercorran-Castle, which appertained to Robert Courtmain. But for
all these Preparations, Gruffydh ap R^ys had a wishful Eye upon Carmardhyn and
therefore he sent out some Spies to learn the Strength and Condition of the
Town, who bringing him a very kind and hopeful Account, he decamped by Night,
and rushing suddenly into the Town, ordered his Men to make a great shout,
thereby to strike a great Terror into those within. Owen ap Caradoc the
Governor, being surprised with such an unexpected uproar, made all possible
haste to the place where he had heard the shouting, and thinking that his Men
were at his Heels, fell in among the Enemy; but having none to support him, his
Men being all fled, he was after a manful Defense cut in pieces, and so the
Town being taken, Gruffydh burnt every thing to the ground, excepting the
Castle, which was also sore defaced. And then returning with a great deal of
Spoil and Booty to his usual residence at Stratywy; his Forces were
considerably increased by the accession of many stout young Men, who came to
him from all Quarters, and thought that Fortune so prospered his Arms, that no
body was able to stand before him. After this he marched to Gwyr, but William
de Londres thinking it impossible to stand before him, forsook the Castle with
all his Men in all haste, so that when Gruffydh was come thither, he found a
great deal of Cattle and Spoil, and none to own them, and therefore having
burnt down the Castle, he carried away every thing of Value in the Country.
When the Cardigan-shire Men heard how fortunately he succeeded in all his
Attempts, and being extremely fearful, lest his next Expedition should be
against them, sent to him, desiring him, as being their near Relation and
Country man, to take upon him the Rule and Government over them. Gruffydh
willingly accepted of their Offer, and coming thither, was joyfully received by
the Chief Men in the Country, who were Cadifor ap Grono, Howel ap Dinerth, and
Trahaern ap Ithel, which three Persons had forsaken Dyfed, by reason that it
was so thwacked with Normans, Flemings and English Men. Nor was Cardigan free
from Strangers, who pretended to sway and rule the Country, but the People
bearing in mind the continual Wrong and Oppression they received from them,
bore an inveterate hatred to them, and were very glad to be delivered from
their insolent and imperious Oppressors. For King Henry what by Force and
Banishment of those that stood up stiff for their Liberty, and what by
corrupting of those that were wavering, had brought all that Country to his
subjection, and bestowed what Lands he thought fit upon his English or Norman
Favorites. But notwithstanding the Strength of the English in this Country,
Gruffydh was not a whit cast down, but boldly coming on to Cardigan Iscoed, he
laid Siege to a Fort that Earl Gilbert and the Flemings had built at a place
called Blaen Porth Gwythan. After diverse Assaults, and the killing of several
of the besieged, with the loss only of one of his Men, Gruffydh took the place,
and rasing it to the ground, brought all the Country thereabouts to subjection.
This Action proved very fatal to the English, for immediately upon this, they
began to forsake their Houses and Habitations, as thinking it too hot for them
to stay any longer in the Country, and so the Welsh burnt and destroyed as far
as Penwedic all the Houses of those Strangers whom Earl Gilbert had brought
with him. Then Gruffydh besieged the Castle of Stradpythylh which belonged to
Ralph Earl Gilbert's Steward, and having made himself Master of it, he put all
the Garrison to the Sword. Removing from thence, he encamped at Glasgryg a mile
from Lhanbadarn, purposing to Besiege Aberystwith-Castle next morning, but for
want of Provision necessary for his Army, he was forced to make bold with some
Cattle which grazed within the Limits of the Sanctuary. And here it may be
observed, that not only Men enjoyed the Privilege of these Sanctuaries, but
also Cattle and Horses, and whatever else lived within the Liberties of them.
But the day following, Gruffydh marched disorderly toward the Castle, being
apprehensive of no great opposition, by reason that he was ignorant of the
number of the Garrison, and so encamping upon an opposite Hill, which was
divided from the Castle by a River, with a Bridge over it, he called a Council
to determine with what Engines they might with best Success play against it, and
so make a general, Assault. The Normans observing their Disorder, very
cunningly sent out some of their Archers to skirmish with them, and so by
little and little to entice them to the Bridge, where some of the best armed
Horsemen were ready to issue out upon them. The Welsh not thinking the
Garrison to be so strong, approached near the Bridge, still skirmishing with the
Normans, who pretended to give ground; but when they came very near, out
sallies one on horse back, who would fain pass the Bridge; but being received
upon the points of their Spears, he began to flag, and as he endeavored to
return, he fell off his Horse, and so the Welsh pursued him over the Bridge. The
Englishmen seeing this, fled toward the Castle, and the Welsh with all speed
followed them to the top of the Hill; but whilst they thought that the day was
their own, up rises a Party of Horse which lay in ambuscade under the Hill, and
standing betwixt the Welsh and the Bridge, prevented any Succor to come to
them. And the Welsh being thus hemmed in betwixt both Parties, the former
recoiling with greater strength, were so unmercifully cut off, that scarce one
Man was left living. When the rest of the Welsh Army, that staid on the other
side of the River, saw what number the Garrison contained, and that they were
strong beyond their expectation, presently decamped, and with all speed
departed out of the Country.

When King Henry was informed of all the Mischief and Cruelties that Gruffydh
ap Rhys had committed among his Subjects in Wales, he sent for Owen ap Cadwgan,
desiring him and Lhywarch ap Trahaern to use all the effectual Method possible
to take or kill the Arch Rebel Gruffydh, promising very speedily to send his
Son Robert with an Army to Wales for that purpose. Owen being very proud that
the King put such Confidence in him, encouraged his Men to be now so
industrious to merit the King's Favor, as they had been formerly to deserve
his Displeasure; and so joining his Forces with Lhywarch, they both marched to
meet Prince Robert at Stratywy, where they supposed Gruffydh ap Rhys had hid
himself in the Woods. When they were come to the Frontiers of the Country, they
made a Vow, that they would let neither Man, Woman, or Child escape alive;
which so affrighted the People of the Country, that all made what shift they
could to save their Lives, some by fleeing to the Woods and Mountains, and some
by getting into the King's Castles, from whence they had come but a little
before. Then Owen and Lhywarch separated with distinct Parties to scour the
Woods, which about Stratywy are very desertous; and Owen having entered with an
Hundred Men, presently discovered the tract of Men and Cattle, and followed
their Footsteps so close, that within a little while he overtook them; and
having slain a great many of them, and put the rest to flight, he carried away
all their Cattle back to his Army. But whilst Owen was busy in searching the
Woods, Gerald Steward of Pembrock, who with a great Power of Flemings was upon
his march to join the King's Son, met with them who fled from Owen; who
desiring help of Gerald, declared how Owen had forcibly drove them out, slain a
great many of their Companions, and spoiled them of all their Goods. Gerald and
his Flemings understanding that Owen was so nigh with such a small number of
Men, thought he had now very convenient opportunity to be revenged of him upon
the account of his Wife; and therefore to make sure Work with him, he pursued
him close into the Woods. Owen being forewarned by his Men that a great number
followed him, and advised to make all speed to get away, was deaf to all such
Counsels, as thinking that they of whom his Men were so much afraid of, were
the King's Friends, and therefore their Integrity need not be questioned, since
they all had respect to the same common Cause. But he found, that a private
Quarrel is sometime more regarded than the public Good; and therefore when
Gerald was advanced within bowshot, he greeted him with a Volloy of Arrows, to
show how great a Friend he was; but Owen, tho persuaded to flee, was so little
terrified at such an unwelcom Salutation, that though the Enemy were Seven to
One, yet he told them, that they were but Flemings, and such as always trembled
at the hearing of his Name. And then falling on with a great deal of Courage,
he was at the first On-let struck with an Arrow into the Heart, of which Wound
he presently dyed; which when his Men saw, they all fled, and brought word to
Lhywarch and the rest of their Fellows of what had happened; and so suspecting
the King's Army, seeing they could not be trusted in their Service, they all
returned to their respective Countries. Owen being in this manner unhappily
slain, his Brethren divided his Lands betwixt them; excepting Caereneon, which
properly belonged to Madawc ap Ryryd ap Blethyn; and which he had forcibly
taken away from his Uncle Meredith. His Father Cadwgan had several Children by
different Women; and besides himself, he had Issue Madawc by Gwenlhian the
Daughter of Gruffydh ap Conan; Eineon by Sanna the Daughter of Dyfnwal; Morgan,
by Efelhiw or Elhiw the Daughter of Cadifor ap Colhoyn Lord of Dyfed; Henry and
Gruffydh were by the Daughter of the Lord Pigot his wedded Wife; Meredith by
Eururon Hoedliw; and himself by Inerth the Daughter of Edwyn. But a while
afterward, Eineon ap Cadwgan and Gruffydh ap Meredith ap Blethyn, besieged the
Castle of Cymmer in Merionythshire, which was lately built by Vchtryd ap Edwyn;
for Cadwgan had bestowed upon Vchtryd his Cofin-German Merionyth and Cyfeilioc,
upon condition, that in all Cases he should appear his Friend, and his Sons
after him; contrary to which Promise he bore no manner of regard to Cadwgan's
Children after Owen's death; but to strengthen himself the better, he erected
this Castle of Cymmer, which very much displeased many of Cadwgan's Sons. And
therefore Eineon and Gruffydh, to make Vchtryd sensible of his Error in
despising of them, furiously set upon Cymmer Castle, and having slain diverse of
the Garrison, the rest surrendered themselves; and so taking possession of it,
they divided the Country betwixt them; Mowdhwy Cyfyeilioc and half Penlhyn to
Gruffydh ap Meredith; and the other half of Penthyn with all Merionyth to
Eineon.

The next Year King Henry failed with a great Army into Normandy, against the
French King, who with the Earl of Flanders and others, went about to make
William the Son of Robert Curthoise Duke of Normandy; but at the appearance of
the King of England, they all scattered, and laid aside their intended Design.
About the same time Gilbert Strongbow Earl of Strigill, to whom King Henry had
given all Cardigan, departed this Life, after a long Fit of a Consumption; much
to the Joy and Satisfaction of the Welsh, who were in great measure displeased,
that they should be deprived of their own natural Lord Cadwgan, from whom this
Country was taken away, and be forced to serve and be subject to a Stranger,
whose Kindness they had no great reason to expect. But the Year following,
Howel ap Ithel Lord of Ros and Ryfonioc, now Denbigh-land, and Riryd and
Lhywarch the Sons of Owen ap Edwyn. And when they could not otherwise agree,
they broke out into open War; and thereupon Howel sent to Meredith ap Blethyn,
and to Eineon and Madawc, Cadwgan's Sons; who came down from Merionyth with a
Party of Four Hundred well-disciplin'd Men, and encamped in Dyffryn Clwyd.
Riryd and Lhywarch on the other hand, de^^red the Assistance of their Cosins
the Sons of Vchtryd; and so both Armies meeting in the Vale of Clwyd, they fell
to Blows with a great deal of Spirit and Alacrity, and after a tedious and a
bloody Fight, Lhywarch, Owen ap Edwyn's Son, was at last slain, and with him
Iorwerth the Son of Nudh, a noble and a valorous Person; and Riryd was forced
to make his Escape by flight. But though Howel obtained the Victory, yet he did
not long survive his slain Enemies; for having received a desperate Wound in
the Action, dyed of it within Forty Days; and then Meredith ap Blethyn, and
the Sons of Cadwgan finding it dangerous to stay longer there, for fear of some
French, who lay garrisoned in Chester, returned home with all speed.

King Henry was still in Normandy, and about this French King, who was
shamefully vanquished and overthrown, and had a great number of his Nobles
taken Prisoners. But as King Henry returned the following England, one of the
Ships happened, by the negligence of the Pilot, to be cast away, wherein
perished the King's two Sons, William who was legitimate, and Heir apparent to
the Crown, and Richard his base Son; together with his Daughter and Niece, and
several others of his Nobility, to the number in all of 150 Persons. This
unparalled Loss of so many Kindred and Friends did not perplex his Mind so
long, but that within a short time, he began to solace and raise his drooping
Spirits with the thoughts of a new Wife; and having married Adelice Lovain, he
purposed to go against Wales, and having prepared his Forces, he led them in
person to Powys-land. When Meredith ap Blethyn and Eineon, Madawc and Morgan,
the Sons of Cadwgan and Lords of the Country heard of it, they sent to Gruffydh
ap Conan Prince of North Wales, desiring some help at his hands; who flatly
refused, assuring them, that because he was at peace with the King of England,
he could neither with Honor nor Safety send them any Succor, nor permit them
to come within his Dominions. The Lords of Powys receiving this unwelcom
Answer, and having now no manner of hopes of any Aid, were resolved however to
defend themselves as well as they could; and therefore they thought it the most
effectual means to annoy the Enemy, and to keep them from entering into the
Country, was to observe and defend the Streights, by which the Enemy must of
necessity pass. Neither were they out in their Policy; for it happened that the
King himself, with a small number, advanced to one of these narrow Passages,
the rest of the Army, by reason of their Carriages, having taken some compass
about; which the Welsh perceiving, presently poured a Shower of Arrows upon
them, and the advantage of the ground giving help to their Execution, they slew
and wounded a great many of the English. The King himself was struck in the
Breast, but for all that the Arrow could not hurt him, by reason of his Armor;
yet he was so terrified with this unexpected Conflict, and considering with
himself, that he must receive several such Brushes before he could advance to
the plain Country; and what was above all, being sensible that by such rash
Misfortune he might lose all the Honor and Fame which he had before obtained,
sent a Message to parley with them who kept the Passage, and with all assurance
of Safety, to desire them to come to the King. The Welsh being come, and
questioned how they had such Confidence to oppose the King, and to put his Life
in so much danger; made Answer, that they belonged to Meredith ap Blethyn, and
according to their Master's Orders they were resolved to keep the Passage, or
to dye upon the spot. The King finding them so resolute, desired them to go to
Meredith, and propose to him an agreement of Peace, which he and his Cosins the
Sons of Cadwgan accepted of; and promised to pay the King 10000 Head of Cattle,
in Retribution for former Offenses. And so King Henry leaving all things in a
peaceable and quiet posture in Wales, and appointing the Lord Fitz-Warren
Warden or Lieutenant of the Marches, returned to England.

But when a foreign Enemy was removed out of the Country, the Welsh could never
forbear quarrelling Gruffydh ap Rhys ap Theodore, who had been now for some
time quiet, fell upon Gruffydh ap Sulhaern, and for what reason not discovered,
treacherously slew him. But the next Year Welsh; for Eineon the Son of Cadwgan
dying, left all his share of Powys and Merionyth to his Brother Meredith. But
his Uncle Meredith ap Blethyn, thinking that these Lands more properly belonged
to him, ejected his Nephew Meredith to whom his Brother Eineon had left them,
and took possession of them himself. And what augmented these Differences, King
Henry set now at liberty Ithel ap Riryd ap Blethyn, Meredith's Nephew, who had
been for a long time detained in Prison; who coming to his own Country, was in
expectation to enjoy his Estate, which, upon his being put in custody, his
Relations had divided betwixt them; of which, the greatest share fell to his
Uncle Meredith. But when Gruffydh ap Conan was informed, how that Meredith ap
Blethyn, contrary to all Justice, had taken away by force the Lands of his
Nephew Meredith ap Cadwgan, he sent his Sons Cadwalhon and Owen with an Army
into Merionyth, who conquering and bringing to subjection all the Country,
carried away the chief of the People, and all the Cattle to Lhyn. And at the
same time the Sons of Cadwgan entered into the Lands of Lhywarch ap Trahaern,
and cruelly wasted and destroyed it, by reason that he had countenanced the
Doings of their Uncle Meredith ap Blethyn. But these inward Clashings and
Animosities concerning Estates and Titles, were seconded by most unnatural
Bloodshed and unparalleled Cruelties; for Meredith ap Blethyn, when he found
that his Nephew Meredith ap Cadwgan was assisted by the Prince of North Wales,
and that it Merionyth from him, he was resolved to practice that upon his
Nephew, which he had failed to effect upon another. And therefore lest his
other Nephew Ithel ap Riryd should meet with the like Help and Encouragement to
recover those Lands, which during his Imprisonment were taken away from him, of
which his Uncle actually enjoyed a considerable share; Meredith thought it his
wisest way to prevent all manner of Disputes, by sending Ithel out of the
World, which upon mature Deliberation he treacherously effected. Nor was this
the only Murder committed at this time; for Cadwalhon the Son of Gruffydh ap
Conan exceeded him far, and slew his three Uncles, Grono, Riryd, and Meilyr the
Sons of Owen ap Edwyn; but which was most unnatural of all, Morgan ap Cadwgan
with his own hands killed his Brother Meredith; a Crime most execrable, tho he
did afterward repent of it.

Gruffyth ap Rhys, by the false and invidious Accusations of the Normans, was
dispossessed of all the Lands which King Henry had formerly granted him, and
which he had for a considerable time peaceably enjoyed. And toward the end of
the same Year dyed Daniel ap Sulgien Bishop of S. David's, and Archdeacon of
Powys, a Man of extraordinary Piety and Learning, and one who made it his
continual Employment to endeavor to work a Reconciliation betwixt North Wales
and Powys, which in his time were at perpetual Variance and Enmity with one
another. The next Year dyed likewise Gruffydh the Son of Meredith ap Blethyn;
and about the same time Owen ap Cadwgan having got into his hands Meredith ap
Lhywarch, delivered him to Pain Fitz-John, to be kept safe Prisoner in the
Castle of Bridgnorth. The reason of this was, because Meredith had slain Meyric
his Cosin-German, and very barbarously had pulled out the Eyes of two more of
his Cosins, the Sons of Griffri. This cruel and inhuman Custom of plucking out
the Eyes of such as they hated or feared, was too frequently practiced in
Wales; for the Ievaf the Son of Owen served two of his Brethren after this
unnatural manner, and thinking that too little, passed a Sentence of perpetual
Banishment upon them. A little after, his Brother Lhewelyn ap Owen slew
Iorwerth ap Lhywarch; but all this Mischief practiced by these two Brothers
Ievaf and Lhewelyn, turned at last upon themselves; for their Uncle Meredith ap
Blethin being apprehensive that his two Nephews were a considerable Rub in his
way, and if they trooped off, that all their Estate would of right fall to him;
slew Ievaf outright, and having plucked out Lhewelyn's Eyes, castrated him,
for fear he should beget any Children to inherit his Lands after him. These no
doubt were implacable Times, when for the least Offense, nay sometime
Suspicion, Murder was so openly and incorrigibly committed; which must of
necessity be attributed to this one Principle, That so many petty States having
equal Power and Authority in their own Territories, and being subject to none
but the King of England, still endeavored to outvie and overtop each other.
And so, nearness of Relation giving way to Ambition, they never regarded those
of the same Blood, so that themselves might add to their strength, and increase
their Estate by their Fall; and for this reason Meyric slew Lhywarch, and his
Son Madawc his own Cosins; but before he could make any Advantage of their
Death, he was himself served after the same manner. But the only Person who
afterward repented of such a foul Crime, was Morgan ap Cadwgan, who being
severely troubled in mind for the Murder he had lately committed upon his
Brother Meredith, took a Journey to Jerusalem to expiate for his Crime, and in
his return from thence, dyed in the Isle of Cyprus. But this treacherous way of
private murdering those by whom they were offended, could not be forgot among
the Welsh; for Eineon the Son of Owen ap Edwyn Cadwalhon the Son of Gruffydh ap
Conan had basely slain three of his Brothers, and taking the opportunity of his
being at Nanhewdwy, assisted by Cadwgan ap Grono ap Edwyn, set upon him, and
slew him. About the same time, that great Usurper Meredith ap Blethyn ap
Confyn, who by most unnatural and most hellish Practices, had got the Lands of
all his Brothers and Nephews, and by that means was become a Man of the
greatest strength and sway in Powys, dyed of a severe Fit of Sickness, which
reduced him to that apprehension of his former Miscarriages, that he endured
Penance for the expiation of former Guilts.

Wales, Henry the first of that Name, King of England, dyed in Normandy in the
Month of October; after whom Stephen Earl of Buloign Son to the Earl of Bloys,
his Sisters Son, by the means of Hugh Bygod, was crowned King by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, all the Nobility of England consenting thereunto; though
contrary to a former Oath they had taken to Maud the Empress. The first thing
that employed his Thoughts after his accession to the Government, was against
David King of the Scots; who taking advantage of this new Revolution in
England, by some treacherous means or other, got the Towns of Carlisle and
Newcastle into his hands. But King Stephen, tho scarcely settled in his Throne,
presently marched toward the North; of whose coming David being assured, and
fearing to meet him, voluntarily restored Newcastle, and compounded for
Carlisle; but would not swear to him by reason of his Oath to Maud; which
however his Son Henry did not stick at, and thereupon was by King Stephen
created Earl of Huntington. This change and alteration of Affairs in England,
made also Welsh bestir themselves; for Morgan ap Owen, a Man of considerable
Quality and Estate in Wales, remembering the Wrong and Injury he had received at
the hands of Richard Fitz-Gilbert, slew him, together with his Son Gilbert. And
shortly after, Cadwalader and Owen Gwyneth the Sons of Gruffydh ap Conan Prince
of North Wales, having raised a mighty Army, marched against the Normans and
Flemmings, and coming to Cardigan, committed very considerable Waste and
Havoc in the Country, and took two of the strongest Places, one belonging to
Walter Espec, and the Castle of Aberystwyth. In this last place they were
joined by Howel ap Meredith, and Rhys ap Madawc ap Ednerth; who marching
forward, took the Castle of Richard de la Mare, together with those of Dinerth
and Caerwedros, and then returned with very valuable Booty. But having
succeeded so well in this Expedition, they could not rest satisfied, till they
had rid the whole Country from the intolerable Pride and Oppression of the
Normans and Flemings; and therefore returning the same Year to Cardigan with
6000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, well disciplined and experienced Soldiers; and being
joined by Gruffydh ap Rhys and Howel ap Meredith of Brecknock, with his Sons,
and Madawc ap Ednerth; they overran the Country, as far as Aberteifi,
restoring all the former Inhabitants to their proper Inheritances, and
discarding all such Strangers as the late Earl of Strygil had placed in the
Country. But when Stephen, who was Governor of Aberteifi, saw that, he called
to him Robert Fitz-Martyn, the Sons of Gerald, and William Fitz-John, with all
the strength of the Normans, Flemings, and English in Wales, or the Marches;
and meeting with the Welsh betwixt Aber Ned and Aber Dyfi, gave them battle.
But after a very sore and Bloody Encounter, the English began to give ground,
and according to their usual manner, trusting too much to the strength of their
Towns and Fortifications, began to look how to save themselves that way. But
the Welsh pressed upon 'em so hard, that they killed above 3000 Men, besides
several that were drowned and taken Prisoners. This Victory being so happily
obtained, Cadwalader and Owen overran the whole Country, forcing all the
Normans and Flemings to depart the Country with all speed, and placing in their
room those miserable Welsh, who had been so long deprived and kept from their
own Estates; and after they had weeded the Country of those insatiable
Caterpillars, they returned to North Wales, laden with very rich Spoils and
acceptable Plunder. The King of England was not in a condition to take notice
to what Extremities his Subjects were reduced to in Wales, by reason that his
own Nobles of England were risen in Arms against him; the reason of which
Tumult among the Nobility was occasioned by a fallacious Report that went about
of the King's Death, who lay then sick of a Lethargy. They that bore him no
good Will, verified the Rumor as much as they could, and stirred up the common
People in behalf of the Empress; whereas on the other hand the King's Friends
betook themselves to Castles and strong Holds for fear of the Empress, and
among others Hugh Bigod secured the Castle of Norwich, and after that he was
assured that the King was well again, he was loath to deliver the same out of
his possession, England, Gruffydh ap Rhys, Son to Rhys ap Theodore, the right
Heir to the Principality of South Wales, dyed, leaving Issue behind him a Son
called Rhys, commonly known by the Name of Lord Rhys, by Gwenlhian the Daughter
of Gruffydh ap Conan, who by some is said to have poisoned her Husband. Toward
the end of the same Year dyed likewise Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales,
after he had reigned 57 Years; to the great Grief and Discontent of all his
Subjects, as being a Prince of incomparable Qualities, and one who after diverse
Victories obtained over the English, had thoroughly purged North Wales from all
Strangers and Foreigners. He had Issue by Angharad the Daughter of Owen ap
Edwyn, three Sons, namely, Owen, Cadwalader, and Cadwalhon, and five Daughters,
Marret, Susanna, Ranulht, Agnes, and Gwenlhian: and by a Concubine Iago,
Ascain, Edwal Abbot of Penmon, Dolhing, and Elen, who was married to Hova ap
Ithel Felyn of Yal. There were several good and wholesome Laws and Statutes
enacted in his time; and among the rest, he reformed the great Disorders of the
Welsh Minstrels, which were then grown to great Abuse. Of these there were
three sorts in Wales; the first were called Beirdh, who composed several Songs
and Odes of various Measures, wherein the Poet's Skill was not only required,
but also a natural Endowment, or a Vein which the Latins term furor Poeticus.
These likewise kept the Records of all Gentlemen's Arms and Pedegrees, and were
principally esteemed among all the Degrees of the Welsh Poets. The next were
such as played upon Musical Instruments, chiefly the Harp and the Crowd; which
Music Gruffydh ap Conan first brought over into Wales; who being born in
Ireland, and descended by his Mothers side of Irish Parents, brought with him
from thence several skilful Musicians, who invented almost all the Instruments
as were afterward played upon in Wales. The last sort were called Atcaneaid,
whose Business it was to sing to the Instrument played upon by another. Each of
these, by the same Statute, had their several Reward and Encouragement allotted
to them; their Life and Behavior was to be spotless and unblameable, otherwise
their Punishment was very severe and rigid, every one having Authority to
punish and correct them, even to the Deprivation of all they had. They were
also interdicted and forbidden to enter any Man's House, or to compose any Song
of any one, without the special leave and warrant of the Party concerned; with
many other Ordinances relating to the like purpose.

Owen Gwynedh.
AFter the death of Gruffydh ap Conan, his eldest Son Owen, surnamed Gwynedh,
succeeded in the Principality of North Wales; who no sooner had entered upon
the Government, but together with the rest of his Brethren, he made an
Expedition into South Wales; and having demolished and overthrown the Castles
of Stradmeyric, Stephan, and Humffreys, and laid in Ashes the Town of
Caermardhyn, he returned home with no less Honor than Booty and Plunder. About
the same time, John, Archdeacon of Lhanbaran departed this Life, a Man of
singular Piety and strictness of Life, who for his rigid Zeal in Religion and
Virtue, was thought worthy to be canonized, and to be counted among the number
of the Saints. This Year likewise King Stephen passed over to Normandy, and
having concluded a Peace with the French King, and the Duke of Anjou, returned
back to England without any further delay. But the following Spring gave
opportunity for greater Undertakings; David, King of Scots, upon the King of
England's going to France last Summer, had entered the Borders of England, and
continued to make considerable Wast and Havoc in that part of the Country.
Whereupon King Stephen, to rid his Country and his Subjects from so dangerous
an Enemy, marched with an Army toward the North, whose coming the King of
Scots hearing of, he relinquished the Borders of England, and retired to his
own Country. But that would not satisfy King Stephen, who desired to be
further revenged for the unpardonable Hostilities committed by the Scots in his
Country; and therefore pursuing the Scots to their own Country, he harassed and
laid wast all the South part of the Kingdom of Scotland. But the King's absence
animated several of the English Nobility to rebel; to which purpose they
fortified every one their Castles and strong Holds: William Earl of Gloucester
those of Leeds and Bristol; Ralph Lunel, Cari; William Fitz-Allen, Shrewsbury;
Paganellus, Ludlow; William de Moyun, Dunester; Robert de Nichol, Warham;
Eustace Fitz-John, Merton; and Walklyn, Dover. But for all these mighty
Preparations, the King in a short time became Master of them all; some he won
by assault, others upon fair Promises and advantageous Conditions were
surrendered up, and some he got by treacherous and underhand Contrivances. The
Scots thought to make good advantage of these Commotions in England; and
thereupon, as soon as they heard that some of the English Nobility were in
actual Rebellion against the King, they entered into the Borders, and began, as
they thought, without any apprehension of Opposition, to ravage and lay waste
the Country before 'em. But William, Earl of Albemarle; William Pyppell, Earl
of Nottingham; Walter Espec and Gilbert Lacy, gathered together all the Forces
they could raise in the North; and being animated and encouraged by the
eloquent and pressing Oration of Ralph, Bishop of Orkneys, which he delivered
in the audience of the whole Army, they set upon the Scots at Almerton with
such unanimous Courage, that after a very great slaughter of his Men, King
David was glad to escape with his Life by flight. After this, King Stephen
seized to his own use the Castles of Ludlow and Leeds, and pressed the Bishops
of Salisbury and Lincoln so hard, that to prevent their perishing by Famine,
they were constrained to surrender; the former the Castles of Vises and
Shirburn; the latter those of Newark upon Trent and Sleeford. This did not a
little augment the King's strength against the ensuing Storm; for in the Summer
this Year, Maud the Empress, Daughter and Heir to King Henry, to whom King
Stephen, with all the Nobility of England, had sworn Allegiance, landed at
Arundel, with her Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, and was there honorably
received by William de Albineto, who was lately married to Queen Adeliz, King
Henry's Widow, with whom he received the Earldom of Arundel in Dowry. But as
soon as King Stephen heard of her landing, he marched with all possible speed
to Arundel, and laid siege to the Castle; but finding it upon trial
impregnable, he raised the siege, and by that means suffered the Empress and
her Brother to escape to Bristol.

Wales; Cynric, one of Prince Owen's Sons, having by some means or other
disgusted Madawc ap Meredith ap Blethyn ap Confyn, a Person of considerable
Esteem and Estate in the Country, was, with his connivance set upon and slain
by his Men. But the Affairs of England this Year, afforded greater rarity of
action; King Stephen with a formidable Army laid siege to the City of Lincoln,
to the relief of which, Ranulph, Earl of Chester, and Robert Earl of Gloucester,
marched with their Forces. But before they could arrive, the Town was taken;
whereupon they drew up their Forces in order to give the King battle, who on
the other side, was as ready to receive them. King Stephen drew up his Forces
in three Battles, the first being led by the Earls of Britain, Mellent,
Norfolk, Hampton, and Warren; the second by the Earl of Albemarle, and William
of Ypres; and the third by the King himself, assisted by Baldwyn Fitz-Gilbert,
with several others of his Nobility. Of the Enemies side, the disinherited
Barons had the first place; the Earl of Chester, with a considerable Party of
Welchmen, far better couraged than armed, led the second; and the Earl of
Gloucester the third Battle. After a hot and bloody Dispute of both sides, the
Victory at length favored the Barons, King Stephen being first taken Prisoner,
and a little after the Queen, together with William of Ypres, and Bryan
Fitz-Count. But within a while after William Martell and Geffrey de Mandeville
gathered together some fresh Forces, and fought the Empress and her Brother at
Winchester, and having put the Empress to flight, took Earl Robert Prisoner,
for exchange of whom, the King was set at liberty. The next Year King Stephen
would Wilton; which however did not so much discourage him, but that he laid so
close a siege to the Empress at Oxford, that she was glad to make her escape to
Wallingford. The same Year dyed Madawc ap Ednerth, a Person of great Quality
and Note in Wales; and Meredith ap Howel, a Man of no mean Esteem, was slain by
the Sons of Blethyn ap Gwyn.

For the two succeeding Years nothing remarkable Wales; excepting that this
Year Howel ap Meredith ap Rhytherch of Cantref Rychan, and Rhys ap Howel were
cowardly slain by the Treachery and perfidious Practices of the Flemings; and
the next Howel ap Meredith ap Blethyn was basely murdered by his own Men; at
which time, Howel and Cadwgan the Sons of Madawc ap Ednerth, upon some unhappy
Quarrel, did kill each other. But Anarawd Son to Gruffydh ap Rhys Prince of
South Wales, and his Father in Law Cadwalader the Son of Gruffydh ap Conan, and
Brother to Prince Owen Gwynedh; which from Words quickly proceeded to Blows. In
this Scuffle Anarawd was unhappily slain; which so exasperated Prince Owen
against his Brother Cadwalader, that together with his Son Howel, he marched
with an army into his Brothers Country, and after a considerable Waste and
Destruction, burnt to the ground the Castle of Aberystwyth. Cadwalader, upon
the News of Prince Owen's approach, withdrew himself and fled to Ireland; where
having hired a great number of Irish and Scots for Two Thousand Marks, under
the Command of Octer, and the Sons of Turkel and Cherulf, he struck sail for
Wales, and landed at Abermenay in Carnarvonshire. The Prince, to protract no
time, marched with all speed to prevent their farther progress into the
Country; and both Armies being come in view of each other, a Peace was happily
concluded betwixt the two Brothers. The Irish understanding this, and how that
their coming over was like to prove but a Fool's Errant to them, they surprised
and secured Cadwalader, till their Wages and Arrears were paid; who, to obtain
his Liberty, delivered to them two thousand Heads of Cattle, besides many
Prisoners, and other Booty, which they had taken in the Country. But as soon as
the Prince was informed that his Brother Cadwalader was set loose, without any
farther demur upon the case, he fell in upon the Irish, and having slain a very
considerable number of them, recovered all the Booty they purposed to ship off,
and forced as many as could escape, to return with great loss, and a greater
shame back to Ireland.

But the Normans sped far better in Wales; Hugh Son to Radulph Earl of Chester,
having fortified his Castle of Cymaron, set upon and won the Country of
Melienyth a second time; and the Castle of Clun being fortified by another
Lord, all Eluel became subject to the Normans. The same time King Stephen took
Geffry Mandeville Prisoner at S. Albans, where the Earl of Arundel by the slip
of his Horse was like to be drowned in the River. But the Earl of Mandeville,
to obtain his liberty, delivered up to the King the Tower of London, with the
Castles of Walden and Plassey, which reduced him to that condition, that he was
forced to live upon the Plunder and Spoil of Abbeys and other religious Houses,
till at length he was slain in a Skirmish against the King, and his Son
banished the Kingdom.

The next Year a Skirmish happened betwixt Hugh and Rhys ap Howel, wherein the
latter was taken Prisoner, with many others of his Accomplices, who were all
committed to Prison by the English. But it fared much better with Howel and
Conan the Sons of Prince Owen, who having raised an Army against the Flemings
and Normans, gained a considerable Victory at Aberteifi, and having placed a
Garrison in the Town, returned home with great Honor, and much Booty. About
the same time, Sulien ap Rhythmarch, one of the College of Lhanbadarn, and a
Person of great Reading and extensive Learning, departed this Life. Shortly
after, Gilbert Earl of Clare, came with a great number of Forces to Dyfed, and
built the Castle of Caermardhyn, and the Castle of the Sons of Vchtryd. Hugh
Mortimer Meyric ap Madawc ap Riryd ap Bleddu, and Meredic ap Madawc ap Ednerth.
And so far it went of the side of the English; but now the Welsh begin to gain
ground; Cadelh the Son of Gruffydh ap Rhys Prince of South Wales, laid siege to
the Castle of Dynefowr, belonging to Earl Gilbert, which being surrendered up,
Cadelh, assisted by his Brethren Meredith and Rhys, brought his Army before the
Castle of Caermardhyn, which after a short siege yielded in like manner,
reserving only this one Condition, that the Garrison should not be put to the
Sword. From thence he marched to Lhanstephan, and set before the Castle; to the
Relief of which the Normans and Flemings coming with their Forces, were
shamefully vanquished and overcome, and so the Castle was easily delivered up
to the Welsh. But the Normans were so cruelly nettled at this, that they
mustered up all the Forces they could possibly draw together out of the
neighboring Countries, and unexpectedly surrounded the Castle, intending by
all possible means to recover the same. But the Governor, Meredith ap
Gruffydh, a Man of great Years, and no less Experience, so animated and
encouraged the besieged, that when the Normans and Flemings ventured to scale
the Walls, they were bear back with such Vigor, and Loss of their side, that
at length they were compelled to raise the Siege, and leave the Welsh in
possession of the Castle.

Shortly after this, Run the Son of Prince Owen of North Wales, a Youth of
excellent hopes, and incomparable Qualifications, dyed, whose Death his Father
took so much to heart, that for some time he seemed to be past all Comfort,
being fallen into such a melancholy Disposition, that he was diverted with
nothing but Retirement. But an Accident fell out, which roused him out of this
lethargical Fit of Sorrow and Discontent; the Castle of Mould was so very
strong and well garrisoned by the English, that it mightily annoyed the Country
thereabouts, and had been frequently besieged, but could never be taken. Prince
Owen at this time levied an Army and laid close siege to it; and the Garrison
for several assaults behaved it self so manfully, that the place seemed
impregnable and invincible. But the Presence and Example of Prince Owen so
encouraged his Men, that they fell on with all possible Vigor and Might, and
at last forced their entrance into the Castle. Having put a great number of the
Garrison to the Sword, and taken the rest Prisoners, the Castle was rased to
the ground; and this fortunate Attempt so pleased the Prince, that he forgot
all Sorrow for his Son, and returned to his usual Temper and accustomed
Merriments. At the same time, King Stephen of England obtained a remarkable
Victory over his Enemies at Farendon; and although the ensuing Year Rondel Earl
of Chester and he were reconciled, yet he thought it more advisable to detain
him Prisoner, though contrary to his promise, until such time as the Earl would
deliver up the Castle of Lincoln, with all the Forts and places of strength in
his custody.

Cadelh, Meredith, and Rhys, the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys ap Theodor, brought
an Army before the Castle of Gwys; but finding themselves too weak to master
it, they desired Howel, Son to Prince Owen Gwynedh, a Person famously
remarkable for martial Endowments, to come to their assistance. Howel, who was
ever very desirous to signalize himself, and to evidence his Valor to the
World, readily consented to their Request; and having drawn his Forces
together, marched directly toward Gwys, where being arrived, he was joyfully
received, and honorably entertained by such Lords as desired his help. Having
viewed the Strength and Fortification of the Castle, he found it was
impracticable to take the place, without the Walls could be destroyed; and
therefore he gave orders, that certain battering Engines should be provided,
whilst the rest should gaul and molest the besieged, by throwing of great
Stones into the Castle. The Enemies perceiving what irresistible Preparations
the Besiegers contrived, thought it to no purpose to withstand their Fury; and
therefore to do that voluntarily which must be done by compulsion, they
presently yielded up the Castle. Shortly after this a great Difference happened
betwixt the Sons of Prince Owen, Howel, and Conan, and their Uncle Cadwalader;
whereupon the former entered with an Army into the Country of Merionyth, and
committed great Wastes and Hostilities there, insomuch that the Inhabitants
flocked into Sanctuaries to save their Lives. But the young Lords finding what
fearful and unstable condition the People were in, and the better to draw them
to their side, issued out their Proclamation, assuring that all who would
favor their Country, should not only enjoy their Lives, but their former
Liberty and accustomed Privileges; upon the publication of which Edict, the
People returned to their own Habitations. Having by this Stratagem brought all
the Country under their own Pleasure and good Will, they lead their Army before
the Castle of Cynfael, belonging to Cadwalader, which he had built and strongly
fortified. The government of this Castle Cadwalader had committed to Merfyn,
Abbot of Tygwyn, or the White-House; who being summoned to surrender, by the
Brothers Howel and Conan, did not only refuse, but defied their utmost Efforts
upon the place. The Lords finding they could do no good by Threats and Menaces,
judged it more convenient to make use of the other Extreme; and therefore
promised the Abbot a very high Reward, if he would deliver the Castle into
their hands. But all proved to no effect, the Abbot being a Person of more
Honesty and greater Honor, than to be corrupted to betray his Trust; told them
flatly, That he would not deceive his Masters expectation, and therefore would
choose rather to dye with Honor, than to live with Shame. The Lords finding
him inexorable, and withal being vexed, that a Churchman should put such a
stop to their fortunate Proceedings, made such a vigorous Assault upon the
Castle, that after they had pulled down some part of the Walls, they entered in
by force, and ravaged so furiously, that they killed and wounded the whole
Garrison, the Abbot only escaping, who by the help of some of his Friends in
Howel's Army, got away safe. Toward the close of this Year, several Persons of
Note departed this Life, among whom were Robert Earl of Gloucester, and Gilbert
Earl of Clare, as also Vchthryd Bishop of Llandaf, a Man of great Piety and
Learning, in whose See succeeded Nicholas ab Gurgant.

Bernard Bishop of St. David's, and was succeeded by David Fitzgerald, Cardigan.
Sometime after Prince Owen Gwynedh built a Castle in Yale, called Castelh y
Rodwyth; and his Brother Cadwalader built another at Lhanrystid, and bestowed
his part of Cardigan upon his Son Cadwgan. Also Madoc the Son of Meredith ap
Blethyn founded the Castle of Oswestry, and gave his Nephews Owen and Meyric
the Sons of Gruffydh ap Meredith his share of Cyfeilioc.

Conan Son to Prince Owen Gwynedh, for certain Faults and Miscarriages
committed against his Father, though the particulars are not discovered, was put
in Prison, where for some time he continued in Custody. But it fared better
with his Brother Howel, who having made his Uncle Cadwalader his Prisoner,
reduced all his Country, together with his Castle subject to himself. In
South Wales, some Business of moment happened this Year; Cadelh the Son of
Gruffydh ap Rhys having fortified the Castle of Carmardhyn, marched with his
Army toward Cydwely, wasted and destroyed the whole Country, and being
returned home, joined his Army with his Brothers Meredith and Rhys, who entering
into the Country of Cardigan, won that part called Is Aeron. This was succeeded
by an Action of greater Importance in North Wales; some irreconcilable
Difference arising betwixt Prince Owen and Rondel Earl of Chester, quickly
broke out into open War. The Earl made all the possible Preparations the
opportunity would permit, and drew together a considerable Army from all parts
of England and which strengthened and encouraged him the more, he was joined by
Madoc ap Meredith Prince of Powys, who disdaining to hold his Lands of Prince
Owen Gwynedh, chose rather to side with, and abet his Enemies. The Prince on
the other hand was not backward in his Preparations, and perceiving the Enemy
to come upon him, thought it not advisable to suffer him to advance too far
into the Country, but to stop and prevent his Carreer before he should take too
firm a footing in his Dominions. To this end he marched with his whole Power as
far as Counsylht, with full Resolution to give the Earl of Chester Battle,
which the English were glad of, as thinking themselves far more numerous, and
much better Armed and Disciplined than the Welsh. But both Armies having joined
Battle, they quickly faltered in their expectation of undoubted Success, and
finding the Welsh to press so irresistibly severe upon them, they thought it
wiser to retire, and endeavor to save themselves by flight. But the Welsh
pursued them so hard, that few escaped without being either slain or taken
Prisoners, and they some of the Chief Commanders, who through the fleetness of
their Horses, avoided the Fury of their pursuers.

The next Year, the Scene of Action removed to South Wales, Cadelh, Meredith
and Rhys, the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys Prince of South Wales, being entered with
an Army into Cardigan, wan all the Country from Howel the Prince of North Wales
Son, excepting the Castle of Lhanfihangel in Pengwern. The Siege of Lhanrystyd
Castle proved so difficult and unmanagable, that the young Lords of South Wales
lost a great part of their bravest Soldiers before it, which so troubled and
vexed them, that when they got possession of the Castle, they put all the
Garrison to the Sword. From thence they marched to Ystratmerric Castle, which
after they had won, manned and re-fortified, they disbanded their Forces, and
returned home. But Cadelh the eldest of the Brothers, was upon the point of
receiving his last Blow by treachery at home, which he had escaped from the
Enemies abroad. For some of the Inhabitants of Tenbigh in Pembroke shire,
having conceived some displeasure and hatred against Cadelh, were resolved to
revenge themselves, and to lay a Trap for his Life; and having observed what
pleasure he took in Hunting, were resolved to execute their Plot, whilst he was
hot and eager at his Sport. Observing therefore one day how he went a Hunting
with only a few Companions, they placed themselves in an ambuscade, and when
the Game came that way, they unexpectedly set upon the unarmed Sports-men, and
having easily made all the rest fly away, they wounded Cadelh so cruelly, that
he narrowly escaped their hands alive; who making shift to get home, lay for a
long time dangerously ill, and with great difficulty at length recovered his
Life. Upon this, his Brothers Meredith and Rhys passed with an Army into Gwyr,
and having burnt and destroyed the Country thereabouts, they besieged and took
the Castle of Aberlhychwr, but finding they could not keep it, they rased it to
the Ground, and after that, returned home with great Booty to Dynefawr, and
repaired the Fortifications of the Castle there. About the same time also,
Howel, Prince Owen Gwynedh's Son, fortified Humphry's Castle in the Valley of
Caletwr.

Owen did a very barbarous Action to Cunetha, his Brother Cadwalhon's Son, for
fearing lest that this young Man should lay claim to any part of his Estate as
his Father's right, he first pulled out his Eyes, and afterward castrated him,
for fear he should beget any Children, who might some time or other renew their
claim and right to Cadwalhon's Estate. This inhuman severity was succeeded by
another of no small remark; Lhewelyn Son to Madoc ap Meredith having watched a
convenient Opportunity, set upon, and slew Stephen the Son of Baldwin. But
Cadwalader Prince Owen's Brother after a tedious Imprisonment which he had
sustained through the Malice and Rancour of his Nephew Howel, at length made his
escape, and flying to the Isle of Anglesey, brought a considerable part of that
Island under his subjection. But Prince Owen hearing how that his Brother had
got loose from custody, and that he was in actual possession of a great part of
Anglesey, he presently dispatched an Army over, which proving too formidable to
Cadwalader's Party, he was constrained to escape to England, and to desire
Succor from his Wife's Relations, who was the Daughter of Gilbert Earl of
Clare. This Year Galfrede Arthur, commonly called Geffrey of Monmouth, was made
Bishop of St. Asaph, and at the same time Simon Archdeacon of Cyfeilioc, a Man
of great Worth and Esteem in his Country died.

But the Year following, Meredith and Rhys the Sons Gruffydh ap Rhys, Prince of
South Wales, laid Siege to Penwedic Castle, which belonged to Howel Prince
Owen's Son, and after great pains and considerable loss of Men of their side,
at last made themselves Masters of it. From thence they marched by Night to
Tenby, and unexpectedly falling upon the Castle, of which one William
Fitzgerald was Governor, they scaled the Walls before the Garrison were aware
of any Danger, and so possessing themselves of the Castle, they fell foul upon
the Garrison, in Revenge of the Mischief they had done, and further designed to
their Brother Cadelh. For Cadelh at this time was gone upon a Pilgrimage, and
during his absence had committed his whole Inheritance and all other concerns
in Wales, to the Care of his Brethren Meredith and Rhys. But after the taking
Tenby-Castle, they divided their Army into two Parties, with one of which, Rhys
marched to Ystratcongen, and after great havoc and waste committed there, he
passed to Cyfeilioc, which fared in like manner with Ystratcongen. Meredith
with the other Party sat before Aberavan-Castle, and after a short Siege won
and got possession of it, and then returned home with very considerable Booty,
and many rich Spoils. About the same time Rondel Earl of Chester, who had lived
in continual Enmity and frequent Hostility with Prince Owen of North Wales,
departed this Life, leaving his Son Hugh to enjoy both his Titles and Estate in
England, and to prosecute the Feuds and Hostilities against the Welsh.

Meredith Son to Gruffydh ap Rhys Prince of South Wales, who was Lord of
Cardigan Ystratywy and Dyfed, being not passed the Twenty Fifth Year of his
Age, a Person of incomparable Valor and Audacity, and in all his Warlike
Attempts and Achievements very Fortunate. He was presently followed by
Geoffrey Bishop of Llandaf, a Man as Famous for Learning and a good Life, as
the other was for Masculine Bravery and Martial Prowess. In England the face of
things looked very lowering, Henry Surnamed Shortmantel, the Empress Son, landed
in England, and in his progress through the Country took several Castles, among
which were Malmesbury, Wallingford and Shrewsbury. But his Fury was quickly
appeased by the Death of Eustace King Stephen's Son, so that the sole obstacle
for his succeeding to the Crown, being now removed, he willingly concluded a
Peace with King Stephen, permitting him to enjoy the Crown peaceably for his
life, upon Condition Stephen did not long survive this Treaty, and then Henry
Plantagenet, the Empress Son, was Crowned in Henry's reign, Rhys Gruffydh ap
Rhys, King of South Wales, upon apprehension that Owen Gwynedh had raised an
Army for the Conquest of South Wales, drew together all his Strength, and
marched to Aberdyfi to face the Enemy upon their own Borders. But finding the
Rumor to be false, and that the Prince of North Wales had no such Design in
hand, having built a Castle at Aberdyfi, which might defend the Frontiers from
any future Design of his Country, he returned back without attempting any thing
farther. At the same time, Madoc ap Meredith built a Castle at Caereneon near
Cymer, and then Eglwys Fair in Myfot, was founded. About this time also, Meyric
Nephew to Prince Madoc ap Meredith made his escape out of Prison, wherein he
had been detained by his Uncle for a considerable time.

The same Year King Henry being displeased with the Flemings whom his
Predecessor King Stephen had brought over into England, issued out a
Proclamation, charging the greatest part of them to depart his Dominions, and
to retire to their Countrymen in West-Wales, where his Grandfather Henry the
First the Bastard's Son had planted them. And thus that part of Wales called
Pembroke-shire, was overrun with these Strangers, who being better befriended
by the Kings of England, than the Welsh could well expect to be, made sure
footing in that Country, where they have ever since continued firm. It was the
English Policy of those times to accept of any opportunity to curb and keep
under the Welsh, whom they experienced to be none of the safest Neighbors, and
therefore the Kings of England did grant any Lands and Privileges in Wales to
any that would accept of them, which honestly they had no Power to bestow.

But this was not enough in detriment to the Welsh, Henry raised a very great
Army which he gathered from all parts of England, with purpose to subdue all
North Wales, being principally moved hereto, by the instigation of Cadwalader
the Prince's Brother, whom Owen Gwynedh, for what Reasons not known, deprived
of his Estate, and banished the Country. Also Madoc ap Meredith Prince of
Powis, who maligned the Liberty and Privilege of the Princes of North Wales,
who owned subjection to no other than the King of England, whereas those of
Powis were obliged to do homage to the Prince of North Wales, did jointly
consent to this Invitation. The King of England accepting of their Proposals,
led his Army to West-Chester, and encamped upon the Marsh called Saltney, in
Welsh, Morfa-Caer-Lleon. Prince Owen all this while was not ignorant of this
intended Invasion, and therefore having made all possible Preparations to
confront the Enemy, he marched his Army to the Frontiers of England, and
encamping at Basingwerk, resolved to give the English Battle. King Henry
understanding of the Prince's Resolution, detached some of the chiefest Troops
out of the Main-body, under the command of several Earls and other Lords, and
sent them toward the Prince's Camp. But after they had advanced some little
way, and were passing through a Wood, called Coed-Eulo, David and Conan Prince
Owen's Sons, unexpectedly set upon them, and what by the advantage of the
Ground, and the suddeness of the Action, the English were born down with a
great Slaughter, and those who survived, narrowly escaped to the King's Camp.
This was a very unwelcome beginning to King Henry; but however, in order to
prosper better hereafter, he thought it advisable to decamp from Saltney, and
to rank his Troops along the Seacoast, thinking thereby to get betwixt Prince
Owen and his Country, which if he could effect, he was sure to reduce the Welsh
to a very great inconveniency. But the Prince foreseeing the Danger of this,
retired with his Army to a place called Cil Owen, that is, Owen's Retreat,
which when King Henry perceived, he let fall his Design, Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
and came to Ruthlan. W. Parnus writes, that in this Expedition against the
Welsh, King Henry was in great danger of his Life, in passing through a strait at
Counsylth near Flint, where Henry Earl of Essex, who by inheritance enjoyed the
Office of bearing the Standard of England, being overcharged by the Enemy,
cast down the same and fled. This accident so encouraged the Welsh, that they
bore on so violently, that the King himself narrowly escaped, having of his
Party Eustace Fitz-John and Rob. Curcie, two valiant Knights, together with
several others of his Nobility and Gentry slain in the Action.

After this Prince Owen decamped from Cil Owen, and entrenched himself upon
Bryn y Pin, where little of moment passed betwixt the two Armies, only some
slight Skirmishes happened frequently. King Henry in the mean time fortified
the Castle of Ruthlan, and during his stay there, Madoc ap Meredith Prince of
Powis, sailed with the English Fleet to Anglesey, and having put some Men on
shore, they burnt two Churches, and ravaged part of the Country about. But they
paid very dear for it, for all the Strength of the Island being met together,
they set upon them in their return to their Ships, and cut them off in such a
manner, that not one remained to bring Tidings to the Fleet of what had befell
them. But they on Board quickly perceived what had happened, and therefore
thought it not very safe harboring upon that Coast, but judging it more
advisable to weigh Anchor, they presently set Sail for Chester; when they were
arrived thither, they found that a Peace was actually concluded betwixt King
Henry and Prince Owen upon these Articles; That Cadwalader should have all his
Lands restored to him, and he received to the Favor and Friendship of his
Brother. Then King Henry leaving the Castles of Ruthlan and Basingwerk well
manned and fortified, and having near the latter founded a Public Structure
for the Order of Knights Templars, returned to England. But the troubles of
Wales did not end with him, for Iorwerdh Goch ap Meredith who had taken part
with the King of England during this War, laid Siege to the Castle of Yale,
which was built by Prince Owen, and making himself Master of it, rased it to
the ground.

The next Year commenced with a very unfortunate Ifor ap Meyric having long
before cast a very wishful Eye upon the Land and Estate of Morgan ab Owen, was
now resolved to put in execution what he had before contrived; and as
Covetousness seldom bears any regard to Virtue or Honor, he treacherously set
upon him, and slew him; and with him fell Gurgan ap Rhys, the most Famous
British Poet of his time. Morgan's Estate Ifor bestowed upon his Brother
Iorwerth, who about the same time got also possession of the Town of
Caer-Lheon. But these inward and home-bread Disturbances were quickly mitigated
by a general Peace which was presently after this concluded betwixt the King of
England and all the Princes and Lords of Wales, Rhys ab Gruffydh ap Rhys Prince
of South Wales only excepted. For this Prince Rhys, who probably would not rely
too far upon the King of England's Fidelity, refused to consent to a Peace; but
however, to secure himself the best he could from the English, whom he had no
small reason to be afraid of, he thought it his best Prudence to issue out his
Orders, commanding his Subjects to remove their Cattle and other Effects to the
Wilderness of Tywy, where they were like to remain securest from the Eyes and
reach of the Enemies. But he had not continued there long, when he received a
more positive Express from King Henry, commanding him to appear forthwith at
his Court, and to accept of the Proposals of Peace, before the joint Forces of
England and Wales were sent to fetch him up. Prince Rhys having received such a
threatening Message, thought it now high time to repent of what he had before so
rashly resolved upon, and therefore after long Consultation, he judged it his
wisest way to accept of the King's Proposals and to appear at Court. There it
was agreed upon, that Rhys, whose Lands heretofore lay scattered about, and
were intermixed with other Person's Estate, should enjoy Cantref Mawr, and any
other Cantref which the King should be pleased to bestow upon him. But contrary
to this Article, the King assigned him several Lordships and other Lands far
remote from each other, and particularly intermixed them with the Estates of
Englishmen, whom he was sure would be a watch and a curb to all the motions of
Prince Rhys. This was indeed a very politic Contrivance or King Henry to keep
under the high and restless Spirit of Rhys; but the Justice of the Action does
not so evidently appear in breaking one of the chiefest Articles of the Peace,
and chopping and bestowing that which was not justly in his Power to give. But
it is manifestly apparent that the English of these times were mainly concerned
right or wrong to oppress and keep under the Welsh of whose mortal hatred to
subjection they had so frequently and so cruelly felt. Prince Rhys was not at
all ignorant of these wrongful and deceitful Dealings of King Henry, but
knowing himself to be unable to redress these Grievances, he thought it more
advisible for a time to live quietly with a little than rashly to hazard all.
But in a short time, he had opportunity either to demand redress from the King,
or else to endeavor it himself by Force of Arms. For as soon as Roger Earl of
Clare was informed of the distribution which the King of England had granted to
Prince Rhys, he came to King Henry, requesting of his Majesty, that he would
grant him such Lands in Wales, as he could win by force of Arm^ The King
readily complied with his Request, being always very forward to grant any thing
which seemed to curb and discommode the Welsh, and therefore the Earl of Clare
marched with a great Army into Cardigan, and having fortified the Castles of
Ystrat-Meyric, Humphrey, Dyfi, Dynerth and Lhanrhystyd, he made several
Incursions into the Country. In the same manner, Walter Clyfford who was
Governor of Lhanymdhyfri Castle, made in-roads into the Territories of Prince
Rhys, and after he had slain several of the Welsh, and made great waste in the
Country, returned with considerable Booty.

Prince Rhys as he was unable to bear these outrages, so he was resolved either
to have immediate redress, or else to proclaim open War against the English,
and therefore he sent an Express to King Henry, complaining of the Hostilities
which his Subjects the Earl of Clare and Walter Clifford had committed in in
his Country. But finding the King to put him still off with only smooth Words
and fair Promises, and that he always winked at the Faults of the English and
Normans, without any farther Consultation about the Matter, he laid Siege to
the Castle of Lhanymdhyfri, and in short time made himself Matter of it. Also
Eineon the Son of Anarawd, Rhy's Brother's Son, and a Person of great Valor,
being desirous to free his Country from that miserable servitude they now
groaned under, and judging withal that his Uncle was now discharged from the
Oath he had lately sworn to the King of England, sat before the Castle of
Humphrey, and having forcibly made his entrance into it, he put all the
Garrison to the Sword, where he found a great number of Horses and Armor,
enough to arm a considerable Body of Men And whilst Eineon was thus engaged at
Humphrey's Castle, Prince Rhys perceiving that he could not enjoy any part of
his Inheritance but what he afterward got by the Sword, drew all his Power
together and entered Cardigan, where like a most violent Torrent, he overrun
the Country, that he left not one Castle standing of those which his Enemies
had fortified, and so brought all the Country to his subjection, King Henry
being sore offended at the progress which Prince Rhys so suddenly made against
him, returned with a great Army into South Wales, but finding it to no purpose
to attempt any thing against the Prince, he thought it more advisable to permit
him to enjoy all that he had gotten, and only to take Hostages for his
observing of Peace during his absence out of the Kingdom, which Prince Rhys
promising to do, he forthwith returned to England, and soon after went for
Normandy, where he concluded a Peace with the French King.

Rhys of South Wales without any respect to his promise to King Henry last
Year, led his Forces to Dyfed, and destroyed all the Castles that the Normans
had fortified in that Country, and then laid Siege to Caermardhyn. But Reynold
Earl of Bristol, the King's base Son, being informed of it, called together the
Earl of Clare, his Brother-in-Law Cadwalader, Prince Owen of North-Wales's
Brother, Howel and Conan Owen's Sons, with two Earls more, who with their joint
Forces marched to raise the Siege. But Prince Rhys was wiser than to abide
their coming, and therefore upon the first intimation of such great Opposition,
he retired to the Mountains called Cefn Rester, and there encamped, being
sufficiently secure from any Enemy, by the natural Fortification of the place.
The Confederate Army lay at Dynwylhir; and there built a Castle, but finding no
news or tidings of Prince Rhys, they returned home without effecting any thing
of Note. King Henry was still in Normandy, and there made War against the Earl
of St. Giles, for the City and Earldom of Toulouse.

Toward the beginning of this Year, Madoc ap Meredith ap Blethyn Prince of
Powis died at Winchester, whence his Body was honorably conveyed to Powis, and
buried at Myfod. He was a Prince very much affected to Piety and Religion, very
charitable to the necessitous, and good to the distressed; but his great Fault
was, that he stickled too hard for the Interest of the English, and was always
in Confederacy with King Henry against the good Success of his Native Country.
He had Issue by his Wife Susanna, the Daughter of Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of
North Wales, three Sons, Gruffydh Maylor, Owen and Elis, and a Daughter named
Marred. He had also three natural Sons, Owen Brogynton, Cynwric Efelh, and
Eineon Efelh, who though base born, yet according to the Custom of Wales,
co-inherited with their Brethren who were legitimate.

And here it will not be amiss, once for all, to give a particular account of
the Principality, afterward the Lordships of Powis, how it came to be divided
into many shares and portions, and by that means became so irrecoverably broken
and weakened, that it was made subject to the Normans before the rest of Wales.
For Powis before King Offa's time, reached Eastward to the Rivers of Severn and
Dee, in a right Line from the end of Broxen Hills to Salop, and comprehended
all the Country between the Wye and Severn, which was anciently the Estate of
Brochwel Yscithroc, of whom mention is made before. But after the making of
Offa's dike, Powis was contracted into a narrower compass, the plain Country
toward Salop being inhabited by Saxons and Normans, so that the length of it
reached North-East, from Pulford-Bridge to Lhangiric-Parish on the Confines of
Cardigan-shire, to the South-West, and the breadth from the farthest part of
Cyfeilioc Westward, to Elsmere on the East Side. This Principality, Roderic the
Great gave to his youngest Son Merfyn, in whose Posterity it remained entire,
till the death of Blethyn ap Confyn, who though he had divided it betwixt his
Sons Meredith and Cadwgan; yet it came again whole and entire to the possession
of Meredith ap Blethyn. But he again broke the Union, and left it between his
two Sons Madawe and Gruffydh; the first of which was Married to Susanna the
Daughter of Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales, and had with her that
part, afterward called by his Name, Powis Fadoc. After his death, this Lordship
was divided also betwixt his Sons Gruffydh Maelor, Owen ap Madawc, and Owen
Brogynton, which last, though basely born, had however, for his incomparable
Valor and Courage, a share of his Father's Estate, namely, Edeyrneon and
Dinmael, which he left to his Sons Gruffydh, Blethyn and Iorwerth. Owen Madawc
had to his Portion Mechain-Is-Coed, and had Issue Lhewelyn and Owen Fychan. But
Gruffydh Maelor the eldest Son, Lord of Bromfield, had to his part, both the
Maelors with Mochnant-is-Raydar, and married Angharad the Daughter of Owen
Gwynedh Prince of North Wales, by whom he had Issue one Son named Madawc, who
held his Father's Inheritance entirely, and left it so to his only Son
Gruffydh, who was called, Lord of Dinas Bran, because he lived in that Castle:
He married Emma the Daughter James Lord Audley, by whom he had Issue Madawc,
Lhewelyn, Gruffydh and Owen. This Gruffydh ap Madawc took part with King Henry
the Third, and Edward the First against the Prince of North Wales; and
therefore for fear of the said Prince, he was forced to keep himself secure
within his Castle of Dinas Bran, which being situated upon the summity of a
very steep Hill, seemed impregnable to all the daring Efforts, that could be
used against it. After his death, Edward the first dealt very unkindly with his
Children who were of Age to manage their own Concerns; and making two of them
privately away, bestowed the Wardship of Madoc his eldest Son, who had by his
Father's Will, the Lordships of Bromfield and Yale, with the reversion of
Maelor Saesnec Hopesdale and Mouldsdale, his Mother's Jointure, on John Earl
Warren; and the Wardship of Lhewelyn, to whose share fell the Lordships of
Chirke and Nanheudwy, to Roger Mortimer, third Son to Roger Mortimer the Son of
Ralph Mortimer, Lord Mortimer of Wigmor. But Emma Gruffydh's Wife, having in
her possession for her Dowry, Maelor Saesnec, Hopesdale, and Moulsdale, with
the presentation of Bangor Rectory; and seeing two of her Sons disinherited and
done away, and the fourth dead without Issue, and doubting lest Gruffydh her
only surviving Child could not long continue, she conveyed her Estate to the
Audley's, her own Kin, who getting possession of it took the same from the
King, from whom it came to the House of Derby, where it continued for a long
time; till at length it was sold to Sir John Glynne, Sergeant at Law, in whose
Family it still remains. But Earl Warren and Roger Mortimer, forgetting what
signal Service Gruffydh ap Madoc had performed for the King, guarded their new
Possessions with such caution and strictness, that they took especial care they
should never return to any of the Posterity of the legal Proprietor; and
therefore having obtained the King's Patent, they began to secure themselves in
the said Lordships. John Earl Warren began to build Holt-Castle, which was
finished by his Son William, and so the Lordships of Bromfield and Yale
continued in the name of the Earls of Warren for three Descents, viz. John,
William and John, who dying without Issue; the said Lordships, together with
the Earldom of Warren descended to Alice Sister and Heir to the last John Earl
Warren, who was married to Edmond Fitz Alan Earl of Arundel, in which House
they remained for three Descents, namely Edmund, Richard, Richard his Son, and
Thomas Earl of Arundel. But for want of Issue to this last, Thomas Earl of
Arundel and Warren, the said Lordships fell to two of his Sisters, whereof one
named Elizabeth, was married to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and the other
called Joan, to William Beauchamp Lord of Abergavenny: But since they came to
the Hands of Sir William Stanley Knight, who being attainted of High Treason,
they devolved by forfeiture to the Crown, and now are annexed to the
Principality of Wales. But Roger Mortimer the other sharer in the Lands of
Gruffydh ap Madoc, was made Justice of North Wales, built the Castle of Chirke,
and married Lucia the Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert de Wafre Knight, by whom
he had Issue Roger Mortimer, who was married to Joan Turbervill, by whom he had
John Mortimer Lord of Chirke. This John sold the Lordship of Chirke to Richard
Fitzalan Earl of Arundel, Edmund's Son, and so it was again annexed to
Bromfield and Yale.

The third Son of Gruffydh Lord of Dinas Bran, named also Gruffydh, had for his
part Glyn Dwrdwy, which Gruffydh ap Gruffydh had Issue Madoc Crupl, who was the
Father of Madoc Fychan, the Father of Gruffydh, the Father of Gruffydh Fychan,
who was the Father of Owen Glyndwr, who rebelling in the days of Henry the
Fourth, Glyndwrdwy by confiscation came to the King, of whom it was afterward
purchased by Robert Salisbury of Rug, in whose Family it still remains. Owen
the Fourth Son of Gruffydh Lord of Dinas Bran, had for his share Cynlhaeth with
the Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging. The other part of Powys,
comprehending the Countries of Arustly, Cyfeilioc, Lhannerch-hudol, Caereneon,
Mochnach uwch Rayadr, Mechan uwch Coed, Moudhwy, Deudhwr, Ystrad Marchelh, and
Teir Tref, or the three Towns, rightfully descended to Gruffydh ap Meredith ap
Blethyn, by Henry the first created Lord Powys Who married Gweyryl or Weyryl
the Daughter of Vrgene ap Howel ap Iefaf ap Cadogan ap Athlestan Glodryth, by
whom he had Issue Owen Surnamed Cyfeilioc. This Owen enjoyed his Father's
Estate entire, and married Gwenlhiam the Daughter of Owen Gwynedh Prince of
North Wales, who bore him one Son, named Gwenwynwyn or Wenwynwyn, from whom
that part of Powys was afterward called Powys Wenwynwyn He had moreover a base
Brother, called Caswalhon, upon whom he bestowed the Countries of Swydh
Lhannerch Hudol, and Braniarth. Gwenwynwyn succeeded his Father in all his
Estate saying what Caswalhon enjoyed, and married Margaret the Daughter of Rhys
ap Theodor Prince of South Wales, by whom he had Gruffydh ap Gwen^ynwyn, who
succeeding his Father in all his Possessions, had Issue six Sons, by Margaret
the Daughter of Robert Corbet, Brother to Thomas Lord Corbet of Cous; and so
the entire Estate of Gruffydh ap Meredith ap Blethyn Lord of Powys, became
shattered, and torn into diverse Pieces. Owen Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn's eldest
Son, had for his part Arustly, Cyfeilioc, Lhannerch Hudol, and a part of
Caereneon; Lhewelyn had Mochnant uwch Rayadr, and Mechain uwch Coed; John the
third Son, had the fourth part of Caerenion; William had Moudhwy; Gruffydh
Fychan had Deudh rr Ystrat-Marchelh, and Teir Tref; and David the sixth and
youngest Son, had the other fourth part of Caereneon. Owen ap Gruffydh had
Issue one only Daughter, named Hawys Gadarn, or the Hardy, whom he left his
Heir; but her Uncles Lhewolyn, John, Gruffydh Fychan, and David, thinking it an
easy matter to dispossess an Orphan, challenged the Lands of their Brother
Owen, alleging for a Cloak to their Usurpation, that a Woman was not capable
of holding any Lands in that Country. But Hawys made such Friends in England,
that her Case was made known to King Edward the Second, who bestowed her in
Marriage upon a Servant of his, named John Charleton, termed Valectus Domini
Regis, who was born at Appley near Wellington, in the County of Salop, Anno One
Thousand Two Hundred Sixty Eight, and in her Right, created him Lord Powys.

This John Charleton Lord Powys, being aided and supported by the King of
England, quickly broke all their Measures; and having taken Lhewelyn, John, and
David, his Wives Uncles, he put them in safe custody, in the Kings Castle of
Harlech; and then obtained a Writ from the King to the Sheriff of Shropshire,
and to Sir Roger Mortimer, Lord of Chirkland, and Justice of North Wales, for
the Apprehension of Gruffydh Fychan, with his Sons in Law, Sir Roger Chamber
and Hugh Montgomery, who were then in actual Hostility against him and his Wife
Hawys. But Gruffydh Fychan and his Accomplices suspecting their own Strength,
and having lost Thomas Earl of Lancaster, their main support, thought it most
advisable to submit themselves to the King's Pleasure, touching the Difference
betwixt them and Hawys; who finding upon record, how that Gruffydh ap Meredith,
Ancestor to the said Hawys, upon his Submission to King Henry the First, became
Subject to the King of England, and thereupon was created Baron of Powys, which
Barony he and his Posterity had ever since held in capite from the King; was of
opinion, that Hawys had more Right to her Fathers Possessions now in their
hands, than any pretense they could lay to her Estate. But to make a final
determination of this matter, and to compose the Difference more amicably
betwixt them; it was agreed, that Hawys should enjoy her Inheritance in
Fee-Simple to her and her Heirs for ever, after the Tenure of England; and that
her Uncles Lhewelyn, John, David, and Gruffydh, should quietly enjoy their
Portion, and the same to descend to their Heir Males perpetually; but in
default of such Heir Males, the same was to descend to Hawys and her Heirs. But
William Lord of Mowdhwy, the Fourth Brother, called otherwise Wilcock Mowdhwy,
because he did not join with the rest against Hawys, had all his Lands
confirmed to him, and to all his Heirs, both Male and Female for ever. He
married Elianor, the Sister of Elen, Owen Glyndwr's Mother, who was lineally
descended from Rhys ap Theodore, Prince of South Wales, by whom he had Issue
John de Mowdhwy; whose Daughter Elizabeth, being Heir to his whole Estate, was
married to one Sir Hugh Burgh, Knight. His Son Sir John Burgh, Lord of Mowdhwy,
married Jane the Daughter of Sir William Clapton of Glocestershire, by whom he
had four Daughters, Elizabeth, Ancreda, Isabel, and Elianor; the first of whom
was married to Thomas Newport, the second to John Leighton of Stretton; the
third to John Lingen; and the younger to Tho. Mytton; who by equal
Distribution, had the Lordship of Mowdhwy divided betwixt them.

But John Charleton Lord of Powys had Issue by his Wife Hawys, a Son named
John, who enjoyed the same Lordship for about Seven Years, and then left it to
his Son, of the same Name, who was Lord of Powys Fourteen Years; and then it
descended to his Son, called also John Charleton, who enjoyed his Fathers
Estate Twenty Seven Years; but dying without Issue, the Lordship of Powys fell
to his Brother Edward Charleton. This Edward had Issue by his Wife Elianor, the
Daughter and one of the Heirs of Thomas Earl of Kent, and the Widow of Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, two Daughters, Jane and Joyce; the first of which was
married to Sir John Gray, Knight; and the second to John Lord Tip^oft, whose
Son was by King Henry VI. created Earl of Worcester. But after the death of
Elianor, this Edward Lord Powys married Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir John
Barkley, Knight; and so after his death, which happened in the Year 1420. the
Lordship of Powys was divided into three parts, whereof his Widow Elizabeth had
for her Jointure Lhannorch Hudol, Ystrad Marchel^, Deudhwr, and Teirtref; and
was afterward married to Lord Dudley. Jane his eldest Daughter had Caereneon,
Mechain, Mochnant, and Flasdinas; and Joyce had Cyfeilioc, and Arustly. But the
Lordship of Powys continued in the Family of Sir John Gray, for five Descents,
in right of his Wife Jane: the last of whom, Edward Gray, Lord Powys, married
Anne, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk,
and dyed without any lawful Issue. Dugdale Bar. Engl. Tom. II. p. 284.
This Edward Lord Powys, in 15 Henry VIII. accompanied the Duke of Suffolk in
the Expedition then made into France, and was at the taking of Bray, and other
places then won from the French. And in 36 Henry VIII. being again ready to
march in the King's Service, he made his last Testament, whereby he settled the
Succession of his whole Barony and Lordship of Powys, his Castle and Manor of
Pool, with diverse other Lordships in the County of Montgomery, and all the rest
of his Estate in the County of Salop, upon the Heirs of his own Body lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten; and in default of such Issue, his Castle and
Manor of Charlton and Pontisbury in Shropshire, upon Jane Orwell, Daughter of
Sir Lewis Orwell, Knight, and her Assigns, during her natural Life. And in case
he should dye without any Issue of his own Body lawfully begotten, that then
Edward Gray, his illegitimate Son by the same Jane Orwell, should have and
enjoy his said Barony and Manor of Powys, his Castle and Manor of Pool, and
all other his Lordships in the County of Montgomery; with the Reversion of the
Castle and Manor of Charlton and Pontysbury, to him and his Heirs lawfully
begotten: and for lack of such Issue, to remain to that Child, in case it
should be a Son, wherewith the same Jane Orwell was then great by him, and to
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten. But if it should not prove a Son, or
if the Son dye without Issue, then that the whole Barony of Powys and all the
Premises beforementioned, should come to Jane Gray his Daughter, and to the
Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten; and for lack of such Issue, to Anne Gray,
his other Daughter, and the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten; and lastly for
default of such Issue, to such Woman-Child as should be born of the Body of the
said Jane Orwell. But after Edward Gray, the Title of Lord of Powys lay extinct
to the Fifth Year of K. Charles I. when Sir William Herbert Son of Sir Edward
Herbert of Redcastle (anciently called Pool-Castle, now Powys-Castle) in the
County of Montgomery, second Son to William Earl of Pembrock, was advanced to
the Dignity of a Baron of the Realm, by the Title of Lord Powys of Powys, in
the Marches of Wales; in whose Family it still continues, though the Title has
been changed from a Baron to an Earl, and since to a Marquess.

About the same time that the Prince of Powys dyed, Cadwalhon ap Madawc ap
Ednerth, who had been for some considerable time at variance with his Brother
Eineon Clyd, was taken Prisoner by him; who delivered him up to Owen Prince of
North Wales. But the Prince being willing to gratify the King of England,
whose Interest Cadwalhon has as much as in him lay opposed, sent him to the
King's Officers to be imprisoned at Winchester; from whence he quickly found a
way to escape: And by the advice of the rest of his Brethren, he returned home
to his Country. King Henry continued all this while in Normandy, and during his
stay there, a Match was concluded upon betwixt his Son Henry and Margaret
Daughter to Lewis King of France. But this new alliance could not prevent these
two Monarchs from Henry marched with his Army to Gascoyne, to quell certain
Rebels, who upon first notice of this Breach between both Kings, were up in
Arms against the English. But the next Year, a Peace was again concluded, and
so all things returned to their former state of Wales; for Howel the Son of
Ievaf ap Cadwgan ap Athlestlan Glodryth, having got to his hand the Castle of
Walwern in Cyfeilioc, rased it to the ground, which so incensed Prince Owen,
who was Owner of it, that nothing could lay his fury, till he had drawn his
Forces together, and made an incursion into Lhandhinam in Arustly, Howel's
Country; which he cruelly harrassed, and carried away considerable Booty. The
People of the Country perceiving these Devastations of the North Wales Men,
came together to the number of 300 Men, offering their Service to their natural
Lord, Howel ap Iefaf; who upon this addition of strength, followed the Enemy to
the Banks of Severn, where they were encamped. Prince Owen finding them to
march after him, was glad of the opportunity to be further revenged upon Howel;
and so turning suddenly upon them, he slew about Two Hundred Men; the rest
narrowly escaping with Howel to the Woods and Rocks. Owen being more joyful for
the Revenge he had taken of Howel, than for any Victory he had gained, rebuilt
Walwern Castle, and having well fortified and manned it, returned home to
North Wales.

Owen the Son of Gruffydh ap Meredith, commonly called Owen Cyfeilioc o Wynedh,
together with Owen ap Madawc ap Meredith, and Meredith ap Howel, set upon
Carrechofa Castle near Oswestry, and having overpowered the Garrison, committed
great Waste and Destruction therein. But about the same time, a pleasant
passage happened in England; Robert Mountford and Henry de Essex, who had both
fought against the Welsh upon the Marches, and both run, began now to impeach
each other, as being the first occasion of flying. The Dispute was to be tried
by Combat, in which being engaged, Henry was overcome; and for his false
accusing of Robert, he was sentenced to have his Estate forfeited, and then
having his Crown shorn, he was entered a Monk at Redding. Within a little
after, King Henry calling to mind what Prince Rhys had committed during his
absence out of the Kingdom, drew up a great Army against South Wales, and
having marched as far as Pencadyr near Brecknock, Rhys met him, and did his
Homage; and having delivered up Hostages for his future Behavior, stopped the
King's farther progress, so that thence he returned to England. But after the
King's departure, two very unlucky Accidents happened in Wales; Eineon the Son
of Anarawd ap Gruffydh, Nephew to Prince Rhys, being villainously murdered in
his Bed by his own Servant, called Walter ap Lhywarch; as also Cadwgan ap
Meredith in like manner, by one Walter ap Riccart. But the loss of his Nephew,
Prince Rhys made up, by possessing himself of that large Country called Cantref
Ma^r, and the Land of Dynefowr, which he afterward enjoyed. Of men of Learning
there dyed this Year, Cadifor ap Daniel, Archdeacon of Cardigan; and Henry ap
Arthen, the greatest Scholar that had flourished in Wales for many Years.

The next Year, a total Rupture broke forth betwixt English and Welsh; Prince
Rhys, a Man of an active and uncontrollable Spirit, being now experimentally
sensible he could never carry on the Greatness and Grandeur of his Quality,
with such lands as the King of England had allotted him, made an Invasion into
the Lordship of Roger de Acre Earl of Gloucester; being moved thereto in a great
measure, by reason that his Nephew Anarawd ap Gruffydh was murdered by his
motive and instigation. Being advanced with a strong Army into the Earl of
Glocester's Estate, without any great opposition he took Aberheidol Castle,
with those belonging to the Sons of Wyhyaon; all which he rased to the ground.
Thence he marched to Cardigan, bringing all that Country under his subjection;
and from thence he marched against the Flemings, whose Country he cruelly
harassed with Fire and Sword. The rest of the Estates of Wales, perceiving
Prince Rhys to prosper so successfully against the English, thought they might
equally succeed, and shake off the English Yoke, which so unreasonably
oppressed them. And therefore they unanimously agreed to cast off their
Subjection to the English, whose Tyranny they could no longer bear, and to put
over them Princes of their own Nation, whose Superiority they could better
tolerate. And so this Year concluded with making suitable Preparations for the
following Campaign.

And therefore as soon as the time of year for action was advanced, David Son
of Owen Prince of North Wales fell upon Flintshire, which pertained to the King
of England; and carrying off all the People and Cattle with him, brought them
to Dyffryn Clwyd, otherwise Ruthyn Land. King Henry understanding this,
gathered together his Forces, and with all speed marched to defend both his
Subjects and Towns from the Incursions and Depredations of the Welsh. Being
come to Ruthlan, and encamped there three days, he quickly perceived he could
do no great matter, by reason that his Army was not sufficiently numerous; and
therefore he thought it more advisable to return back to England, and to
augment his Forces, before he should attempt any thing against the Welsh. And
accordingly he levied the most chosen Men throughout all his Dominions of
England, Normandy, Anjou, Gascoin and Gwien; besides those Succors from
Flanders and Britain; and then set forward for North Wales, purposing to
destroy without Mercy every living thing he could possibly meet with; and being
advanced as far as Croes-Oswalt, called Oswestry, he encamped there. On the
other side, Prince Owen and his Brother Cadwalader, with all the strength of
North Wales; Prince Rhys with those of South Wales; Owen Cyfeilioc and Madawc
ap Meredith with all the Power of Powys; the two Sons of Madawc ap Ednerth,
with the People living betwixt the Rivers of Severn and Wye, met together, and
pitched their Camp at Corwen in Edeyrneon, intending unanimously to defend
their Country against the King of England. King Henry understanding that they
were so near, was very desirous to come to Battle; and to that end he removed
to the Banks of the River Ceireoc, causing all the Woods thereabouts to be cut
down, for fear of any Ambushment lurking therein, and for a more clear prospect
of the Enemy. But some of the Welsh took advantage of this opportunity, who
being well acquainted with the Passage, without the knowledge of their Officers,
fell upon the King's Guard, where all the Pike-men were posted; and after a hot
Skirmish, several were slain on both sides. But in fine, the King wan the
passage, and so marched on to the Mountain of Berwyn, where he lay sometime
without any Hostility on either side, both Armies standing in fear of each
other. The English kept the open Plains, and were afraid to be entrapp'd in the
Streights and narrow Passages; and the Welsh on the other hand watched the
Advantage of the place, and observed the English so narrowly, that neither
Forage or Victuals could pass to the King's Camp. And what augmented the misery
of the English Army, there happened to fall such a Rain, that mightily
disturbed their Encampment, in so much that the Soldiers could scarcely stand,
for the disadvantage of those slippery Hills. But in the end King Henry was
forced to decamp, and after a very considerable loss of Men and Ammunition,
besides the great Charges of this Expedition, was compelled to return back to
England. But to express the great dissatisfaction he entertained of this
Enterprise, in a great fury he plucked out the Eyes of the Hostages, which he
had some time before received from the Welsh; which were Rhys and Cadwalhon the
Sons of Owen Prince of North Wales, and Cynric and Meredith the Sons of Rhys of
South Wales. Some write, that in assailing of a Bridge, the King was in no small
danger of his Life; one of the Welsh having aimed directly at him, was like to
pierce him through the Body, had not Hubert de Clare, Constable of Colchester,
who perceived the Arrow a coming, thrust himself betwixt the King and it,
though to the loss of his own Life.

But though King Henry was shamefully forced to return to England, yet he did
not give over the thoughts of subduing the Welsh; and therefore after a long
Consultation, he made a third Expedition into Wales, conveying his Army by Sea,
as far as Chester. There he staid for some time, till all his Fleet, as well
those Ships that he had hired out of Ireland, as his own, were all arrived. But
when they were all come together, and got safely to Chester, his mind was
altered; and instead of a design against Wales, he unexpectedly dismissed his
whole Army. Prince Rhys was glad of this opportunity, and therefore withdrawing
his Forces from the Confederate Army, he marched to the Siege of Aberteifi
Castle, which being surrendered to him, he rased to the ground. From thence he
got before Cilgerran, which he used after the same manner, and therein took
Prisoner Robert the Son of Stephen his Cosin-German, who was the Son of Nest
his Aunt, who after the death of Gerald, had married Stephen Constable. The joy
of these happy Successes on the part of the Welsh, was somewhat clouded by the
death of Lhewelyn, Son of Owen Prince of North Wales, a Person of great Worth,
and exceedingly well beloved of all his Country.

Welsh being something secure from any Invasion from the English; there rose up
another Enemy to create them Disturbance; the Flemings and Normans finding the
English to fail in their Attempt against the Welsh, thought they might with
better success quell and subdue them. And therefore they came to West-Wales
with a great Army, and laid siege to the Castle of Cilgerran, which Rhys had
lately fortified; but after two different Assaults, they were manfully beat
back, and forced to depart home again. But what the Flemings could not effect
against the Welsh in South Wales, the Welsh easily brought about against the
English in North Wales; for Prince Owen having besieged Basingwerk Castle, then
in the possession of the King of England, without much time spent, made himself
Master of it. But it was always the misfortune of the Welsh, that when they
found themselves secure from any Enemy abroad, they were sure to quarrel and
fall out at home; though indeed it could not be well otherwise expected, where
so many petty States endeavored still to surmount and outvie one another. And
now when all things went very successfully of their sides, in opposition to the
English; two ambitious Persons began to kindle a Flame in their own bosoms;
Owen Cyfeilioc the Son of Gruffydh ap Maredith Lord of Powys, and Owen Fychan
second Son to Madawc ap Meredith, forcibly dispossessed Iorwerth Goch of his
Estate in Powys, which they divided betwixt themselves; Mochnant Vwch Rayadr to
Owen Cyfeilioc, and Mochnant is Rayadr to Owen Fychan.

But the rest of the Princes of Wales could not brook this Injury done to
Iorwerth Goch; and therefore Owen Prince of North Wales, with his Brother
Cadwalader, and Rhys Prince of South Wales, went with an Army into Powys
against Owen Cyfeilioc, and having chased him out of the Country, they bestowed
Caereneon upon Owen Fychan, to hold it of Prince Owen; and Rhys had Walwern, by
reason that it lay near his own Territories. But within a while after, Owen
Cyfeilioc returned with a numerous band of Normans and English along with him,
and laid siege to the Castle of Caereneon, which he burnt to the ground. But
the loss of this place was made up by the taking of Ruthlan Castle, which Owen,
Rhys, and Cadwalader jointly besieged; and which was so strongly fortified, and
so manfully defended, that it cost them three Months before they could make
themselves Masters of the place. Afterward they won the Castle of Prestatyn,
and reduced the whole Country of Tegengl, subject to Prince Owen; and then
returned home to their respective Dominions. And from henceforward nothing of
moment was transacted, during the remainder of Prince Owen's Reign, Conan most
unmercifully slew Vrgeney Abbot of Lhwythlawr, together with his Nephew
Lhawthen. But a little after, Prince Rhys of South Wales Robert, Son to Stephen
Constable, whom, as is said before, he had taken at the Siege of Calgarran
Castle, and sent him to Ireland to the aid of Dermot the Son of Murchart King
of Linster, who was then in actual war with the King of Leimster. With him and
his Brother Morris Fitzgerald, and their Nephews Robert Meyler and Raymond,
went over a strong Detachment of Welchmen, under the command of Richard
Strongbow Earl of Strigule, who were the chief motive of the Conquest of
Ireland, when it was first brought in subjection to the Crown of England.

Owen Gwynedh Son of Gruffydh ap Conan Prince of North Wales, departed this
Life, in the Two and Thirtieth Year of his Reign. He was a wise and a valourous
Prince, ever fortunate and victorious in all his Undertakings, insomuch, as he
never undertook any Design but what he accomplished. He had by different Women
several Issues, who gat themselves greater Esteem by their Valor, than by
their Birth and Parentage. He had by Gwladus the Daughter of Lhywarch ap
Trahaern ap Caradoc, Iorwerth Drwyndwn, or the broken Nose, Conan, Maelgon, and
Gwenlhian; by Christian the Daughter of Grono ap Owen ap Edwyn, he had David,
Roderic, Cadwalhon Abbot of Bardsey, and Angharad, afterward married to
Gruffydh Maylor. He had by other Women several other Children, as Conan,
Lhewelyn, Meredith, Edwal, Rhun, Howel, Cadelh, Madawc, Eineon, Cynwric,
Philip, and Ryrid Lord of Clochran in Ireland. Of these, Run, Lhewelyn, and
Cynwric died before their Father; and the rest will be mentioned in the Sequel
of this History.

David ap Owen.
PRince Owen Gwynedh being dead, the Succession was of right to descend to his
eldest legitimate Son, Iorwerth Drwyndwn, otherwise called Edward with the
broken Nose; but by reason of that Blemish upon his Face, he was laid aside as
unfit to take upon him the Government of North Wales. Therefore his younger
Brothers began every one to aspire, in hopes of succeeding their Father; but
Howel, who was of all the eldest, but base born, begotten of an Irish Woman,
finding they could not agree, stepped in himself, and took upon him the
Government. But David, who was legitimately born, could not brook that a
Bastard should ascend his Fathers Throne; and therefore he made all the
Preparations possible to pull him down. Howel on the other hand was as resolute
to maintain his ground, and was not willing so quickly to deliver up, what he
had not very long got possession of; and so both Brothers meeting together in
the Field, were resolved to try their Title by the point of the Sword. The
Battle had not lasted long, but Howel was slain; and then David was unanimously
proclaimed and saluted Prince of North Wales, which Principality he enjoyed
without any Molestation, till Lhewelyn, Iorwerth Druryndwn's Son came of age,
as will hereafter appear. But Madawc, another of Owen Gwynedh's Sons, finding
how his Brothers contended for the Principality, and that his native Country
was like to be turmoil'd in a Civil War, did think it his better Prudence to
try his Fortune abroad; and therefore leaving North Wales in a very unsettled
condition, sailed with a small Fleet of Ships which he had rigged and manned for
that purpose, to the Westward; and leaving Ireland upon the North, he came at
length to an unknown Country, where most things appeared to him new and
uncustomary, and the manner of the Natives far different from what he had seen
in Europe. This Country, says the learned H. Lhoyd, must of necessity be some
part of that vast tract of ground, of which the Spaniards, since Hanno's time,
boast themselves to be the first Discoverers; and which by order of
Cosmography, seems to be some part of Nova Hispania or Florida: whereby it is
manifest, that this Country was discovered by the Britains, long before either
Columbus or Americus Vesputius sailed thither. But concerning Madawc's Voyage
to this Country, and afterward his return from thence; there be many fabulous
Stories and idle Tales invented by the Vulgar, who are sure never to diminish
from what they hear, but will add to and increase any Fable as far as their
Invention will prompt them. However says the same Author, it is certain that
Madawc arrived in this Country, and after he had viewed the Fertility and
Pleasantness of it, he thought it expedient to invite more of his Countrymen
out of Britain; and therefore leaving most of those he had brought with him
already behind, he returned for Wales. Being arrived there, he began to
acquaint his Friends with what a fair and extensive Land he had met with, void
of any Inhabitants, whilst they employed all their Skill to supplant one
another, only for a ragged Portion of Rocks and Mountains; and therefore he
would persuade them to change their present state of Danger and continual
Clashings for a more quiet Being of Ease and Enjoyment. And so having got a
considerable Number of Welsh together, he bid his final adieu to his Native
Country, and sailed with Ten Ships back to them he had left behind. It is
therefore to be supposed, says our Author, that Madawc and his People
inhabited part of that Country, since called Florida, by reason that it appears
from Francis Loves, an Author of no small Reputation, that in Acusanus and
other places, the People honored and worshipped the Cross; whence it may be
naturally concluded, that Christians had been there before the coming of the
Spaniards; and who these Christians might be, unless it were this Colony of
Madawcs, cannot be easily imagined. But by reason that the Welsh who came over,
were not many, they intermixed in a few Years with the Natives of the Country,
and so following their Manners and using their Language, they became at length
undistinguishable from the Barbarians. But the Country which Madawc landed in
is by the learned Dr. Powel supposed to be part Mexico; for which Conjecture he
lays down these following Reasons; First, as it is recorded in the Spanish
Chronicles of the Conquest of the West Indies, the Inhabitants and Natives of
that Country affirm by Tradition, that their Rulers descended from a strange
Nation, which came thither from a strange Country; as it was confessed by King
Montezeuma, in a Speech at his Submission to the King of Castile, before
Hernando Cortez the Spanish General. And then the British Words and Names of
Places used in that Country, even at this day do undoubtedly argue the same; as
when they speak and confabulate together, they use this British Word Gwrando,
which signifies to hearken or listen; and a certain Bird with a white Head,
they call Fengwyn, which signifies the same in Welsh. But for a more complete
confirmation of this, the Island of Corroeso, the Cape of Bryton, the River of
Gwyndor, and the white Rock of Pengwyn, which are all British Words do
manifestly show, that it was that Country which Madawe and his People inhabited.

As soon as the Troubles of North Wales were over, and Prince David securely
settled in his Throne, Powys: For Owen Cyfeilioc the Lord of that Country, had
always, as much as in him lay, opposed the Interest and Advantage of Rhys
Prince of South Wales; upon which account Prince Rhys came with a great Army
against Powys, and having subdued Owen Cyfeilioc his Enemy, he was for all that
so favorable to him, that upon his delivering him Pledges for his future
Behavior, he presently departed out of Powys, and returned with much Honor to
South Wales. And now all the States of Britain being at perfect Rest and Amity
with one another, the whole Tide and Scene of Action returned to Ireland; for
Henry King of England having called together all his Nobility, began to consult
about the Irish Expedition, which had already been determined to be taken in
hand. To this Consultation there came some Messengers from Richard Strongbow
Earl of Strigule Marshal of England, to deliver up to the Kings hands the City
of Dublyn, the Town of Waterford, with all such Towns and Castles as he got in
right of his Wife; whereupon the King restored to him all his Lands both in
England and Normandy, and created him Lord Steward of Ireland. For this Earl of
Strigule had lately, without the King's Permission, gone over to Ireland, and
had married the Daughter of Dermott King of Dublyn; which King Henry took in
such an indignation, that he presently seized upon all his Lands in England and
Normandy. Therefore the King having now some footing in Ireland, the Expedition
was unanimously concluded upon; and so the King set upon his Journey, and
coming toward Wales, he was received by Prince Rhys, whose Submission the King
liked so well, that he presently confirmed to him all his Lands in South Wales.
To return the King's Favor Rhys promised his Majesty 300 Horses and 4000 Oxen
toward the Conquest of Ireland; for the sure payment of which, he delivered
Fourteen Pledges. Then King Henry marching forward, came to Caeriheon upon
Vske, and entering the Town, he dispossessed the right Owner Iorwerth ap Owen
ap Caradoc, and kept it for his own proper use, placing a Garrison of his own
Men therein. But Iorwerth was not so easie-mouth'd, as to be so unreasonably
curbed by the King; and therefore departing in a great fury from the King's
presence, he called to him his two Sons Owen and Howel, whom he had by Angharad
the Daughter of Vchtryd Bishop of Llandaf, and his Sisters Son Morgan ap
Sitsylht ap Dyfnwal; and bringing together all the Forces they were able, upon
the King's departure they entered the Country, and committing all the Waste and
Destruction as they came along, they at last came before Caerlheon, which when
they took, they used in the like manner, spoiling and destroying whatever they
could meet with; so that nothing escaped their Fury, excepting the Castle,
which they could not win. The King was in the mean time upon his Journey to
Pembroke, where being accompanied by Prince Rhys, he gave him a grant of all
Cardigan, Ystratywy, Arustly, and Eluel; in Recompense of all the Civilities
and Honor he paid him. And so Rhys returned to Aberteifi, a Town he had lately
won from the Earl of Gloucester, and there having prepared his Present, about
the beginning of October he returned again to Pembrock, having ordered Eighty
Six Horses to follow him; which being presented to the King, he accepted of
Thirty Six of the choicest, and returned the rest with great Thanks. The same
day King Henry went to S. David's, and after he had offered to the Memory of
that Saint, he dined with the Bishop, who was the Son of Gerald, Cosin-German
to Rhys; whither Richard Strongbow Earl of Strygile came from Ireland to confer
with the King. Within a while after, King Henry being entertained by Rhys at
the White-House, restored to him his Son Howel, who had been for a considerable
time detained as a Pledge, and appointed him a certain day for payment of his
Tribute, at which time, all the rest of the Pledges should be set at liberty.
The day following, being the next after the Feast of S. Luke, the King went on
board, and the Wind blowing very favorably, set sail for Ireland; and being
safely arrived upon those Coasts, he landed at Dublyn; where he rested for that
whole Winter, in order to make greater Preparations against the following
Campaign.

But the change of the Air and Climate occasioned such a raging Distemper and
Infection among the Soldiers, that to prevent the perishing of his whole Army,
England; and so having shipped off all his Army and Effects, he loosed Anchor,
and landed in Wales in the Passion Week next Year, and coming to Pembrock, he
stayed there on Easter Day, and then proceeded upon his Journey toward
England. Rhys hearing of the King's return, was very officious to pay him his
Devotion, and would gladly feign to be one of the first who should welcome him
over; and so meeting with him at Talacharn, he expressed all the Ceremonies of
Duty and Allegiance. Then the King passed on, and as he came from Caerdyf by
the new Castle upon Vsk, meaning to leave Wales in a peaceable condition, he
sent for Iorwerth ap Owen ap Caradoc, who was the only Person in open Enmity
against him, and that upon very just ground, willing him to come and treat
about a Peace, and assuring him of a safe Conduct for himself, his Sons, and
all the rest of his Associates. Iorwerth was willing to accept of the Proposal,
and thereupon set forward to meet the King, having sent an Express to his Son
Owen, a valourous young Gentleman, to meet him by the way. Owen, according to
his Fathers Orders set forward on his Journey, with a small retinue, without
any thing of Arms or Weapons of War, as thinking it Folly to clog himself with
such needless Carriage, when the King had promised a safe Conduct. But he did
not find it so safe; for as he passed the new Castle upon Vske, the Earl of
Bristol's Men, who were garrisoned therein, laid in wait for him as he came
along, and setting cowardly upon him, slew him, with most of his Company. But
some few escaped to acquaint his Father Iorwerth of such a treacherous Action;
who hearing that his Son was so basely murdered, contrary to the King's
absolute promise of a safe Passage; without any farther consultation about the
matter, presently returned home with Howel his Son, and all his Friends, and
would no longer put any trust or confidence in any thing that the King of
England, or any of his Subjects, promised to do. But on the other side, to
avenge the Death of his Son, who was so cowardly cut off; he presently raised
all the Forces that himself and the rest of his Friends were able to do; and so
entering into England, he destroyed with Fire and Sword all the Country, to the
Gates of Hereford and Gloucester. But the King was so intent upon his return,
that he seemed to take no great notice of what Iorwerth was doing; and
therefore having by Commission constituted Lord Rhys Chief Justice of all
South Wales, he forthwith took his Journey to Normandy. About this time dyed
Cadwalader ap Gruffydh, the Son of Gruffydh ap Conan, sometime Prince of
North Wales; who by his Wife, Alice the Daughter of Richard Clare Earl of
Gloucester, had Issue, Cunetha, Radulph, and Richard; and by other Women,
Cadfan, Cadwalader, Eineon, Meredith Goch, and Cadwalhon. Toward the end of
this Year Sitsylht ap Dyfnwal and Iefan ap Sitsylht ap Riryd, surprised the
Castle of Abergavenny, which belonged to the King of England, and having made
themselves Masters of it, they took the whole Garrison Prisoners.

Henry and his Son of the same Name; this latter being upholded by the Queen
his Mother, his Brothers Geffrey and Richard, the French King, the Earl of
Flanders, together with the Earl of Chester, William Patrick with several other
valiant Knights and Gentlemen. But the old King having a stout and a faithful
Army, consisting of Almanes and Brabanters, was not in the least dismayed or
discouraged at such a seeming Storm; and which made him more bold and
adventurous, he was joined by a strong Party of Welchmen, which Lord Rhys had
sent him, under the command of his Son Howel. King Henry overthrew his Enemies
in diverse Encounters, and having either killed or taken Prisoners most of them
who were rose up against him, he easily dissipated the Cloud which at first
seemed so black and threatening. Iorwerth ap Owen was not very sorry to see the
English clash, and fall into civil Dissentions among themselves; and therefore
taking advantage of such a seasonable opportunity, he drew his Army against
Caerlheon, which stood out very stiffly against him. But after many warm
Disputes of both sides, Iorwerth at length prevailed, and entering the Town by
force, he took most of the Inhabitants Prisoners; and then laying siege to the
Castle, it was surrendered up in exchange for the Prisoners he had taken in the
Town. Howel his Son, at the same time was busy in Gwent is Coed; and having
reduced all that Country, excepting the Castle, to subjection, he took Pledges
of the Inhabitants, to be true and faithful to him, and to withdraw their
Allegiance from the King of England. At the same time, something of action
passed in North Wales; for David ap Owen Gwynedh Prince of North Wales bringing
an Army over the River Menai into Anglesey against his Brother Maelgon, who
kept that Island from him; forced him to make his escape to Ireland; in his
return from whence the following Year, he was accidentally discovered and
seized upon, and then by his Brothers orders committed to close Prison. Prince
David having brought the Isle of Anglesey to its pristine state of subjection
to him, was resolved to move all manner of Obstacles which might at any time
for the future endanger its falling off from him; and these he judged to be his
own next Relations, North Wales. But before this Sentence was put in execution,
his Brother Conan dyed, and so escaped the Ignominy of being banished his
native Country, for no other reason, but the Jealousy of an ambitious Brother.

About the same time, Howel the Son of Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon, took
Prisoner his Uncle Owen Pencarn, who was right Heir of Caerlheon and Gwent; and
now having him secure, and to prevent his getting any Children to inherit those
places which himself was next Heir to, he first pulled out his Eyes, and then
very inhumanly cut off his Testicles. But Vengeance did not permit such a base
Action to go unpunished; for upon the Saturday following, a great Army of
Normans and Englishmen came unexpectedly before the Town, and wan both it and
the Castle, notwithstanding all the Opposition which Howel and his Father
Iorwerth made; though this last was not privy to his Sons Action. About the
same time King Henry came over to England, a little after whose arrival,
William King of Scots, and Roger de Moubray were taken Prisoners at Alnewike by
the Barons of the North, as they came to destroy the Northern part of the
Country in the Quarrel of the young King. But old King Henry having committed
them to the safe custody of the Earl of Leicester, and received Hugh Bygod Earl
of Chester to his Mercy, returned to Normandy with a very considerable Army of
Welchmen, which David Prince of North Wales had sent him; in return of which,
he gave him his Sister Emme in Marriage. When he was arrived in Normandy, he
sent a Detachment of the Welsh to cut off some Provisions which were going to
the Enemies Camp; but in the mean time, the French King came to a Treaty of
Peace, which was shortly afterward concluded upon; so that all the Brethren,
who had all this time maintained such an unnatural Rebellion against their
Father, were forced to beg the old King's Forgiveness and Pardon for all their
former Misdemeanors. David Prince of North Wales began to grow very bold and
assuming, by reason of his new Alliance with the King of England; and nothing
would serve his turn, but he must put his Brother Roderic in Prison, and secure
him with Fetters, for no other account, than because he demandod his share of
his Fathers Lands. It was the custom of Wales, as is said before, to make an
equal division of the Father's Inheritance between all the Children; and
therefore David had no color of Reason or Pretense to deal so severely with
his Brother; unless it were to verify that Proverb; Might overcomes Right. But
though Prince David might depend much upon his Affinity with the King of
England; yet Rhys Prince of South Wales gained his Favor and Countenance the
more, by reason that he let slip no opportunity to further the King's Interest
and Affairs in Wales, and by that means was a very necessary and useful
Instrument to keep under the Welsh, and to promote the surer Settlement of the
English in the Country. Not that he bore any Love or Affection to either King
Henry or his Subjects; but because he was sufficiently rewarded for former
Services, and was still in expectation of receiving more Favors at the King's
hands, he was resolved to play the Politician so far, as to have regard to his
own Interest, more than the Good of his native Country. And what did ingratiate
him to King Henry most of all, upon the Feast of S. James he brought all such
Lords of South Wales as were at Enmity with the King, to do him Homage at
Gloucester; namely, Cadwalhon ap Madawc of Melyenyth, his Cosin-German; Eineon
Clyt of Eluel, and Eineon ap Rhys of Gwerthrynion, his Sons in Law; Morgan ap
Caradoc ap Iestyn of Glamorgan; Gruffydh ap Ifor ap Meiric of Sengennyth, and
Sitsylht ap Dyfnwal of Higher Gwent, all three his Brothers in Law, who had
married his Sisters; together with Iorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon. King Henry
was so well pleased with this Stratagem of Rhys, that notwithstanding these
Persons had been his implacable Enemies, he readily granted them their Pardon,
and received them to Favor; and restored to Iorwerth ap Owen the Town and
Castle of Caerlheon, which he had unjustly taken from him.

Henry and these Welsh Lords, some of the English in Wales took advantage of,
and more particularly William de Bruce Lord of Brecnock, who having for a long
time a great longing to Gwentland, could not bring about his Design, by reason
that Sitsylht ap Dyfnwal, the Person of greatest sway and Power in the Country,
was an inveterate Enemy to all the English. But being now reconciled to the
King, William de Bruce, under pretense of congratulating this new Peace and
Agreement betwixt the English and Welsh, invited Sitsylht and Geffrey his Son,
with several others of the Persons of chiefest note in Gwentland, to a Feast in
his Castle of Abergavenny, which by composition he had lately received from
them. Sitsylht, with the rest, came according to appointment, and without the
least suspicion of any treasonable Designs; but after they had been civilly
entertained for some time, William Bruce to move a Quarrel against them, began
at last to propound certain Articles to them, to be by them kept and performed;
and among other unreasonable Conditions, they were to swear, that none of them
should at any time carry with them Bow or Sword. The Welsh refusing to consent
to and sign such improper Articles as these; William Bruce presently calls out
his Men, who were ready for that purpose, and bidding them fall to their
business, they most treacherously fell upon and slew the innocent and naked
Welsh; and as if it did not sufficiently express their Cruelty and Inhumanity,
they immediately went to Sitsylht's House, which stood not far from
Abergavenny, and taking hold of Gwladus his Wife, they slew her Son Cadwalader
before her face, and then setting fire to the House, they packed her away to
the Castle. This execrable Murder being thus most barbarously, and which was
worst of all, under pretense of Friendship and Kindness, committed; W^lliam
Bruce, to cloak his Treason with some reasonable Excuse, and to make the World
believe it was not for any private Interest or Expectation he had done such an
Act, as he knew would be by all Men abhorred; caused it to be reported abroad,
that he had done such a thing in revenge of the death of his Uncle Henry of
Hereford, whom the Welsh on the Easter-Even before had slain. But whilst these
things passed in South Wales, Roderic, David Prince of North-Wales's Brother,
made his escape by some means or other out of Prison, and fleeing to Anglesey,
he was received and acknowledged by all the Country the other side the River
Conwey, for their Lord and Prince; which they were the more willing to do, by
reason that they conceived an utter Abhorrence of Prince David, who contrary to
all Rules of Equity, and almost Nature, had disinherited all his Brethren and
Cosins; as boldly relying upon his Affinity and Relation to the King of
England. But David perceiving the Storm to grow very violent, and that the
Country did numerously flock and adhere to his Brother Cadwalader, thought it
his best way to stay a while, till the Storm was abated; and so retired over
the River Conwey Toward the end of this Year, Cadelh the Son of Gruffydh ap
Rhys, and Brother to Lord Rhys, after a tedious fit of Sickness, and taken upon
him the Monkish Order, departed this Life, whose Body was very honorably
enterred at Stratflur.

In the Spring of the following Year, dyed also David Bishop of Menevia, or S.
David's, whose See was supplied by one Piers, being nominated thereunto by the
King of England. But what happened most remarkable this Year; the Lord Rhys
Prince of South Wales made a very great Feast at Christmas in his Castle of
Aberteifi, which he caused to be proclaimed through all Britain, Ireland, and
the Islands adjacent, some considerable time before; and according to their
Invitation, many Hundreds of English, Normans, and others coming to Aberteifi,
were very honorably received, and courteously entertained by Prince Rhys. But
among other tokens of their Welcome and Entertainment, Rhys caused all the
Bards or Poets throughout all Wales to come thither; and for a better Diversion
to the Company, he provided Chairs to be set in the Hall, in which the Bards
being seated, they were to answer each other in Rhyme; and those that acquitted
themselves most handsomely, and overcame the rest, were promised great Rewards
and rich Presents. In this poetical Disceptation, the North Wales Bards
obtained the Victory, with the Applause and Approbation of the whole Company;
and among the Professors of Music, between whom there was Rhys's own Servants
were accounted the most expert. But for all this civil and obliging Treatment
of Prince Rhys, the Normans upon the Marches fell to their accustomed manner of
treacherous way-laying, and privately assaulting the harmless and undesigning
Welsh; and therefore Eineon Clyt Rhys his Son in Law, and Morgan ap Meredith,
falling into the Net which the Normans had deceitfully laid for them, were
treacherously murdered. Therefore to keep the Normans under greater fear and
awe for the future, Prince Rhys built a Castle at Rhayadr Gwy, being a place
where the River Wye falls with a very great Noise and Precipitation down a
great Rock. Conan ap Owen Gwynedh made War against him; but finding upon trial
that their Design against Rhys was impracticable, they thought it more
advisable to retire back to North Wales.

Cadwalhon, Brother to Owen Gwynedh, and Uncle to David and Roderic, who for
fear of his Brother had some time ago fled for Refuge to the King of England;
as he was conveyed home by some of the King's Servants to enjoy his patrimonial
Estate in Wales, was by those barbarous and treacherous Villains murdered in
his Journey. This Year the Sepulcher of that famous and noble British King
Arthur, with his Wife Gwenhofar (by the means of some Welsh Bard, whom King
Henry had heard at Pembrock relate in a Song the worthy and mighty Acts of that
great Prince, and the place where he was buried) was found in the Isle of
Afalon, without the Abbey of Glastenbury; their Bodies being laid in a hollow
Elder Tree, buried Fifteen Foot in the Earth. The Bones of King Arthur were of
marvelous and almost incredible bigness, having ten Wounds in the Skull,
whereof one being considerably larger than the rest, seemed to be his
Death-Blow; and the Queens Hair seemed to the sight to be fair and yellow, but
when touched, crumbled presently to Dust. Over the Bones was laid a Stone, with
a Cross of Lead, upon the lower side of which Stone were engraven these words:
HIC JACET SEPULTUS INCLYTUS REX ARTHURUS IN INSULA AVALONIA.

Here lies buried the famous King ARTHUR in the Isle of Afalon.



No Action of moment had passed in Wales this long time, and the Welsh were in
perfect Amity and Concord with the King of England; but some unlucky Accident
fell out at last to dissolve this happy Ranulph de Poer, who was Sheriff of
Glocestershire, or rather as Giraldus Cambrensis observes, of Herefordshire,
being a cruel and unreasonable Oppressor of the Welsh, put the Lord of
Gwentland to death; in revenge of whom, a certain young Person of that Country,
set upon Ranulph with several other Gentlemen his Companions, and slew them to
a Man. King Henry was implacably enraged at this News, and so cruelly incensed,
that he presently raised and drew together all his Power, and came to
Worcester, intending to march forward to Wales, and to invade the Enemies
Country. But the Lord Rhys ap Gruffydh, a subtle and a politic Prince,
thinking it impossible to withstand the English Army, and fearing the King's
Puissance, which he perceived to be so implacably bent against the Welsh, went
in person to Worcester, and swearing Fealty to the King, became his perpetual
Liege-Man; and for the due observance of this Contract, he promised to send his
Sons and Nephews for Pledges. But when he would have persuaded them to answer
his request, the young Men considering with themselves, how former Pledges had
not been very genteely treated by the English, refused to go; and so the whole
matter rested for that time. What became of the matter afterward we know not;
but probable it is, that King Henry returned to England satisfied with Rhys's
Submission; for we hear no more of his coming to Wales. And so the Country
remained quiet and undisturbed for a long time; till at length the Welsh began
to fall to their wonted Method of killing and murdering one another. Cadwalader
Prince Rhys's Son was privately murdered in West-Wales, and buried in the Ty
Gwyn. And the Year following, Owen Fychan the Son of Madawe was slain by night
in the Castle of Carrergova near Oswestry, by Gwenwynwyn and Cadwalhon the Sons
of Owen Cyfeilioc. But what was most unnatural of all, Lhewelyn, whose Father
Cadwalhon ap Gruffydh ap Conan was lately murdered by the Englishmen, was taken
by his own Brothers, who very barbarously put out his Eyes. About the same
time, Baldwyn, Archbishop of Canterbury, being attended by Giraldus Cambrensis,
took a Progress into Wales, being the first Archbishop of Canterbury that
visited that Country; whose Authority the Clergy of Wales in vain opposed,
though they stiffly alleged the Liberties and Privileges of their Metropolitan
Church of S. David's. In this Visitation, described by Giraldus in his
Itinerarium Cambriae, he persuaded many of the Nobility of Wales to go to the
Holy Land against those prevailing Enemies of Christianity, the Saracens; to
whose prevailing Greatness, Jerusalem it self was now in great danger Maelgon
the Son of Lord Rhys brought all his Power against Tenbigh, and having by force
made himself Master of it, burnt the whole Town to the ground, and so carried
away very considerable Spoil. He was a Person of such civil Behavior and easy
Access, of so comely Personage, and Honesty in all his Actions, that he
attracted the most earnest Love and Affection of all his Friends; by which
means he became very terrible and formidable to his Enemies, especially the
Flemings, of whom he obtained diverse Victories and Conquests.

The next Year, being the Year of Christ 1189. Henry the Second, surnamed
Courtmantel, King of England dyed, and was buried at Fonteverard; after whom,
his Son Richard, called Curdelyon, was by the unanimous consent of all the
Peers and Nobility of England, crowned in his place. Prince Rhys being thus
deprived of his greatest Friend, thought it his wisest way to make the best
provision he could for himself, by enlarging his Dominions, and extending the
Bounds of his present Territories; and therefore having raised all the Strength
he could, he wan the Castles of Seynclere, Abercorran, and Lhanstephan; and
having taken and committed to Prison Maelgwn his Son, who was the greatest
Thorn in his Side, as one that was most passionately beloved by the South Wales
Men, he brought the whole Country to his subjection. Then he built the Castle
of Cydwely; but Gwenlhian, a Woman of such incomparable Beauty, and exceeding
in all feminine Qualifications, that she was accounted the fairest and best
accomplished Lady in all the Country. And not long after her dyed Gruffydh
Maylor, Lord of Bromfield, Myfod, and honorably interred there, being attended
by most of the Persons of Quality throughout the whole Country. He had Issue by
his Wife Angharad Daughter of Owen Gwynedh Prince of North Wales* a Son called
Madawc, who succeeded his Father in that part of Powys, called from him Powys
Fadawc. Rhys, Prince of South Wales, was growing very powerful, and had made
himself Master of the greatest part of South Wales, only with some few places
more* Dynefowr held out still; which however, upon the first Assault he made
against it, was delivered up to him. But as he increased (...) ^he number of
Towns and Castles, he had the Misfortune to have that of his Children
diminished; for his Daughter Gwenlhian was lately deceased; and now he had no
sooner got Dynefowr Castle into his possession, but his Son Owen dyed at Strata
Florida, or Ystratflur. King Richard was gone to the Holy Land against the
Saracens; but in his return to England, he wan the Kingdom of Cyprus, and gave:
it to Gwido King of Jerusalem, upon condition he would resign his former Title
to him: During his stay in this Island, he married Berengaria the Daughter of
the King of Navarr.

Mae^gon, Prince Rhys's Son had been now detained a long time in Prison, where
his Father had shut him up; but being at last utterly weary of such a close
Confinement, he found some means or other to get out, and to make his escape.
His Father Prince Rhys was not so troubled at his being broke out, and that he
had got his liberty, as to give over the Conquest, which all this while he had
gone so furiously on with; but laying siege to Lhanhayaden Castle, he took it
without any great Opposition, and brought all the Country about to his
subjection. And what favored him more in his Attempts against the English,
King Richard Austria, was taken Prisoner by Duke Leopold, who presented him to
the Emperor Henry, who demanded 200000 Marks for his Ransom; laying to his
charge, that he had spoiled and plundered the Island of Sicily in his Voyage to
the Holy Land. And as Rhys took the advantage of King Richard's absence to
subject South Wales; so Roderic Brother to David Prince of North Wales, made
use of Gothrike's the King of Man's help, to get the Principality of
North Wales to himself, and eject his Brother. And therefore entering into
Angl^sey, he quickly reduced the whole Island to his subjection. But he did not
enjoy it long; for before the Year was over, the Sons of his Brother Conan came
with an Army against him, and forcing him, together with the King of Man to fly
the Island, they took present Possession of it themselves. And while these
things were done in North Wales, Maelgon, Prince Rhys of South Wales his Son,
who was lately escaped from Prison, besieged Ystratmeyric Castle, and after
some small Opposition, got it into his own hands upon Christmas night; which
encouraged him to farther Attempts. And at the same time, his Brother Howel,
surnamed Says, or the Englishman, by reason that he had served for some time
under the King of England, another Son of Prince Rhys, got by surprise the
Castle of Gwys, and having secured Philip de Gwys the Owner, with his Wife and
two Sons, he made them all Prisoners of War. Then the two Brothers Howel and
Maelgon joined their Forces; but fearing that they had more Castles than what
they were able to defend, they thought it convenient to raze Lhanhayaden
Castle; which the Flemings having notice of, they gathered all their Power
together, and coming to Lhanhayaden at the day appointed, they unexpectedly set
upon the Welsh, and slew a great number of them. But notwitstanding this sudden
and unhappy accident, they thought it necessary to destroy the Castle; and so
coming to Lhanhayaden the second time, they rased it to the ground, without any
Molestation from, or appearance of any Enemy to disturb them. But when Anarawd,
another Son of Pr Rhys, saw how prosperously his Brothers succeeded, he thought
to make himself as rich as they, and by a shorter and an easier Method: And
therefore having under a smooth pretense of Friendship and Love got his
Brothers Howel and Madawc in private; being moved with Ambition and
Covetousness to enjoy their Estates, he first made them Prisoners, and then
very unnaturally pulled out their Eyes. But Maelgon escaped this Snare, and
hearing what a foul Action was committed, he promised his Brother Anarawd the
Castle of Ystratmeyric, for the Liberty and Releasment of his two Brothers,
which Anarawd granted. But it is Rhys having rebuilt the Castle of Rhayadr Gwy,
was laid wait for, and taken Prisoner by his own Sons, who were afraid, that in
case their Father had them once in his power, he would severely revenge their
cruel and unnatural Deed^. But Howel proved more kind and dutiful than the
rest; who, though blind, found a way to let his Father escape out of Maelgon's
Prison; and so Prince Rhys being set at liberty, he took and destroyed the
Castle of Dynefowr, which belonged to his Son Maelgon. But though he succeeded
in this Attempt, yet he lost another castle elsewhere; for the Sons of
Cadwalhon ap Madawc of Melyenydh being informed that Prince Rhys was detained
Prisoner by his Son Maelgon, they besieged Rhayadr Gwy Castle, which being
surrendered up to them, they fortified for their own use.

But whilst these unhappy Differences, and unnatural Clashings betwixt Prince
Rhys and his Sons, continue and rage in South Wales, a new revolution of
Affairs happened in North Wales. Prince David had now enjoyed the Scepter of
North Wales for above Twenty Four Years; and one would think, that so long a
Possession would secure him in his Throne, that it could not be very easy to
pull him down. But Possession is not always the surest Card, which proved very
true in Prince David's case at this time; for Lhewelyn the Son of Iorwerth
Drwyndwn, who was the eldest Son of Owen Gwynedh Prince of North Wales, being
now arrived to Years of maturity, and having Sense enough to understand what a
just Title and Claim he had to the Principality of North Wales, of which his
Uncle David had so unjustly kept him out; he thought it high time to endeavor
to recover what was lawfully his own, which however he was well persuaded his
Uncle David would never easily part with. And therefore being well assured that
the justness of his Title would never mount him up to the Throne, without he
had an Army at his heels to help him on; he called together all his Friends and
Relations by his Mothers side, who was Marred the Daughter of Madawc ap
Meredith Prince of Powys, and having drawn to his side his Cosins the Sons of
Conan ap Owen Gwynedh* and Rhodri ap Owen, he came into North Wa es,
proclaiming how against all Justice his Uncle David had first disinherited his
Father Iorwerth, and then had kept the Government from him who was the right
Heir. And though his Father Iorwerth had been incapable of taking upon him the
Government by reason of some Infirmity; yet there was no reason that his
Fathers Weakness should exclude and turn him out; and therefore, being now
sensible of what he was not capable to understand in his youth, he laid claim
to the Principality, which was justly his own. But there was no great need of
conjuring to understand his Claim, nor of much Rhetoric to persuade the People
to own him for their Prince; whose Affection was cooled, and almost worn off
from David, ever since he had dealt so unnaturally with his Brothers, whom
after he had deprived of their Estates, he banished out of the Country. And
therefore before Lhewelyn could expect to have any sure footing, the whole
Country of North Wales was at his devotion, excepting only Three Castles, which
David, by the help of the English, in whom, by reason of his Affinity with the
late King Henry, he depended much upon, kept to himself. And thus David being
deprived of almost all that he formerly possessed; we shall reckon him no more
among the Princes of North Wales, but restore the Principality to the true Heir
Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth.

Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth.
LHewelyn ap Iorwerth the Son of Owen Gwynedh, having thus successfully carried
on his just Claim to the Dominion of North Wales, and being quietly settled in
the Government of it, Roger Mortimer Melyenith, and built the Castle of
Cymaron, whereby he reduced that Country to his subjection, and forced thence
the two Sons of Cadwalh n ap Madawc that were Governors thereof. About this
time Rhys and Meredith (two valiant but undutiful) Sons of Prince Rhys, having
got together a Body of hot headed daring Soldiers, came before Dynefawr, and
took the Castle that was garrisoned by their Fathers Men: Hence they proceeded
to Cantre-Fychan, where the Country civily received them, and surrendered up
the Castle to them. At this their Father was justly incensed, and therefore to
put a stop to their farther Proceedings, he endeavored by all means to take
them, which not long after happened; for their Adherents now began to be
touched with the Sense as well of their Treason against, as of their Allegiance
due to their lawful Lord Prince Rhys; and therefore to atone for their past
Faults, and to procure his future Favor, they betrayed their rebellious
Leaders to their offended Father, who immediately committed them to safe custody.

Rhys levies a great Army, whose first Attempt was upon the Town and Castle of
Caermadthyn, both which he took in a short time and destroyed, and then
returned with considerable Booty. Not long after he led the said Army to the
Marches, and invested the Castle of Clun, which was not so easily taken as the
former; for this cost him a long Siege, and many a fierce Assault; and
therefore to be revenged of it, when he took it he laid it in Ashes; thence he
proceeded to the Castle of Radnor, which he likewise wan; but immediately after
it cost him a bloody Battle; for he was no sooner Master of the Castle, but
Roger Mortimer and Hugh de Say came with a numerous and well-disciplin'd Army,
consisting of Normans and English, to the relief of it. Whereupon Prince Rhys
thinking it not his best course to confine his Men within the Walls, led 'em up
into a Champion Ground hard by, and there, like a valiant Prince, resolved to
give his Enemies Battle, though they had much the advantage of him; for his Men
were neither so well armed, nor so much accustomed to Battle as the others
were; however their Courage made amends for their Arms, and their Leaders
Prudence and Conduct supplied the Defects of their Discipline; for they chose
rather to die honorably in the Defense of their Country than shamefully to
survive the Loss of it; and therefore they attacked their Enemies so valiantly,
that they were not long able to withstand their Force, but quitted the Field in
great Disorder, leaving a great number of their Men behind them slain upon the
spot: and Prince Rhys pursued them so warmly, that they were glad of the
shelter of the Night to protect them from his Fury. After this Victory, he
besieged the Castle of Pain in Elfel, which he easily took, and kept in his
own hands, till William de Bruce, the Owner thereof, came to him, and humbly
desired Peace of him, which he granted him, and withal delivered him up his
Castle again. Not long after, the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom King Richard
had substituted his Lieutenant in England) marches with a powerful Army toward
Wales, and besieges the Castle of Gwenwynwyn, at the Pool; but the Garrison
made such a vigorous Defense, that he lost a great many of his Men, and all his
A^^empts proved ineffectual; therefore he sent for some Pyoneers, whom he
ordered to undermine the Walls; which when the besieged understood, they
bethought of securing themselves on the most honorable Terms they could; they
were not willing to put themselves to the hazard of a Battle, for their Enemies
were thrice their Number; therefore they proposed to surrender up the Castle,
on condition they should carry off all their Arms along with them: Which Offer
the Archbishop accepted of, and so permitted the Garrison to march out quietly.
Then fortifying the Castle for the King's use, and putting a strong Garrison in
it for its defense, he returned again to England. But Gwenwynwyn was not so
willing to part from his Castle, as never to attempt the Recovery of it;
therefore as soon as he understood that the Archbishop was gone back, he
immediately besieged it, and shortly after received it on the same Terms that
his Men had delivered it up, and afterward kept it for his own use.

Britain and France, and carried off a great number of the Nobility, besides
common People. This Year likewise dyed the valiant Rhys, Prince of South Wales,
the only Stay and Defense of that part of Wales; for he it was that got them
their Liberty, and secured it to them. He often very readily exposed his own
Life for the defense of theirs and their Country; generally he got the better
of his Enemies, and at last either brought them entirely under his Subjection,
or forced them to quit their Country. He was no less illustrious for his
virtuous Endowments, than for his Valor and Extraction; so that it was with
good reason that the British Bards and others wrote so honorably of him, and
so mightily deplored his Death.

To this Prince were born many Sons and Daughters, whereof his elder Son
Gruffydh succeeded him; the others were Cadwalhon, Maelgon, Meredith, and Rhys.
Of his Daughters, one called Gwenthtan was married to Ednyfed Fycha^ Ancestor
to Owen Tudor that married Kitharine Queen-Dowager to King Henry the Fifth: And
the rest were very well matched with some of the Nobility of the Country.
Prince Gruffydh being settled in the Government of his Country, did not long
enjoy it peaceably; for his troublesome Brother Maelgon thought it now a fit
time to endeavor the recovery of the Inheritance his Father had deprived him
of. To this purpose he makes a League with Gwenwynwyn, the Son of Owen
Cyfeilioc, Lord of Powys, and by their joint Interest got together a
considerable Body of Men, wherewith they surprised Prince Gruffydh at
Aberystwyth, whom, after they had slain a great many of his Men, they took
Prisoner. Thus Maelgon effectually accomplished his Design in the recovery of
the Castle, and the whole Country of Cardigan. His unfortunate Brother he
committed to the custody of his spiteful Confederate Gwenwynwyn, who
immediately out of Malice delivered him up to the Mercy of his inveterate
Enemies the English. After this Gwenwyn^yn having got together an Army entered
Arustly, and brought it to his subjection.

David ap Owen, whom Prince Lhewelyn had for^ed to quit his Usurpation of the
Principality of North Wales, had hitherto lived quietly and peaceably, not so
much out of kindness to his Nephew, as because he knew not how to redress
himself; but now having got a great Army of English and Welsh, he used his
utmost Efforts to recover his Principality. Whereupon Prince Lhewelyn who was
the right Heir, and in possession of it, came on boldly to meet him, and gave
him battle, wherein he shamefully routed his Army, and took his Uncle David
Prisoner, whom he delivered into safe custody, whereby he secured to himself
and his Country Peace and Quietness. Toward the close of this Year Owen
Cyfeilioc Lord of the higher Powys departed this Life, and left his Estate to
Gwenwynwyn his Son; after whom that part of Powys was called Powys-Wenwynwyn,
to distinguish it from the other called Powys Fadoc the Inheritance of the
Lords of Bromfield. Much about this time Trahaern Fychan, a Man of great Power
and Authority in the County of Brecknock, was suddenly seized upon as he was
going to Llancors to confer about some business with William de Bruce Lord
thereof, and by an Order of the Lords, tied to an Horse Tail and dragged
through the Streets of Brecknock to the Gallows, where he was beheaded, and his
Body hung up by the Feet for three Days. Which Barbarity inflicted upon him for
no known just Cause, so frightened his Brothers Wife and Children, that they
fled their Country for fear of the same Usage. The Maelgon, who had before
routed his Brother Prince Gruffydh's Army, and taken him Prisoner, begins now
to enlarge his Territories, and takes in his Brothers Castles of Aberteifi and
Ystratmeyric. Also the youngest Son of Prince Rhys about this time recovered
the Castle of Dynefowr from the Normans.

The same Summer Gwenwynwyn took up a resolution of attempting to extend Wales
to its ancient Limits; and for this purpose he raises a powerful Army, with
which he first designs to be avenged of William de Bruce for the inhuman Death
of his Cousin Trahaern Fychan, and therefore he besieges his Castle of Pain in
Elfel, where he makes a Protestation, that as soon as he had taken it, for a
farther satisfaction to his Revenge, he would unmercifully ravage the whole
Country as far as Severn. But these mighty Menaces were soon blown over; for he
had neither Battering Engines nor Pioneers, so that he was forced to lay before
the Castle for three Weeks without effecting any thing; whereby the Murderers
had time enough to apply themselves to England for Succors, which they
obtained. For upon this Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, Lord Chief Justice of England
levies a considerable Army, to which he joins all the Lords Marchers, and comes
in all have to the Relief of the place, where he meets Gwenwynwyn; with whom,
before he would hazard a Battle, he was desirous to have a Treaty of Peace, to
which Gwenwynwyn and his Adherents would in no wise hearken or condescend, but
returned in answer, that their business there was to be revenged of old
Injuries done them. Hereupon the English Lords resolved to enlarge Prince
Gruffydh of South Wales, whom they knew to be an inveterate Enemy of
Gwenwynwyn, as he that delivered him up to their hands; and likewise to be a
Man of great Authority in his Country, therefore they rightly concluded he
might be more serviceable to them when at liberty than under confinement,
wherein they were not disappointed; for he immediately got together a strong
Body of his Countrymen, and joining with the English, advanced toward the
Castle, where they furiously attacked Gwenwynwyn, who made no less vigorous
defense; hereupon there ensued a bloody Battle, with a great slaughter on both
sides, but at length the English got the Victory, and Gwenwynwyn lost a great
number of common Soldiers (if we believe Matthew Paris 3700 Men) besides a
great many of his best Commanders, among whom were Anarawd, Son of Eineon, Owen
ap Cadwalhon, Richard ap Iestyn, and Robert ap Howel. Meredith ap Conan was
likewise taken Prisoner, with many more. After this the English returned home
triumphantly, and requited Prince Gruffydh's Service with a perfect Liberty,
who immediately, partly by his own Force, partly by the Affection of his
People, repossessed himself of all his Dominions, save the Castles of Aberteifi
and Ystratmeyrie, which his usurping Brother Maelgon, by the Assistance of
Gwenwynwyn, had, during his Confinement by the English, taken from him, and
still unjustly detained. Hereupon, some of Prince Gruffydh's prime Nobility and
Clergy came to him, and offered him their Endeavors of reconciling him to his
Brother, and made him so apprehensive of his just Displeasure at him, that he
took a solemn Oath before them, that in case his Brother would give him
Hostages for the security of his own Person, he would deliver him up his Castle
of Aberteifi by a day appointed; which Proposals Prince Gruffydh accepted of,
and accordingly sent him his Demands: But it was the least of Maelgon's
intention to make good his part, or else he was very unconstant in his
resolution; for he had no sooner received the Hostages, but instead of
delivering up the Castle, he fortifies it, and puts in a Garrison for his own
use, and commits the Hostages to the custody of Gwenwynwyn, Prince Gruffydh's
mortal Enemy; but not long after, their Innocence procured them an opportunity
of an Escape.

In the Year 1199 Maelgon still pursuing his Hatred Gruffydh, gets an Army,
wherewith he besieges his Castle of Dynerth, which he was Master of in a short
time, and then put all the Garrison to the Sword. But about the same time
Prince Gruffydh in lieu of this, wan the Castle of Cilgerran, and strongly
fortified it. This Year Richard the First of England, as he was besieging the
Castle of Chalons in France, was shot from the Walls with an Arrow, whereof he
not long after dyed, and left his Kingdom to his Brother John, who thereupon
was with great Solemnity crowned at Westminster. But he could not expect to
enjoy this Kingdom peaceably; for his elder Brother Geoffry Plantagenet had
left a Son behind him named Arthur, whose Right the Crown of England was by
lineal descent; which now therefore he justly lays claim to, and by the
assistance of King Philip of France (who espoused his Quarrel) endeavors to
recover. But before Prince Arthur had made sufficient Preparations to carry on
his Design, he was unexpectedly set upon by his Uncle, his Army routed, and he
himself taken Prisoner, and committed to safe custody; not long after which, he
dyed, and so King John was rid of his Competitor.

Gruffydh ap Conan ap Owen Gwynedh dyed, and was buried in a Monk's Cawl in the
Abbey of Conway, which way of burying was very much practiced (especially by the
better sort) in those days; for the Monks and Friars had deluded the People
into a strong Conceit of the Merits of it, and had firmly persuaded them it was
highly conducing to their future Happiness to be thus interred. But this
Superstition, together with the Propagators of it, they had lately received
from England: For the first Abbey or Monastery we read of in Wales, since the
Destruction of that famous House of Bangor, which favored of Romish Dregs, was
the Ty-Gwyn built in the Year 1146. after which they mightily increased and
spread over all the Country; and now the Fountain Head began to be corrupted;
for the Clergy maintained a Doctrine which their Ancestors abhorred, as may
easily be gathered from the Writings of that worthy Divine Ambrosius Telesinus,
who flourished in the Year 540. when the Christian Faith (which we suppose to
be delivered at the Isle of Afalon by Joseph of Arimathea) flowed in this Land
in a pure and uncorrupted Stream, before it was infected and polluted by that
proud and blood-thirsty Monk Augustine. I say, he then wrote and left behind
him as his own Opinion, and the Opinion of those days these following Verses:
Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nys angreifftia gwyd
Ac ny phregetha:
Gwae ny cheidw ei gail
Ac of in figail
Ac nys areilia;
Gwae ni cheidw ei dhefaid
Rhae bleidhie Rhufeniaid
A'i ffon gnwppa.


From whence it is apparent, that the Church of Rome was then corrupt, and that
the British Churches persevered in the primitive and truly Apostolical
Profession of Christianity, as it was at first planted in the Island; and that
no Roman Innovations had crept in among them, which afterward mightily
increased, when they were once introduced by Augustine the Monk.

This Year likewise we find the spiteful and turbulent Maelgon, choosing rather
to persist still in his Rebellion, than to return to his Allegiance, and to
prefer a small Lucre to the Love and Safety of his Country. For now finding
that the Castle of Aberteifi was not tenable by his own Power and Force, yet
rather than deliver it up to his Brother Prince Gruffydh, and thereby procure
his Favor, he chose to sell it to his bitter Enemies the English, for an
inconsiderable Sum of Money, whereby he opened them a free passage into all
Wales; this being reckoned one of its chief Defenses and Bulwarks. About this
time Madawc Son of Gruffydh Maylor Lord of Bromfield built the Abbey of
Lanegwest, commonly known by the English by the Name of Vale Crucii.

In the Year 1201. the valiant Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth North Wales banished out of
his Territories his Cousin Meredith the Son of Conan ap Owen Gwynedh, whom he
suspected of treasonable Practices, and therefore confiscated his Lands which
were the Cantref of Lhyn and Efyonyth. Much about the same time Meredith the
Son of Prince Rhys was slain at Car^wilhion by Treason, whereupon his elder
Brother Gruffydh possessed himself of his Castle in Lhanymdhyfri and all his
Lands. This Gruffydh was a valiant and discreet Prince, and one that was like
to bring all South Wales to good order and Obedience; for in all things he trod
in his Fathers steps, and made it his business to succeed him as well in his
Valor and virtuous Endowments, as in his Government. But the vast hopes
conceived of him soon proved abortive; for in the ensuing James's day he dyed,
to the great Grief and Loss of his Country, and shortly after was buried at
Ystratflur with great Pomp and Solemnity. He left behind him for a Successor a
Son called Rhys, which Maud the Daughter of William de Bruce had bore him. The
following Year some of the Welsh Nobility marched with an Army toward the
Castle of Gwerthrynion, which belonged to Roger Mortimer, and after a short
Siege, they took it and levelled it with the ground.

This Year Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth calling to mind his Estate and Title, and how
all the Welsh Princes were obliged both by the Laws of Roderic the Great, and
those of Howel Dha to acknowledge the King or Prince of North Wales for their
Sovereign Lord, and to do Homage to him for their Dominions: Yet
notwithstanding that they knew this to be their duty, and that they formerly
had readily performed it; yet because of late Years his Predecessors had
neglected to call them to their Duty, they now began to imagine themselves
exempted from it; and some thought themselves accountable to no superior
Prince; others denied Subjection to Prince Lhewelyn, and held their Dominions
of the King of England. To put a stop therefore to the further growth of this
Contempt, and to assert his own Right, Prince Lhewelyn summons all the Welsh
Lords, who for the most part appeared* and swore Allegiance to him. But
Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powys neither came to this meeting, nor would own the
Princes Supremacy: Which Stubborness and Disobedience the Prince acquainted his
Lords with, whereupon they delivered their Opinion, that it was but reasonable,
that Gwenwynwyn should be compelled to his Duty, or else forfeit his Estate:
This all the Lords consented to, but Elis ap Madawc, who was an intimate Friend
of Gwenwynwyn, and therefore would not consent to the enacting any thing that
might be prejudicial to him, but broke off from the Meeting much dissatisfied
with their Proceedings. Notwithstanding which, Prince Lhewelyn, pursuant to the
Advice of the rest of his Lords, raises an Army, and marches toward Powys; but
before he made any use of it, he was by the Mediation of some learned and able
Men reconciled to Gwenwynwyn, and so Gwenwynwyn became his dutiful Subject,
which he confirmed both by Oath and Writing; and indeed it was not without good
reason, that Prince Lhewelyn used all the caution imaginable to bind this Man;
for he had sworn Allegiance before to the King of England. Lhewelyn having thus
subjected Gwenwynwyn, he thought it now convenient to show likewise some Marks
of his Resentments against his Adherent Elis ap Madawc, and therefore he strips
him of all his Lands; whereupon Elis fled the Country, but not long after,
yielding himself to the Prince's Mercy, he received of him the Castle of
Crogen, and Seven Townships besides. And now having mentioned Crogen, it will
not be improper to step a little out of the way, and here take notice of the
reason why the English formerly, when they had a mind to reproach the Welsh,
called them Crogens. The first occasion of it was this, King Henry the Second
in his Expedition against the Welsh to the Mountains of Berwin, lay a while at
Oswestre, during which time he detached a number of his Men to try the Passages
into Wales, who as they would have passed Offa's Ditch at the Castle of Crogen,
at which place there was a narrow way through the same Ditch, which appears now
very deep through all that Country, and bears its old Name; these Men, I say,
as they would have passed this Straight, were met by a Party of Welsh, and a
great many of them strain and buried in that Ditch, as appears by their Graves
there to be seen; and the Name of the Straight imports as much, being called in
Welsh Adwy'r bedhaw* The English therefore bearing in mind this Slaughter, when
ever they got any of the Welsh into their Clutches, upbraided them with the
Name of Crogen, intimating thereby that they should expect no more Favor or
Mercy at their hands, than they showed them in the Skirmish. But this word
which at first was rather a Badg of Reputation than Disgrace to the Welsh, came
afterward to be used in a bad Sense, and only then applied when they designed
to reproach and abuse them. But to return to Prince Lhewelyn, whom we find
returning home after he had successfully asserted his Sovereignty over all
Wales, and set all things in good order: And by the way he fortifies the Castle
of Bala in Penlhyn. About this time Rhys the Son of Gruffydh ap Rhys the right
Prince of South Wales took the Castle of Lhanymdhyfry upon Michaelmas-day. This
Year Lhewelyn Prince of Wales took to Wife Joan the Daughter of King John,
which Agatha Daughter of Robert Ferrers Earl of Derby bore him, with whom he
gave the Prince for a Dowry the Lordship of Elsmere in the Marches of Wales.

Rhys whom we mentioned the Year before to have taken the Castle of
Lhanymdhyfri, wins likewise the Castle of Llangadoc, and puts a Garrison
therein; but he enjoyed neither of them long; for shortly after, his Uncle
Maelgon, with his Friend Gwenwynwyn, levied a powerful Army, and with it
besieged and took the Castle of Lhanymdhyfri; thence they removed to Lhangadoc,
and wan the Castle likewise, upon this Condition, that the Garrison be
permitted to march out quietly. When they had taken these two Castles, they
went to Dinerth, where Maelgon finished the Castle he had formerly begun there.
This Year likewise Prince Lhewelyn set at liberty his Uncle David ap Owen
Gwynedh, who made but a sorry return to this Kindness; for instead of living
peaceably at home, and enjoying that Liberty that was granted him, he flees to
England, and there gets an Army, wherewith he attempts to restore himself to
his ancient Estate of North Wales; but he missed his Mark; for his prudent
Nephew immediately met him on his March, and gave him a shameful Overthrow,
wherewith David was so mightily disheartened, that he presently returned for
England, and shortly after died for mere sorrow. The next Year Howel, a blind
Rhys was slain at Camaes by his Brother Maelgon's Men, and buried just by his
Brother Gruffydh at Ystratflur. But notwithwanding that, Maelgon in those days
usurped all the Rule and Government of South Wales; yet his Brother Gruffydh's
Sons, Rhys and his Brethren, wan from him the chief Defense of all that
Country, to wit, the Castles of Dynefowr and Lhanymdhyfri. About this time
William Marshal, Earl of Pembrock, besieged the Castle of Cilgerran, and took
it; and not long after, Maelgon Irishman to kill Gadifor ap Griffri; after
which horrid Fact, Maelgon seized upon his Four Sons, and put them to death;
these were forward promising young Gentlemen, and descended from a Noble Stock;
for their Mother Susanna was a Daughter of the said Howel ap Rhys, by a
Daughter of Madawc ap Meredith Prince of Powys. In the Year 1206. Maelgon
Abereneon. At which time there was such abundance of Fish seen at Aberystwyth,
that the like number was never known to have come there in the memory of Man
before.

This Year the King of England banished the Realm William de Bruce and his
Wife, on the account of a Grudg that he bore his Son, and then seized upon all
his Lands; whereupon, William with his Wife and Son fled to Ireland, and there
continued for some time. And this Hardship he now underwent was the less
pitied, because he exercised the great Power he had in the Marches of Wales
with extreme Cruelty and Injustice. The same Year Gwenwynwyn came to Shrewsbury
to speak with the King's Council, where he was detained Prisoner: Whereupon
Prince Lhewelyn conquered all his Country, took all his Towns and Castles, and
garrisoned them for his own use. This Expedition of Prince Lhewelyn mightily
alarmed the usurping Maelgon, and the more, because he had intelligence that
Lhewelyn was on his march toward South Wales; therefore he now puts himself in
the best posture he could to receive him; but finding himself not able to abide
the Prince's coming, and to withstand his Forces, he demolisheth his Castles of
Aberystwyth, Ystratmeyric, and Dinerth, which before he had fortified.
Notwithstanding which, the Prince comes to Aberystwyth, and rebuildeth the
Castle and puts a Garrison therein; after this he seized upon the Cantref of
Penwedic and the Land betwixt Dyfi and Aeron which he gave to Maelgon's Nephews
the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys, and then returned home with great Joy and
Triumph. Not long after Rhys Fychan, Son to Prince Rhys, besieged the Castle of
Lhangadoc, and took it, contrary to the Promise and League he had made with his
Nephews, forgetting likewise how freely and readily they had administered to him
in his necessity; therefore to be avenged of this Ingratitude and breach of
promise, Rhys and Owen no sooner heard of it, but they furiously attacked the
Castle, and took it by assault, and put to the Sword, or took Prisoners all the
Garrison, and then burnt the Castle to the ground.

John levied a powerful Army with which he made a Voyage to Ireland; but as he
was on the Borders of Wales on his Journey thitherwards, there was a Criminal
brought before him who had murdered a Priest. The Officer desired to know the
King's Pleasure, how he would have the Delinquent punished; but the King,
instead of ordering any Punishment to be inflicted upon him suitable to the
heinousness of his Crime, discharged him with a Well done thou good Servant,
thou have slain mine Enemy; for such he reckoned the Clergy of those days who
were very ill-affected to his usurped arbitrary Government, and therefore he
slightly regarded any Injuries that were done them, nay, thought those did him
good service who did them wrong. He had not been long in Ireland, but he got
into his clutches the unfortunate William de Bruce the younger, and his Mother
Mawd de Saint Valerike, whom we have mentioned before to have quitted England
for fear of him, and to have fled here for shelter. Upon his return to England
he brought these in triumph along with him, and committed them to
Windsor-Castle, where, by his Orders, not long after they were inhumanly
famished. The reason of King John's Displeasure against William de Bruce Lord
of Brecnock, Page 303.
Matthew Paris delivers, to be this; When the Pope had excommunicated the Realm
of England, the King, to prevent any Inconveniences that might ensue thereupon,
took Pledges of such of his Nobles as he thought were disaffected to him, and
would be like, if occasion offered, to countenance and promote a Rebellion.
Amongst others, he sends Messengers to William de Bruce to demand his Sons for
Pledges, to whom Mawd, de Bruce's Wife, being the readier speaker, answered,
(though what she said was no less her Husband's Sentiment than her own) Thar
the King, who had proved so base a Guardian to his Nephew Prince Arthur, whom
instead of setting in, he deprived of his Right, should have none of her
Children. This Answer the Messengers delivered to the King, whereat he was
highly displeased, that he ordered some Soldiers should be sent to seize this
Lord, but he having timely intelligence of this Order, fled into Ireland with
his Wife and Children, where now his Wife Mawd, with her Son, were
unfortunately taken by King John, but he himself escaped, and fled into France,
where not long after he dyed.

This Year the Earl of Chester rebuilt the Castle of Dyganwy, situate on the
Seashore, East of the River Conway, which Prince Lhewelyn had before
demolished. He likewise fortifies the Castle of Treffynon or S. Wenefrid. Upon
this Lhewelyn enters into the Earl's Land, which when he had ravaged
sufficiently, he returns home with considerable Booty. About this time Rhys
Fychan Son to Prince Rhys, fearing lest Prince Lhewelyn should fall upon him
for the wrong he had done to his Nephews, whom he, Prince Lhewelyn, stiffly
defended in their right; made his Application to the King of England, who
readily granted him what Succors he desired; and with these he besieged the
Castle of Lhanymdhyfri; the Garrison for some time made a vigorous defense, but
having no hopes of any Relief, they thought it their wisest course to
Capitulate, and so they desired they might march out with their Arms, Bag and
Baggage, and all that belonged to them, which was granted them. About this time
likewise Gwenwynwyn was set at Liberty, whom the King had hitherto detained
Prisoner, and withal lends him some Forces to attempt the recovery of his
Country which Prince Lhewelyn had seized upon during his Imprisonment; and though
by his own Strength he was not able to cope with the Prince, yet by this
Assistance granted him by the King, he soon re-possess^d himself of his
Dominions. This Success of Gwenwynwyn encouraged Maelgon likewise to endeavor
the recovery of that part of his Country which the Prince had taken from him in
the same Expedition. Now he makes his application to the King of England, and
swears Allegiance to him. Hereupon the King grants him a considerable Army as
well English as Normans; to these he joins what Forces he could raise in Wales,
and then contrary to the Oath and Agreement he had made with his Nephews Rhys
and Owen, he in a hostile manner enters their Country, when he was come to
Cantred Penwedic, he encamped at Cilcenny where he staid some time to take
measures for the better accomplishment of his Designs; by this time his Nephews
had got together about 300 chosen well disciplined Men, but with so small a
Number durst not oppose their Uncle's numerous Army in open Field; therefore
they were to endeavor to overthrow those by a Stratagem which they could not
do by main force. Herein they proved very successful, for coming as near their
Enemies as they could without being discovered, they sent out their Spies that
Night for Intelligence, who brought back the good News, that all was quiet in
Maelgon's Camp, and that they kept no strict Watch, being not aware of an
approaching Enemy. This Intelligence mightily encouraged the Brothers to
prosecute their Designs, and now they march as silently as they can toward
their Enemies Camp, where they met with no opposition, being not discovered
because all were fast asleep. When they were advanced as they thought as far as
Maelgon's Tent, they furiously fell on, and slew a great number of his Men
before they awaked; the rest being frightened with the noise and shouts of their
Enemies, and withal thinking their Numbers to be far greater than it was, were
glad to make use of the darkness of the Night to quit the Field, only Maelgon's
Guard valiantly kept their Post, and defended their Lord till he had time and
opportunity to escape. But Maelgon's Army suffered very much in this Action,
his Nephew Conan ap Howel with his Chief Counselor Gruffydh ap Cadwgan were
both taken Prisoners, and Eineon ap Caradoc with a great number more were slain
upon the spot. About the same time Gilbert Earl of Gloucester fortified the
Castle of Buelht, where a little before he had lost a considerable number of
his Men, by reason that the place was not very strong and tenable. And toward
the conclusion of this year, Mallt or Mawd de Bruce, the Wife of Gruffydh ap
Rhys departed this Life, and was interred by her Husband in a Monk's Coul in
Ystratflur.

But the following Year a great Storm threatened North Wales, by reason that
the Marchers made frequent and grievous Complaints to King John, how that
Prince Lhewelyn perpetually molested their Country, slew their Men, and
committed all the waste and destruction possible as he passed along. The King
hearing of such intolerable Depredations continually exercised by the
North Wales Men, thought it high time to redress his Subjects, and therefore he
raised a mighty Army throughout all England* and called to him all the Lords
and Princes of Wales as held their Lands and Patents from him, as Howel ap
Gruffydh ap Conan ap Owen Gwynedh, whom Prince Lhewelyn had banished out of
North Wales; Madoc ap Gruffydh Maylor Lord of Bromfield, Chirke and Yale,
Meredith ap Rotpert Lord of Cydewen, Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powys, Maelgon and Rhys
the Sons of Prince Rhys and Governors of South Wales. With this formidable
Army he came to Chester, intending to enter into North Wales by that way, and
being fully resolved to execute the severest Vengeance upon the Inhabitants,
and not to let one living Soul remain alive throughout the whole Country. But
Matters of this nature are easier resolved upon, than accomplished; Prince
Lhewelyn was no sooner informed of these mighty preparations against him,
comprehending the whole Strength of the English Nation, and what was worst of
all, being assisted by his own Countrymen, but he issued forth his Orders,
commanding all his Subjects of the Inland Counties of Denbigh and Flint,
together with them of the Island of Anglesey, to remove for a time all their
Cattle and other Effects to Snowden-Hills, where they were sure to remain
securest from their Enemies. But King John marched his Army along the Seacoast
to Ruthlan, and there passing the River Clwyd, he came to the Castle of
Teganwy, where he encamped for some time to refresh and recreate his Army,
which by reason of the long Marches they made, was in a great measure weary and
fatigued. But what the more augmented their misery, Lhewelyn getting behind
them, cut off all their hopes of Provision from England, and the Welsh by the
Advantage of being acquainted with the straits and narrow Passages, cut off all
that straggled from the English Camp, so that in time, they were glad to take
up with Horseflesh, and any thing were it never so mean, which might till up
their greedy and empty Stomachs. At last King John finding no other Remedy, and
perceiving it impossible to continue longer there so hungry and fainty, thought
it his wisest way to march for England and leave the Welsh to themselves, and
so he decamped in a great fury, leaving Lhewelyn to bury that great number of
Dead, which had starved in this successless Expedition. But to recover the
Honor he had now lost, he was resolved to try another touch with the Welsh,
but possibly not with the same confidence and assurance of Victory. And
therefore returning to Wales in the next August, he entered with such another
terrible Army of English, and was assisted by the same Welsh Lords, at
Blanchmonastery, now Oswestry, being in the Lordship of John the Son of William
Fitzalan. In this Expedition, King John passing the River Conwey, and encamping
at the other side toward Snowden-Hills, sent part of his Army conducted by
Guides who were acquainted with the Country, to burn Bangor, which they
effectually did; and taking Ro^pert Bishop of that See out of Church, they
carried him Prisoner to the English Camp, where he continued for some time,
till he obtained his Ransom for a present of two hundred Hawks. But Prince
Lhewelyn finding the whole Strength of England, and almost Wales to fight
against him, and judging it impossible for himself alone, to withstand so great
a multitude, thought it his best way to endeavor to find out some method or
other, to reconcile himself to the King. And no better measures could possibly
be thought of, than to send Joan his Wife, King John's Daughter, to entreat
with her Father about a Peace, and a cessation of all Hostilities; who being a
prudent, sly Woman, so prevailed upon the King, that he granted Prince Lhewelyn
her Husband, a safe Conduct to come to him, and to renew the former Peace and
Amity that was betwixt them. And so Lhewelyn having done Homage, promised the
King toward his Expenses in this Expedition, 20000 Head of Cattle and forty
Horses, and what was more than all, he granted all the inland Countries of
Wales, with the Appurtenances, to him and his Heirs for ever. And then King
John having received better Success in this, than the former Expedition,
returned to England in great Triumph, having subdued all Wales, excepting that
part which Rhys and Owen the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys, still kept and
maintained against the English. But having no leisure to march against them
himself at his departure out of the Country, he gave strict charge to Foulke
Vicount of Caerdyff, Warden of the Marches, a cruel Tyrant, though well beloved
and favored by the King, to take an Army with him, and so joining with Maelgon
and Rhys Fychan, to compel the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys to acknowledge him for
their Sovereign, and to do him Homage. Foulke having received so positive a
Command, presently raised his Forces, and calling Maelgon and Rhys, came to the
Cantref of Penwedic; which when the young Lords Rhys and Owen heard of, and
being assured that this Blow was levelled against them, which they knew they
were not able to bear, before the Stroke was struck, they sent to Foulke to sue
for Peace, and a safe Conduct for them to pass to the Court of England. This
being granted, they came to London, and making their submission to the King,
and requesting his Pardon for all former Misdemeanors, they gave up all
pretense to their Lands betwixt Aeron and Dyfi; and so paying their Homage,
they were dismissed very graciously. But Foulke before his departure out of the
Country, fortified the Castle of Aberystwyth, and placing a strong Garrison
therein, kept it to the King's use. But Maelgon and Rhys Fychan, a couple of
headstrong, inconstant People, quickly repented them of the Peace they had
made with the King of England, and thereupon, without the least reason or
provocation, they laid Siege to Aberystwyth Castle, and with much ado having
made themselves Masters of it, they destroyed those Fortifications which Foulke
had lately erected, and defaced the Castle to the ground. But they paid sauce
for this another way, for as soon as Rhys and Owen had heard that their Uncles
had broken and violated the King's Peace, they made in-roads into Isaeron,
which was Maelgon's Country, and having slain a considerable number of his Men,
among whom was one brave and lusty Youth called Bachglas, they returned with
very rich Booty.

Maelgon and Rhys Fychan were quickly followed by the North Wales Men in their
revolt from the King of England, for Prince Lhewelyn being not able to endure
any longer the tyranny and oppreission which the King's Garrisons exercised in
his Country; called together Gwenwynwyn from Powys, Maelgon ap Rhys from
South Wales, Madoc ap Gruffydh Maylor from Bromfield, and Meredith ap Rotpert
from Cydewen, and plainly declared before them the Pride and insolency of the
English, and how that they who were always used to have a Prince of their own
Nation, were now by their own wilfulness and neglect become subject to
Strangers. However, it was not too late to recover their ancient Liberty, and
if they did but unanimously agree among themselves, they might easily cast off
that Yoke which was so intolerably burdersome to them. Then the Lords being
sensible of the truth and reasonableness of what Prince Lhewelyn delivered, and
being conscious to themselves that their present slavery and subjection to the
English, was wholly owing to their own fear and cowardice, swore fealty to
Prince Lhewelyn, and swore to be true and faithful to him, and to stick by each
other to the utmost of their Lives and Fortunes. And so joining their Forces
together, they took all the Castles in North Wales which were in the hands of
the English, excepting Ruthlan and Dyganwy; and then going to Powys, they laid
Siege to the Castle which Robert Vspont had built at Mathrafal. But King John
being informed how the Welsh had conspired against him, and that they had taken
and sezied upon almost all his Castles in North Wales, and how that they were
now in actual besiegement of Mathrafal, presently drew up his Army, and coming
to Mathrafal, quickly raised the Siege, and to prevent the Welsh from coming
any more against it, he burnt it to the ground and so returned to England,
having no time to stay any longer in Wales, by reason of the Differences that
happened betwixt him and his Nobility. But being afterward at Nottingham, and
hearing how that Prince Lhewelyn cruelly harrassed and destroyed the Marches,
he caused all the Welsh Pledges which he had received the last year to be
hanged, among whom were Howel the Son of Cadwalhon, and Madoc the Son of
Maelgon, with many others of the Nobilities Sons, to the number of Twenty
Eight. And about the same time Robert Vepont caused Rhys the Son of Maelgon to
be hanged at Shrewsbury, being a Youth of about seventeen years of age, and so
cruelly murdered the innocent Child to revenge the Crimes and Offenses
committed by his Father and others. But though King John was so severe to the
Welsh, yet the Princess of North Wales was more dutiful and favorable to him,
for whilst he staid at Nottingham, she sent him an Express, declaring how that
the Barons had entered into a Conspiracy with the French King against him, and
that this latter was a preparing and raising an Army to come over to England,
upon pretense that the King was a Rebel, and bid open Defiance to the Holy
Church, in as much as he would not condescend nor yield to the Bishop of Rome's
Request. And in confirmation of all this, she told him that Robert Fitzwalter,
Eustace de Vescy and Stephen Redell, were secretly fled into France, to promote
and carry on this intrigue. And that this design against King John was no
feigned surmise, the next Innocent the Third detached one of his Nuncio's to
Wales, who absolved Prince Lhewelyn, Gwenwynwyn and Maelgon from their Oaths of
Allegiance to King John, and withal gave them a strict command under the
penalty of Excommunication, to molest and annoy him with all their Endeavors,
as an open Enemy to the Church of God. Prince Lhewelyn, you may be sure, was
not in the least troubled at this, for now he gained the fittest opportunity
imaginable, to restore such Lands as he had formerly much against his mind
delivered up to the King, being the inland Country of Denbigh and Flint, which
Lhewelyn at this time repossessed himself of. And well it was, he was so quick,
for within a little while after, King John by the persuasions of Pandulph the
Pope's Legate, granted his Holiness all his Request, and so obtained Absolution
at Pandulph's hands, and upon performance of his Promises, an assurance of a
releasement from that Ecclesiastical Bull, which had so formidably roared
against him.

South Wales had now been quiet for a considerable time, and they that used to
be commonly very turbulent and contentious, were now pretty easy and amicable.
But it was impossible that such a peaceable Course of Life should hold long,
where Injustice and Oppression had so much Liberty, and where People were
wrongfully kept out of their just and rightful Inheritance. And this was the
occasion of the breach of that quietness, which for the two or three years last
past they had so satisfactorily enjoyed. For Rhys the Son of Gruffydh ap Rhys,
who was right Heir to Prince Rhys, finding he could have no share of his
Father's Estate, but that his Uncles forcibly kept all from him, thought it his
best way to make his Case known to the King of England, and to desire a remedy
and redress from him. King John in compassion of the young Man's hard
Condition, sent to his Deputy Foulke Vicount of Caerdyff Warden of the Marches,
and to the Steward of Hereford, commanding them to take away all Ystratywy from
Rhys Fychan, by some called Rhys Gryg, unless he would permit his Nephews to
enjoy Lhanymdhyfry-Castle, with all the Lands and Privileges thereunto
belonging. Foulke having received such Orders from his Master the King of
England, sent to acquaint Rhys of the Proposals, and so demand of him whether
or no he would deliver up Lhanymdhyfry to his Nephews, according to the Kin'gs
Command; who returned answer, that he did not know of any such Obligation due
from him to the King of England, as to part with his Lands at his Command, and
therefore assured him peremptorily and in plain terms, that he would not
willingly part with one foot of what he was in present possession of. Foulke
therefore having received this resolute Answer, was likewise as resolute to get
that by force which he could not obtain by fair means; and so having raised a
great Army, he marched to Talhwynelgain to meet with young Rhys, who was to
come thither with all the Forces he could raise in Brecknock; and from thence
they marched in three Battles toward Dynefawr, the first being commanded by
young Rhys, the second by Foulke and Owen Brother to Rhys led the third. Rhys
Fychan was not in the least dismayed at their Number, but thinking it more
advisable to meet them in the Field, rather than suffer them to block him up at
Dynefawr, came out very boldly, and gave them Battle, but after a warm
Engagement on both sides, Rhys Fychan in the end got the worse, and after a
loss of a great number of his Men, he was glad at last to make his escape by
flight. And so retiring to Dynefawr, he doubled the Garrison of that place, but
thinking the Town of Lhandeilo-fawr not to be Tenable, he burnt it to the
Ground, and then kept himself private in the Woods and other desert places. But
young Rhys and Foulke laid Siege to Dynefawr, and in the first Assault came on
so fiercely, that they forced the Garrison to retire to the Castle, which for
some time they defended very manfully. But the besiegers began to play so
violently with their battering Engines, and to undermine the Wall in such a
manner, that the Governor after a short defense began to Capitulate, giving
three Pledges for security, that if they received no Relief by the morrow at
Noon, the Castle should be surrendered up, conditionally that the Garrison
should march out with all the Tokens of Honor, and carry their Arms and all
other Implements of War along with them. No Relief being arrived, the Castle
the next day was accordingly surrendered, and all the Articles of the
Capitulation observed; and so young Rhys being possessed of Dynefawr, in a
little time afterward, brought all Cantref-fawr to his subjection. When Rhys
Fychan was sensible how the stream run violently against him, he thought it his
wisest way to remove his Wife and Children, and all his other Effects, to his
Brother Maelgon's Country, and so leaving Lhanymdhyfry Castle well manned and
fortified, he departed toward Aberystwyth. But as soon as Foulke was returned
to the Marches, young Rhys came with an Army consisting of Welsh and Normans
before Lhanymdhyfry, intending to besiege that place, but before they were
encamped before the Town, the Governor thought it his best way to surrender,
upon Condition only, that the Garrison should depart away with their Lives. And
shortly afterward, Rhys Fychan was taken at Caermar^dhyn, and committed to the
King's Prison, and so all the Disturbances and Troubles of South Wales came to
a peaceable issue. But it was not so in North Wales, for Prince Lhewelyn being
desirous to rid his Country from the insupportable Tyranny and Oppression of
the English Garrisons, laid Siege to the Castles of Dyganwy and Ruthlan, the
only places now remaining in the hands of the English, which he took without
any great opposition, and so freed his Country from any Title or Pretense the
King of England might claim in North Wales. King John indeed was engaged
another way, and consequently in no good Condition to help himself, for having
repented of all the indignities and stubborness he expressed against Pope
Innocent; at this time he received Penance at the hands of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to atone for all the severities he had practiced against the
Church. And to restore himself the more to his Holiness Favor, he made the
Kingdom of England Tributary to the Church of Rome, to be holden of the Pope,
in paying him the sum of 1000 Marks yearly for ever; and withal recalled and
restored to their former Preferments and Places all such as had been banished,
or had voluntarily fled the Kingdom upon the account of their strict adherence
and submission to the Pope of Rome.

Nor was this all, for the next year King John with Chester and Derby, was
resolved upon a Voyage to the Holy Land, but was unfortunately prevented of his
Journey, by the Rebellion of his Barons, which now broke forth violently by
reason that the King would not grant them some ancient Laws and Privileges,
such as their Forefathers always enjoyed. Therefore the Barons entered into a
Confederacy with Prince Lhewelyn of North Wales, desiring him to make what
Diversion he could on his part, which they were resolved to do on theirs; and
so having raised an Army, they appointed Robert Fitzwalter their General.
Coming to Bedford, they were honorably received into the Castle by William
Beauchamp, and from thence marching to London, they were entertained with all
the Expressions and Tokens of Joy. King John perceiving how powerful they were
like to prove, and how that the Country did in a great measure favor their
Cause, thought it his wisest way to nip them in the bud, and to fall upon them
before they grew too strong; and therefore having levied his Forces, he marched
together with William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, toward the Castle of
Rochester. Being arrived there, he laid close Siege to the Castle, but the
Governor William de Abbineto so bravely defended it, that it could hardly be
taken after three Months Siege, but at length the King's Men bore on so
violently, that they took it by a Storm, where besides William de Abbineto, the
King took several of the Barons Prisoners. This was an ill beginning to the
Design of the Confederates, and what did not add a little to their Misfortune,
the Pope presently issues out his Bull of Excommunication against Lhewelyn
Prince of Wales, and all the English Barons as made War against King John, who
was under the protection of the Church of Rome. But Prince Lhewelyn did not
regard his threatening Anathemas, and therefore having raised an Army, he came
to Shrewsbury, which was delivered up to him without any resistance. And whilst
Lhewelyn remained there, Giles de Bruce Bishop of Hereford, one of the chief of
this Conspiracy, sent his Brother Reynold to Brecnock whom all the People
readily ow^ed for their Lord; and so without the least grumbling or opposition
he received the Castles of Abergefenny and Pencelhy, the Castelh Gwyn, or the
White Castle, together with Grosmont Castle and the Island of Cynuric. But when
the Bishop came thither in Person, he had the Castles of Aberhondhy, Hay,
Buelht, and Blaenlhyfny, delivered up to him; but thinking he had enough
himself, and being rather desirous to secure his Interest, and to strengthen
his Party in the Country, than to heap more upon his own shoulders than he was
well able ^o support, he bestowed Pain Castle, Clune and all Eluel upon Walter
Fychan, the Son of Eineon Clyd.

In the mean time, young Rhys the Son of Gruffydh ^p Rhys, and his Uncle
Maelgon were reconciled and made Friends, and so coming both to Dyfed, they
destroyed Arberth and Maenclochoc Castles, and recovered all such Lands as
formerly belonged to them, ex^epting Cemais. But Rhys's Brothers Maelgon and
Owen went to North Wales and did Homage and Feal^y to Prince Lhewelyn, whilst
their Brother Prince Rhys marched forward to Cydwely, and having rased the
Castles of Carnwylheon and Lhy^hwr, brought all the Country about under his
subjection. But this was ^ot enough to satisfy the ambitious humor of that
young Prince, for having once tasted the pleasure of Victory, and the taking
and demolishing of Towns, ^e was resolved to prosecute his Conquest whilst
Fortune seemed to favor his Undertakings; and therefore he lead his Army
against Talybont Castle, which belonged to Hugh de Miles, and forcing his
entrance into the same, he put a great number of the Garrison to the Sword. The
next day he marched to Sengennyth Castle, but the Garrison which kept it,
think^ng it fruitless and to no purpose to oppose him, burnt the place, and
departed to Ystymlhwynarth. But he followed them at the Heels, and the next day
took it, and rased it to the ground, and overran the Country in such a violent
manner, that in three days time, he became Master of all the Castles and
Fortresses in all Gowerland and Morgannwe, and so returned home with great
Victory and Triumph. At the same time Rhyt Fychan, otherwise Rhys Gryg, young
Prince Rhys's Uncle, obtained his Liberty from the King of England, leaving his
Son with two more for Pledges for his modest and peaceable Behavior toward
his Subjects, whom at other times he was wont to molest and oppress. About this
time the Abbots of Tal y Llecheu and Tuy Gwyn, were consecrated Bishops, the
former of St. David's, and the other of Bangor. But the Bishop of Hereford who
seemed to be the most violently inclined against King John, and was otherwise
unwilling to part with what he had got in Wales's could not for all that refuse
the Injunction of the Pope, by whose express Command he was constrained to make
Peace with the King, which being concluded, in his return homeward, he died at
Gloucester, leaving his Estate to his Brother Reginald, who had married the
Daughter of Prince Lhewelyn.

But for all that, Giles de Bruce Bishop of Hereford was fallen off, and
reconciled to King John, yet Prince Lhewelyn did not think it convenient to
follow his Example, and therefore with his whole Army he marched against
Carmardhyn, and took the Castle in five days, having rased it to the ground, he
successively laid Siege to the Castles of Lhanstephan, St. Clear, and
Talacharn, which he used after the same manner. From thence he went to
Cardigan, and winning Emlyn Castle, he subdued Cemaes, and then laying Siege to
Trefdraeth Castle, in English called Newport, he quickly took it, and
afterward rased it to the ground. His next Design was upon Aberteifi and
Cilgerra^ Castles, but the Garrisons which defended them, finding it to no
purpose to wait his coming, and so to withstand all his Attempts against those
places voluntarily surrendered, and by that means prevented all the Mischief,
which in opposing him, would in all probability unavoidably attend them. And so
Prince Lhewelyn having successfully overrun and subdued all Carmardhyn and
Cardigan, triumphantly returned to North Wales, being attended by several of
the Welsh Nobility, such as Howel ap Gruffydh ap Conan, Lhewelyn ap Meredith,
Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powys, Meredith ap Rotpert, Maelgon and Rhys Fychan the Sons
of Prince Rhys of South Wales, Rhys and Owen the Sons of Gruffydh ap Rhys,
together with all the Power of Madoc ap Gruffydh Maylor Lord of Bromfield.

Lhewelyn returned to Aberteifi to compose a Difference, which since his
departure, had happened betwixt Maelgon and Rhys Fychan, Prince Rhys's Sons on
the one side, and Rhys and Owen, Gruffydh ap Rhys's Sons on the other.
Therefore to make up this Quarrel, and to reduce all Matters to a quiet and
amicable issue, Prince Lhewelyn made an equal distribution of South Wales
betwixt them, allotting to Maelg^n, three Cantrefs in Dyfed, viz. Gwarthaf,
Penlhwynoc, Cemaes, and Emlyn with Cilgerran Castle; to young Rhys, two Castles
in Ystratywy, Hiruryn and Maelhaen, Maenor Bydfey, with the Castle of
Lhanymdhyfry, and two in Cardigan Gwy^t^yth and Mabwyneon. His Brother Owen had
to his share the Castles of Aberteifi and Nant yr Arian, with three Cantress in
Cardigan; and Rhys Fychan, otherwise called Rhys Gryc, had Dynefawr Castle, the
Cantref Mawr, the Cantref Bychan, excepting Hiruryn and Midhfey, together with
the Comotes of Cydwely and Carnwylhion. This Division being accomplished to
every one's Satisfaction, and all the Lords of South Wales being amicably
reconciled, Prince Lhewelyn took his Journey for North Wales; but he had not
advanced very far, when News was brought him that Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powys was
revolted, and was become again the King of England's Subject. This unwelcome
News struck very deep in the Prince's Mind, by reason that Gwenwynwyn was a Man
of great Power and Strength in the Country, and went a great way to repel the
Incursions of the English upon the Marches, which now he being gone off, could
not, he feared, be so well effected. But however, to make the best of a bad
Market, he endeavored to take him off from the English, and to restore him to
his former Allegiance due to himself as his Natural Prince; and to that end, he
sent to him some Bishops and Abbots to put him in mind of his Oath and Promise,
how that he with the rest of the Lords of Wales, had obliged himself to oppose
the English to the utmost of his Power; and had delivered Pledges for the sure
performance of what he had then by Oath engaged in; and lest he should have
forgot what he had then promised, he was desired to read his own hand Writing,
whereby it was apparent that he had very unjustly violated both his Oath and
Promise. But all the Rhetoric the Bishops could make use of, was not of force
enough to work Gwenwynwyn to reconciliation with the Prince, and an aversion to
the King of England; and therefore seeing nothing would do, Prince Lhewelyn was
resolved to make him incapable of serving the English, and so entering Powys
with a strong Army, he subdued the whole Country to himself, Gwenwynwyn being
forced to fly for Succor to the Earl of Chester.

Whilst these things passed in Wales, Lewis the Dauphin of France being invited
by the English Barons against King John, landed in the Island of Thanet, and
marching forward to London, he there received Homage of all the Barons, that
were in actual War against the King. And then setting forward to Winchester,
where King John then lay, he took in his way the Castles of Rygat, Guildford
and Farnham, and coming to Winchester, had the Town presently surrendered to
him. King John did not think fit to abide his coming, but removing to Hereford,
in the Marches of Wales, he sent to Prince Lhewelyn and Reynold Bruce, desiring
their Friendship, and imploring their Aid aad Assistance against the French.
But they refusing to hearken to his Proposals, he destroyed Radnor and Hay
Castles, and marching forward to Oswestry, which belonged to John Fitzalan, he
burnt it to the ground, and then departed toward the North. But after that he
had settled his Affairs there, and appointed Governors in all the Towns and
Places of Strength; whilst he was making all necessary Preparations at Newark
to confront the Barons, he fell sick, and in a short time died, and was buried
at Worcester.

After his Death his Son Henry was by several of the English Nobility
proclaimed King, and in a little while, most of the Barons, who upon their
hatred to King John, had maintained an open War against him, came in, and owned
their Allegiance to his Son Henry, tho contrary to their Oath to Lewis the
Dauphine. Welsh, Reynald de Bruce who had all this while maintained a
Confederacy with Prince Lhewelyn his Father-in-Law against King John, underhand
made his Peace with King Henry. But he suffered severely for his Treachery; for
young Rhys, and Owen his Nephew by his Sister, seeing that he in whom they put
their greatest Confidence, had deceitfully forsaken them, came upon him with
all their Power, and took from him all Buelht, excepting only the Castle.
Prince Lhewelyn was presently made acquainted with Bruce's revolt, but as soon
as he was informed that his Son-in-Law was gone over to the King of England, he
went in great fury to Brecknoc, and laying Siege to the Town of Aberhondhy, he
was with much ado prevailed upon by young Rhys to raise the Siege for the sum
of a Hundred Marks; and then crossing the Mountanous part of Glamorgan, called
the Black Mountains, where his Carriages suffered very much, he came to Gwyr,
and encamping at Lhangruc, Reynald Bruce with six Knights in his Company, came
to meet him, desiring his Pardon for his passed Offense, assuring him that for
the future, he would be true and faithful to him, and would to his endeavor
assist him against the King of England. Prince Lhewelyn was too good natured to
reject his submission, and so did not only receive him to his Favor, but
bestowed upon him also the Castle of Senghennyth, which Reynald committed to
the Custody of Rhys Fychan. Prince Lhewelyn having settled all things in good
Order in Gwyr, marched to Dyfed, and being at Cefn Cynwarchan, the Flemings
sent their Agents to him to desire Peace, which the Prince, by reason that they
always adhered to the English Interest, would not grant them. And so young Rhys
having the first Man passed the River Cledeu to Storm the Town, Iorwerth Bishop
of St. David's, with the rest of his Clergy came to the Prince to entreat for a
Peace for the Flemings, which after a long debate, was granted, and concluded
upon these Terms; First, That all the ^nhabitants of Rhos, and the Country of
Pembroke should from thence forward swear Allegiance to Prince Lhewelyn, and
ever after acknowledge his Sovereignty. Secondly, That toward the defraying of
his Charges in this Expedition, they should pay one Thousand Marks to be
delivered to him before the ensuing Feast of St. Michael. Thirdly, That for the
sure performance of these Articles they should deliver up Twenty Hostages, who
were to be some of the most Principal Persons in their Country. Then Prince
Lhewelyn having now brought all Wales subject to himself, and put Matters in a
settled posture in South Wales, returned to North Wales, having purchased very
considerable Honor and Esteem for his Martial Achievements in this Expedition.

And now all Matters of Differences being adjusted, and the Welsh in good hopes
of a durable Freedom from all Troubles and Hostilities; another Accident
unhappily fell out to cross their Expectation. Lewis the Dauphin perceiving the
English Barons to slight and forsake him, concluded a Peace with King Henry,
and returned to France; and then the Barons, the King promising to answer all
their Request, and to redress their Grievances, made their submission, without
including the Welsh in their Articles. They had all this while gladly embraced
the Friendship and Aid of the Prince of Wales; but now upon their
Reconciliation to the King, thinking they had no farther need of him, they very
basely forsook him, who had been the principal Support and Succor of their
Cause. And not only so, but they conspired together to convert their Arms
against Wales, thinking they could without any breach of Equity or Conscience,
take away the Lands of the Welsh, to make addition to what some of them had
already unjustly possessed themselves of. William Marshall Earl of Pembroke
opened the Scene, and coming unexpectedly upon the Welsh, took the Town of
Caerlheon. But he got nothing by this, for Rhys Fychan perceiving what he would
fain be at, ra^ed Senghennyth Castle, and all the rest in his Custody in that
Country, and banishing the English with their Wives and Children, divided the
Country betwixt Welsh, who kept sure possession of it. Prince Lhewelyn also
finding those to become his Foes, who had but lately courted his Friendship,
and fearing lest that the English being now in Arms should make any Attempt
upon his Castles, augmented the Garrisons of Carmardhyn and Aberteifi, to make
them capable of withstanding the English, in case they should come against
them. But though the Welsh and English were at open Variance and in actual
Hostility one against another, yet young Rhys with Prince Lhewelyn's
approbation and consent, thought it advisable to go and do Homage to the King
of England, for his Lands in Wales. This might be thought a matter of
Supererogation, to make courtship to one who was declared Enemy to all the
Welsh, and one that would not in all probability, suffer him to enjoy a quiet
possession of his Estate, in case he had Ability and Opportunity to eject him.
But the Welsh Interest was English; Rhys Gryc, Prince Rhys's Son, being married
to the Earl of Clare's Daughter; and Marret, Prince Lhewelyn's Daughter, to
John Bruce.

The Prince of Wales had quickly an occasion to Flemings in Dyfed, who had
lately sworn Allegiance to him, began now to repent of what they had but a
little time ago gladly submitted to, and contrary to their Oaths, and the
League they had sworn to observe, they fell upon Aberteifi Castle, which they
took. Prince Lhewelyn being highly displeased with the treacherous practices of
these perjured Flemings, marched with all speed to Aberteifi, and having
recovered the Castle, which he afterward rased, he put all the Garrison to the
Sword. Gwys was served in the same manner, and the Town of Haverford was burnt
to the ground, and overrunning Rhos and Daugledhau, he committed a lamentable
Destruction throughout the whole Country. This the Flemings received as the due
reward of their sinistrous Dealing, which made them quickly apprehensive of
their folly, and their imprudent Behavior toward the Prince of Wales; and
therefore being sorrowfully sensible how unable they were to put a stop to his
farther progress by force of Arms, they made Overtures for Cessation of all
Hostilities till the May following, which being granted them upon strict
Conditions, Prince Lhewelyn returned to North Wales. In the mean time some
Welsh Lords besieged Buelht Castle, which was in the possession of Reynald
Bruce, but before they could take it, King Henry brought an Army to the Marches
and raised the Siege, and then marching forward to Montgomery, built a new
Castle in that Town.

Lhewelyn and his Son Gruffydh this latter having kept himself in possession of
the Cantref of Merionyth, contrary to the Consent and well-liking of his
Father. The Prince therefore having now no great matter of moment abroad, was
resolved to curb the Insolency of his Son, and therefore sent to him to command
his appearance, and to wish him to deliver up the Cantref quietly, lest he
should be forced to take it violently out of his Hands. Gruffydh was not in the
least dismayed at his threatenings, but being resolved to keep what at present
he enjoyed, would neither go to his Father, nor deliver up the Cantref to him.
The Prince being enraged that he should be so slighted by his Son, made a
vehement Protestation, that he would be severely revenged both of him and all
his accomplices; and therefore coming to Merionyth with a great Army, was
resolved to drive his Son out of the Country. But Gruffydh made all possible
preparations to oppose his Father, and drew up his Forces to give him Battle,
but when both Armies were ready to join, the Differences betwixt them was
happily composed, and Gruffydh prevailed upon to make his submission to his
Father. But the Prince, though he forgave his Son his Offense, and received him
to favor, would not however, permit him to enjoy Me^ionyth and Ardydwy; but
taking them away from him, and building a Castle in the latter, returned home.
But he had not continued long at his Palace a^ Aberffraw, when another occasion
called him abroad; for young Rhys being disappointed of Aberteifi, which in the
division of South Wales was allotted to his share, forsook the Prince, and put
himself under the protection of Willam Marshal Earl of Pembrock. Prince
Lhewelyn hearing this, marched in great haste to Aberystwyth, and being
desirous to punish Rhys for his desertion from his Allegiance due to him,
seized to his own use that Castle, together with all the Demain and Lands
belonging to it. When Rhys understood what the Prince had done, he presently
made his Complaint to the King of England, who coming to Shrewsbury, and
sending for Prince Lhewelyn, adjusted matters so betwixt them, that the Prince
promised to treat with Rhys for Aberteifi, after the same manner as he had done
with Maelgon for Caermardhyn. And toward the close of the Year, John Bruce,
Prince Lhewelyn's Son in Law, obtained leave to fortify Senghennyth Castle,
which in right to the Prince's grant to Raynald Bruce, belonged to him. But
young Rhys did not long survive the Agreement betwixt him and Prince Lhewelyn;
for he dyed the following Ystratflur; after whose death, the Prince divided his
Estate betwixt his Brother Owen and his Uncle Maelgon.

William Marshal Earl of Pembrock was now in Ireland, and very busy in
prosecuting the War against the King of England's Enemies in that Kingdom; the
opportunity of whose absence Prince Lhewelyn taking advantage of, won the
Castles of Aberteifi and Caermardhyn, belonging to the Earl; and putting both
the Garrisons to the Sword, placed in their room a strong Party of his own Men.
But when the Earl was informed of what the Prince of Wales had done, he
presently left Ireland, and landed at S. David's with a great Army, and having
recovered his Castles, he treated the Welsh after the same manner, as Prince
Lhewelyn had used his Garrisons, and passing forward into the Prince's Country,
destroyed all before him as he went along. The Prince understanding how
violently he came forward, sent his Son Gruffydh with a considerable Body of
Men to check his Fury; who coming to Cydwely, and receiving intelligence that
the Magistrates of that place, had a private design to betray him to the Enemy,
he put the whole Town in Flames, and burnt it to the ground, without sparing
either Churches, or other Religious Houses. The Earl of Pembrock had passed the
River Tywy at Caermardhyn, where Gruffydh met him, and gave him battle; but the
Victory proved so uncertain, that the Night was forced to part them; and so the
English retired over the River. Matthew Paris writes, that the Earl obtained a
very signal Victory, and that of the Welsh there were Nine Thousand slain and
taken; though the Welsh Account, which in this case is in all likelihood the
best, makes the whole Army of the Welsh to consist but of that number. But both
Armies having layn for certain Days in that posture, and the River Tywy being
betwixt them; Gruffydh, by reason that Provision began to grow scarce in his
Camp, returned back; and then the Earl decamped, and marched to Cilgerran,
where he began to build a very strong Castle. But before he could have time to
finish it, he received an Express from the King, with orders to come to him;
and so he went by Sea to London, leaving his Army at Cilgerran, to continue the
Work which he had begun. Shortly after, the King, together with the Archbishop
of Canterbury, came to Ludlow, and sending for Prince Lhewelyn thither, they
had good hopes to adjust all Differences, and to make an amicable Composition
betwixt him and the Earl. But when this could not be effected, both Parties
sticking close to their private Interest; the Earl being assisted by the Earl
of Derby, and Henry Pyggot Lord of Ewyas, designed to pass by Land to Pembrock;
but his purpose being discovered to the Prince, he detached his Son to secure
the Passage of Carnwylhion, and came in person to Mabedryd; which when the Earl
understood, finding it dangerous to prosecute his Design any further, he
returned to England; and then the Prince marched to North Wales. The next
Action that passed in Wales, Welsh; for Rhys Fychan, having by some sinistrous
means or other, taken his Father Rhys Gryc, contrary to all filial Affection
and Duty, detained him Prisoner, and would not set him at liberty, till he had
delivered up Lhanymdhyfri Castle to him. About the same time, Meredith,
Archdeacon of Cardigan, Prince Rhys's Son, departed this Life, and was
honorably interred at S. David's, by his Father.

But a while after, a great Storm threatened the Welsh; King Henry having raised
a great Army, was resolved to make a violent Prosecution of the Earl of
Pembrock's Quarrel, against the Prince of Wales, and if possible, to make all
that Country, for ever subject to the Crown of England; and so being advanced
into the Marches, he encamped at Ceri. Prince Lhewelyn on the other hand, being
informed of these mighty Preparations in England, and understanding that they
were intended against him, did use all the Endeavors possible, to make a
vigorous Resistance; and having drawn together all the Forces he was able to
levy, thought it his wisest way to meet the English upon the Marches, and not
to permit the Enemy to enter his Country. Both Armies being come in sight of
each other, frequent Skirmishes happened betwixt 'em; but one day, almost the
whole Armies engaged, and after a vigorous Attack of both sides, the English at
last got the worst, and were forced to retire, having a great many Men slain
and taken Prisoners. Among the latter, was William Bruce, Reynald's Son, who
offered for his Ransom all Buelht, together with a considerable Sum of Money,
which the Prince would not accept of. But King Henry finding that his Army was
worsted in this Rencounter, thought it best to make Peace with the Prince of
Wales, which being concluded, Lhewelyn came to the King, and having paid him
all other Respects, besides that of Submission and Allegiance, he returned in
great Honor to North Wales. But this Action is somewhat otherwise laid down by
Matthew Paris, who writes, that this Skirmish betwixt the English and Welsh
happened upon an other account; for the Garrison of Montgomery issuing out of
the Castle, to enlarge a certain Passage leading through a Wood, where the
Welsh were wont to rob and kill all Passengers; began to fell the Timber, and
cut down all the Bushes which lessened the Road, thereby to make the Passage
more clear and secure. The Welsh receiving intelligence of this, came presently
upon him in great Numbers, and surprising the Enemies, being busy at their
Labor, forced as many as could escape, to betake themselves for refuge into
the Castle, which afterward, having first cast a deep Trench about it, they
smartly invested. H^bert de Burgh, Lord Chief Justice of England, and Owner of
the Castle, having notice of this, sent presently to King Henry, desiring his
speedy help against the Welsh, who thereupon came in Person with part of his
Army, and raised the Siege. Then, the rest of his Forces being arrived, he
marched into the Wood, which was Five Miles in length, and by reason of the
thickness of the growth impassable; and for an easy passage through it, caused
it to be burnt down. After that, he led his Army farther into the Country, and
coming to an Abbey called Cridia, which the Welsh were wont to take for refuge,
he caused it to be burnt down; but finding it a very convenient place for a
Fortress, he granted leave to Hubert de Burgh to build a Castle there. But
whilst the Work was going on, the Welch-men gauled the English, and skirmished
with them frequently, so that many were slain on both sides; but at last
William Bruce, with many others that went abroad to fetch Provision, was
intercepted by the Welsh, and taken Prisoner, and most of his Company were
slain, among whom, one who was knighted a few days before, seeing some of his
Fellows in great danger, rushed boldly into the midst of his Enemies, and after
a manful defense, bravely lost his Life. Several of King Henry's Men were
corrupted by Prince Lhewelyn, and upon that account took no great pains to
repulse the Enemy; which when the King perceived, and finding withal the
Provision was grown very scarce in his Camp, he was forced to conclude a
dishonorable Peace with the Welsh, consenting to demolish that Castle, which
with so great an Expense both of Men and Money was now almost finished, upon his
own Charges, Prince Lhewelyn paying only Three Thousand Pounds toward it. Then
both Armies separated, Prince Lhewelyn marching to North Wales, and the King
leaving William Bruce Prisoner with the Welsh, returned to England having
purchased no small Discredit in this Expedition.

William Bruce was brought to Wales, and there had Henry's Sister; and as the
report went, was taken in the very act of Adultery; for which the Prince caused
him to be hanged forthwith. About the same time, Lhewelyn, Maelgon's Son dyed
in North Wales, and was buried at Conwey; and Maelgon, Prince Rhys his Son in
South Wales, and was buried in Ystratflur; whose Estate descended to his Son
Maelgon. And a little after, William Marshall, Earl of Pembrock Welsh, and upon
whose account King Henry had chiefly brought his Army into Wales. He was
succeeded both in his Title and Estate by his Brother Richard, who was much
more favorably inclined toward the Welsh, and never attempted any thing
against them. But the King of England was resolved to retrieve the Honor he
had lost in the late Expedition against the Welsh; and therefore being returned
from France, whither he had made a Descent, to recover what his Father had lost
in that Kingdom, he came to Wales; and having remained some time in the
Marches, he returned again to England, leaving his Army under the command of
Hubert Burgh, Earl of Kent, to defend the Marches against any in-road which the
Welsh might attempt. And he had not remained there long, when he received
Intelligence, that a Party of Welsh had entered the Marches near Montgomery,
whom he forthwith pursued, and setting upon them surprizedly, he put a great
number of them to the Sword. Prince Lhewylyn hearing this, came in Person with
a great Army to the Marches, and fitting before Montgomery Castle, he forced
Hubert to withdraw, and then making himself Master of the place, he burnt it to
the ground, and put the Garrison to the Sword; the like Fate attended the
Castles of Radnor, Aberhondhy, Rhayadr Gwy, Caerlheon, Neth, and Cydwely;
though Caerlheon held out very stubbornly, and the Prince had several of his
Men destroyed before the Place. King Henry being informed of what miserable
Desolation the Prince of Wales so successfully committed upon his Subjects in
these Countries, had him presently excommunicated; and then coming to Hereford
with a mighty Army, he detached the greatest part of it, with a great number of
his Nobility to Wales. These by the direction of a Friar of Cymer, unexpectedly
as they thought, fell upon a Party of Welsh; who at the first Encounter seemed
to fly, till they had allured the English to pursue them to a place where a
greater Party of Welsh lay in ambuscade; who rushing of a sudden upon the
English, put them in such a confusion, that the greatest part of them was cut
off. The King being sensible, that this was a treacherous Insinuation of the
Friar, was resolved to be revenged, by burning the Abbey of Cymer; but the
Prior, for Three Hundred Marks, prevented it; and so the King returned to
England, having effected nothing in this Expedition, besides the building of
Mawd Castle. In the mean time, Maelgon Son of Maelgon ap Rhys laid siege to
Aberteifi, and having by force got entry into the Town, he put all the
Inhabitants to the Sword, then destroyed all before him to the Castle Gates,
which were so strongly fortified, that it seemed almost impracticable to take
it in any short time. But Maelgon, being joined by his Cousin Owen, Gruffydh ap
Rhys's Son, was resolved to try the utmost that could be effected; and
therefore taking with him some of Prince Lhewelyn's most experienced Officers,
^e brake down the Bridge upon the River Teifi, and ^hen investing the Castle
more closely, he so battered and undermined it, that he became in a little time
Master of it.

The Year following, Prince Lhewelyn made a De^cent England, and having
committed very considerable Waste and Destruction upon the Borders, he ^eturned
to North Wales with a rich Booty both of Men and Cattle. King Henry, to correct
the Welsh for these grievous Devastations, and to prevent their further
Incursions into England, demanded a very great Subsidy of his Subjects to carry
on the War against the Welsh; which being granted him, he made all possible
Preparations for his Expedition to Wales. In the mean time, Randulph Earl of
Chester dyed, and was succeeded in that Honor by John his Sisters Son, who was
afterward married to Prince Lhewelyn's Daughter. But the English in Wales
being in expectation of King Henry's coming thither, began to repair and
fortify their Castles; and particularly, Richard Earl of Cornwall rebuilt
Radnor Castle, Lhewelyn was sufficiently sensible, that the King of England
intended an Invasion, and therefore to be beforehand with him, he came with an
Army to Brecknock destroyed all the Towns and Castles throughout the Country,
excepting Brecknock Castle, which held out so manfully, that after a Months
sitting before it, he was at last constrained to raise the Siege. In his return
to North Wales, he burnt the Town of Clun, recover^^ all that Country called
Dyffryn Tefeidiat, in the possession of John Fitz-Alan, destroyed Red Castle in
Powys, and burnt Oswestry. But what happened very fortunately to the Welsh;
Richard Marshal Earl of Pembroke being fallen at variance with King Henry, took
part with Prince Lhewelyn; with whom joined Hubert de Burgh, who had lately
made his escape out of the Castle of Devizes, where the King, upon some
Articles of Information brought against him, had committed him to Prison. But
the Earl of Pembrock, attended by Owen ap Gruffydh ap Rhys, came to S. David's;
and being very glad of an opportunity to revenge himself upon the King, slew
every one tha^ owned any Dependence upon the Crown of England* Maelgon and Rhys
Gryc, with all the Forces of Prince Lhewelyn, quickly joined the Earl; who in
their march through the Country, took the Castles of Ca^dyff, Abergevenny,
Pencelhy, Blaenlhefyni, and Bwlch y Ddinas, which all, excepting Cardyff, they
burnt to the ground. The King receiving intelligence, that the Earl of Pembrock
had entered into a Confederacy with the Prince of Wales, and that he was now i^
open Hostility against his Subjects in that Country, gathered a very formidable
Army, consisting, besides English, of Flemings, Normans, and Gascoigns; and
coming to Wales, he encamped at Grosmont, where the Earl, with the Welsh Army
met him. But when the English would have endeavored to advance further into
the Country, the Welsh opposed them, and so a Battle ensued, wherein the
English lost Five Hundred Horse, besides a far greater number of their
Infantry. The Welsh having gained a considerable Victory in this Action, the
King was advised to withdraw his Forces, for fear lest that the Welsh should
again set upon them, and so sustain a greater Loss; which Counsel the King
willingly hearkened unto, and so he returned for England. The English being
withdrawn, the Earl likewise decamped, and marched to Caermardhyn, which he
besieged; but after Three Months in vain Assault, the Garrison most bravely
defending the place; and the English Fleet having thrown in new Provisions, he
thought it most advisable to raise the Siege. Shortly after, Rhys Gryc, Son to
Prince Rhys dyed at Lhandeilo Fawr, and was honorably interred by his Father
at S. David's. About the same time, Maelgon Fychan, Maelgon ap Rhys his Son,
finished Trefilan Castle, which was begun in his Fathers time.

Henry was not willing to hazard any more Campaigns in Wales, and therefore he
appointed John of Monmouth, a great Soldier, and General of the English Forces,
Warden of the Marches of Wales, who thinking to get to himself an eternal Name
in conquering the Welsh, raised all the Power he could; and imagining that the
Welsh could not be privy to his purpose, he apprehended he could fall upon the
Earl-Marshal unexpected. But in this, he was to his sor^ow, most widely
mistaken; for the Earl having received private intimation of his Design, hid
himself ^n a certain Wood, by which the English were to march; and when they
were come so far, the Welsh of a sudden gave a great shout, and leaping out of
the place they had absconded themselves in, they fell upon the English, being
unprovided, and putting their whole Army to flight, they slew an infinite
number both of the English and their Auxiliaries. John of Monmouth himself made
his escape by flight; but the Earl-Marshal entering his Country, destroyed it
with Fire and Sword. And what added to the Misery of the English, Prince
Lhewelyn in the Week after Epiphany, joining the Earl-Marshal, made an
Incursion into the King's Territories, destroying all before them, from the
Confines of Wales to Shrewsbury; a great part of which they laid in Ashes. King
Henry was all this while with the Bishop of Winchester at Gloucester, and for
want of sufficient Power or Courage to confront the Enemy, durst not take the
Field; of which being at length perfectly ashamed, he removed to Winchester,
leaving the Marches naked to the mercy of the Enemy. And now, there being no
apprehension of fear from the English, the Earl of Pembrock, by the Counsel of
Geoffrey de Marisco, transported his Army into Ireland, thinking to obtain a
Conquest in that Kingdom; but in the first Encounter with the Irish, he was
unfortunately slain through the Treachery of his own Men: And so his Estate and
Title descended to his Brother Gilbert.

But King Henry finding it impracticable to force the Welsh to a Submission,
and being in a great measure weary of continual Wars and incessant Hostilities,
thought it his best Prudence to make some honorable Agreement with the Prince
of Wales; and therefore he deputed Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops
of Rochester, Coventry and Lichfield, and Chester, to treat with Prince
Lhewelyn about a Peace. When the King came to meet with them in their return
from this Negotiation, being at Woodstock, he was certified of the death of the
Earl of Pembrock which he took so much to heart, that he presently melted into
Tears, being afflicted for the death of so great a Person, whom he openly
declared had not left his Second in all his Kingdom. Going from thence to
Gloucester, he met with the Archbishop and Bishops* who delivered to him the Sea
the Appendix.
Form of the Treaty of Peace with Prince Lhewelyn, which he would not conclude,
unless upon this condition; That all the English Nobility who were confederated
with him, and by evil Counsel were exiled, should be recalled, and restored to
the King's Favor. The Archbishop further acquainted his Majesty, with what
Difficulty he had brought the matter to this conclusion, being sometimes forced
to add Threatenings on the King's behalf, with his Clergy; to which Menaces the
Prince is said to have answered, That he bore more regard to the King's Charity
and Piety, than he did fear his Arms, or dread his Clergy. But the King, who
was very desirous of a Peace, readily consented to what the Prince required;
and therefore he issued out his Letters, recalling all the Nobles who were
out-lawed, or otherwise exiled, requiring them to appear at Gloucester, upon
Sunday next before Ascension day, where they should receive their Pardons, and
be restored to their Estates, which the King had taken into his own hands.

The Peace being thus concluded betwixt the English and Welsh, Prince Lhewelyn
set his Son Gruffydh at liberty, whom for his disobedient and restless Humor
he had detained in close Prison for the space of Six Years. About the same
time, Cadwalhon ap Maelgon of Melienydh, departed this Life, who was quickly
followed by Owen, Gruffydh ap Rhys's Son, a Person of great Worth, and
exceedingly beloved, and Ystratflur, by his Brother Rhys. And the Year
following dyed Owen ap Meredith ap Rotpert of Cydewen; and not long after him,
Madawc, A. D. 1236.
the Son of Gruffydh Mayelor, Lord of Bromfield, Chirk and Yale, who was buried
at the Abbey of Lhan Egwest, or Vale Crucis, which he had built; leaving Issue
behind him one Son, called Gruffydh, who succeeded into the Possession of all
these Lordships. A little after Gilbert, Earl of Pembrock, got by Treachery
Marchen Castle, which belonged to Morgan ap Howel, and fortified the same very
strongly, for fear of Prince Lhewelyn. The next Spring Joan, King John's
Daughter, and Princess of Wales, departed this Life, and was Lhanfaes, in the
Isle of Anglesey; where the Prince, in memory of her, afterward founded a
religious House, for the Order of Mendicant-Friars. About the same time also
dyed John Scot, Earl of Chester, without any Issue, upon which account the King
seized that Earldom into his own hands. Hugh Lupus was the first that enjoyed
this Honor, who coming over to England with the Conqueror, was by him created
Earl of Chester, and Sword Bearer of England; Habendum and tenendum dictum
comitatum Cestriae, sibi and haeredibus suis, ita libere ad gladium, sicut ipse
Rex totam tenebat Angliam ad coronam: To have and to hold the said County of
Chester, to him and his Heirs by right of the Sword, so freely and securely as
the King held the Realm of England in the right of the Crown. After Five
Descents, Randulph Bohun came to be Earl of Chester, who was Uncle to this
John, the last Earl. This Randulph had several Encounters with Prince Lhewelyn,
and was in continual agitation against him; but once more particularly, meeting
with the Prince, and being sensible of his Inability to withstand him, he was
obliged to retire for Refuge to the Castle of Ruthlan, which the Prince
presently besieged. Randulph perceiving himself to be in danger, sent to Roger
Lacy, Constable of Chester, requesting him to raise what strength he could
possible, and come to succor him in this Extremity. Wherefore Lacy having
received this Express, called to him presently all his Friends, desiring them
to make all the Endeavors imaginable to rescue the Earl from that imminent
Danger which so severely threatened him: At whose request, Ralph Dutton, his Son
in Law, a valorous Youth, assembled together all the Players and Musicians, and
such as then, being Fair-time, had met to make merry; and presenting them to
the Constable, he forthwith marched to Ruthlan, raised the Siege, and delivered
the Earl from all his fear. In recompense of this Service, the Earl granted the
Constable several Freedoms and Privileges; and to Dutton the ruling and
ordering all Players and Musicians within the said Country, to be enjoyed by
his Heirs for ever.

Lhewelyn being discomposed in Body, called unto him all the Lords and Barons
of Wales to Ystratflur, where each of them swore to remain true and faithful
Subjects, and did Homage to David, Lhewelyn's Son, whom he had named to succeed
him. Matthew Paris writes, that Prince Lhewelyn being impotent by reason of a
Palsy, and sore disquieted by his Son Gruffydh, sent Ambassadors to the King
of England, signifying to him, that for as much as he could not expect to live
long, by reason of his Age, he was desirous to lead the remainder of his days
in Peace and Tranquillity; and therefore now purposed to submit himself to the
Government and Protection of the King, and would hold his Lands of him;
promising withal, that whenever the King should stand in need of his help, he
would serve him both with Men and Money, to the utmost of his power. The
Bishops of Hereford and Chester were sent Mediators in this behalf, though some
of the Nobility of Wales openly and peremptorily withstood it, and upon no
condition whatsoever would accept of such a Peace. But David being declared
Successor to the Principality, began to plague his Brother Gruffydh, who though
elder, was yet base-born; and took from him Arustly, Ceri, Cyfeilioc, Mowdhwy,
Mochnant, and Careneon; and let him only enjoy the Cantref of Lhyn. But a
little afterward he dispossessed him of all, and contrary to his Oath to the
Bishop of Bangor, in whose protection Gruffydh then remained, took him
Prisoner; having upon promise of no Violence, obtained to speak with him, and
sent him to Cricieth Castle. But whilst these two Brothers continued to
entertain an irreconcilable Odium one to another, their Father, Prince Lewelyn
ap Iorwerth, Welsh, departed this Life, and was very honorably interred in the
Abbey of Conwey, after he had reigned Six and Fifty Years. He was a Prince of
great Courage and Audacity, and had no less Prudence in contriving, than
Boldness in executing any martial Adventure; he was a great Support to the
Welsh, and no less a Plague to the English; he made very considerable Conquests
upon the Borders, and extended the Frontiers of Wales, much beyond their former
Limits. He had Issue by his only Wife Joan, Daughter to King John of England,
one Son called David, who afterward succeeded in the Principality of Wales;
and a Daughter named Gladys, who was married to Sir Ralph Mortimer. He had also
a base Son, named Gruffydh, whom his Brother David kept a close Prisoner to his
dying day.

David ap Lhewelyn.
PRince Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth being deceased, his only legitimate Son David,
whom all the Barons of Wales had, as is said, in his Fathers Lifetime sworn to
obey, legally succeeded in the Government; wherein being actually confirmed, he
went to the King of England to Gloucester, and there did him Homage See Appendix.
for his Principality. Then all the Barons, both English and Welsh who held any
Lands in Wales, in like manner did Homage and Fealty for the same. But the
English could not long refrain from their wonted Hostilities toward the Welsh;
and thereupon Gilbert Marshal, taking advantage of this Revolution, before
Matters were thoroughly settled, brought an Army before the Castle of Aberteifi,
which being delivered up to him, he fortified with a strong Garrison. Prince
David was as yet too weak to appear in the Field; and indeed the more, by
reason that several of his Nobility and others, could not affectionately love
him, for that unnatural Spleen he showed to his Brother Gruffydh, whom, for no
visible reason, he detained in close custody. But above the rest, Richard,
Bishop of Bangor, stormed at the Prince, and finding that he violated his
Promise, in setting his Brother at liberty, whom, under pretense of an amicable
Consultation he had fraudulently seized upon in the Bishop's presence, without
more ado excommunicated him; and then retiring to England, made a very
querimonious relation of the whole matter to the King, desiring him to release
Gruffydh out of Prison, before the Rumor of so heinous a Fact should reach the
Court of Rome, and so reflect upon his Majesty's Reputation. King Henry
thereupon sent to his Nephew, Prince David, blaming him highly for such a
treacherous Action, and dealing so severely with his Brother; and then
earnestly requested him to deliver Gruffydh out of custody, both to save
himself from perpetual Defamation, and to deserve an Absolution from the severe
Sentence pronounced against him, But David absolutely refused to comply to the
King's desire, assuring him, that Wales could never enjoy a peaceable time, as
long as his Brother Gruffydh had his liberty.

Gruffydh being acquainted with his Brothers Resolution, and thinking that
thereby he had unavoidably displeased the King of England, privately sent to
King Henry, assuring him, that if by Force he would deliver him out of Prison,
he would not only hold his Lands for ever from him, but also pay him the yearly
Acknowledgment of Three Hundred Marks; offering both to give his corporal Oath,
and to deliver up sufficient Pledges for the performance of it; and withal to
assist the King with all his Power in bringing in the rest of the Welsh to his
subjection. Moreover, Gruffydh ap Madawc, Lord of Bromfield, positively assured
the King, that in case he would lead an Army into Wales, to revenge the Falsity
and injurious Practices of David, he would give him all possible Aid and
Assistance. Indeed, King Henry, besides this solemn Invitation, had no weak
Pretense to come to Wales; for Richard, Bishop of Bangor, a fiery Man, had
prosecuted the matter so warmly at Rome, that he obtained of the Pope also to
excommunicate David, which Excommunication being denounced against him, his
Lands were pretendedly forfeited But the King being chiefly allured with the
Promises of the Welsh in the behalf of Gruffydh, levied a very formidable Army
to lead to Wales; strictly commanding by Proclamation, all the English, who
owed him any Martial-Service, to repair armed to Gloucester, by the beginning of
Autumn. This Rendezvous being accordingly performed, the King came thither in
person at the time appointed, and having regulated his Troops, and put all
Matters in convenient order, he marched to Shrewsbury, where he remained
Fifteen Days to refresh his Army. During his stay there several of the Nobility
became Suitors unto him on behalf of Gruffydh, whose Condition they desired he
would commiserate; among whom were, Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, Walter
Clifford, Roger de Monte Alto, Steward of Chester, Maelgon ap Maelgon, Meredith
ap Rotpert Lord of Cydewen, Gruffydh ap Madawc of Bromfield, Howel and Meredith
the Sons of Conan ap Owen Gwynedh, and Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powys.
These Noblemen prevailed so far with King Henry, that a League was concluded
between him and Senena the Wife of Gruffydh. See Appendix.
For the performance of these Articles, the aforesaid Noblemen offered to be
Securities, and bound themselves by their several Writings. But as if all
things had conspired together against Prince David, See Appendix.
several Persons that had been at continual variance and enmity among
themselves to this time, were now, by reason that they equally favored
Gruffydh's Cause, made Friends among one another: Morgan ap Howel Lord of Cery,
made his Reconciliation to Sir Ralph Mortimer, See Appendix.
and his Submission to King Henry, in a very solemn manner: In the same form
several others of the Nobility submitted to the King; as, Owen ap Howel,
Maelgon ap Maelgon, Meredith ap Meredith, Howel ap Cadwalhon, and Cadwalhon ap
Howel. David finding himself thus relinquished by the greatest part of his
Nobility, and particularly by Gruffydh ap Madawc, Lord of Bromfield, whom he
chiefly feared, by reason of his great Wisdom and Power, and that he was much
esteemed by the King of England, could not easily conclude how to carry himself
in this perplexity of Affairs. But in fine, considering with himself what a
puissant Army King Henry brought against him, and how himself was considerably
weakened by the defection of his Subjects, he thought it most advisable to
truckle to the King; and therefore with all speed sent him his Submission.

See Appendix.
Prince David having given a plenary Submission to the King, desired, that being
his Nephew, and the lawful Heir and Successor of his Father Prince Lhewelyn, he
should enjoy the Principality of Wales, rather than Gruffydh, who was
illegitimate, and in no wise related to the King; assuring him further, that
the War would never be at an end, if he was set at liberty. King Henry knowing
well the truth of all this, and withal being assured that Gruffydh was not only
valiant himself, but had likewise very powerful Abettors and Promoters of his
Cause, was very inclinable to assent to David's Request, and to prevent any
farther Troubles, willingly granted it. Therefore David in a while after sent
his Brother Gruffydh to the King, together with the Pledges promised for the
performance of the Articles lately agreed upon; who were all sent to the Tower
of London to be kept in safe custody; Gruffydh being allowed a Noble a day to
provide himself with Necessaries. Shortly after, David came himself to London,
and after he had done his Homage, and sworn Fealty to the King of England,
returned to Wales, being honorably and peaceably dismissed. But as soon as
Gruffydh found out King Henry's mind, and that it was the least part of his
design to set him at liberty, having flatly denied the Bishop of Bangor his
request therein; he began to set his Brains a working, and to devise a means
whereby he might make his escape out of the Tower. Whereupon, having one night
deceived his Keepers, he let himself down from the top of the Building, by a
Line which he had composed out of the Sheets and Hangings of the Room; which
being too weak to bear his weight, being a heavy corpulent Person, let him down
headlong to the ground; by the greatness of which Fall he was crushed to
pieces, and so presently expired. King Henry being informed of this unhappy
Accident, severely punished the Officers for their inexcusable Carelessness; and
ordered that his Son, who was kept Prisoner with him in the Tower, should be
more narrowly observed.

After this King Henry fortified the Castle of Dyserth in Flintshire; and for
their passed Service, or rather to oblige them to the like after, granted to
Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn all his Estate in Powys, and to the Sons of Conan ap
Owen Gwynedh their Lands in Merionyth. And the next Year Maelgon Fychan
fortifyed Garthgrugyn, John de Mynoc the Castle of Buelht, and Roger Mortimer
that of Melyenyth. But all these Preparations were not to no purpose; for the
following Year early, King Henry came with Wales, and began very unreasonably
to molest the Welsh, and without any just pretense forcibly to seize upon their
Lands and Estates. Indeed, after the death of Gruffydh, he had a mind no longer
to keep his Promise to David, and therefore entitled his eldest Son Edward to
the Principality of Wales, whom he thought to oblige the Welsh to obey. But
Prince David understanding his design, levied all his Power for the defense of
his just Right; yet finding himself unable to withstand the Army of the
English, purposed to effect that by Policy which he could not attain by Force.
He sent therefore to the Pope, complaining how that King Henry of England
compelled him unjustly to hold his Lands of him, and that upon no legal
pretense he seized the Estates of the Welsh at his pleasure; telling him
moreover, that Prince Lhewelyn his Father had left him and the Principality of
Wales to the Protection of the Sea of Rome, to which he was willing to pay the
yearly Sum of Five Hundred Marks, obliging himself and his Successors by Oath,
for the due performance of this Payment. The Pope (you may be sure) gladly
accepted of the Offer, and thereupon gave commission to the two Abbots of
Aberconwey and Cymer, to absolve David from his Oath of Allegiance to the King
of England, and having enquired into the whole Estate of the Quarrel, to
transmit an account of it to him. The Abbots, See Append^x.
according to their Commission, directed a very positive Mandat to the King of
England. King Henry admiring the strange Presumption and Confidence of these
Abbots, or more the unsatiable Avarice and Greediness of the Pope, sent also to
Rome; and with a greater Sum of Money, easily adjusted all matters; his
Holiness being very desirous to make the best advantage of both Parties.

But Prince David finding that the Pope minded his own Gain, more than to
justify his Complaints against the King of England, thought it to no purpose
to rely upon his Faith, but judged it more advisable to vindicate himself by
force of Arms. Having therefore gathered his Forces together, (being now
reconciled to, and followed by all the Nobility of Wales, excepting Gruffydh ap
Gwenwynwyn and Morgan ap Howel, who also shortly after submitted to him) he
drew up his Army to the Marches, intending to be revenged upon the Earls of
Clare and Hereford, John de Monmouth, Roger de Monte Alto, and others, who
injured and oppressed his People; with whom he fought diverse times, and with
various success. Lent-time next Year, the Marchers and the Welsh met near
Montgomery, between whom was fought a very severe Battle; the Governor of that
Castle being General of the English, and having ^unningly placed an Ambuscade
of Men, pretended, after some short Engagement, to flee, whom the Welsh
daringly pursued, not thinking of any Trea^hery. Bat as soon as they were past
the Ambushment, ^p rises an unexpected Party of Men, who falling upon the backs
of the Welsh, put them to a very great ^isorder, and killed about Three Hundred
Men, not without a considerable Loss of their own side, a^ong whom was slain a
valiant Knight called Hu^ert Fitz-Matthew. But King Henry being weary of ^hese
perpetual Skirmishes and daily Clashings be^ween the English and Welsh, thought
to put an and to the whole with one stroke; and therefore ^aised a very great
Army of English and Gascoignes, and entered into North Wales, purposing to
waste and destroy the Country. But before he could ad^ance very far, Prince
David intercepted him in a arrow Pass, and so violently set upon him, that a
^reat number of his Nobility and bravest Soldiers, and in a manner all the
Gascoignes were slain. The King finding he could effect nothing against the
Welsh, invited over the Irish, who landing in Angle^ey, began to pillage and
waste the Country; but the ^nhabitants gathering themselves together in a Body,
^uickly forced them to their Ships; after which, King Henry having victualled
and manned all his Castles, returned dissatisfied to England.

But concerning this Expedition to Wales, and the continuance of the English
Army therein, a certain Person in the Camp, Mat. Par.
wrote to this effect to his Friends ^n England: The King with his Army is
encamped at Gannock, and is busy in fortifying that place, sufficiently strong
already, about which we lay in our Tents, in watching, fasting, praying, and
freezing. We watch for fear of the Welsh, who were used to come suddenly upon
us in the nightime: We fast for want of Provision, the Halfpenny Loaf being
now risen and advanced to Five Pence: We pray that we may speedily return safe
and Scot-free home: And we freez for want of Winter-Garments, having but a thin
Linen Shirt to keep us from the Wind. There is a small Arm of the Sea under
the Castle where we lie, which the Tide reached, by the Convenience of which,
many Ships bring (...) Provision and Victuals from Ireland and Chester This Arm
lies betwixt us and Snowden, where the Welsh are encamped, and is in breadth,
when the Tide is in, about a Bow-shot. Now it happened, that upon the Monday
before Michaelmas-day, an^ Irish Vessel came up to the Mouth of the Haven with
Provision to be sold to our Camp, which being negligently looked to by the
Mariners, was upon low ebb stranded on the other side of the Castle, near the
Welsh. The Enemy perceiving this, descended from the Mountains, and laid siege
to the Ship, which was fast upon the dry Sands; whereupon, we detached in Boats
Three Hundred Welsh of the Borders of Cheshire and Shropshire, with some
Archers and armed Men, to rescue the Ship; But the Welsh, upon the approach of
our Men, withdrew themselves to their usual Retirements i^ the Rocks and Woods,
and were pursued for about two Miles by our Men afoot, who slew a great number
of them. But in their return back, our Soldiers being too covetous and greedy
of Plunder, among other sacrilegious and profane Actions, spoiled the Abbey of
Aberconwey, and burnt all the Books and other choice Utensils belonging to it.
The Welsh being distracted at these irreligious Practices, got together in
great number, and in a desperate manner setting upon the English, killing a
great number of them, and following the rest to the Waterside, forced as many
as could not make their escape into the Boats, to commit themselves to the
mercy of the Waves. Those they took Prisoners they thought to reserve for
exchange; but hearing how we put some of their captive Nobility to death, they
altered their minds, and in a revengeful manner scattered their dilacerated
Carcasses along the surface of the Water. In this Conflict, we lost a
considerable number of our Men, and chiefly those under the Command of Richard
Earl of Cornwall; as Sir Alan Buscell, Sir Adam de Maio, Sir Geoffry Estuemy,
and one Raimend a Gascoign, with about a Hundred common Soldiers. In the mean
time Sir Walter Bisset stoutly defended the Ship till Midnight, when the Tide
returned; whereupon the Welsh, who assailed us of all sides, were forced to
withdraw, being much concerned that we had so happily escaped their hands. The
Cargo of this Ship, were Three Hundred Hogsheads of Wine, with a plenty of
other Provision for the Army, which at that time it stood in very great need
of. But the next Morning, when the Sea was returned, the Welsh came merrily
down again to the Ship, thinking to surprise our Men; but as Luck would have
it, they had at full Sea the Night before relinquished the Ship, and returned
safe to the Camp. The Enemy missing of our Men, set upon the Cargo of the Ship,
carried away all the Wine and other Provisions; and then when the Sea began to
slow, they put Fire to the Vessel, and returned to the rest of the Army. And
thus we lay encamped in great Misery and Distress for want of Necessaries,
exposed to great and frequent Dangers, and in great fear of the private
Assaults and sudden Incursions of our Enemies. Oftentimes we set upon and
assailed the Welsh, and in one Conflict we carried away a Hundred Head of
Cattle, which very triumphantly we conveyed to our Camp. For the scarcity of
Provision was then so great, that there remained but one Hogshead of Wine in
the whole Army; a Bushel of Corn being sold for Twenty Shillings; a fed Ox for
Three or Four Marks; and a Hen for Eight Pence; so that there happened a very
lamentable Mortality both of Man and Horse, for want of necessary Sustenance of
Life.

The English Army having undergone such Miseries as are here described, and
King Henry, as is said, perceiving it was in vain for him to continue any
longer in Wales, where he was sure to gain no great Credit, he returned with
his Army into England, being not very desirous to make another Expediti^^ into
Wales. Then all the Nobility and Barons Wales, and those that had favored and
maintain^^ Gruffydh's Cause, were made Friends and recor^^ led to Prince David,
to whom they vowed true a^^ perpetual Allegiance. But the Prince did not lo^^
survive this Amity and Agreement between him a^^ his Subjects; for falling sick
toward the beginning (...) March, at his Palace in A^^^ and was buried at
Conwey, leaving no Issue to su^ceed. The only thing unpardonable in this Princ^
was his over Jealousy and Severity against his B^^ther Gruffydh, a Person so
well-beloved of the Welc^ that upon his account their Affection was much
co^^ed, and in some entirely alienated from their Princ^ Indeed thus much may
be said for David, that Gru^fydh was a valorous and an aspiring Man, and if s^
at liberty, would bid fair to eject him out of (...) Principality; which King
Henry of England too (wh^ thought he might bring over David, a milder Man to
what Terms he pleased) was sensible of, when (...) would by no persuasion
dismiss him from custody i^ the Tower of London. But this occasioned all the
Disturbances that happened in his time, the Wel^^ themselves, for the Love they
bore to Gruffydh, inviting the King of England to come to invade their Country,
and to correct the unnatural Enmity their Prince expressed to his Brother. But
when all Differences were over, the King of England returned with his Army
shamefully back, and the Prince an^ his Nobility reconciled; the Welsh might
have expected a very happy time of it, had not Death taken the Prince so
unnaturally away, before he had well known what a peaceful Reign was.

Lhewelyn ap Gruffydh.
^Rince David being dead, the Principality of (...) North Wales legally
descended to Sir Ralph Mor^^^er, in Right of his Wife Gladys, Daughter to
^^^welyn ap Iorwerth. But the Welsh Nobility be^^^ assembled together for the
electing and nomina^^^g a Successor, thought it by no means advisa^^^ to admit
a Stranger to the Crown, though his ^^de was never so lawful; and especially an
Eng^^^^man, by whose Obligations to the Crown of Eng^^^d, they must of
necessity expect to become Sub^^^s, or rather Slaves to the English Government.
therefore they unanimously agreed to set up Lhe^^^yn and Owen Goch, the Sons of
Gruffydh, a base (...) of Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, and Brother to Prince ^^vid;
who being sent for, and appearing before the ^^sembly, all the Nobles and
Barons, then present, (...) them Homage, and received them for their
So^^^eigns. But as soon as the King of England un^^rstood of the death of the
Prince of Wales; he ^^ought, the Country being in an unsettled and wa^^ring
condition, he might effect great matters there; ^^d therefore he sent one
Nicholas de Miles to South-^ales, with the Title of Justice of that Country,
^^th whom he joined in Commission Meredith ap ^^ys Gryc, and Meredith ap Owen
ap Gruffydh; (...) eject and disinherit Maelgon Fychan of all his ^ands and
Estate in South Wales. The like injurious ^ractices were committed against
Howel ap Meredith, ^ho was forcibly robbed of all his Estate in Glamor^^n by
the Earl of Clare. These unreasonable Ex^^tions being insupportable; Maelgon
and Howel made ^^own their Grievances to the Princes of North Wales, ^esiring
their Succor and Assistance for the recovery ^f their lawful Inheritance from
the Encroachments of the English. But the King of England und^^standing their
Design, led his Army into Wales; (...) on whose arrival, the Welsh withdrew
themsel^^^ to Snowden-Hills, where they so tired the Engl^^^ Army, that the
King finding he could do no go^^ after some stay there returned back to
England. Wi^^ in a while after, Ralph Mortimer, the Husband Gladys Dhu dyed;
leaving his whole Estate, and w^^ it, a lawful Title to the Principality of
North-Wa^^^ to his Son Sir Roger Mortimer.

English and the Welsh, M. Paris, p. 739.
only the dismal Effects the last Years Expedition, were not worn off; (...)
ground being incapable of Cultivation, and the C^^^tel being in great measure
destroyed by the Engl^^^ occasioned great Poverty and Want in the Count^^ But
the greatest Calamity befell the Bishops; S. As^^^ and Bangor being destroyed
and burnt by the Englis^ the Bishops thereof were reduced to that utmost
E^tremity, as to get their Subsistence by other Me^^ Charity; the Bishop also
of S. David's deceased, a^^ he of Landaff had the Misfortune to fall blind.
(...) the Bishopric of S. David's succeeded Thomas, s^^^^ named Wallensis, by
reason that he was born in Wal^^ who thinking himself obliged to benefit his
own Co^^try what lay in his power, desired to be advance from the Archdeaconry
of Lincoln to that Sea; which the King easily granted, and confirmed him in
(...) Welsh; Rhys Fychan Son to Rhys Mechyl, wo^ from the English the Castle of
Carrec Cynnen, which his unkind Mother, out of Malice, or some ill Opinion
entertained of him, had some time before privately delivered up to them. And
about the sa^^ time the Body of Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn base Son (...) Lhewelyn ap
Iorwerth, was recovered from the King o^ England, by the earnest solicitations
of the Abbo^^ of Conwey and Ystratflur; who conveying it to Conwey, bestowed
upon it a very pompous and honorable Enterment.

After this, the Affairs of the Welsh proceeded Plenty begets ^^ar; they began,
for want of a foreign Enemy, to ^^arrel and fall out among themselves. Owen was
too ^^gh and ambitious to be satisfied with half the Prinpality, and therefore
must needs have a fling at the ^hole; wherein Fortune so far deceived him, that
he ^^st his own Stake, as will afterward appear. But ^^e better to encompass
his Design, by sly Insinua^^ons he persuaded David his younger Brother to
se^^nd his Cause; and they with joint Interest levied ^^eir Power, with
intention to dethrone their elder ^^other Lhewelyn. But that was no easy
matter; (...) Lhewelyn was prepared to receive them, and with puissant Army met
them in the Field, and so was ^^^olved to venture all upon the fortune of a
Battle. (...) was strange and grievous to behold this unnatural ^ivil War; and
the more grievous now, by reason ^^at it so manifestly weakened the strength of
the Welsh, to withstand the Incursions of the English, ^ho were extremely
pleased with so fair an opportu^^ty to fall upon them. But they were too far
en^^ged, to consider of future Inconveniences; and a ^^yal of War they must
have, though the English ^ere ready to fall upon both Armies. The Battle ^eing
joined, the day proved bloody of both sides, and whether was like to conquer
was not presently discovered; till at length, Owen began to give ^round, and in
fine was overthrown, himself and his ^rother David being taken Prisoners.
Lhewelyn, ^^ough he had sufficient reason, would not put his ^rothers to death;
but committing them into close Prison, seized all their Estates into his own
hands, and so enjoyed the whole Principality of Wales.

The English seeing the Welsh at this rate oppress and destroy one another,
thought they had full liberty to deal with them as they pleased; and there^pon
began to exercise all manner of Wrong and In^ustice against them; insomuch that
the next Year, all the Lords of Wales came in a body to Prince Lhewelyn, and
declared their Grievances, how unmercifully Prince Edward (whom his Father had
sent to Wales) and others of the Nobility of England deal with them, how
without any color of Justice they seized upon their Estates, without any room
for Appeal; whereas if themselves offended in the least, they were punished to
the utmost extremity. In fine, they solemnly declared, that they preferred to
dye honorably in the Field, before to be so unmercifully enslaved to the Will
and Pleasure of Strangers. Prince Lhewelyn was not a Stranger to all this; and
now having happily discovered the Bent and Inclination of his Subjects, was
resolved to prosecute, if possible, the Expulsion of the English, and to be
revenged upon them for their most cruel, and almost inhuman Practices toward
the Welsh. Having therefore drawn all his Power together, being accompanied by
Meredith ap Rhys Gryc, in the space of one Week he recovered out of the hands
of the English all the inland Country of North Wales, and then all Merionyth
with such Lands as Prince Edward had usurped in Cardigan, which he bestowed
upon Meredith the Son of Owen ap Gruffydh. Having also forced Rhys Fychan out
of Buelht, he conferred it upon Meredith ap Rhys; and in like manner bestowed
all the Lands which he recovered, between his Nobles; reserving nothing to his
own use, besides Gwerthryneon, the Roger Mortimer. The next Summer, he entered
into Powys, and made War against Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn, who always had taken
part with, and owned Subjection to the King of England, which he totally
overcame, excepting the Castle of Poole, some small part of Caerneon, and the
Country lying upon the bank of the Severn.

But Rhys Fychan was not satisfied with the loss of Buelht, and therefore was
resolved to try to recover it; to which end, he went to the King of England, of
whom he obtained a very strong Army, commanded by one Stephen Bacon, which
being sent by Sea, landed at Caermardhyn in the Whitsun-Week. From thence the
English marched to Dynefawr, and laid Siege to the Castle, which valiantly held
out, until Lhewelyn's Army came to its Relief. Upon the arrival of the Welsh,
the English decamped from before the Castle, and put themselves in posture of
Battle, which the Welsh perceiving, they made all haste to answer and oppose
them. Whereupon there ensued a very terrible Engagement which lasted a very
long while; this being for number of Men the greatest Battle that had been
fought between the English and the Welsh. But the Victory favored the Welsh,
the Englishmen being at length forced to fly, having lost above Two Thousand
Men, besides several Barons and Knights who were taken Prisoners. After this
the Prince's Army passed to Dyfed, where having burnt all the Country, and
destroyed the Castles of Abercorran, Lhanstephan, Maenclochoc and Arberth, with
all the Towns thereunto belonging, returned to North Wales with much Spoil. But
as soon as he was arrived, great Complaints were exhibited to Prince Lhewelyn
against Jeffrey Langley Lieutenant to Edward Earl of Chester, who without any
regard to Equity and Conscience, most wrongfully oppressed the Inhabitants of
Wales under his Jurisdiction. Whereupon the Prince to punish the Master for the
Servant's Fault, entered with some part of his Army into the Earl's Estate,
burnt and destroyed all his Country on both sides the River Dee, to the Gates
of Chester. Edward had no power at present to oppose him, but being resolved to
be revenged upon the Welsh with the first opportunity, he desired Aid of his
Uncle, then chose King of the Romans, who sent him a strong Detachment, with
which he purposed to give Prince Lhewelyn Battle. But finding him too strong,
he thought it more advisable to desist from Hostility, the Prince's Army
consisting of Ten Thousand experienced Men, who were obliged by Oath, rather
all to die in the Field, than suffer the English to gain any Advantage over the
Welsh. But Gruffydh ap Madoc Maelor, Lord of Dinas Bran, a Person of notorious
Reputation for Injustice and Oppression, basely forsook the Welsh his
Countrymen, and with all his Forces went over to the Earl of Chester.

Lhewelyn passed to South Wales, and seized into his Hands the Land of Cemaes,
and having reconciled the Difference betwixt Rhys Gryg and Rhys Fychan, he won
the Castle of Trefdraeth, with the whole Country of Rhos, excepting Haverford.
Thence he marched in an hostile manner toward Glamorgan, and rased to the
ground the Castle of Lhangymwch, and then returning to North Wales, he met by
the way with Edward Earl of Chester, whom he forced precipitously to return
back. But before he would put an end to this Expedition, he must needs be
revenged upon that ungrateful fugitive Gruffydh ap Madoc Maelor, and thereupon
passing through Bromfield, he miserably laid waste the whole Country. Upon this
the Kings of England and Scotland sent to Lhewelyn, requiring him to cease from
Hostility, and after that unmerciful manner to devour, and forcibly to take
away other Men's Estates. The Prince was not over sollicitous to hearken to
their Request, but finding the time of the year very seasonable for Action
against the English, he divided his Army into two Battles, each of these
consisting of 1500 Foot and 500 Horse, with which he purposed to enlarge his
Conquest. Edward Earl of Chester, to prevent the Blow which so desperately hung
over his Head, sent over for Succors from Ireland, of whose coming Prince
Lhewelyn being certified, manned out a Fleet to intercept them, which meeting
with the Irish at Sea, after a sharp Dispute, forced them to return back with
loss. King Henry being acquainted with the miscarriage of the Irish, resolved
to come in Person against the Welsh, and having drawn together the whole
Strength of England, even from St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall to the River
Tweed, marched with his Son Edward in a great Rage to North Wales, and without
any opposition advanced as far as Teganwy. But the Prince had stopped his
farther Progress, and prevented any long stay he could make in Wales, having
before hand caused all manner of Provision and Forage to be carried over the
River, and then securing the strait and narrow Passages whereby the English
might get on farther into the Country, the Army was in a short time so mortally
fatigued, that the King for want of necessary Subsistence was forced to retire
in haste to England with considerable loss.

The Prince after that sending for all the Forces in South Wales, came to the
Marches, where Gruffydh Lord of Bromfield finding that the King of England was
not able to defend his Estate yielded himself up, and then passing to Powys, he
banished Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn, and took all the Lands in the Country into his
Hands. Proceeding farther, he was encountered with by Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, who with a choice Party of English gave him Battle. But Lhewelyn's
Army exceeding both in Number and Courage, easily vanquished and overcame the
English, and so the Victory being quickly obtained, the Prince presently
reduced to his Power all the Castles belonging to the Earl of Gloucester. King
Henry hearing of the Earl's overthrow, was much concerned at the loss of so
many brave Soldiers, in whose Valor and Experience he always put a very great
Confidence, and therefore to revenge their Deaths, he was again resolved to
march against the Welsh. Having called his Forces together, and received Supply
from Gascoign and Ireland, he came to Wales, but not daring to venture far into
the Country, for fear of being forced to make another shameful retreat, he only
destroyed the Corn near the Borders, it being Harvest time, and so returned to
England. But Lord James Audley, whose Daughter was married to Gruffydh Lord of
Bromfield, did more mischief and hurt to the Welsh, who having brought over a
great Number of Horsemen from Germany to serve against the Welsh, so terrified
them with the unusual largeness of the Horses, and the unaccustomed manner of
sighting, that in the first Encounter the Welsh were easily overcome. Bu^
minding to revenge this Disgrace, and withal being better acquainted with their
method of Arms, the Welsh in a little after made in-roads into the Lord
Audley's Lands, where the Germans presently set upon them, and pursued them to
certain straits, which the Welsh discovered for a politic retreat. The Germans
thinking they had entirely drove the Welsh away, returned carelessly back, but
being set upon of the sudden, without any thought of an Enemy behind, they were
all in a manner slain by the rallying Welsh. This year a very great scarcity of
Beefs and Horses happened in England, whereof several Thousands yearly were
supplied out of Wales, by reason of which, the Marches were perfectly robbed of
all their Breed, and not so much as a Beast to be seen in all the Borders.

Wales convened together and took their mutual Oaths to defend their Country to
Death, against the oppressing Invasions of the English, and not to relinquish
and forsake one another upon pain of Perjury; though notwithstanding, Meredith ap
Rhys of South Wales violated this Agreement, and put himself in the Service of
the King of England. King Henry was ready to fall upon the Welsh, to which
purpose he summoned a Parliament, wherein he proposed to raise a Subsidy
toward the Conquest of Wales* being not able of himself to bear the Expenses
of this War, by reason of several Losses he had already received, the Country
of Pembroke being lately destroyed and taken by the Welsh, where they found
plenty of Salt, which before they were in great necessity of. But William de
Valentia accusing the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester as the Authors of all
this Mischief, quite broke all their measures, so the King was forced to
prorogue the Parliament for a time without any grant of a Subsidy. But within a
while after, it sat at Oxford, where King Henry and Edward his Son took a
Solemn Oath to observe the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and the same being
tendered to Guy and William the King's Brothers, and to Henry Son to the King of
Almain, and to Earl Warren, they refused to take it and so departed. In this
Parliament the Lords of Wales fairly proffered to be tried by the Laws for any
Offense they had unjustly commirted against the King, which was mainly opposed
by Edward, who caused one Patrick de Canton (to whom the Lordship of Cydwely
was given, in case he could win and keep the same) to be sent to Caermardhyn as
Lieutenant for the King, with whom Meredith ap Rhys was joined in Commission.
Being arrived at Caermardhyn, Patrick sent to the Prince, to desire him to
appoint Commissioners to treat with him concerning a Peace, which he consented
to, and without any suspicion of treachery, sent Meredith ap Owen, and Rhys ap
Rhys to Emlyn, if possible, to conclude the same. But Patrick meaning no such
thing, laid an ambuscade for the Welsh, who coming honestly forward, were by
the way villanously set upon by the English, and a great many slain; but those
that happily escaped, calling up the Country, presently gave chase to Patrick
and his Accomplices, who being at length overtaken* were almost all put to the
Sword. But Prince Lhewelyn was now altogether bent upon a Peace, and did not
only desire it, but was willing to purchase it for a sum of Money, to which
purpose he offered to give the King 4000 Marks, to his Son 300* and 200 to the
Queen, which the King utterly refused, replying. That it was not a sufficient
recompense for all the Damages he had suffered by the Welsh. Matthew of
Westminster reports, that about Michaelmas this year, the Bishop of Bangor
was commissioned by the Prince and Nobility of Wales to treat with the King of
England about a Peace, and to offer him 16000 Pound for the same, upon these
Conditions, that according to their ancient Custom, the Welsh should have all
Causes tried and determined at Chester, and that they should freely enjoy the
Laws and Customs of their own Country; but what was the result of this Treaty,
my Author does not mention.

There being no hopes of a Peace, Prince Lhewelyn South Wales, and first fell
foul upon Sir R^ger Mortimer, who contrary to his Oath, maintained the King of
England's Quarrel. Having forcibly dispossessed him of all Buelht, and without
any opposition taken the Castle, where was found a plentiful Magazine, he
marched through all South Wales, confirming his Conquest, and afterward returned
to his Palace at Aber, Bangor and Conwey. The year following, Owen ap Meredith
Lord of Cydewen died. But the next Summer was somewhat more noted for Action, a
party of Prince Lhewelyn's Men took by surprise the Castle of Melienyth
belonging to Sir Roger Mortimer* and having put the rest of the Garrison to the
Sword, they took Howel ap Meyric the Governor with his Wife and Children
Prisoners; and after that, the Castle was demolished by the Prince's Order. Sir
Roger Mortimer hearing of this, with a great Body of Lords and Knights came to
Melienyth, where Prince Lhewelyn met him, bur Sir Roger not daring to hazard a
Battle, planted himself within the Ruins, and finding he could do no good,
desired leave of the Prince to retire peaceably. The Prince upon the account of
Relation and near Consanguinity betwixt them, and withal because he would not
be so mean spirited as to fall upon an Enemy, who had no power to resist him,
let him safely depart with his Forces, and then passing on himself to Brecknock
at the request of the People of that Country, who swore Fidelity unto him; so
passed on and returned to No^th-Wales. And now being Confederate with the
Barons against King Henry, he was resolved to practice something in the
prejudice of the English, and so set upon the Earldom of Chester, destroyed the
Castles of Tygann^y and Diserth belonging to Edward, who coming thither, was
yet not able to prevent the Mischief done Welsh. The next year John Strange
Junior, Constable of Montgomery with a great Number of Marchers, came a little
before Easter by night, through Ceri to Cydewen, intending to surprise the
Castle, which when the People of the Country understood, they gathered
together, and setting upon them, slew 200 of his Men, but Strange with a few
got safely back.

Within a while after, the Marchers and the Welsh met again near a place called
Clun, where a hot Engagement happened between them, in which the Welsh were
worsted, and had a great Number of their Men slain. After this, nothing
remarkable fell out for a considerable time, unless it were, that David being
released out of Prison by Prince Lhewelyn his Brother, most ungratefully
forsook him, and with all his might, sided with his Enemies the English; also
Gruffydh ap Gwenwynwyn having taken the Castle of Mold, demolished it to the
ground. During this quiet and unactive interval in Wales, Meredith ap Owen, the
main Support and Defender of South Wales died, to the great disadvantage of the
Affairs of that Country. And now indeed, the Welsh were like to be Henry was
resolved once more to lead an Army into Wales, and to see if he could have
better Success than he had hitherto against the Welsh. But when he was prepared
to undertake this Expedition, Ottobonus Pope Clement's Legate in England,
interposed and mediated a Peace, which was concluded upon at the Castle of
Montgomery, wherein it was articled, that Prince Lhewelyn should give the King
30000 Marks, and the King was to grant the Prince a Charter, from thenceforth
to receive Homage and Fealty of all the Nobility and Barons of Wales, besides
one, so that they could hold their Lands of no other but himself, and from
thence forward he was to be lawfully styled Prince of Wales. This Charter being
ratified and confirmed as well by the Authority of the Pope, as the King's
Seal; Prince Lhewelyn desisted from any farther Acts of Hostility, and
punctually observed all the Articles of Agreement betwixt him and King Henry,
so that nothing more was outragiously transacted between the English and Welsh,
during the remainder of this King's reign. Within that space, died Grono ap
Ednyfed Fychan, one of the Chief Lords of the Prince's Council, and shortly
after him, Gruffydh Lord of Bromfield, who lies buried at Vale-Crucis.

Henry put an end to the observations of the Peace betwixt the English and
Welsh* who dying on the 16th. day of November this year, left this Kingdom to
his Son Edward. Prince Edward was then in the Holy Land, and very active
against those Enemies of Christianity, the Turks, where he had already
continued above a year; but understanding of his Father's Death, and that in
his absence he was proclaimed King of England, he made all haste to return to
receive the Solemnity of Coronation. But what by the tediousness of the
Journey, and what by being honorably detained at Princes Courts in his way, it
was two years before he could get into England, then upon the 15th. of August,
and in the year 1274. he was Crowned at Westminster. Prince Lhewelyn was
summoned to attend at his Coronation, but he flatly refused to appear, unless
upon sure Terms of safe Conduct* for having offended several of the English
Nobility, he could not in safety pass through their Country without the danger of
exposing his Person to the inveterate Malice and acceptable Revenge of some of
them. And therefore without the King's Brother, the Earl of Gloucester, and
Robert Burnell Lord Chief Justice of England, were delivered up as Pledges for
his safe Conduct, he would not come up to do his Homage and Fealty at his
Coronation, according to the Writ directed to him. And indeed, seeing King
Edward had broke the Peace lately concluded upon before the Pope's Legate, and
did receive, and honorably entertain such Noblemen of Wales as for their
disloyalty were banished by Prince Lhewelyn, by whom he feared some treachery;
there was no reason that the Prince should pay him any subjection, but by the
breach of Peace was exempted from all Homage. However, Prince Lhewelyn to show
that it was not out of any stubborness or disrespect to the King of England,
that he refused to come, sent up his Reasons by the Abbots of Ystratflur and
Conwey to Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Bishops
then sitting ^n Convocation in the New-Temple at London, which were to this
effect.

To the most Reverend Fathers in God Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Metropolitan of all England, the Archbishop of York, and the rest of the
Bishops in Convocation; Lhewelyn Prince of Wales and Lord of Snowden,
sends Greeting.
WE would have your Lordships to understand, that whereas formerly most
terrible and incessant Wars were continually managed betwixt Henry King of
England and our self; the same were at last composed, and all matters of
Differences were adjusted by the means of his Excellency Cardinal Ottobonus the
Pope's Legate, who having drawn the Articles and Conditions of the Peace agre^d
upon, they were signed and swore to, not only by the King, but also the Prince
his Son, now King of England. Among these Articles were comprehended, that we
and our Successors should hold of the King and his Successor the Principality
of Wales, so that all the Welsh Lords, one Baron excepted, should hold their
Baronies and Estates in Capite of us, and should pay their Homage and Fealty
for the same to us; we in like manner doing Homage to the King of England and
his Successors. And besides, that the King and his Successors should never
offer to receive and entertain any of our Enemies, nor any such of our own
Subjects as were lawfully banished and excluded our Dominions of Wales, nor by
any means defend and uphold such against us. Contrary to which Articles, King
Edward has forcibly seized upon the Estates of certain Barons of Wales, of
which they and their Ancestors have been immemorably possessed of, and detains
a Barony, which by the form of Peace should have been delivered to us; and
moreover, has hitherto entertained David ap Gruffydh our Brother, and Gruffydh
ap Gwenwynwyn, with several others of our Enemies who are Outlaws and
Fugitives of our Country. And though we have often exhibited our Grievances and
Complaints against them, for destroying and pillaging our Country, yet we could
never obtain of the King any relief or redress for the several Wrongs and
Injuries we received at their hands; but on the contrary they still persist to
commit wastes and other outrages in our Dominions. And for all this, he summons
us to do him Homage at a place which is altogether dangerous to our Person,
where our inveterate Enemies, and which is worse, our own unnatural Subjects,
bear the greatest sway and respect w th the King. And though we have alleged
several Reasons to the King and his Council, why the place by him assigned, is
not safe and indifferent for us to come, and desire him to appoint another,
whereto we might with more safety resort, or else that he would send
Commissioners to receive our Oath and Homage, till he could more opportunely
receive them in Person; yet he would not assent to our just and reasonable
Request, nor be satisfied with the Reasons we exhibited for our nonappearance.
Therefore we desire your Lordships earnestly to weigh the dismal effects that
will happen to the Subjects both of England and Wales upon the breach of the
Articles of Peace, and that you would be pleased to inform the King of the sad
Consequence of another War, which can no way be prevented, but by using us
according to the Conditions of the former Peace, which for our part, we will in
no measure transgress. But if the King will not hearken to your Counsel, we
hope that you will h^ld us excused, if the Nation be disquieted and troubled
thereupon, which as much as in us lies we endeavor to prevent.


King Edward would admit of no Excuse, no^ hearken to any manner of Reason in
the case, but was unmercifully enraged, and conceived an unpardonable
displeasure against Prince Lhewelyn, which yet he thought convenient to conceal
and dissemble for a time. Indeed, he could never abide Lhewelyn, ^^nce the time
that he was vanquished and put to ^ight by him at the Marches, so that the
chief Cause ^f King Edward's anger, originally proceeded from (...) point of
Honor, which this refusal of Homage ^^rved sufficiently to increase. But to
prosecute his Revenge, which upon this score is in Princes very ^erce and
unforgetful, in a short time he came to ^hester, meaning to recover by force
what he could ^ot obtain by fair means. From hence he sent to ^^e Prince of
Wales, requiring him to come over and (...) him Homage, which Lhewelyn either
absolutely re^^sing, or willingly detracting to do, King Edward ^ade ready his
Army to force him to it. But there Lhewelyn's stubborness; for at this time the
^ountess of Leicester the Widow of Simon Montfort ^ho lived at Montargis a
Nunnery in France, sent over (...) Wales her Daughter, the Lady Eleanor (whom
^hewelyn extremely loved) with her Brother Aeme^ke, to be married to the
Prince, according to the A^reement made in her Father, Earl Montfort's time.
^ut Aemerike fearing to touch upon the Coast of ^ngland, steered his course
toward the Islands of ^cilly, where by the way they were all taken by four
^ristol Ships, and brought to King Edward, who re^eived the Lady very
honorably, but committed her ^^other Prisoner to the Castle of Coff, whence he
was ^fterward removed to the Castle of Shirburne. The ^ing having obtained this
unexpected Advantage over ^hewelyn, began boldly to fall upon him, and so
di^^ding his Army into two Battalions, led one himself ^^to North Wales, and
advanced as far as Ruthlan, where he strongly fortified the Castle. The other
he ommitted to Paganus de Camurtiis, a great Soldier, ^ho entering into
West-Wales, burned and destroyed (...) great part of the Country. But the
People of South Wales, fearing that his next Expedition was levelled against
them voluntarily submitted themselves to the ^ing, and did him Homage, and then
delivered upon ^he Castle of Ystratywy to Paganus.

Prince Lhewelyn hearing of this, and finding his own Subjects to forsake him,
but more especially being desirous to recover his espouse the Lady Eleanor,
thought it likewise advisable to submit, and therefore sued to King Edward for
a Peace, who granted it, but upon very severe Conditions upon Lhewelyns side.
The Agreement consisted of ten Articles, which were, 1. That the Prince should
set at liberty all manner of Prisoners, that upon the King's Account were
detained in Custody. 2. That for the King's favor and good will, he should pay
50000 Marks* to be received at the King's pleasure. 3. That these four Cantreds
or Hundreds, viz. Cantref Ros where the King's Castle of Teganwy stands;
Ryfonioc, where Denbigh; Tegengl, where Ruthlan; Dyffryn Clwyd, where Rhuthyn
stands, should remain in the King's hands. 4. That the Lords Marchers should
quietly enjoy all the Lands they had conquered within Wales, excepting in the
Isle of Anglesey, which was wholly granted to the Prince. 5. That in
consideration of this Island, the Prince should pay 5000 Marks in hand, with
the reserve of a 1000 Marks yearly to begin at Michaelmas; and in case the
Prince died without Issue, the whole Island should return to the King. 6. That
the Prince should come every year to England to pay his Homage to the King for
all his Lands. 7. That all the Barons of Wales, excepting five in Snowden,
should hold their Lands and Estates of the King, and no other. 8. That the
Title of Prince should remain only for his Life, and not descend to his
Successors, and after his Death, the five Lords of Snowden should hold their
Lands only from the King. 9. That for the performance of these Articles, the
Prince should deliver up for Hostages ten Persons of the best Quality in the
Country, without imprisoning, disinheriting, and any time of redemption
determined. And farther, that the King should choose Twenty Persons within
North Wales, who besides the Prince, should take their Oaths for the due
performance of these Articles, and in case the Prince should swerve and recede
from them, and upon admonition ^hereof not repent, they should forsake him, and
be^ome his Enemies. 10. The Prince was obliged to ^uffer his Brethren quietly
to enjoy their Lands in Wales, whereof David for his Service was dubbed Knight
by the King, and had the Earl of Derby's Widow given him in Matrimony, and with
her as (...) Portion, the Castle of Denbigh in North Wales, be^ides a 1000
Pounds in Lands. His other Brother Roderic was lately escaped out of Prison
into England, and the younger called Owen, was upon his Composition delivered
out of Prison.

King Edward having imposed these severe and unmerciful Conditions upon Prince
Lhewelyn, and for a better security for the performance of them, built a Castle
at Aberystwyth, returned very honorably into England; upon whose arrival, the
People willingly granted him a Subsidy of the Twentieth part of their Estates
toward his Charges in this War. But it seems very probable that Prince
Lhewelyn submitted to these intolerable Conditions, more upon the account of
his Amors, and to regain the Lady Eleanora out of the King of England's hand,
than that he was apprehensive of any considerable Danger he might receive by
the English Troops. For it is hardly conceivable, that a Prince of such
notorious Conduct and Valor, would so easily accept of such hard Terms, and in
a measure deliver up his Principality, when there was no necessity so to do,
without resisting an Enemy, whom he had frequently overcome, and forced to
retire back with greater inequality than the English had at present over him.
But the force of love worked Wonders, and in this case* proved most
irresistible, which to obtain, Lhewelyn did not think hard to forfeit his
proper Right to his inveterate Enemies, and for ever to exclude his Posterity
from succeeding in their lawful Inheritance. The next year Eleanora at
Worcester, the King and Queen, with all the Nobility and Persons of Quality in
England, honoring the Wedding with their p^esence.

But this specious Amity, and the Peace la^^ concluded betwixt them did not
last long, the E^glish Governors in the Marches and inland Co^^tries of
Wales, presuming upon the Prince's submi^sion to the King, grievously oppressed
the Inhab^tants of the Country, with new and unheard of (...) actions, and with
intolerable partiality openly e^couraged the English to defraud and oppress t^^
Welsh. These insupportable practices moved t^^ Welsh to go in a Body to David
Lord of Denbig^ to endeavor a reconciliation between him and (...) Brother the
Prince, that they both being at Unity might easily deliver themselves and their
Country from the unmerciful Tyranny of the English David was not ignorant of
the miseries of his Cou^try-men, England, but to become his (...)Enemy. This
happy Union being thus effected David was chose General of the Army, with which
he presently marched to Hawarden, and surprising the Castle, slew all that
opposed him, and took Roge^ Clifford Prisoner, who had been sent by King Edward
Justitiar into those parts. From thence, being joined by the Prince, he passed
to Ruthlan, and laid Siege to the Castle; but upon notice given that the King
was marching to raise the Siege, he thought convenient to withdraw, and to
retire back. At the same time, Rhys ap Maelgon and Gruffydh ap Meredith ap
Owen, with other Lords of South Wales, took from the English the Castle of
Aberystwyth, with diverse others in that Country, and spoiled all the People
thereabouts, who owned subjection to the Crown of England. In the mean while,
John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, perceiving how matters were like to
proceed between the King and the Prince, and how the Kingdom was effectually
involved in a War, of his own proper motion came to Prince Lhewelyn, to
endeavor a re-submission from him and his Brother David to King Edward, and so
to put a stop to any farther Hostilities.

But he sent beforehand to the Prince and People of Wales, intimating to them,
That for the Love he bore to the Welsh Nation, he undertook this Arbitration,
without the knowledge, and contrary to the King's liking; and therefore
earnestly desired, that they would submit to a Peace with the English, which
himself would endeavor to bring to pass. And because he could make no long
continuance in those Parts, he wished them to consider, how that if he should
be forced to depart before any thing was brought to a conclusion, they could
hardly find another who would so heartily espouse their Cause; and farther
threatened, that in case they contemned and derided his Endeavors, he would not
only instigate the English Army, now greatly strengthened and increased, to fall
upon them, but also signify their Stubbornness to the Court and Bishop of
Rome, who esteemed and honored England, beyond any other Kingdom in the World.
Moreover, he much lamented to hear of the excessive Cruelty of the Welsh, even
beyond that of the Saracens and other Infidels, who never refused to permit
Slaves and Captives to be ransomed; which the Welsh were so far from
practicing, that even some time they slew those for whose Redemption they
received Money. And whereas they were wont to esteem and reverence holy and
ecclesiastical Persons, they are now so far degenerated from Devotion and
Sanctity, that nothing is more acceptable to them than War and Sedition, which
they had now great need to forsake and repent of. Lastly, he proposed, that
they would signify to him, wherein, and what Laws and Constitutions of theirs
was violated by the English, and by what means a firm and a lasting Peace might
be established; which, if they rejected, they must expect to incur the Decree
and Censure of the Church, as well as endure the violent In-roads and
Depredations of a powerful Army. To these, partly Admonitions, and partly
Threatenings of the Archbishop, Prince Lhewelyn returned an Answer; That he
humbly thanked his Grace for the Pains and Trouble he undertook in his and his
Subjects behalf; and more particularly, because he would venture to come to
Wales, contrary to the pleasure and good liking of the King. And as for
concluding a Peace with him, he would not have his Grace be ignorant, that with
all readiness he was willing to submit to it, upon condition that the King
would duly and sincerely observe the same. And though he would be glad of his
longer Wales, yet he hoped that no Obstructions would happen of his side, why a
Peace (which of all things he most desired) might not be forthwith concluded,
and rather by his Graces procuring than any others; so that there would be no
farther need of acquainting the Pope with his Obstinacy, nor moving the King of
England to use any Force against him. And though the Kingdom of England be
under the immediate Protection of the Sea of Rome, yet, when his Holiness comes
to understand of the great and unsufferable Wrongs done to him by the English;
how the Articles of Peace were broken, Churches and all other religious Houses
in Wales were burned down and destroyed, and religious Persons unchristianly
murdered, he hoped he would rather pity and lament his Condition, than with
addition of Punishment increase and augment his Sorrow. Neither shall the
Kingdom of England be any wise disquieted and molested by his means, in case
the Peace be religiously observed toward him and his Subjects. But who they
are, that delight themselves with War and Bloodshed, manifestly appears by
their Actions and Behavior; the We^ch being glad to live quietly upon their
own, if they might be permitted by the English, who coming to the Country,
utterly destroy whatever comes in their way, without regard either to Sex, Age,
or religious places. But he was extreme sorry that any one should be slain,
having paid his R^^^^^; the Author of which unworthy Action he did not pretend
to maintain, but would inflict upon him his condign Punishment, in case he
could be got out of the Woods and Deserts, where as an Outlaw, ^he lives
undiscovered. But as to commencing a War in a Season inconvenient, he protested
he knew nothing of that till now; yet those that did so, do solemnly attest
that to be the only measure they had to save themselves, and that they had no
other security for their Lives and Fortunes, than to keep themselves in Arms.
Concerning his Sins and Trespasses against God, with the assistance of his
Grace, he would endeavor to repent of; neither should the War be willingly
continued by him, in case he might save himself harmless; but before he would
be unjustly dispossessed of his legal Propriety, he thought it but reasonable,
by all possible measures to defend himself. And he was very willing, upon due
Examination of the Trespasses committed, to make Satisfaction and Retribution
of all Wrongs committed by him and his Subjects; so that the English would
observe the same of their side; and likewise was ready to conclude a Peace,
which he thought was impossible to be established, as long as the English had
no regard to Articles, and still oppress his People with new and unwarrantable
Exactions. Therefore seeing his Subjects were unchristianly abused by the
King's Officers, and all his Country most tyrannically harassed, he saw no
reason why the English, upon any fault of his side, should threaten to bring a
formidable Army to his Country, nor the Church pretend to censure him; seeing
also, he was very willing upon the aforesaid Conditions, to submit to a Peace.
And lastly, he desired his Grace, that he would not give the more credit to his
Enemies, because they were near his Person, and could deliver their Complaints
frequently, and by word of mouth; for they who made no conscience of
oppressing, would not in all probability, stick to defame, and make false
Accusations; and therefore his Grace would make a better Estimation of the
whole matter, by examining their Actions, rather than believing their Words.

Prince Lhewelyn having to this purpose replied in general to the Archbishops
Articles, presented him with a Copy of the several Grievances, which himself
and others of his Subjects had wrongfully and unjustly received at the hands of
the English. And these, though somewhat tedious, are thought necessary to be
particularly inserted in the Appendix, by reason that they demonstrably
vindicate the Welsh Nation, from the unreasonable Aspersions which the English
of these times cast upon it. For, the breach of Peace, and the occasion of
those dismal Disturbances in the Kingdom, are, by the English Writers of those
times, wholly attributed to the restless and rebellious Humor and unconstant
Temper of the Welsh* Whereas, had they looked at home, they might have found
the Original of all these Troubles, to have proceeded from the intolerable
Extortions and insupportable Oppressions of their own Nation. For whoever
considers these unmerciful Grievances, and the manifold Wrongs the Welsh
endured, it cannot in reason be expected, but that they would endeavor to
vindicate themselves, and repel Force by Force. For, had the English the
liberty of dispossessing them wrongfully of their proper Inheritance and
Estates, and it was not lawful for the Welsh to endeavor the defending and
keeping their own? And must they be reckoned disobedient, and Promoters of
Sedition, upon the account that they would not be trampled under, and enslaved
by the English? These Measures were too hard and intolerable, and scarce
allowable in an Infidel Nation; to oppress, (and what in them lay) eradicate a
People, for no other reason, than because they were weaker and more helpless
than themselves; and then, what is worse, to accuse them of being Authors of
Sedition, because they would not suffer themselves to be peaceably enslaved,
but endeavored to vindicate their Right by main Force. But it is highly
probable, that King Edward had no inclination to observe, what Articles of
Agreement soever were concluded upon; and therefore encouraged his Deputies in
the Marches and inland Country of Wales, in all their Oppressions and
sinistrous Dealings toward the Welsh. This was the best Method, and the most
expedient Means to reduce the Country of Wales to subjection to the Crown of
England, which the King had long ago intentionally effected: And to accuse the
Welsh of not observing the Conditions of Peace, was a specious Pretense to
bring that actually to pass, and to lead an Army into the Country. But whaever
the English might pretend, it is evident the Welsh had the greater occasion to
complain, See the Appendix.
as appears from the Grievances committed as well against the Prince himself,
as others of his Subjects.

The Archbishop having read over these Grievances, and finding the Welsh to be
upon good reason guiltless of that severe Character, which by the malicious
Insinuations of the English, he had conceived of them, went to King Edward;
requesting him to take into consideration the unjust Wrongs and Injuries done
to the Welsh; which if he would not redress, at least he might excuse them from
any breach of Obedience to him, seeing they had so just a reason for what they
did. The King replied, That he willingly forgave them, and would make
reasonable Satisfaction for any Wrong done; so that they had free access to
declare their Greivances before him; and then might safely depart, in case it
would appear just and lawful they should. The Archbishop upon this thought he
had obtained his purpose, and therefore, without any stay, posted it to
Snowden, where the Prince and his Brother David resided; and having acquainted
them with the King's mind, earnestly desired that they, and the rest of the
Nobility of Wales, would submit themselves, and by him be introduced to the
King's presence. Prince Lhewelyn, after some times Conference and Debate,
declared that he was ready to submit to the King, with the reserve only of two
particulars; namely, his Conscience, whereby he was obliged to regard the
Safety and Liberties of his People; and then the decency of his own State and
Quality. But the King understanding by the Archbishop, how that the Prince
stood upon Terms, positively refused to consent to any more Treaty of Peace,
than that he should simply submit, without any farther Conditions. The
Archbishop had experience enough, that the Welsh would never agree to such
Proposals; and therefore desired of his Majesty, that he would give him leave,
with the rest of the English Nobility present, to confer and conclude upon the
matter; which being granted, they unanimously resolved upon the following
Articles, and sent them to the Prince by John Wallensis, Bishop of S. David's.

I. The King will have no Treaty of the four Cantreds, and other Lands which he
has bestowed upon his Nobles; nor of the Isle of Anglesey. II. In case the
Tenants of the four Cantreds submit themselves, the King purposes to deal
kindly and honorably with them; which we are sufficiently satisfied of, and
will, what in us lies, endeavor to further. III. We will do the like touching
Prince Lhewelyn, concerning whom we can return no other Answer, than that he
must barely submit himself to the King, without hopes of any other Conditions.
These were the public Articles agreed upon by the English Nobility, and sent
to Prince Lhewelyn; besides which, they sent some private Measures of
Agreement, relating both to him and his Brother David; promising, that in case
he would submit, and put the King in quiet possession of Snowden, his Majesty
would bestow an English County upon him, with the yearly Revenue of a Thousand
Pound Sterling. And moreover, his Daughter should be provided for, suitable to
her Birth and Quality, and all his Subjects according to their Estate and
Condition; and in case he should have Male Issue by a second Wife, the
aforesaid County and a Thousand Pound should remain to his Posterity for ever.
As for David the Prince's Brother, if he would consent to go to the Holy Land,
upon condition not to return but upon the King's Pleasure, all things should be
honorably prepared for his Journey with respect to his Quality; and his Child
maintained and provided for by the King. To these the Archbishop added his
Threats; That in case they did not comply, and submit themselves to the King's
Mercy, there were very severe and imminent Dangers hanging over their Heads; a
formidable Army was ready to make an inroad into their Country, which would not
only gaul and oppress them, but in all probability totally eradicate the whole
Nation: Besides which, they were to expect the severest Censure and Punishment
of the Church.

But all this could not force so unlimited a Submission from the Prince, but
that he would stick upon some certain Conditions; and therefore by Letter he
acquainted the Archbishop, That he was with all willingness desirous to submit
himself to the King; but withal, that he could not do it but in such a manner
as was safe and honest for him. And because the Form of Submission contained in
the Articles sent to him, were by himself and his Council thought pernicious
and illegal for him to consent to as tending rather to the Destruction, than
the Security of himself and his Subjects, he could in no wise agree to it; and
in case himself should be willing, the rest of his Nobility and People would
never admit of it, as knowing for certain the Mischief and Inconveniency that
would ensue thereby. Therefore he desired his Lordship, that for a Confirmation
of an honest and a durable Peace, which he had all this while earnestly
labored for, he would manage Matters circumspectly, and with due regard to the
following Articles. For it was much more honorable for the King, and far more
consonant to Reason, that he should hold his Lands in the Country where he was
born and dwelt in, than that by dispossessing of him, his Estate should be
bestowed upon Strangers. With this was sent the general Answer of the Welsh to
the Archbishop's Articles, viz.

1. Though the King would not consent to treat of the four Cantreds, nor of the
Isle of Anglesey; yet unless these be comprehended in the Treaty, the Prince's
Council will not conclude a Peace; by reason that these Cantreds have ever,
since the time of Camber the Son of Brutus, properly and legally belonged to
the Princes of Wales; besides the Confirmation which the present Prince
obtained by the Consent of the King and his Father, at the Treaty before
Cardinal Ottobonus the Pope's Legate, whose Letters Patents do still appear.
And more, the Justice of the thing it self is plainly evident, that it is more
reasonable for our Heirs to hold the said Cantreds for Money, and other
Services due to the King, than that Strangers enjoy the same, who will forcibly
abuse and oppress the People.

2. All the Tenants of the Cantreds of Wales do unanimously declare, that they
dare not submit themselves to the King's Pleasure; by reason that he never from
the beginning took care to observe either Covenant, Oath, or any other Grant to
the Prince and his People; and because his Subjects have no regard to Religion,
but most cruelly and unchristianly tyranize over Churches and religious
Persons; and then, for that we do not understand our selves any way obliged
thereunto, seeing we be the Princes Tenants, who is willing to pay the King all
usual and accustomed Services.

3. As to what is required, that the Prince should simply commit himself to the
King's Will, we all declare, that for the aforesaid Reasons, none of us dare
come, neither will we permit our Prince to come to him upon those Conditions.

4. That some of the English Nobility will endeavor to procure a provision of
a Thousand Pounds a Year in England; we would let them know, that we can accept
of no such Pension; because it is procured for no other end, than that the
Prince being disinherited, themselves may obtain his Lands in Wales.

5. The Prince cannot in honesty resign his paternal Inheritance, which has for
many Ages been enjoyed by his Predecessors, and accept of other Lands among
the English, of whose Customs and Language he is ignorant; and upon that score,
may at length be fraudulently deprived of all, by his malicious and inveterate
Enemies.

6. Seeing the King intends to deprive him of his ancient Inheritance in Wales,
where the Land is more barren and untilled; it is not very probable that he
will bestow upon him, a more fruitful and an a^able Estate in England.

7. As to the Clause, that the Prince should give the King a perpetual
Possession of Snowden; we only affirm, that seeing Snowden essentially belongs
to the Principality of Wales, which the Prince and his Predecessors have
enjoyed since Brute, the Prince's Council will not permit him to renounce it,
and accept another Estate in England, to which he has not equal Right.

8. The People of Snowden declare, That though the Prince should give the King
possession of it, they would never own, and pay Submission to Strangers; for in
so doing, they would bring upon themselves the same Misery, that the People of
the Four Cantreds have for a long time groaned under; being most rudely handled
and unjustly oppressed by the King's Officers; as woefully appears by their
several Grievances.

9. As for David, the Prince's Brother, we see no reason, why against his Will
he should be compelled to take a Journey to the Holy Land; which if he happens
to undertake hereafter upon the account of Religion, it is no cause that his
Issue should be disinherited, but rather encouraged.

Now seeing neither the Prince nor any of his Subjects upon any account
whatsoever, have moved and begun this War, but only defended themselves, their
Properties, Laws, and Liberties, from the Encroachments of other Persons; and
since the English, for either Malice or Covetousness to obtain our Estates,
have unjustly occasioned all these Troubles and Broils in the Kingdom, we are
assured that our Defense is just and lawful, and therein depend upon the Aid
and Assistance of Heaven; which will be most cruelly revenged upon our
sacrilegious and inhumane Enemies, who have left no manner of Enormities, in
relation to God and Man, uncommitted. Therefore your Grace would more justly
threaten your Ecclesiastical Censures, against the Authors and Abettors of such
unparalleled Villainies, than the innocent Sufferers. And besides, we much
admire, that you should advise us to part with our own Estates, and to live
among our Enemies; as if, when we cannot peaceably enjoy what is our own
unquestionable Right, we might expect to have quiet possession of another Man's:
And though, as you say, it be hard to live in War and perpetual Danger; yet
much harder it is, to be utterly destroyed and reduced to nothing; especially,
when we seek but the Defense of our own Liberties from the insatiable Ambition
of our Enemies. And seeing your Grace has promised to fulminate Sentence
against all them that either for Malice or Profit would hinder and obstruct the
Peace; it is evident who in this respect are Transgressors and Delinquents; the
fear and apprehension of Imprisonment and Ejection out of our Estates, the
sense of Oppression and tyrannical Government, having compelled us to take up
Arms for the security of our Lives and Fortunes. Therefore as the English are
not disposessed of their Estates, for their Offenses against the King, so we
are willing to be punished, or make other Satisfaction for our Crimes, without
being disinherited; and as to the breach of the Peace, it is notorious that they
were the Authors, who never regarded either Promise or Covenant, never made
Amends for Trespasses, nor Remedy for our Complaints.

When the Archbishop saw there was no likelihood of a Mediation, and that a
Peace was impossible to be concluded as long as the Welsh stuck upon
Conditions; he presently relinquished his pretended Affection toward them, and
denounced a Sentence of Excommunication against the Prince and all his
Adherents. It was a subject of no little wonder, that a Person of so reputed a
Sanctity, who esteemed the several Grievances done to the Welsh to be
intolerable, should now condemn them for refusal of unlimited Submission to the
King of England; whereas he had already owned it to be unreasonable. But this
ecclesiastical Censure was only a Prologue to a more melancholy Scene; King
Edward immediately upon it, sending an Army by Sea to Anglesey, without any
great Opposition, conquered the Island, and without any Mercy, put all that
withstood him to the Sword. From thence designing to pass over to the
Continent, he caused a Bridge of Boats covered with Planks to be built over the
Menay (being an Arm of the Sea which parts the Isle from the main Land) at a
place called Moel y don, not far from Bangor, where the Water is narrowest. The
Bridge being finished, which was so broad as that Threescore Men might pass in a
breast, William Latimer, with a strong Party of the best experienced Soldiers,
and Sir Lucas Thany, Commander of the Gascoigns and Spaniards, whereof a great
number served the King, passed over, but could discover no sign, or any the
least intimation of an Enemy. But as soon as the Tide began to appear, and the
Sea had overflown beside the Bridge, down come the Welsh fiercely out of the
Mountains, and setting upon the disheartened English, killed or drowned their
whole number, excepting Latimer, who by the swimming of his Horse got safe to
the Bridge In this Action, several worthy Soldiers of the English side were
lost; among whom were Sir Lucas Thany, Robert Clifford, Sir Walter Lyndsey, two
Brothers of Robert Burnel Bishop of Bath, with many others; in all to the
number of Thirteen Knights, Seventeen young Gentlemen, and Two Hundred common
Soldiers. A little after, or as some say before, another Engagement passed
between the English and the Welsh, wherein the former lost Fourteen Colors,
the Lords Audley and Clifford the younger being slain, and the King himself
forced to retreat for safety to the Castle of Hope.

And while these things passed in North Wales, the Earl of Gloucester and Sir
Edmund Mortimer acted vigorously with their Forces in South Wales; and fighting
the Welsh at Lhandeilo Fawr, overthrew them, with the loss of no considerable
Person, saving William de Valence the King's Cosin-German, and Four Knights
besides. Prince Lhewelyn was all this while in Cardigan, a wasting and
destroying all the Country, and principally the Lands of Rhys ap Meredith, who
very unnaturally held with the King of England in all these Wars. But being at
length tired with Action, with a few Men privately separated himself from his
Army, and came to Buelht, thinking to ease and respit himself there
undiscovered. But coming to the River Wye, he met with Edmund Mortimer and John
Gifford, with a considerable Party of the People of that Country, which
Mortimer was Lord of. But neither Party venturing to assail the other, Prince
Lhewelyn with one only Servant retired to a private Grove in a neighboring
Valley, there to consult with certain Lords of the Country, who had appointed
to meet him. In the mean time Mortimer descends from the Hill, with intention
to fall upon Lhewelyn's Men; which they perceiving, betook themselves to the
Bridge called Pont Orewyn, and manfully defended the Passage he was to cross.
Mortimer could effect nothing against them, till he had gained the Bridge, the
River being unpassable; and to force them to quit it, seemed altogether
impracticable. But at last, the River was discovered to be fordable a little
below, and so Helias Walwyn was detached with a Party through the River, who
unexpectedly falling upon the backs of the Defendants, easily forced them to
leave the Bridge, and save themselves by flight. Prince Lhewelyn all this while
in vain expected the Lords of Buelht, and in fine continued to wait so long,
till Mortimer having passed over the Bridge, surrounded the Wood he was in with
armed Men. The Prince perceiving himself to be betrayed, thought to make his
escape to his Men; but the English so closely pursued him, that before he could
come in, one Adam Francton, not knowing who he was, run him through with his
Sword, being unarmed. The Welsh still expected the arrival of their Prince, and
though but a few in number, so gallantly maintained their ground, that in
spite of the far greater number of the English, they were at length with much
ado put to flight. The Battle being over, Francton returned to plunder his
dead; but perceiving him to be the Prince of Wales, he thought himself to have
obtained a sufficient Prize, and thereupon presently chopped off his Head, and
sent it to King Edward at Conwey, who very joyfully caused it to be placed upon
the highest Pinnacle of the Tower of London. And thus fell this worthy Prince,
the greatest, though the last of the British Blood, betrayed most basely by the
Lords of Buelht, and being dead, most unworthily dealt with by the King of
England; who contrary to all Presidents, treated a lawful Prince like a
Traitor, and exposed his crowned Head to the Derision of the Multitude.

Not long after, David the Prince's Brother was delivered up by the Welsh
themselves, and in a Parliament for that purpose assembled at Shrewsbury, was
condemned to dye; his Head to be sent to accompany his Brothers upon the Tower
of London, and his four Quarters to the four Cities of Bristol, Northhampton,
York, and Winchester. Then the King for the easier keeping the Welsh in due
subjection, built Two strong Castles in North Wales; the one at Conwey and the
other at Caernarvon* There was none that now stood out besides Rhys Fychan of
Ystratywy; and he, finding David was gone, and himself like to do nothing to
purpose, fairly yielded himself up to the Earl of Hereford, who by the King's
Orders committed him Prisoner to the Tower of London; and so all the Country of
Wales became ever since subject to the Crown of England.

The PRINCES of WALES of English-Blood.
PRince Lhewelyn and his Brother David being so basely taken off, and leaving
no body to lay any specious Claim to the Principality of Wales; King Edward by
a Statute made at Ruthlan, incorporated and annexed it to the Crown of England;
Anno 12. Edw. I.
constituting several new and wholesome Laws; as concerning the Division of Wales
into several Counties, the Form and Manner of Writs, and Proceedings in Trials,
with many others not very unlike the Laws and Constitutions of the English
Nation. But all this could never win the Affection of the Welsh toward him; who
by no means would own him as their Sovereign, unless he would condescend and
agree to live and reign among them. They had not forgot the cruel Oppressions
and intolerable Insolences o^ English Officers; and therefore they flatly told
him, they would never yield Obedience to any other, than a Prince of their own
Nation, of their own Language, and whose Life and Conversation was spotless and
unblameable, King Edward perceiving the Welsh to be resolute and inflexible,
and absolutely bent against any other Prince, than one of their own Country,
happily thought of this politic, though dangerous Expedient. Queen Eleanor was
now quick with Child, and ready to be delivered; and though the Season was very
severe, it being the depth of Winter, the King sent for her from England, and
removed her to Caernarvon Castle, the place designed for her to ^^ve in. When
the time of her Delivery was come, ^^ng Edward called to him all the Barons and
chief ^ersons throughout all Wales to Ruthlan, there to ^onsult about the
public Good and Safety of their ^ountry. And being informed that his Queen was
^elivered of a Son, he told the Welsh Nobility, that ^hereas they had
oftentimes entreated him to appoint ^^em a Prince, he having at this time
occasion to de^art out of the Country, would comply with their ^equest, upon
condition they would allow of, and ^^ey him whom he should name. The Welsh
readi^^ agreed to the motion, only with the same Reserve, that he should
appoint them a Prince of their own Nation. King Edward assured them, he would
name ^^ch an one as was born in Wales, could speak no ^nglish, and whose Life
and Conversation no body ^ould stain; whom the Welsh agreeing to own and ^bey,
he named his own Son Edward, but little before ^^om in Caernarvon Castle.

King Edward having by these means deluded the Welsh, and reduced the whole
Country of Wales to ^is own Devotion, began to reward his Followers with other
Men's Proprieties, and bestowed whole Lordships and Towns in the midst of the
Country upon English Lords, among whom Henry Lacy Earl of Lineoln obtained the
Lordship of Denbigh; Reginald Gray, second Son to John Lord Gray of Wilton, the
Lordship of Ruthyn. This Henry Lacy was Son to Edmund Lacy, the Son of John
Lacy, Lord of Halton Pomfret, and Constable of Chester, who married Margaret
the eldest Daughter, and one of the Heirs of Robert Quincy Earl of Lincoln.
This Henry Lacy Lord of Denbigh married the Daughter and sole Heir of William
Longspear Earl of Salusbury, by whom he had Issue two Sons, Edmund and John,
who both dyed young, one by a Fall into a very deep Well within the Castle of
Denbigh; and a Daughter named Alicia, who was married to Thomas Plantagenet
Earl of Lancaster, who in right of his Wife was Earl of Lincoln and Sarum, Lord
of Denbigh, Halton Pomfret, and Constable of Chester, After his Death, King
Edward II. bestowed the said Lordship of Denbigh upon Hug^ Lord Spencer Earl of
Winchester, upon whose deceas^^ King Edward III. gave it, together with many
other Lordships in the Marches, to Roger Mortimer Earl^ March, in performance
of a Promise he had made whilst he remained with his Mother in France, tha^ as
soon as he should come to the possession of the Crown of England, he would
bestow upon the sai^ Earl of March, to the value of a Thousand Poun^^ yearly,
in Lands. But within few Years after, M^^timer being attainted of High Treason,
King Edwa^^ bestowed the said Lordship of Denbigh upon Montague Earl of
Salusbury; but it was quickly restore^ again to the Mortimers, in which House
it continued till the whole Estate of the Earls of March, ca^^ with a Daughter
to the House of York, and so to the Crown, Richard Duke of York Grandfather to
Edward the Fourth, having married the sole Daughter and Heir of the House of
the Mortimers. And so (...) continued in the Crown to Queen Elizabeth's time,
who in the Sixth Year of her Reign, bestowed the said Lordship upon her great
Favorite Robert Ear^ of Leicester, who was then created Baron of Denbigh.
After him it returned again to the Crown, where (...) has continued to this
present Year 1696. when his present Majesty granted a Patent under the great
Sea^ to William Earl of Portland, for the Lordships of Denbigh, Bromfield, and
Yale. Some of the Welsh Representatives, perceiving how far such a Grant
encroached upon the Properties and Privileges of the Subject, disclosed their
Grievances to the Honorable House of Commons, who after some consideration,
resolved (nemine contradicente) that a Petition should be presented to his
Majesty by the Body of the whole House, to request him to recall his Grant to
the said Earl of Portland; which was accordingly done in the manner following:
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament Assembled; Humbly lay before Your Majesty. That whereas
there is a Grant passing to William Earl of Portland, and his Heirs, of the
Manners of Denbigh, Bromfield, and Yale, and diverse other Lands in the
Principality of Wales; together with several Estates of Inheritance, enjoyed by
many of Your Majesty's Subjects by Virtue of Ancient Grants from the Crown:

That the said Manors, with the large and extensive Royalties, Powers, and
Jurisdictions to the same belonging, are of great Concern to Your Majesty and
the Crown of this Realm: And that the same have been usually Annexed to the
Principality of Wales, and Settled on the Princes of Wales for their Support:
And that a great number of Your Majesty's Subjects, in those Parts, hold their
Estates by Royal Tenure, under great and valuable Compositions, Rents,
Royal-Payments, and Services to the Crown and Princes of Wales; and have by
such Tenure great Dependence on Your Majesty and the Crown of England; and have
enjoyed great Privileges and Advantages with their Estates, under such Tenure.

We therefore most humbly beseech Your Majesty, to put a stop to the Passing
this Grant to the Earl of Portland, of the said Manors and Lands; and that the
same may not be disposed from the Crown, but by Consent of Parliament: For that
such Grant, is in Diminution of the Honor and Interest of the Crown, by
placing in a Subject, such large and extensive Royalties, Powers, and
Jurisdictions, which ought only to be in the Crown; and will Sever that
Dependence, which so great a Number of Your Majesty's Subjects, in those Parts,
have on Your Majesty and the Crown, by reason of their Tenure; and may be to
their great Oppression in those Rights which they have purchased, and hitherto
enjoyed with their Estates: And also, on Occasion of great Vexation to many of
Your Majesty's Subjects, who have long had the absolute Inheritance of several
Lands (comprehended in the said Grant to the Earl of Portland) by Ancient
Grants from the Crown.


His MAJESTY'S Answer.
Gentlemen,
I Have Kindness for my Lord Portland; which he has deserved of Me, by long and
faithful Services; but I should not have given him these Lands, if I had
imagined the House of Commons could have been concerned; I will therefore Recall
the Grant, and find some other way of showing My Favor to him.




The Lordship of Ruthyn continued in the possession of the Grays, till the
Reign of Henry VII. when George Gray Earl of Kent, and Lord of Ruthyn, upon
some Bargain, passed the same over to the King, since which it has been in the
possession of some of the Earls of Warwick and afterward came to the
Middletons of Chirk Castle in the County of Denbigh, where it still continues;
being now enjoyed by the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Middleton, Baronet.

But besides Henry Lacy and Reginald Gray, several other Gentlemen of Quality,
came at this time with King Edward to North Wales, who in some time became to
be Men of great Possessions and Sway in the Country, whose Posterity enjoy the
same to this time. But he that expected to fare best in the distribution of
these Lordships and Estates in Wales, was one Rhys ap Meredith, a Welsh Man,
and one that, contrary to the Allegiance sworn to his Prince, and his Duty to
his Native Country, had served the King of England in all these Wars, and done
the greatest hurt of any Man to the Interest of Prince Lhewelyn. For these
great Services done to King Edward, Rhys expected no less than to be promoted
to the highest Preferments; whom the King after the Prince of Wales's
Overthrow, first dubbed Knight, and afterward fed him with fair Words and
great Promises.

But when he, and all his Neighbors and Countrymen had submitted themselves to
the Government of the King of England; it happened that the Lord Pain Tiptost,
Warden of the King's Castles which joined to Rhys's Country, and the Lord Alan
Plucknet, the King's Steward in Wales, cited Sir Rhys ap Meredith, with all the
rest of the Country, to the King's Court; which he refusing to do, alleging
his ancient Privileges and Liberties, together with the King's Promises to
him, the foresaid Officers proceeded against him according to Law. Whereupon
Rhys being greatly vexed to be thus served by those whole Interest he had all
this while so warmly espoused, thought to be revenged of Pain Tiptost, and the
rest of the English. And to that end, having drawn together some of his Tenants
and Countrymen, he fell upon the said Pain Tiptost; between whom several
Skirmishes afterward happened, and several Men were slain on both sides. King
Edward was now at Arragon, to compose the Difference betwixt the Kings of
Arragon, and Naples; but being informed of the Disturbances which had happened
in Wales, betwixt his Ministers there, and Sir Rhys ap Meredith; he writ to
this latter, requiring him to keep the Peace, till his return; at what time he
would redress all Grievances, and reduce Matters to a good and reasonable
Order. But Sir Rhys having already waited sufficiently upon the King's
Promises, and being now in a good condition to offend his Enemies by force of
Arms, would not give over the Enterprise he saw so promising, but marching with
his Forces to his Enemies Lands, burnt and spoiled several Towns belonging to
the English. Upon this, the King sent to the Earl of Cornwall, whom he had
appointed his Deputy during his absence, to march with an Army into Wales, to
repress the Insolences, and to prevent any farther disorderly Attempts of the
Welsh. The Earl accordingly prepared an Army and went against Sir Rhys's, whose
Army he quickly dispersed, and overthrew his Castle of Drefolan, but not
without the loss of some of his Chief Men. For as they besieged and undermined
the said Castle, the Walls unexpectedly fell down, by which unlucky Accident,
several of the English were oppressed and bruised to Death, among whom were the
Lord Strafford, and the Lord William de Monchency. But within a while after,
Robert Tiptost Lord Deputy of Wales, raised a very powerful Army against Sir
Rhys, and after a slaughter of 4000 of the Welsh, took him Prisoner, who the
Michaelmas following, at the King's going to Scotland, was condemned and
executed at York.

Rhys did not put a final period to all the Quarrels betwixt the English and
Welsh, for in a short time after, there happened a new occasion for the Welsh
to murmur against, and upbraid the Government of the English over them. King
Edward was now in actual Enmity and War with the King of France, for the
carrying on of which, he wanted a liberal Subsidy and Supply from his Subjects.
This Tax was with a great deal of passion and reluctance levied in diverse
places of the Kingdom, but more especially in Wales, the Welsh being never
acquainted with such large Contributions before, Roger de Puelesdon, who was
appointed Collector of the said Subsidy, and hanged him up, together with
diverse others who abetted the collecting of the Tax. Then West-Wales Men chose
Maelgon Fychan for their Captain, and so entering into Caermardhyn and
Pembroke-shires, they cruelly harassed all the Lands that belonged to the
English, and then returned laden with considerable Booty. The Glamorgan-shire
Men, and they toward the South Parts, chose one Morgan for their Leader, and
set upon the Earl of Gloucester, whom they forced to make his escape out of the
Country; and so Morgan was put in possession of those Lands which the Ancestors
of the Earl of Gloucester had forcibly taken away from Morgan's Forefathers. On
the other side, the North Wales Men set up one Madoc, related to the last
Lhewelyn slain at Buelht, who having drawn together a great Number of Men, came
to Caernarvon, and setting upon the English, who in great multitudes had then
resorted thither to a Fair, slew a great many, and afterward spoiled and
ransacked the whole Town. King Edward being acquainted with these different
Insurrections and Rebellions in Wales, and desirous to quell the Pride and
Stubborness of the Welsh, but most of all to revenge the Death of his great
favorite Roger de Pulesdon, recalled his Brother Edmund Earl of Lancaster, and
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Lord of Denbigh, who with a considerable Army
were ready to embark for Gascoign, and countermanded them into Wales. Being
arrived there, they passed quietly forward, till they came to Denbigh, and as
soon as they drew near unto the Castle, upon St. Martin's day the Welsh with
great Fury and Courage faced them, and joining Battles, forced them back with a
very considerable loss. Polydore Virgil says, (but upon what Authority is not
known) that the Welsh obtained this Victory rather upon the account that the
English Army was hired with such Money as had been wrongfully taken out of the
Abbeys and other Religious places, so that it was a Judgment from above, more
than the Force of the Welsh, that overcame the English Army. But be the cause
of it what it will, it is certain the English were vanquished, upon which
account King Edward came in Person to Wales, and kept his Christmas at
Aberconwey, where Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury being returned
from Rome, came to him, and having done Homage, returned honorably again to
England. But as the King advanced farther into the Country, having but one part
of his Army with him, the Welsh set upon and took most of his Carriages, which
contained a great quantity of Victuals and Provision, so that the King with all
his followers were constrained to endure a great deal of hardships, in so much
that at last Water mixed with Honey, and very course and ordinary Bread with
the saltest Meat, were accounted the greatest Delicacies for his Majesty's own
Table. But their misery was like to be greater, had not the other part of the
Army come in time because the Welsh had encompassed the King round, in hopes to
reduce him to the utmost distress, by reason that the Water was so risen, that
the rest of the Army could not get to him. But the Water within some time after
abating, the remainder of the Army came in, whereupon the Welsh presently
retired, and made their escape. One thing is very remarkable of King Edward
during his distress at Snowden, that when the Army was reduced to very great
extremity, a small quantity of Wine was found, which they thought to reserve
for the King's own use. But he to prevent any discontent, which might thereupon
be raised in his Soldiers, absolutely refused to taste thereof, telling them.
That in time of Necessity all things should be common, and as he was the Cause
and Author of their Distress, he would not be preferred before them in his Diet.

But whilst the King remained in Snowden, the Earl of Warwick being informed
that a great Number of Welsh were assembled, and had lodged themselves ^n a
certain Valley betwixt two Woods, chose out a Troop of Horse, together with
some Cross-Bows and Archers, and set upon them in the Night time. The Welsh
being thus surprised, and unexpectedly encompassed about by their Enemies, made
the best they could to oppose them, and so pitching their Spears in the ground,
and directing the points toward their Enemies, endeavored by such means to
keep off the Horse. But the Earl of Warwick having ordered his Battle so, as
that between every two Horse there stood a Cross-Bow, so gauled the Welsh with
the shot of the quarrels, that the Spear-men fell apace, and then the Horse
breaking easily in upon the rest, bare them down with so great a slaughter, as
the Welsh had never received before. After this, King Edward to prevent any
more rebellious attempts of the Welsh, cut down all the Woods in Wales,
wherein, in any time of Danger, they were wont to hide and save themselves. And
for a farther security, he repaired and fortified all the Castles and places of
Strength in Wales, and built the Castle of Bewmoris in the Isle of Anglesey,
and so having put all things in a settled posture, and punished those that had
been the occasion of the Death of Roger de Pulesdon, he returned with his Army
into England. But as soon as the King had left the Welsh, Madoc, who, as it is
said before, was chosen Captain by the North Wales Men, gathered some Forces
together, and came to Oswestry, which presently yielded to him. And then
meeting with the Lord Strange near Knookine, who with a Detachment of the
Marchers came to oppose him, gave him Battle, vanquished his Forces, and
miserably ravaged his Country. The like Success he obtained a second time
against the Marchers, but at last they brought together a very great Number of
Men, and met Madoc marching toward Sh^ewsbury, upon the Hills of Cefn Digolh,
not far from Camrs Castle, where after a bloody Fight on both sides, Madoc was
taken Prisoner, and his Army vanquished and put to flight. Then he was sent to
London, and there sentenced to remain in perpetual Imprisonment in the Tower,
though others affirm, that Madoc was never taken, but that after several
Adventures and severe Conflicts, whereby the Welsh were reduced to great
extremities, he came in, and submitted himself to the King, who received him
upon Condition he would not desist to pursue Morgan Captain of the
Glamorgan-shire Men, till he brought him Prisoner before him. Madoc having
performed this, and the whole Country being peaceable and undisturbed, several
Hostages from the Chiefest Nobility of Wales for their orderly and quiet
behavior were delivered to the King, who disposed of them into diverse Castles
in England, where they continued in safe Custody till the end of the War, which
was presently-commenc^d with Scotland.

Edward's reign, the Prince of Wales came down to Chester, and received Homage
of all the Freeholders in Wales as follows, Henry Earl of Lancaster for
Monmouth; Reginald Gray for Ruthyn; Foulke Fitzwarren for his Lands; the Lord
William Martyn for his Lands in Cemaes; Roger Mortimer for his Lands in Wales;
Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln for Rhos and Rhyfoneioc; Robert Lord Montalt, for
his Lands, and Gruffydh Lord of Poole, for the Lordship of Powys, at the same
time paid their Homage Tudor ap Grono of Anglesey, Madoc ap Tudor Archdeacon of
Anglesey, Eineon ap Howel of Caernarvon, Tudor ap Gruffydh, Lhewelyn ap
Ednyfed, Gruffydh ^ychan Son of Gruffydh ap Iorwerth, Madoc Fychan Denglfield,
Lhewelyn Bishop of St. Asaph, and Richard de Pulesdon. This last in the Twelfth
Year of King Edward was constituted Sheriff of Caernarvon for life, with the
stipend of Forty Pounds sterling yearly. At the same place, Gruffydh ap Tudor,
Ithel Fychan, Ithel ap Blethyn, with many more did their Homage. Then the
Prince came to Ruthlan, where the Lord Richard de Sutton Baron of Malpas, paid
Homage and Fealty for the said Barony of Malpas. Thence the Prince removed to
Conwey, where Eineon Bishop of Bangor, and David Abbot of Maynan did their
Homage; as did Lewis de Felton Son of Richard Felton, for the Lands which his
Father held of the Prince in Maelor Saesneg, or English Maelor. John Earl
Warren swore Homage for the Lordships of Bromfield and Yale, and his Lands in
Hope-Dale, at London in the Chapel of the Lord John de Kirkby sometime Bishop
of Ely; as also a while after, Edmund Mortimer for his Lands of Cery and
Cydewen.

But besides all these, there paid Homage to the Prince of Wales at Chester,
Sir Gruffydh Llwyd Son of Rhys ap Gruffydh ap Ednyfed Fychan, a stout and a
valiant Gentleman, though not very fortunate, and as Florus says of Sertorius, he
was magnae quidem, sed calamitosae virtutis. He was Knighted by King Edward the
First, upon his bringing the first News of the Queen's safe delivery of a Son
at Caernarvon Castle, the King holding then a Parliament at Ruthlan. This Sir
Gruffydh continued for some time very gracious with the King of England, but
observing at length the intolerable Oppression and Tyranny exercised by the
English Officers, especially by Sir Roger Mortimer Lord of Chirke and Justice
of North Wales, toward his Countrymen the Welsh, became so far concerned and
discontented with such unwarrantable Practices, that he presently brake out
into open Rebellion against the English. And the better to effect what he
purposed, he treated with Sir Edward Bruce Brother to Robert then King of
Scotland, who had conquered Ireland, to bring or send over some Forces to
assist him in his Design against the English, upon which account he sent him
the following Letter.

Nobili in Christo Conquestori Domino Edvardo, Illustrissimo Regi Hiberniae,
suus, si placet, Griffinus Llwyd in North-Wall: reverentiam debitam in honor.
AVdita nobis vestri in terrarum conquisitione fama egregia in partibus
nostris, praecipue debelland. aemulos nostros and vestros, qui tam vos quam nos
ab Haereditatibus vi injuste expellendo destruxerunt, and nomen nostrum
memoriamque in terris delere conati fuerunt, ab initio supra modum applaudimus,
ut merito debemus, omnes unanimiter in partibus nostris, unde vobis ex part
Wallensium Nobilium significo per praesentes, quod si ad Walliam cum hominibus
vestris dignemini venire, vel si vos in propria persona accedere illuc non
poteritis, aliquem Nobilem Albanen. Comitem, Baronem vel Militem, cum paucis,
si plurimi nequeant adesse, ad dictas parts nostras volueritis mandare. Parati
erimus omnes unanimiter........ dicem eo quod nomen vestrum celebre ubique
publicetur expugnat: si quid Saxonibus in Albania, per illustrem Regem fratrem
vestrum ultim. per vos in Hibernia, per vos and nos in Wallia statum vestrum
pristinum per Brutum conquisitum recuperabimus, ipsisque suppeditatis, confusis
and dispersis, Britannia juxta discretam vestrae dominationis ordinationem
inter Britones and Albaneos in posterum divisa cohaereditabitur. Valeat
dominatio vestra Regia per cuncta Saecula.


To this Letter of Sir Gruffydh Llwyd's, Sir Edward Bruce returned the
following Answer.

OMnibus desiderantibus a servitute liberari sa^utem in eo. Qui desiderant in
se relevat. and liberat. ab angustiis, temporibus opportunis, quia quilibet
Christianus obligatur suo proximo in omni angustia subvenire, and praecipue
illis qui ex una rad^ce originis sive parentelae and patriae primitus
processerunt, ideo compatientes vestrae servituti and angustiae, jam.......
Anglicana molestia indigenti decrevimus (auxiliante altissimo) vestro gravamini
occurrere, and innaturalem and barbaricam totis viribus Anglicanam de vestris
finibus expellere servitutem, ut sic sicut a principio Albanicus and
Britannicus populus expulsis hostibus in perpetuum fiet unus. Et quia nullus
inimicus faciliter relevatur libenter praecipimus, si jugum Anglicanum in
tantum vos deprimit, quantum nuper depresserat populum Scotianum, ut sic ex
vestro concordi conamine, and nostro superveniente (juvamine dispenente semper
divino) positis jura vestra and justitiam recuperare and proprietatem.......
haereditatem pacifice possidere. Veruntamen Dei cum omnia serviunt in isto
proposito filium invocamus, quod non ex praesumptione and ambitione injusti
dominii talia attemptamus, sed ex mera compassione effusionis innocentis vestri
sanguinis and subjectionis intollerabilis and signant: ad hoc quod vellemus
inimicorum vestrorum and nostrorum vtres reprimere, qui nec pacem nec
concordiam defiderant. Imo vestram and nostram finalem destructionem, sicut a
principio ingressionis eorum in Britanniam incessanter diebus ac noctibus
molientur, and quia nullo modo est nostrae conscientioe quemquam decipere, nec
etiam decipi a quocunque, nostram intentionem and Proposit. sine
^ergiversatione aliqua declaramus quod libenter sciremus vestram voluntatem, si
rationem nostri laboris and conaminis intuitu relevationis vestrae acceptare
decrement. nobis committere prosecutionem querelae vestrae and justitiae nec
non capitale dominium vestri prout alius hactenus Princeps vester liberius
habere consuevit. Ita quod vos omnes and singuli cujuscunque extiteritis
conditionis pristinis haereditatibus, terris, libertatibus, possessionibus
consuetis, and omnibus conditionibus ad vos expectantibus integre and finaliter
gaudeatis. Vestram igitur voluntatem super hiis, and quibuscunque aliis in
quibus vos consolari poterimus, si videatur expediens caute and celeriter nobis
remandetis. Valete Domini in Domino.


But for all that these Letters passed betwixt them, whether by reason that
Bruce's Terms were conceived unreasonable, nothing however was concluded upon,
and the whole Treaty came to nothing. But Sir Gruffydh, though without any hopes
of assistance from the Scots, would not lay aside what he had once undertaken,
and therefore having gathered all the Forces he could, desperately set upon,
and almost in an instant overran all North Wales and the Marches, seizing upon
all the Castles and Strongholds through the Country. But all to no purpose, for
as the most violent stream is quickly over, so Sir Gruffydh's Army was
presently spent, and then being met with by a strong Detachment of English, his
Party was easily discomfited, and himself taken Prisoner.

The same Year being the 15th. of the reign of King Edward the Second, his
eldest Son Edward born at Windsor, in a Parliament holden at York, was created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine, and Earl of Chester. This Prince succeeded
his Father in the Kingdom of England, by the Name of Edward the Third, one of
the greatest and most powerful Monarchs that ever sat upon the English Throne.

Edward born at Woodstock, eldest Son and Heir to Edward the Third, was created
Prince of Wales, upon the 12th. day of May in the 17th. year of his Father's
reign, being then about fourteen years of age. He was a Prince of incomparable
Qualifications, but so signally Famous in Martial Affairs, that upon the
account of the several Actions he was engaged in, he received the Name of
Black-Prince. He took John the French King Prisoner at the Battle of Poictiers,
and shamefully vanquished the French Army in the Battle of Cressy. He did not
live to enjoy the Crown, but died one year before his Father, in the Forty
Sixth Year of his Age; no Prince was in his lifetime better beloved, and after
his Death more lamented by the English Nation, who had he lived to sit upon the
Helm, no one doubted but that he would have exceeded as to all Qualifications,
the most glorious Renown of the greatest of his Ancestors.

In the time of Edward the Third, lived Sir Tudor Vaughan ap Grono, descended
lineally from Ednyfed Vaughan, a Person as to Estate, Power and Interest, one
of the Chiefest in North Wales. Upon some motive, either of Ambition or Fancy,
he assumed to himself the Honor of Knighthood, requiring all People to call and
style him Sir Tudor ap Grono, as if he did prognosticate and foresee, that out
of his Loins should arise those that should have Power to confer that Honor.
King Edward being informed of such unparalleled Presumption, sent for Sir
Tudor, and asked him, With what Confidence he durst invade his Prerogative, by
assuming the degree of Knighthood, without his Authority. Sir Tudor replied,
That by the Laws and Constitution of King Arthur, he had the Liberty of taking
upon himself that Title, in regard he had those three Qualifications, which
whosoever was endued with, could by those Laws claim the Honor of a Knight. 1.
He was a Gentleman. 2. He had a sufficient Estate. And 3. He was Valiant and
Adventurous; adding this withal, If my Valor and Hardiness be doubted of, lo
here I throw down my Glove, and for due proof of my Courage, I am ready to
Fight with any Man, whatever he be. The King appproving and liking well the
Man's forwardness and resolution, was easily persuaded to confirm the Honor of
Knighthood upon him. From this Sir Tudor lineally descended Henry the Seventh
King of England, who was the Son of Edmund Earl of Richmond, the Son of Sir
Owen Tudor, Son to Meredith, the Son of this Sir Tudor ap Gono.

After the Death of the Black Prince, his Son Richard born at Bourdeaux in
France, being but Ten Years of age, was created Prince of Wales at Havering at
Bower, on the 20th. day of November, and in the Edward the Third, his
Grandfather's reign, whom he succeeded in the Crown of England.

Henry born at Monmouth, Son and Heir to Henry the Fourth King of England, upon
the 15th. of October, in the 1st. Year of his Father's reign, was created
Prince of Wales at Westminster, who succeeded his Father in the English Crown
by the Name of Henry the Fifth.

Whilst Richard the Second reigned, one Owen ap Gruffydh Fychan, descended of a
younger Son of Gruffydh ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield, was not a little Famous.
This Owen had his Education in one of the Inns-of-Court, where he became
Barister at Law, and afterward in very great Favor and Credit served King
Richard, and continued with him at Flint Castle, till at length the King was
taken by Henry Duke of Lancaster. Betwixt this Owen and Reginald Lord Gray of
Rhuthyn, there happened no small Difference touching a Common lying between the
Lordship of Rhuthyn, whereof Reginald was Owner, and the Lordship of
Glyndowrdwy in the possession of Owen, whence he borrowed the Name of Glyndwr.
During the reign of Richard the Second, Owen as being a Courtier, and in no
mean esteem with the King, did overpower Reginald, who was neither so well
befriended at Court, nor beloved in the Country as Owen was. But after King
Richard's deposal, the Scene was altered, and Reginald as then better
befriended than Owen, entered upon the Common* which occasioned Owen in the
first Year of Henry the Fourth to make his Complaint in Parliament against him,
for thus divesting him of his Right. No redress being found, the Bishop of St.
Asaph wished the Lords to take care, that by thus slighting his Complaint, they
did not irritate and provoke the Welsh to an Insurrection, to which some of the
Lords replied, That they did not fear those rascally bare-fo^ted People.
Glyndwr therefore perceiving how his Petition was slighted in Parliament, and
finding no other method to redress himself, having several Friends and
Followers, put himself in Arms against Reginald, and meeting him in the Field,
overcame and took him prisoner, and spoiled his Lordship of Rhuthyn. Upon this
many resorted to him from all parts of Wales, some thinking him to be in as
great Favor now, as in King Richard's days, others putting in his head, that
now the time was come when the Britains by his means might again recover the
Honor and Liberties of their Ancestors. But Reginald being thus kept prisoner,
and very severely handled by Owen, to terrify him into compliance with him in
his rebellious Actings, and not permitted to have his Liberty, under Ten
Thousand Marks for his Ransom, whereof Six Thousand to be paid upon the Feast
of St. Martyn, in the 4th. Year of Henry the Fourth, and to deliver up his
eldest Son with some other Persons of Quality as Hostages for the remainder;
the King at the humble suit of Reginald, seeing no other way for his
enlargement, gave way thereto, authorizing Sir William de Roos, Sir Richard de
Gray, Sir William de Willughby, Sir William le Zouche, Sir Hugh Huls, as also,
John Harvey, William Vaus, John Lee, John Langford, Thomas Pain, and John
Elnestow, to treat with Owen and his Council, and to conclude in what they
should conceive most expedient and necessary to be done for his redemption.
Whereupon they consenting to give the sum demanded by Glyndwr for his
deliverance, the King gave License to Robert Braybroke Bishop of London, as
also to Sir Gerard Braybroke the Father, and Sir Gerard the Son, then Feoffees
of diverse Lordships for this Reginald, to sell the Manor of Hertelegh in the
County of Kent, toward the raising of that Money. And for the better enabling
him to pay so great a Fine, the King was pleased to grant, that whereas it was
enacted, that such Persons who were owners of Lands in Ireland, and did not
there reside, should for such their neglect, forfeit two parts of the Profits
of them to the King; that notwithstanding this Act, he should forfeit nothing
for non-residence there, during the term of six years next ensuing.

This good Success over the Lord Gray, together with the numerous resort of the
Welsh to him, and the favorable interpretations of the Prophecies of Merdhyn,
which some construed very advantagioussy, made the swelling mind of Glyndwr
overflow its Banks, and gave him some hopes of restoring this Island back to
the Britains. Wherefore he set upon the Earl of March, who met him with a
numerous party of Hereford-shire Men, but when they came to close, the
Welch-men proved too powerful, and having killed above a Thousand Men of the
English, they took the Earl of March Prisoner. King Henry upon this was
frequently requested to Ransom the Earl, but to no purpose; for whether by
reason that Mortimer had a juster Title to the Crown than himself, he being the
next Heir in Blood after King Richard, who was as yet living, or because of
some other private odium, the King would never hearken to his Redemption,
alleging that he wilfully threw himself into the hands of Glyndwr. But about
the midst of August, to correct the presumptuous Attempts of the Welsh, the
King went in Person with a great Army into Wales; but by reason of
extraordinary excess of weather, which some attributed to the Magic of Glyndwr,
he was glad to return safe.

But the Earl of March perceiving that he was not like to obtain his Liberty by
King Henry's means, whether out of compliance, by reason of his tedious
Captivity, or Affection to the young Lady, he agreed to take part with Owen
against the King of England, and to marry his Daughter; with them joined the
Earl of Worcester, and his Brother the Earl of Northumberland, with his Son the
valiant Lord Percy, who conspiring to depose the King of England, in the House
of the Archdeacon of Bangor, by their Deputies divided the Realm amongst them,
causing a tripartite Indenture to be made, and to be sealed with every one's
Seal; by which Covenant all that Country lying betwixt the Severn and the
Trent, Southward, was assigned to the Earl of March; all Wales, and the Lands
beyond the Severn, Westward, were appointed Glyndwr; and all from the Trent,
Northward, to the Lord Percy. This was done (as some said) through a foolish
Credit they gave to a vain Prophecy, as though King Henry was the execrable
Moldwarp, and they three the Dragon, the Lion, and the Wolf which should pull
him down, and distribute his Kingdom among themselves. After that they
exhibited Articles of their Grievances to King Henry, and divulged their
Reasons for taking up Arms; at length they marched with all their Power toward
Shrewsbury to fight the King, depending mainly upon the arrival of Glyndwr and
his Welch-men. But the matter was gone so far, that whether he came in or no,
they must fight, and so both Armies being joined, the King's Party prevailed,
young Percy being slain upon the spot, and Douglas, besides most of the English
of Quality, who with a Party of Scotch had come to the Aid of the Confederates,
was taken Prisoner, but afterward honorably set at Liberty by the
Intercession of the Prince of Wales. In the mean time the Earl of
Northumberland was a marching forward with a great Party from the North, but
the King having settled Matters about Shrewsbury, coming to York, and sending
to him to lay down his Arms, he voluntarily submitted and dismissed his Forces.
Then the King returning from Yorkshire, determined to pass over to
North Wales, to chastise the presumptuous Practices of the immorigerous Welsh,
who after his departure from Shrewsbury, had made in-Roads into the Marches,
and done much hurt to his English Subjects. But other Business of greater
Consequence intervening, he detached his Son the Prince of Wales, who took the
Castle of Aberystwyth, which was quickly again retaken by Owen Glyndwr, who
thrust into it a strong Garrison of Welsh. But ^n the Battle of Husk sought
upon the fifteenth of March, the Welsh received a very considerable Blow from
the Prince's Men, Glyndwr's Son being taken Prisoner, besides Fifteen Hundred
more taken and slain. After this, we hear little of Glyndwr, excepting that he
continued and persisted to vex and plague the English upon the Marches, to the
tenth year of King Henry's reign, when he miserably ended his life; being as
Holingshed reports, Holins.
toward his ^atter days driven to that extremity, that despairing of all
comfort, he fled and lurked in Caves and other the most solitary places,
fearing to show his face to any Creature, till at length being starved for
hunger and lack of sustenance, he miserably ended his life.

But these rebellious Practices of Glyndwr, highly exasperated King Henry
against the Welsh, insomuch that several rigorous and unmerciful Laws were
enacted, relating to Wales, which in effect destroyed all the Liberties of the
Welsh Subject. They were made incapable of purchasing any Lands, or to be
elected Members of any County or Borough, and to undertake any Office, whether
Civil or Military in any Town incorporated. If any Suit at Law happened betwixt
an English Man and a Welsh Man, the former could not be convicted, but by the
Sentence of an English Judge, and the Verdict of an English Jury; besides, that
any English Man who married a Welsh Woman, was thereby forthwith disfranchised
from all the Liberties of an English Subject. It was farther enacted, that no
Welsh Man should be in possession of any Castle, or other place of Strength,
and that no Victuals or Armor should be brought into Wales, without a special
Warrant from the King or his Council; and farther, that no Welsh Man was
capable of undertaking the Office of Justice, Chamberlain, Sheriff or any other
place of Trust in any part of Wales, notwithstanding any Patent or License
heretofore given to the contrary. These, with many others most rigorous and
unjust Laws, particularly that forbidding any Welsh Man to bring up his
Children to Learning, or to bind them Apprentices to any Trade or Occupation,
were enacted by the King against the Welsh; so that nothing could cool his
displeasure, but that a whole Nation should be wrongfully oppressed, for the
fault and miscarriage of one Person. But one might think, that this was no
politic method to secure a Nation in its Allegiance, which upon lighter
Affronts was used to defend its Privileges; and therefore we may well
attribute the quiet disposition of the Welsh toward this time, to the
moderation of Henry the Fifth, who within a little time succeeded his Father in
the Crown of England.

Co-temporary with Glyndwr was Sir David Gam, so called by reason he had but
one Eye* the Son of Lhewelyn ap Howel Vaughan of Brecknock, by Mawd the
Daughter of Iefan ap Rhys ap Ifor of Eluel. He was a great stickler for the
Duke of Lancaster, and for that reason became mortal Enemy to Glyndwr, who
having his Education, as is said before, at one of the Inns of Court, got to be
preferred to the service of King Richard the Second, who, as Walsingham says,
made him his Scutifer, or Shield-bearer. But being informed that his Master
Richard was deposed and murdered, and withal being provoked by several Wrongs
and Affronts done him by his Neighbor the Lord Gray of Rhuthyn, whom King
Henry greatly countenanced, and looking upon Henry as an Usurper, he caused
himself to be proclaimed Prince of Wales. And for a better grace of the matter,
he feigned himself to be descended by a Daughter from Lhewelyn ap Gruffydh the
last Prince; whereas in truth, he came Paternally but from a younger Brother of
the House of Powys. But as Ambition has no moderation, so Glyndwr for a time
acted the part of a Prince, and summoned a Parliament to meet at Machynlleth,
whither the Nobility and Gentry of Wales appeared, and among the rest Sir David
Gam, but not upon the same design with the rest, having an intention in this
meeting to murder Glyndyfwr. But the Plot being discovered, and Sir David
secured, he had liked to undergo present Execution, had not Glyndyfwr's best
Friends, and the greatest Upholders of his Cause, pleaded in his behalf, by
whose intercession he was prevailed with to grant Sir David both his Life and
Liberty, upon condition he would ever after continue True and Loyal to him. Sir
David promised very loudly, but with the reservation never to perform; for as
soon as he came to his own Country, where he was a Person of very considerable
Sway and Interest, he did exceedingly annoy and molest those that any way
favored or adhered to Glyndyfwr. While Sir David lay in Prison at Machynlleth,
for his attempt against Owen's Life, this Englyn was made upon him.

Dafydd Gam dryglam dreigl, iti in wan frwydr,
Fradwr Rissiart Bhrenin,
Llwyr y rhoes Diawl (hawn hwyl Flin
Y fath ystad) ei fys ith Din.
But Glyndyfwr receiving information, how that Sir David Gam, contrary to the
Promise he had made at his releasement, endeavored all he could to destroy his
Interest among the Welsh, entered the Marches, and among other tokens of his
Indignation, burned the House of Sir David, and as the report goes, calling to
him one of Sir David's Tenants, spoke to him thus merrily in Verse, O Gweli di
wr coch Came
In ymofyn y Girnigwen
Dywed ei bod hi Tan y Lan
A nod y glo ar ei Phenn.
But Sir David had the luck to escape his reach, and was constrained to retire
to England, where he lived for the most part at Court, till the Death of
Glyndyfwr.

When King Henry the Fifth went with an Army to France against the French King,
Sir David Gam brought into his service a numerous Party of Stout and Valorous
Welch-Men, who upon all occasions expressed their Courage and Resolution. In
the Battle of Agincourt, News being brought to the King that the French Army
was advancing toward him, and that they were exceeding numerous, he detached
Captain Gam to observe their motion, and review their number. The Captain
having narrowly eyed the French, found them twice to exceed the English, but
not being in the least d^unted at such a multitude, he returned to the King,
who enquiring of him what the Number of the French might be, he made answer,
An't please you my Liege, they are enough to be killed, enough to run away, and
enough to be taken Prisoners. King Henry was well pleased, and much encouraged
with this resolute and undaunted answer of Sir David's, whose Tongue did not
express more Valor than his Hinds performed. For in the heat of Battle, the
King's Person being in danger, Sir David charged the Enemy with that eagerness
and masculine Bravery, that they were glad to give ground, and so secured the
King, though with the loss of much Blood, and also his Life, himself and his
Son-in-Law Roger Vaughan, and his Kinsman Wa^ter Llwyd of Brecknock, having
received their mortal Wounds in that encounter. When the King heard of their
Condition, how that they were past all hopes of recovery, he came to them, and
in recompense of their good Services, Knighted them all three in the Field,
where they soon after died; and so ended the Life, but not the Fame of the
signally Valiant Sir David Gam.

Edward of Westminster, the sole Issue of that unfortunate Prince King Henry
the Sixth, by Margaret the Daughter of Rayner Duke of Anjou, and titular King
of Jerusalem, Sicily, and Arragon; was created Prince of Wales, in a Parliament
held at Westminster, on the 15th day of March, in the Thirty Second Year of his
Fathers Reign. When the Day was lost at Tewksbury, this young Prince thought to
make his escape by flight, but being unfortunately taken, and brought to the
presence of King Edward the Fourth, who then sat upon the Helm, made such
resolute and unexpected Replies, that he put the King to such a passion, that
he smote him on the Mouth with his Gauntlet; and then his Brother Richard the
Crouch-back, ran him into the Heart with his Dagget.

Edward, born in the Sanctuary at Westminster, the eldest Son of King Edward
the Fourth, was, after his Fathers Expulsion out of England, in the Forty
Ninth Year of King Henry the Sixth, created Prince of Wales and Earl of
Chester, in the Eleventh Year of his Fathers Reign. Upon the death of Edward
the Fourth, this young Prince being then at Ludlow in the Marches of Wales, was
presently sent for to London, and proclaimed King of England, but never lived
to be crowned; for his Uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, who was appointed his
Protector, most vilainously made him away, together with his Brother the Duke
of York; and afterward was himself proclaimed and crowned King.

Edward the Fourth, in his Wars against Henry the Sixth, was very much assisted
by the Welsh; in recompense of which Service, he designed to reform Matters so
in Wales, as that intolerable Oppression which they had hitherto endured,
should be regulated and taken off. And to that end, he meant to establish a
Court within the said Principality, and constituted John Bishop of Worcester
President of the Prince's Council in the Marches; who, together with Anthony
Earl of Rivers, sat in the Town Hall of Shrewsbury, and constituted certain
Ordinances for the public Good and Tranquillity of that place. But the matter
proceeded no farther; for the Troubles and Disquietness of his Kingdom, coming
heavy upon him, and the shortness of his Reign after his Establishment not
permitting, he was forced to leave that to others, which himself thought once
to bring about.

Edward, born at Middleham near Richmond in the County of York the only Son of
King Richard the Third, was at Ten Years of Age created by his Father Prince of
Wales, and dyed soon after.

Arthur, the eldest Son of King Henry the Seventh, born at Winchester, was in
the Seventh Year of his Fathers Reign created Prince of Wales. About the
Fifteenth Year of his Age, being then newly married to Katherine the Infanta of
Spain, he was sent by his Father into Wales, that by his presence he might keep
that Country in better awe. With him King Henry sent Dr. William Smith,
afterward made Bishop of Lincoln, Wokins p. 789.
as President of his Council; together with Sir Richard Pool, his Chamberlain,
Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Richard Crofts, Sir David Philip, Sir William Vdal, Sir
Thomas Englefield, Sir Peter Newton, and others, to be his Counselors and
Directors in his management of Affairs. But the Prince had not continued long
there, but he fell sick at his Castle at Ludlow, of which Indisposition he
shortly after dyed, and was buried with great Solemnity in the Cathedral Church
of Worcester. But the creating of his Brother Henry Duke of York Prince of
Wales in his stead, was deferred for about the space of a Month, to discover
whether the Lady Katherine was got with Child by Prince Arthur. But when it
appeared for certain, she had not conceived; on the 18th day of February, in
the Nineteenth Year of his Father, King Henry the Seventh's Reign, Henry Duke
of York was created Prince of Wales.

King Henry the Seventh, being by his Grandfather Owen Tudor descended out of
Wales, and having sufficiently experienced the Affection of the Welsh toward
him; first, of those, who upon his first landing, opportunely joined him under
Sir Rhys ap Thomas; and then of those, who under the command of Sir William
Stanley, Lord of Bromfield, Yale, and Chirkland, aided him in Bosworth-Field;
could not in Honor and Equity, but bear some regard to the miserable state and
condition of the Welsh, under the English Government. And therefore this
prudent Prince, finding the Calamities of the Welsh to be insupportable, and
seeing what grievous and unmerciful Laws were enacted against them by his
Predecessors, he took occasion to redress and reform the same, and granted to
the Welsh a Charter of Liberty and Immunity, whereby they were released from
the cruel Oppression, which since their Subjection to the English Government,
they had most cruelly sustained. And seeing the Birth and Quality of his
Grandfather Owen Tudor was called in question, and that he was by many
upbraided of being of a mean and ignoble Parentage; King Henry directed a
Commission to the Abbot of Lhan Egwest, Dr. Owen Pool Canon of Hereford, and
John King Herald at Arms, to make inquisition concerning the Pedigree of the
said Owen; who coming to Wales, made a diligent enquiry into this matter; and
by the assistance of Sir John Leyaf, Guttyn Owen Bardh, Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn ap
Efan Fychan, and others, in the consultation of the British Books of Pedegrees,
they drew up an exact Genealogy of Owen Tudor, which upon their return, Vide
App^nd.
they presented to the King.

Edward, Son to Henry the Eighth, by the Lady Jane Seymour, his third Wife, was
born at Hampton Court, on the 12th of October; and upon the 18th. of the said
Month, was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester.

King Henry the Seventh, had already abrogated those unreasonable and
intolerable Laws, which the former Kings of England, particularly Henry the
Fourth, had made against the Welsh; and now, King Henry the Eighth, willing to
make a plenary Reformation of what his Father had wisely begun, thought it
necessary toward the Good and Tranquillity of both Nations, to make the Welsh
subject to the same Laws, and the same Government with the English. He
understood that the usual Hostilities and Depredations were still continued and
kept up by both sides upon the Borders; and though his Father had eased the
Yoke of the Welsh, yet he perceived, that it did contribute but little toward
the disannulling of that inveterate and implacable Envy and Animosity which
raged in the Marches. Therefore to remedy this, otherwise unavoidable,
Distemper, he concluded that it was the only effectual Method, to incorporate
the Welsh with the English; that they being subject to the same Laws, might
equally Welsh with the English, which Union has had that blessed Effect, that
it has dispelled all those unnatural Differences which heretofore were so rife
and irreconcilable.

When the Reformation was first established in Wales, it was a mighty
Inconveniency to the vulgar People, such as were unacquainted with the English
Tongue, that the Bible was not translated into their native Language. Queen
Elizabeth was quickly apprehensive of the Inconveniency which the Welsh
incurred, for the want of such a Translation; and therefore, Hereford, S.
David's, S. Asaph, Bangor, and Landaff, were ordered to take care that the Bible
containing the Old and New Testament, with the Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, be truly and exactly translated into the
British or Welsh Tongue, and that the same so translated, being by them perused
and approved, be printed to such a number at least; as that every Cathedral,
Collegiate and Parish Church and Chapel of ease within the said Diocese where
that Tongue is vulgarly spoken, might be supplied before the First of March,
Anno 1566. And from that time forward, the Welsh Divine Service should be used
in the British Tongue, in all places throughout those Diocesses, where the
Welsh is commonly spoke, after the same manner as it was used in the English
Tongue; and that the Charge of procuring the said Bible and Common Prayer,
should equally depend betwixt the Parson and the Parish; the former being
obliged to pay one half of the Expense; and that the Price of the Book should
be set by the foresaid Bishops, or by Three of them at the least. But this Act
of Parliament was not punctually observed; for the Old Testament was wholly
omitted, and only the New, with the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of
the Sacraments, then translated, which Translation was chiefly owing to Richard
Bishop of S. David's, who was assisted by William Salusbury, a Perfect Critic
in the Welsh Tongue, and one excellently conversant in all British Antiquities.
But in the Year 1588. Dr. William Morgan, first Bishop of Landaff, and then of
S. Asaph, undertook the Translation of the whole Bible; and by the help of the
Bishops of S. Asaph and Bangor, Gabriel Goodman Dean of Westminster, David
Pow^l^. D.D. Edmund Price Archdeacon of Merionyth, and Richard Va^ghan, he
effectually finished it. This was of singular Profit and Advantage to the
Welsh, to have the whole Scripture read and perused in their own native Tongue;
by which means they received a clearer demonstration of the Corruptions of the
Church of Rome, when they saw many of their Principles apparently
contradicting, and others not very firmly founded upon the Holy Scriptures. And
on the other hand they perceived the Necessity and Advantage of the
Reformation, they easily discovered that the whole Doctrine of the Church of
England was sound and orthodox, and that they were now happily delivered from
that Popish Slavery which their Forefathers ignorantly adored; and therefore
being convinced of the Truth of their Religion, they became, and continued
generally, very strict Adherents and firm Observers of the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Church.

And here by the bye, I cannot but observe what a reverend Writer has lately
insinuated, relating to the Christian Religion planted in Wales. For that
Learned Person in his Funeral Sermon upon Mr. Gouge, would fain induce the
World to believe, that Christianity was very corrupt and imperfect among the
Welsh, before it was purifyed by that, whom he terms Apostolical Man. Whereas
it is notoriously evident, that since the Reformation was settled in that
Country, and the Bible, with the Book of Common Prayer, translated into the
Welsh Tongue, no place has been more exact, in keeping to the strict Rubric
and Constitution of the Church of England, both as to the Substance and Form of
Worship. But what may more truly be attributed to Mr. Gouge, is that since his
Travels into Wales, and the propagating of his Doctrine among the ignorant of
that Country, Presbytery, which before had scarce taken root, has daily
increased, and grown to a Head.

Henry, eldest Son of King James the First, being arrived to the Age of
Seventeen Years, was created Prince of Wales, on the 30th. of May, Anno 1610,
but he dying of a malignant Fever, about Two Years after; his Brother Charles
being Fifteen Years of Age, was created Prince of Wales in his room, Anno 1615.
For joy of this new Creation, the Town of Ludlow, and City of London, performed
very great Triumphs; and the more to honor this Solemnity, the King made
Twenty Five Knights of the Bath, all Lords or Barons Sons; and the Inns of
Court, to express their Joy, elected out of their Body Forty choice Gentlemen,
to perform solemn Justs and Barryers.

Charles, eldest Son of King Charles the First, by Henrietta Maria, Daughter to
King Henry the Fourth of France, was born May 29. 1630. and afterward created
Prince of Wales.

Since the happy Incorporation of the Welsh with the English, the History of
both Nations, as well as the People is united; and therefore I shall not repeat
that which is so copiously and frequenty delivered by the English Historians;
but shall conclude with Dr. Heylyn. That since the Welsh have been incorporated
with the English, they have showed themselves most loyal, hearty, and
affectionate Subjects of the State; ^ordially devoted to their King, and
zealous in Defense ^f their Laws, Liberties, and Religion, as well as any ^f
the best of their Fellow Subjects.

APPENDIX.
The return of a Commission sent into Wales by King Henry the Seventh, to
search out the Pedigrees of Owen Tudor.
HENRY the Seventh King of England, etc. Son of Edmund Earl of Richmond, Son of
Owen ap Meredith, and of Queen Catherine his Wife, Daughter ^o Charles the
Sixth, King of France. This Owen was Son of Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw ap
Tudor, ap Gronw, ap Ednyfed Fychan, Baron of Brinfeingle in Denbigh Land, Lord
of Kric^th, Chief Justice and Chief of Council to Llewelyn ap Iorwerth Drwyndwn
Prince of all Wales. And in the time of Prince Llewelyn grew a Variance between
King John of England and the said Prince; whereupon Ednyfed came with the
Prince's Host, and Men of War, and also a number of his own People, and met
these English Lords in a Morning, at what time these English Lords were hostied
and slain; and immediately brought their Heads, being yet bloody to the said
Prince Llewelyn. The Prince, seeing the same, caused Ednyfed Fychan, from
thenceforth to bear in his Arms or Shield, three bloody Heads in token of his
Victory, where he had born in his Arms before a Saracen's Head; and so ever
after this Ednyfed bore the said Arms, his Son, and his Son's Son, unto the
time of Tuder ap Gronw, ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Ednyfed Fychan. And after this
Ednyfed wedded one Gwenllian Daughter to Rhys Prince of South Wales, and had
Issue by her Gronw: which Ednyfed Fychan had in Wales diverse goodly Houses,
Royally adorned with Turrets and Garrets; some in Anglesey, some other in
Caernarvon-shire, and and some in Denbigh-Land; but his chiefest Mannor-House
was in the Commot of Crythin in Caernarvon-shire, which was a Royal Palace, now
decayed for want of Reparations. Also he builded there a Chapel in the Worship
of our Lady, and had License of the Pope for evermore to sing Divine Service
therein for his Soul, and his Ancestors and Progenitors Souls always; and had
Authority to give his Tithes and Offerings to his Chaplain there Vid. an
serving.
starving; which Ednyfed Fychan was Son to Kyner ap lers ap Gwgan, ap Marchudd,
which was one of the fifteen Tribes of North Wales, and Son to Kynan ap Elfyn,
ap Mor, ap Mynan, ap Isbwis Newintyrche, ap Isbwis ap Cadrod Calch Efynydd,
Earl of Dunstable and Lord of Northampton, ap Cywyd Cindion, ap Cynfelyn ap
Arthuys, ap Morydd ap Cynnaw, ap Coel Godeboc King of Britain, of whom King
Henry the Seventh descended lineally by Issue-Male, and is Son to the said Coel
in the thirty first Degree, as it is approved by old Chronicles in Wales. Which
Coel was Son of Tegfan ap Deheufraint, ap Tud^wyl, ap Urban, ap Gradd, ap
Rhyfedel, ap Rhydeirne, ap Endigant, ap Endeyrn, ap Enid, ap Endos, ap
Enddolaw, ap Afalach, ap Afflech, ap Beli mawr King of Britain, of whom King
Henry the Seventh descends by Issue-Male, and is Son to him in forty one
Degree. Which Beli was Son to Monnogon King, ap King ^axor, ap King Pyr, ap
King Sawl Benissel, ap Rhytherech King, ap Rydion King, ap Eidol King, ap
Arthafel King, ap Seissilt King, ap Owen King, ap Caxho King, ap Bleuddyd King,
^p Meirion King, ap Gwrgust King, ap Elydno King, ap Clydawc King, ap Ithel
King, ap Urien King, ap Andrew King, ap Kereni King, ap Porrex King, ap Coel
King, ap Cadell King, ap Geraint King, ap Elidr King, ap Morydd King, ap Dan
King, ap Seissilt King, ap Cy^elyn King, ap Gwrgan King (alias) Farf^rwch, ap
Beli King, ap Dyfnwal King, ap Dodion King, ap Enyd, ap Kwrwyd, ap Cyrdon ap
Dyfufarth Prydain, ap Aedd mawr, ap Antonius ap Seisillt King, ap Rhegaw
Daughter and Heir of King Lyr, and Wife of Henwin Prince of Cornwall. This Lyr
was Son of Bleuddyd, ab Rhunbaladr bras, ap Lleon, ap Brutus darian las, ap
Effroc Cadarn, ap Mymbyr, ap Madoc, ap Locrine, ap Brutus which inherited first
this Land, and after his Name was called Britain, and had three Sons Locrine
Kamber, and Albanactus. Locrine the eldest, parted the Isle with his Brethren,
and kept half the Land for himself, and called it Loegria. Kamber second Son
had the Land beyond Severn, and named it Kambria, in English, Wales. Albanactus
had Scotland, which he then called Albania after his own Name. Of which Brute
King Henry the Seventh is lineally descended by Issue-Male, saving one Woman,
and is Son to Brute in five score Degrees.

How Owen Grandsire to King Henry the Seventh, comes of Beli mawr by Angharad,
Mother to Ednyfed by Issue-Female, by Gittin, Owen, and Sir John Leiaf's Books.
THE Mother of Ednyfed was Angharad, Daughter of Hwfa, ap Cyner, ap Rhywallon,
ap Dinged, ap Tudor Trefor, ap Mymbyr, ap Cadfarch, ap Gwrgenaw, ap Gwaethiawe,
ap Bywyn, ap Biordderch, ap Gwriawn, ap Gwnnan, ap Gwnfiw frych, ap Cadell
Dehurnlluc, ap Pasgan, ap Rhydwf, ap Rhudd Fedel frych, ap Cyndeirn, ap
Gwrtheirn Gwrthenau, called in English Vertiger, by whom King Henry the
Seventh, by the foresaid Angharad, Mother to Ednyfed Fychan, and Wife to Cyner
ab Iers, ap Gwgon, is Son to the said Vortiger in thirty Degrees. Which
Vortiger was Son to Rhydeyrn ap Deheufraint, ap Eidigant, ap Endeirn, ap Enid,
ap Endos, ap Enddolau, ap Afallach, ap Afflech, ap Beli mawr, to whom King
Henry the Seventh is Son by Angharad, Mother to Ednyfed Fychan in forty Degrees.

How King Henry the Seventh comes of Beli mawr by Gwenllian Wife to Ednyfed
Fychan, and Daughter to the Lord Rhys, called Arglwydd Rhys, by Issue-Female.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor, ap Gronw, ap Gwenllian, Daughter
to Rhys Prince of South Wales, ap Gruffydh Prince, (...) Rhys Prince, ap Tudor
mawr Prince, ap ^adell Prince, ap Rodri mawr Prince of all Wales. This Rodri
had three Sons, and di^^ded the Principality of Wales between them (...) three
Parts; to Merfyn his first Son, Prince ^f North Wales, all North Wales, which
died without Issue; and Anarawd Prince of Powys, and Cadell Prince of
South Wales, of whom King Henry the Seventh descends, by ^wenllian Daughter
to Prince Rhys, called Arglwydd Rhys, Wife to Ednyfed Fychan; and ^he said King
Henry the Seventh is Son to Rodri mawr in the seventeenth Degree; which Rodri
mawr was Son to Merfyn first King of Man, which wedded Essillt Daughter and
Heir ^o Cynan Dyndaethwy.

This Merfyn frych was Son to Gwriad ap Elidur, ap Handdear Alcwn, ap Tegid, ap
Gwiar, ^p Dwywc, ap Llywarch hen, ap Elidur Lydanwin, ^p Meirchion, ap Grwst,
ap Cenaw, ap Coel ^odeboc King of Britain, as before. This Coel was King of
Britain and Earl of Colchester, a ^ight worthy King, to whom King Henry the
^eventh is Son, by the said Gwenllian Wife to Ednyfed Fychan, in the thirty
first Degree, by ^he said Gittin Owen, and Sir John Leia's Books.

How Owen Grandsire to King Henry the Seventh comes of Beli mawr, by Essillt
Daughter to Cynan Dyndaethwy.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Gwenllian Daughter
of Prince Rhys, ap Gruffydh ap Rhys, ap Tudor mawr, ap Engion, ab Owen, ap
Howell Dda, ap Cadell, ap Rodri mawr, ap Essillt Daughter of Cynan Dyndaethwy
and Heir, Prince of Wales, ap Rodri Moelwynoc, ap Idwal jwrch, ap Cadwalader
Fendigaid King of all Britain, to whom King Henry the Seventh is Son in the
twenty second Degree. Cadwalader was Son to Cadwallan King, ap Cadfan King, ap
Iago, ap Beli, ap Rhun, ap Maelgwn Gwynedd King, ap Casswallan Lawhir, ap
Eineo^irth, ap Cynedda weledig, ap Edeirn, which wedded Gwawl, Ferch Coel
Godeboc King, which Edeirn was Son to Padarn Peisrydd, ap Tegid, ap Iago, ap
Genedawc, ap Cain, ap Gwrgain, ap Doli, ap Gwrtholi, ap Dufu, ap Gorddufu, ap
Amwerid, ap Omwedd, ap Diwe Brichwain, ap Owen, ap Affallach, ap Afflech, ap
Beli mawr, to whom King Henry the Seventh is Son by the said Gwenllian in the
fiftieth Degree.

Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Gwenllian, Daughter
to Arglwydd Rhys, Son to Gwenllian Daughter of Gruffydh Prince, ap Cynan Prince
of North Wales, Son of Iago Prince, ap Idwall Prince, ap Meuric Prince, ap
Idwall Foel Prince, ap Anarawd Prince, ap Rodri mawr Prince of all Wales, to
whom King Henry the Seventh is Son by Gwenllian Mother to the Arglwydd Rhys in
the seventeenth Degree.

Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor, ap Gronw, ap Gwenllian, Ferch
Arglwydd Rhys, ap Gwladis, Ferch Rhywall^n ap Cynfyn Prince of Powys, and
Angharad Wife to Cynfyn, Daughter and Heir to Meredith Prince of Powys, Son of
Owen Prince of Powys and South Wales, Son to Cadell Prince there. Which Owen ap
Howell dda, had two Sons, Meredith and Eineon, and Owen their Father gave the
Principality of South Wales to Eineon his Son, and the Principality of Powys to
Meredith his other Son. Which Meredith had Issue Angharad, that wedded Cynfyn,
by whom he was Prince of Powys, which Cadell was Son to Rodri mawr Prince of
all Wales, Son to Merfyn frych, etc. to Beli mawr, as above written by Guttin
Owen 's Book.

Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor, ap Gronw, ap Gwenllian, Ferch
Arglwydd Rhys, ap Gruffydh, ap Rhys, ap Tudor, ap Eineon, ap Eineon, ap Howell
Dda, ap Cadell, ap Angharad, Wife to Rodri mawr, Daughter to Meyric ap Dyfnwal,
ap Arthen, ap Seissillt, ap Clydawc, ap Artholes, ap Arnothen, ap Brothan, ap
Seirwell, ap Ussa, ap Caredic, ap Cwnedda weledic, ap Edeirn, ap Padarn
Peisrydd, which Edeirn wedded Gwawl ferch Coel Godeboc, Mother to Cwnedda
weledyc, etc.

How Owen comes of Meuryc Lord of Gwent, by Morfydd's Daughter, Wife to Gronw
ap Ednyfed Fychan.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Tudor, ap Morfydd, Ferch Meuryc L. of
Gwent.

How Owen comes of Rodri mawr, by Angharad, Daughter to Ithel Fychan, ap Ithel
Llwyd, and Wife of Tudor ap Gronw, ap Ednyfed Fychan.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Angharad, ferch Ithel Fychan, ap Ithel
Llwyd, ap Ithel Gam, ap Meredith ap Vchdrud, ap Edwin King of Tegengle in
Flintshire.

How Owen comes of Rodri mawr by Adleis, Wife to Ithel Fychan, Daughter to
Ricart.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gronw, ap Angharad Ferch Adleis Wife to Ithel
Fychan, Daughter to Ricart, ap Cadwalader, ap Gruffydh, ap Kynan Prince of
North Wales, ap Iago, ap Idwal Foel, ap Anarawd, ap Rodri Mawr, etc. All this
by Gyttin Owen 's Book.

How Owen comes of Beli Mawr by Gwerfill Ferch Madawc, o'r hen dwr, Wife to
Gronw ap Tudor, ap Gronw, ap Ednysed Fychan.
Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gwerfill Ferch Madawc o'r hen dwr, ap Iers, ap
Madawc, ap Meredith, ap Bleddyn, ap Kynfin Prince of Powis, etc. and so to Beli
Mawr.

How Owen comes to Beli Mawr by the Mother of the said Gwerfill Ferch Madawc.
Owen ap Meredith, ap Tudor, ap Gwerfill Ferch Madawc o'r hen dwr, ap Lleucu
Ferch Angharad, Ferch Meredith, ap Madawc, ap Gruffudh Maelor Prince of Powis.
This Madawc ap Gruffudh Maelor, builded the Abbey of Valacrucis, in Welsh,
Manachlog Llan Egwestl, the Year of our Lord 12^^. and lies there buried, and
this Gruffudh Maelor was Son to Madawc, ap Meredith, ap Bleddin, ap Cynfin, ap
Gweristan, ap Gwalthfoed, ap Gwrydor, ap Cariadawc, ap Lles Llaw Ddeawc, ap
Edwal, ap Gwnnan, ap Gwnnawc Farf Sych, ap Keidic, ap Corf, ap Cadnawc, ap
Tegonwy, ap Teon, ap Gwinaf Daufreuddwyd, ap Powyr lew, ap Bywdec, ap Rhun
rhudd baladr, ap Llary, ap Casfar Wledic, ap Lludd, ap Beli Mawr King of all
England and Wales, to whom King Henry the Seventh is Son this way by Ludd in 36
degrees.

How Owen comes to Beli Mawr by the Mothers side of Gwerfill Ferch Madawc.
Owen ap Meredith, ap Tudor, ap Gwerfill Ferch Eva, Ferch Llewelyn ap Gruffydh,
ap Gwenwynwin, ap Owen Cyfeilioc, ap Gruff. ap Madawc, ap Meredith of Powis, ap
Bleddyn, ap Cynfin, etc. to Beli Mawr.

Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor ap Gwerfill Ferch Eva, Ferch Margret, Ferch Meredith
goch, ap Meredith, ap Iers Fychan, ap Iers goch, ap Meredith ap Bleddyn, ap
Cynfin, etc. to Beli.

Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor, ap Gwerfyll, Ferch Eva, Ferch Margret, Ferch
Meredith goch, ap Christin, ap Bledrws, ap Edwal Owen Bendew one of the fifteen
Tribes of North Wales, Son to Cynan Feiniard ap Gwalthfoed, ap Gwlyddien, ap
Gwridor, ap Caradawc, ap Lles Llaw ddeawc, ap Edwal, ap Gwnnan, ap Gwnnawc Farf
sych, ap Ceidio, ap Corf, ap Cadnawc, ap Tegonwy, ap Teon, ap Gwinau dau
Freuddwyd, etc. and so to Beli.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret Ferch Tomas, ap Lhewelin, ap Owen ap Meredith
Lord Iscoed, ap Owen, ap Gruffydh, ap Rhys Prince of South Wales, so to Rodri
Mawr.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas ap Llywelin, ap Angharad, Ferch
Arglwydd Sion, John of Hasson by William ap David ap Gruffydh. Dubium.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas ap Llewelyn, ap Angharad Ferch
Margret, Ferch Philip, ap Ifor Lord Iscoed by William ap Gruffydh. Dubium.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas ap Llewelyn, ap Angharad, Ferch
Margret, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Llewelyn ap Iers drwyndwn Prince of all Wales.
This Llewelyn wedded Inet Daughter of King John, which was Son to Henry the
Second, Son to Mawd the Empress, Daughter to Henry the First, Son to William
the Conqueror, Son to Robert Duke of Normandy.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas ap Elinor Ferch..... Lord Bar by
Gyttin Owen, by information of Dr. Owen Pool, and Mr. Lingam 's Wife by an old
Pedigree.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas ap Elinor, ferch Elinor, Ferch
Edward Longshanks King of England.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Tomas, ap Elinor Ferch Elinor Ferch Elinor
second to King Edward abovesaid. Dubium.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor Ferch Meredith, ap Owen, ap
Gruffydh, ap Rhys Prince of South Wales, by Madawc ap Llewelyn ap Howel his
Books.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor, Ferch Catrin, ferch Llewelyn ap
Gruffydh last Prnce of Wales.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor, Ferch Llewelyn ap Gruffydh, ap
Tangwistl, Ferch Llywarch goch, ap Lhowarch ap Pyll, ap Cynan, ap Einion ap
Gwridor goch, ap Helic, ap Glannawc, ap Gwgon Gleddyfrudd, ap Cariadawc
Freichfras, ap Llir Merini, ap Einion irth, ap Cunedda wledic.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor, Ferch Caterin, Ferch Elinor ap
Gruffydh, ap Tangwistl, Ferch Tangwistl, Ferch Llowarch, ap Bran, ap Dinawal,
ap Efnydd, ap Alawe Alser, ap Tudwal, ap Rodri mawr: by Gyttin Owen.

Gwen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor Fychan, Ferch Simon Montford Earl
of Leicester: by Gyttin Owen.

Owen ap Meredith, ap Margret, Ferch Elinor, Ferch Caterin, Ferch Elinor
Fychan, Ferch Elenor, Ferch John King of England.

Hereafter follows the ancient Lineage of the said Owen's Mother Margret Wife
to Meredith ap Tudor.
Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Dafydd Llwyd, ap Cyner, ap Gronw, ap
Cyner, ap Iers, ap Hwfa, ap Cwmus, ap Cillin ap Maeloc dda, ap Gredef, ap Kwmus
du, ap Cillin Ynad, ap Predur Teirnoe, ap Meilir Eryr, gwyr gorsedd, ap Tiday,
ap Tyfodde, ap Gwybfyw, ap Marchwin, ap Branap Pill, ap Cerfyr, ap Meilir
Meilirion, ap Goron, ap Cunedda wledic, ap Gwawl Ferch Coel Godeboc as before.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Dafydd Llwyd, ap Cyner, ap Gronw, ap
Cyner, ap Iers, ap Hwfa, ap Generis Ferch Ednowain Bendew, ap Cynon Finiaid, ap
Gwarthfoed, ap Gwridr ap Cradoc, ap Lles llaw ddeuawc, ap Edwal, ap Gwynnan:
and so to Ludd, ap Beli mawr, as before by Gyttin Owen.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Dafydd Lhwyd ap Cyner, ap Llaysedd
Daughter to Sir William Twychet, Knight, by William. Indub.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Dafydd Lhwyd, ap Alis, Ferch Robert,
ap Turstan Holland Capitain of Harlech: by William.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Dafydd Lhwyd, ap Alis, Ferch Margret,
Ferch Alan Norris, Knight, by William. Indub.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Angharad, Ferch Howell ap Meredith,
ap Iers, ap Cadwgan, ap Llywarch, ap Bran, as before, etc.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Angharad Ferch Howell ap Meredith, ap
Iers, ap Gwenllian, Ferch Cynan ap Owen Gwynedd, ap Gruffydh ap Cynan, etc.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Angharad, Ferch Owen ap Bleddin, ap
Owen Bregennwn, ap Madawc, ap Meredith, ap Bleddin, ap Cynfin Prince of Powis;
these 3 by Gyttin Owen.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Angharad, Ferch Gwladis, Ferch
Llewelin gethni, ap Edwal, ap Gruffydh, ap Meuric, ap Cadhayarn, ap Gwrydd, ap
Rhys goch one of the 15 Tribes of North Wales; which was Son to Sandwr ap
Iarddwr, ap Mor, ap Tegerin, ap Aelaw, ap Gredres, ap Cwmus du, ap Cillin Ynad,
etc. to Coel Godeboc.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Dafydd Fychan, ap Angharad, Ferch Gwladus, Ferch Mali
Llwyd, Ferch Iers ap Engion, ap Geraint, ap Tegwared, ap Cynfawr, ap Madawc
diffaeth, which were Rulers and Great Men in Pentraeth.

Owen ap Margaret, Ferch Nest, Ferch Jermy, ap Gruffydh, ap Howell, ap
Meredith, ap Engion, ap Gwgon, ap Merwydd, ap Golwyn, one of the 15 Tribes of
North Wales, Son to Tangno, ap Cadfael, ap Lludd, ap Llen, ap Llaminod Angel,
ap Pasgen, ap Urien Rheged, ap Meirchion, ap Grwst, ap Cennaf, ap Coel godeboc
King as before.

Owen ap Margret, Ferch Nest, Ferch Jermy, ap Gwerfill, ferch Gwladus, Ferch
Edwal Fychan as before.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Gruffydh, ap Dafydd goch, ap
Gruffydh, ap Llewelyn Prince of Wales.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Gruffydh ap Dafydd goch, ap
Dafydd, ap Gruffydh, ap Tangwistl, Ferch Llowarch goch, ap Llowarch Holbwrch,
ap Pill, ap Cynan, ap Gwridor goch, ap Helic, ap Glannoc as before.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Gruffydh, ap Dafydd goch, ap
Rhanullt, Ferch Rheinallt King of Man.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Gruffydh, ap Angharad, Ferch
Heylyn, ap Tudor, ap Ednyfed Fychan.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Anghahad, Ferch Gruffydh, ap Angharad, Ferch
Heylyn, ap Adleir, Ferch Ricart, ap Cadwalader, ap Gruffydh, ap Cynan Prince.
These 4 by Gyttin Owen.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, ferch Gruffydh, ap Angharad, ferch
Heylyn, ap Adleis, Ferch Ricart, ap Cadwalader, ap Gruffydh, ap Cynan, ap
Afandrec Wife to Iago, Daughter to Gwayr, ap Pill, ap Cynan, ap Cynddelw gam,
ap Elgudi, ap Grwyfnad, ap Diwgludd, ap Tegawc, ap Cyfnerth, ap Madoc Madogion,
ap Sauddl bryd Angel, ap Llylwarch hen, ap Elidor Ludanwin, ap Meirchion gul,
ap Erwst galedlwm, ap Cenaw, ap Coel godeboc King as before.

Owen ap Margret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Marret, Ferch Tudor, ap
Iers, ap Ewrgwnon, ap Cyfnerth, ap Rhuon, ap Nefydd hardd, one of the 15 Tribes
of North Wales.

Owen ap Margaret Ferch Nest, Ferch Angharad, Ferch Margaret, Ferch Tangwistl,
Ferch Madawc, ap Cyfnerth, ap Cyhelyn, ap Llywarch Fychan, ap Llywarch goch, ap
Llowarch Holbwrch, ap Pill, ap Cynon, ap Gwrydr goch, ap Helic ap Glannoc, ap
Gwgon gleddyfrudd, ap Cariadoc freich fras, ap Glir Meirini, ap Engion yrth, ap
Cynedda wledic, by Gyttin Owen.

Abstracted out of the old Cronicles of Wales, by Sir John Leiaf, Priest,
Guttin Owen, Gruffydh ap Llewelyn ap Jermy, Fychan, Madawc ap Llewelyn ap
Howell, Robert ap Howell ap Thomas, John King, with many others, at the King's
Majesty's Costs and Charges. The Abbot of Llanegwestle, and Dr. Owen Pool,
Canon of Harf, Overseers.
APPENDIX.
Rex
omnibus, etc.
SCiatis, quod cum Lewelinus Princeps de Aberffraw and Dominus Snawerden, nobis
concesserit and firmiter promiserit, quod stabit provisioni venerabilium Patrum
Redulphi Cicestrensis Episcopi and Cancellarii nostri, and Alexandri
Conventrensis and Lichfield Episcopi, and dilectorum and fidelium nostrorum
Richardi Mareschalli Comitis Pembroch, Johannis de Lascy Comitis Lincolniae and
Constabularii Cestriae, Stephani de Segrave Justiciarii nostri Angliae, and
Radulphi filii Nicholai Seneschalli nostri, una cum Idnevet Seneschallo ipsius
Lewelini and Werrenoc fratre ejus, Imano Vachan and David Clerico, quam ipsi
facturi sunt super congruis emendis nobis faciendis, de omnibus excessibus
nobis and nostris, ab eo and suis factis and de restitutione nobis and
hominibus nostris facienda de omnibus terris and possessionibus nostris, and
nostrorum per ipsum Lewelinum and Wallenses occupatis, occasion Werrae inter
nos and ipsum motae; simul etiam de recipienda restitutione a nobis and
nostris, de omnibus terris ipsius Lewelini and hominum suorum per nos and
nostros occupatis, occasion Werrae praedictae, and de assignando David filio
ipsius Lewelini and Ysabellae uxori ejus primogenitae filiae and haereredis.
Willielmi de Breus, rationabili portione ipsam Ysabellam contingente, de terris
quae fuerunt praedicti Willielmi patris sui, and de refusione pecuniae nobis,
facienda, pro praedictis excessibus congrue emendandis and portione praedicta
assignanda; Provisa tamen super hoc ab eisdem sufficient securitate de fideli
seruitio nobis praestando and de tranquilitate nobis and regno nostro Angliae,
observanda. Ita quod dampnum vel periculum, nec nobis nec regno nostro inde
possit evenire. Et si pendente provisione praedicta, aliquid de novo emerserit
emendandum, idem Lewelinus voluerit and concesserit, quod per praedictos
provisores emendetur. Nos provisionem eorundem quam facturi sunt super omnibus
praemissis, gratam habemus and acceptam pro nobis, and nostris sicut praefatus
Lewelinus pro se and suis and in hujus rei testimonium has literas patentes
inde fieri fecimus. Test me ipso apud Salop septimo die Decembris and decimo
septimo anno Regni nostri.

Rex,
etc.
LEWELINO Principi de Aberfraw salutem. Sciatis quod recepimus in gratiam
nostram, Gilbertum Mareschallum and omnes qui fuerunt imprisii Richardi
Mareschalli tam de Anglia quam de Wallia qui ad pacem nostram venire voluerunt
and eis reddidimus omnes terras and tenementa sua quae de nobis tenuerunt, and
de quibus dissessiti fuerunt occasion guerrae motae inter nos and praedictum
comitem, and nobis remanent quieta quaecunque super nos and nostros per
praedictum comitem, vel suos imprisios occupata fuerunt quae vobis duximus
significanda. Volentes quod vobis innotescant quae penes nos acta sunt in hac
part, and quia per venerabilem patrem Edmundum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum
and Co-episcopos suos captae sunt Treugae inter nos and vos sub firma spe
tractandi de pace inter nos and vos formanda and fortius firmanda. Mittimus
propter hoc praedictum Archiepiscopum and venerabiles Patres Alexandrum
Coventrensem and Lichfieldensem and Henricum Roffensem Co-episcopos suos ad
parts Marchiae; ita quod erunt apud Salop die Lunae in Crastino sanctae
Trinitatis: Et rogamus vos quatenus sicut nostram desideratis amicitiam non
omittatis quin in Crastino die Martis loco tuto and competenti, quem praedictus
Archiepiscopus vobis significabit ipsi Archiepiscopo and Coepiscopis suis
occuratis ad tractatum cum eis habendum super praemissis. In quorum etiam ore
quaedam quae non duximus scripto commendanda posuimus vobis before exponenda;
rogantes quatinus sicut decet taliter ea quae reformationem pacis recipient
and quae ipsi before in hac part vobis explicabunt audire cum effectu and
eisdem adquiescere velitis, quod non stet per vos quin firmum and stabile pacis
vinculum inter nos and vos roboretur ad nostrum pariter and vestrum commodum
and honorem.

Rex,
etc.
DIlecto and fideli suo Richardo Comiti Cornubiae and Pictaviae salutem.
Sciatis quod treugae captae sunt inter nos and Lewelinum Principem de Aberfraw
per venerabilem patrem Edmundum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem and Episcopos
secum adjuntos and quosdam alios fideles nostross propter hoc ad parts Walliae
destinatos duraturae a festo Sancti Jacobi anno regni nostri decimo octavo
usque in duos annos sequentes in hac forma. Quod omnes injuriae and damnae hinc
inde facta infra ultimam treugam captam per venerabilem Patrem Henricum
Roffensem Episcopum in media quadragessima proximo praeterita pe^ Dictatores
ejusdem treugae emendabuntur, quod omnes terrae hinc inde occupatae per ultimam
Guerram motam, restituentur his quibus postea sint oblatae, homines etiam illi
qui hinc inde recefferint a fidelitate dominorum suorum and se tenuerunt ex
part adversa libere revertantur. Ita quidem quod durantibus treugis praedictis
in nullo occasionabuntur nec aliquid dampni vel mali eis fiet occasion
praedicta. Adjectum est etiam in eadem provisione treugatum; quod si vos and
dilectus and fidelis noster Radulphus de Thorny nolueritis sub eisdem treugis
comprehendi been placebit eidem Lewelino. Sin autem nihilominus, quod ad nos
and alios fideles nostros eas firmiter observabit. Et sub tali condition quod
si forte tenere non velletis contra vos se defendet. Ita quod contra ipsum and
defensionem suam nullum vobis faciemus nec facere porerimus per nos vel per
aliquem de Marchia vel alium interim consilium vel auxilium ad ipsum gravandum,
and taliter sunt treugae praedictae ex part ipsius Lewelini juratae and
assecuratae and in adventu praedicti Archiepiscopi ad nos similiter ex part
nostra eas jurari faciemus and affecurari, and ideo vobis mandamus firmiter
injungentes, quatinus praedictis treugis sine difficultate aliqua adquiescentes
eas teneatis and ex part vestra eas teneri faciatis. Quia modis omnibus
volumus quod eas teneatis and firmiter observetis. Quid autem inde facere
proposueritis aperte responsum vestrum nobis sub festinatione scire faciatis.
Test Rege apud Westmonasterium tricesimo die Junii.

Radulphus Herefordensis Episcopus, Decanus Herefordiae, Walterus de Clifford
and Walterus de bello Campo iterum constituti sunt Dictatores emendarum,
faciendarum and recipiendarum de interceptionibus factis, ut dicitur Lewelino
Principi de Aberfraw, etc. and Morgano de Carleon quoad Castrum Carleon and
eisdem dictatoribus associati sunt Prior de Wenloc and Johannes extraneus and
debent convenire in crastino clausi Paschae apud vadum de Montgomery ad
consequendum quod priore die ad hoc constituto debuisset fuisse executum. Test
Rege apud Northamton sexto die Martii.

REX
omnibus ad quod praesentes literae pervenerint.
Sciatis quod concessimus bona fide and sine malo ingenio and ratas habemus and
gratas treugas captas apud Theokesburiam die Veneris in Festo Sancti Benedicti,
anno regni nostri vicesimo per venerabilem Patrem Edmundum Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum inter nos and omnes homines and imprisios nostros apertos ex una
part, and Lewelinum Principem de Aberfraw and Dominum de Snaudan and omnes
homines and inprisios suos apertos tam Walenses quam alios ex alia part
duraturos a Festo Sancti Jacobi, anno eodem usque in unum annum completum. Ita
scilicet quod tam nos and nostri quam praedictus Lewelinus and sui simus in
eisdem terris and tenementis, hominibus and homagiis in quibus fuimus praedicto
die captionis treugarum istarum. Salva Morgano de Carleon restitutione sua tam
de terris quam de bonis and Mobilibus suis quae comes Gilbertus Mareschallus
occuparerat, super eum infra treugas alias inter nos and ipsum Lewelinum ultimo
captas. Siquid autem interim fuerit foris factum per captionem terrarum vel
castrorum vel bonorum mobilium and manifestum de captione terrarum vel
castrorum illorum terrae; and castra statim reddantur non expectata aliqua
correctione emendatorum treugae, sed de bonis mobilibus ita captis per ipsos
correctores fiant emendae, treugis nihil-ominus durantibus in sua firmitate in
forma praedicta. Ita quod hinc inde nulla namia capiantur pro aliqua
interceptione facta infra treugas istas de bonis mobilibus, nec pro aliqua
contentione ante captionem hujus treugae orta, sed per ipsos correctores fiant.
Nullus etiam receptet in potestate sua imprisios alterius inde emendae sicut
praedictum est durantibus treugis. Nullum etiam castrum novum firmetur in
Marchia vel dirutum reficiatur durantibus treugis, and terrae sint communes
secundum formam treugarum quae ultimo caprae fuerunt inter nos and ipsum
Lewelinum. Juraverunt autem in animam nostram ex part nostra in hanc treugam
bona fide, and sine malo ingenio fideliter observandam usque ad praedictum
terminum dilicti and fideles nostri Henricus de Aldithely, Johannes Lestrange
and Henricus de Stafford, in cujus, etc. Test me ipso apud Theokesburiam,
undecimo die Julii, anno regni nostri vicesimo.

Sciant praesentes and futuri, quod ita convenit inter Dominum Henricum Regem
Angliae illustrem ex una part, and David filium Lewelini quondam Principis
Norwalliae and Dominum de Aberfraw ex altera, apud Gloucestriam die Martis
proximo ante Festum Sancti Dunstanni, anno regni ipsius regis vicesimo quarto,
de Homagio ipsius David quod ipse offerrebat eidem Domino Regi pro jure suo
Norwalliae and de terris quas Barons ipsius Domini Regis scilicet Griffinus
filius Wennuwan and alii Barons Domini Regis petebant versus ipsum David ut
jura sua excepta de monte alto secundum quod continetur in scripto nuper
confecto apud crucem Griffini per Seneschallos Domini Regis, quae ad praesens
excipitur ab arbitrio, salvo tamen in posterum jure Seneschalli Cestriae in
terra illa si quod habent. Scilicet, quod praedictus Dominus Rex cepit homagium
praefati David de praedicto jure suo Notwalliae, and quod tam idem Dominus Rex
pro praefatis Baronibus suis de conscensu eorundem quam praefatus David pro se
and suis and haeredibus eorum super omnibus terris praedictis se submiserunt,
arbitrio venerabilium Patrum Ottonis Sancti Nicolai in Carcere Tulliano
Diaconi, Cardinalis Apostolici sedis legati; Wigorniae and Noriveci
Episcoporum, and nobilis viri Richardi Comitis Pictaviae and Cornubiae, fratris
ipsius Domini Regis and Johannis de Monemue ex part ipsius Domini Regis, and
venerabilis Patris Episcopi de Sancto Asaph Idnevet Vaghan, Eynguan Vaghan ex
part praefati David. Ita quod quomodo libet ab ipsis omnibus vel a majori
part eorundem, super praemissiis fuerit arbitratum, utraque pars ipsorum
stabit Arbitrio and illud in perpetuum firmiter observabit; and ad haec
fideliter sine fraud servanda Willielmus de Cantelupo de praecepto Regis
juravit in animam ipsius Regis and idem David in propria persona sua corporate
praestitit Sacramentum. Et insuper se submiserunt jurisdictioni and
inordinationi praefati Domini legati quamdiu in Anglia legationis fungatur
officio, ut partem contra praemissa venientem per censuram Ecclesiasticam modis
omnibus quibus melius viderit expedire, tam ad praedictum arbitrium observandum
quam ad transgressionem contra illud perpetratam emendandam valeat coercere,
ordine juris observato. Dum tamen idem David vel sui, si forsitan contra
praedicta venire praesumpserint prius coram dicto Domino legato vel aliquibus
aliis ad hoc ab ipso deputandis and partibus merito non suspectis in confinio
Marchiae loco eidem David and suis tuto legitime communicantur, si ad hoc
vocati venerint: Vel si legitime vocati non venerint pro contumacibus habeantur
nisi rationabile and sufficiens habeant impedimentum, finito vero praedictae
legationis officio sub forma praescripta and cohercioni and jurisdictioni
Domini Cantuariensi Archiepiscopi and successorum suorum and Ecclesiae
Cantuariensis se parts praedictae submiserunt. Et sciendum quod per hanc pacem
remanent Domino Regi and haeredibus suis omnia homagia Baronum Walliae quieta,
and remittuntur omnia incendia, homicidia, and alia mala tam ex part
Anglicorum quam Wallensium perpetrata; ita quod ad invicem plene
reconcilientur. Salvo praefati David jure suo, si quod habet in aliis terris.
Et si forte aliquis praedictorum arbitrorum ante hoc arbitrium completum in
fata decesserit, vel per impedimentum rationabile praedicto arbitrio faciendo
non possit interesse; alius loco suo substituetur qui neutri partium merito
suspectus habeatur: Ad hoc praefati Episcopus de Sancto Asaph Idnevet and Ignan
and Griffinus filius Rotherich praestiterunt Sacramentum, quod quantum in eis
est, praedicta fideliter observabunt and ab ipso David and suis modis omnibus
quibus poterunt, facient observari: Ad majorem autem hujus rei securitatem
factum est hoc scriptum inter ipsos Regem and David in modo Chirographi. Ita
quod parti remanenti penes ipsum Dominum Regem appositum est Sigillum ipsius
una cum Sigillo praedictorum Episcopi de Sancto Asapho Idnevet, Ignan and
Griffini, and parti penes ipsum David remanenti appositum est sigillum Domini
Regis: His testibus venerabilibus Patribus Ottone Sancti Nicolai in carcere
Tulliano Diacono, Cardinali apostolicae Sedis legato; Waltero Eboracensi
Archiepiscopo, Waltero Carleolensi, Waltero Wygornensi and Willielmo Norwicensi
Episcopis; Richardo Comite Pictaviae and Cornubiae fratre Domini Regis,
venerabili Patre Episcopo de Sancto Antando; Seneschallis nostris Joanne
extraneo, Edenyfet Watham, Griffino filio Rotherich, David Archidiacon de
Sancto Asaph and aliis.

Rex.
DAVID filio Lewelini salutem.
Been recolimus qualiter nos vobis nuper in mandatis dedimus, quod coram nobis
apud Wigorniam compareretis ad providendum arbitros qui loco eorum qui primo ad
hoc electi fuerint and qui ad parts recesserunt transmarinas, justitiam
secundum formam pacis inter and vos provise singulis conquerentibus exhiberent;
and in arbitrio praedicto secundum formam debitam procederent and similiter ad
justitiam recipiendam de portione uxorem vestram contingente de haereditate
sua: Et similiter ad standum recto super his de quibus Senescallus de Monte
alto and aliis de vobis sunt conquesti. Et quia ad diem and locum vobis
praefixos non accessistis, sed literas vestras nobis misistis; continentes quod
tres ex vestris ad nos loco vestro destinastis, ex quibus tantum unus ad nos
accessit qui ad praemissa adimplenda nullam potestatem habuit; unde quibusdam
ex nostris visum fuerat quod hoc malitiose and ut subterfugium quaereretis per
vos factum fuit. Nos tamen hoc non credentes sed fidelitatem vestram adhuc
magis probare volentes, vobis mandamus in fide qua nobis tenemini, praecipiendo
quatinus omni occasion post pofita personaliter compareatis apud Salop, die
Dominica ante Dominicam Palmarum coram fidelibus nostris quos illuc duxerimus
transmittendos ad consentiendum in personas certas, ad procedendum in arbitrio
praedicto loco eorum qui ad parts ttansmarinas recesserunt and ad faciendum in
eodem arbitrio id quod adhuc restat faciendum; and ad recipiendam justitiam de
portione uxorem vestram de haereditate sua contingente and ad standum recto
Seneschallo Cestriae and aliis de vobis conquerentibus. Quod si personaliter ad
hoc faciendum venire non possitis tales loco vestro mittatis qui plenam
potestatem habeant haec omnia nomine vestro faciendi Nos enim vobis and vestris
per eos quos ibidem mittimus aut per nosmet ipsos salvum and securum provideri
faciemus conductum. Test Rege apud Wudestock decimo nono die Februarii.

Anno Domini millesimo ducentesimo quadragesimo primo, die Dominica proxima
ante inventionem Sanctae crucis assignata, David filio Lewelini quondam
Principis Norwalliae and Marchionibus ad consentiendum in arbitros sustituendos
loco absentium and ad faciendam and recipiendam justitiam secundum formam pacis
conventae inter Dominum Regem and dictum David comparuit Thudius Seneschallus
ipsius David, Cancellarius and Philippus filius Ibor Clericus ex part David
procuratores; ostendentes literas ipsius David, in quibus dictus David
promittebat se ratum habiturum quicquid per ipsos fieret secundum formam pacis
supradictae. Radulphus vero de mortuo mari and Rogerus Seneschallus Cestriae
and Griffinus pro se and aliis Marchionibus comparuerunt; petentes instanter
quod secundum dicta restium productorum coram Domino Stephano de Segrave, and
conjudicibus suis vicem Domini Regis gerentibus apud Salop eisdem exhiberetur
justitiae complementum. Sed contra procuratores praefati David asserebant
dictos testes non esse receptos secundum formam pacis. Quare secundum dicta
eorum non dicebat nec poterat judicari. Tandem continuata die and altercatione
magna super hoc and aliis habitata inter parts, forma pacis praedictae
producta in medio visaque and perfecta loco absentium arbitrorum scilicet
Domini Ottonis Sancti Nicolai in carcere Tulliano Diaconi Cardinalis, Domini
Papae quondam legati in Anglia Wigornensis and Norwicensis Episcoporum
subrogati sunt per Dominum Regem de consensu dictorum procuratorum Episcopus
Coventrensis, Johannes filius Galfridi and Herebertus filius Matthaei, and
Walterus de Clifford: Quibus data est eadem potestas quam haberent absentes si
praesentes essent secundum formam pacis praedictae and assignata est dies
partibus a die Pentecostes proximo in unum mensem apud pontem de Maneford ultra
Salop ad probanda hinc inde sive per productos testes; non obstante productione
jam facta per alios and quolibet probationis genere sive per instrumenta, sive
alio modo quae voluerunt and sibi noverint expedienda; and illa die dabitur
alia ad judicium audiendum secundum probata coram eisdem arbitris juxta formam
pacis superius praelibatae.

Rex.
DAVID filio Lewelini quondam Principis Norwalliae salutem.
Ex certa quorundam relatione didicimus quod vos contra juramentum nobis
praestitum quosdam fratres Griffini filii Madoc and etiam quosdam homines
nostros de Keri, qui homagia nobis fecerunt vobis confeoderatis and ab obsequio
and fidelitate nostra subtraxistis and fratres praedicti Griffini contra nos in
terra vestra receptatis. Tres quidem de Seneschallis vestris in succursum eorum
qui expugnant dilectum and fidelem nostrum Radulphum de Mortuo mari destinastis
caedes and incendia per vos and vestros in terra sua and terris aliorum
fidelium committendo, terras etiam quae in curia nostra abjudicatae fuerunt
Oweno Vaghan and nepotibus suis, eis contra justitiam deforciatis, non
permittentes quod executio fiar de his quae in curia nostra sunt considerata.
Quandam etiam navem Cestriae quae in potestate vestra applicuit Cartata blado
and aliis victualibus arestari fecistis per vos and gentem vestram, in nullo
his quorum bladum and victualia fuerunt inde satisfacientes super quibus non
modicum admiramur and movemur; and multo fortius quod cum nuper misissemus
nuntios vestros solempnes usque Salop, ut pote venerabilem Patrem Henricum
Coventrensem and Lichfieldensem Episcopum, and dilectos and fideles nostros
Johannem filium Galfridi, and Henricum de Aditheleg paratos ad emendas
faciendas and recipiendas de interceptionibus factis, tam ex part nostra, quam
ex part vestra, vos tanquam in contemptum nostrum praedictis fidelibus nostris
non occurristis, nec per aliquos de vestris in eorum occursum mittere curastis,
quod quidem aegre nos movet cum tot and tantas injurias quas longum esset
enumerare contra nos and nostros nullo modo attemptare debuistis: and ideo
vobis mandamus quod praedictos fideles nostros tam fratres praedicti Griffini
quam homines nostros de Keri quos a fidelitate nostra subtruxistis ad fidem
nostram redire faciatis. Non impedientes quin praedictus Owenus Vaghan and
nepotes sui secundum abjudicatum est in curia nostra terris suis gaudere
possint and eas pacifice possidere. Id etiam quod contra dilectum and fidelem
nostrum Radulphum de mortuo mari and alios fideles nostros and etiam quod de
navi illa Cestrensi attemptastis, sic emendari faciatis; quod nobis non
relinquatur materia injurias praedictas gravius ulciscendi quod nollemus. Nec
omitatis quin ci^ra festum Sancti Petri ad vincula nobis significetis qualiter
dampna and injurias praedictas, quae nullo modo dissimulare poterimus nobis
emendare volueritis. Test Rege apud Merlebergh, quarto decimo die Julii.

Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ita convenit inter Dominum Henricum Regem
Angliae illustrem ex una part and Senanam uxorem Griffini filii Lewelini
quondam Principis Norwalliae, quem David frater ejus tenet carceri mancipatum
cum Owen filio suo nomine ejusdem Griffini ex altera; scilicet quod praedicta
Senana manucepit pro praedicto Griffino viro suo quod dabit Domino Regi
sexcentas Marcas, ut Rex eum and praedictum Owen filium suum liberari faciat a
carcere detineri. Et ut Rex postea judicio Curiae suae secundum legem Walensem
ei and haeredibus suis habere faciat super portione quae eum continget de
haereditate quae fuit praedicti Lewelini patris sui and quam praedictus David,
ipsi Griffino deforciavit. Ita si quod idem Griffinus vel haeredes sui per
considerationem curiae Domini Regis reciperent portionem quam se dicunt
contingere de haereditate praedicta, eadem Senana manucepit pro praedicto
Griffino and haeredibus suis quod ipse and haeredes sui imperpetuum inde
reddent Domino Regi and haeredibus suis trecentas Marcas annuas. Scilicet
tertiam partem in denariis and tertiam partem in bobus and vaccis, and tertiam
partem in equis per aestimationem legalium hominum liberandas vicecomiti Salop,
apud Salop, and per manum ipsius vicecomitis ad saccarium Regis deferendas and
ibidem liberandas, scilicet unam medietatem ad festum Sancti Michaelis and
aliam medietatem ad Pascham. Eadem etiam Senana manucepit pro praedicto
Griffino viro suo and haeredibus suis quod firmam Pacem tenebunt cum praefato
David super portione quae eidem David remanebit de haereditate praedicta:
Manucepit etiam Senana pro praefato Griffino and haeredibus suis, quod si
aliquis Walensis aliquo tempore Regi vel haeredibus suis rebellis extiterit,
praefatus Griffinus and haeredes sui ad custum suum proprium ipsum compellent
ad satisfaciendum Domino Regi and haeredibus suis. Et de his omnibus
supradictis observandis, dicta Senana dabit Domino Regi David and Rothery
filios suos obsides: Ita tamen quod si de praefato Griffino and Oweyno filio
suo qui cum eo est in carcere humanitus contingat antequam inde deliberentur;
alter praedictorum filiorum eidem Senanae reddetur reliquo obside remanente:
Juravit insuper Senana tactis Sacro-Sanctis Evangeliis pro se and praefato
Griffino and haeredibus suis quod haec omnia firmiter observabunt. Et manucepit
quod praefatus Griffinus idem jurabit cum a carcere liberatus fuerit, and super
praemissis se submisit nomine dicti Griffini jurisdictioni Herefordensis and
Conventrensis Episcoporum. Ita quod praefati Episcopi, vel alter eorum quem
Dominus Rex elegerit ad requisitionem ipsius Regis per sententias
excommunicationis in personas and interdicti in terras eorum coherceant ad
omnia praedicta and singula observanda. Haec omnia manucepit praedicta Senana
and bona fide promisit se facturam and curaturam quod omnia impleantur, and
quod praefatus Griffinus cum liberatus fuerit, and haeredes sui haec omnia
grata habebunt and complebunt and instrumentum suum inde dabunt Domino Regi in
forma praedicta. Ad majorem siquidem hujus rei securitatem factum est hoc
scriptum inter ipsum Dominum Regem and praefatam Senanam nomine praefati
Griffini viri sui. Ita quod parti remanenti penes ipsum Dominum Regem appositum
est sigillum praefati Griffini per manum praefatae Senanae uxoris suae una cum
sigillo ipsius Senanae; and parti remanenti penes ipsam Senanam nomine praefati
Griffini appositum est sigillum ipsius Domini Regis: De supradictis etiam
omnibus complendis and firmiter observandis dedit praedicta Senana nomine
praefati Griffini Domino Regi plegios subscriptos, viz. Radulphum de Mortuo
Mari, Walterum de Clifford, Rogerum de Monte alto Senescallum Cestriae, Mailgun
filium Mailgwn, Mereduc filium Roberti, Griffinum filium Maddoc de Baunfeld,
Howel and Mereduc fratres ejus, Griffinum filium Wennwen, qui haec omnia pro
praefata Senana manuceperunt and Cartas suas ipsi Domino Regi inde fecerunt.
Actum apud Salop die Lunae proxima ante assumptionem beatae Mariae anno ipsius
Regis vicessimo quinto.

OMnibus hoc scriptum visuris Rogerus de Monte alto Seneschallus Cestriae
salutem.
Sciatis quod ego me constituti plegium Senanae uxoris Griffini filii Leol^ni
quondam Principis Norwalliae, and manu cepi pro ea erga Dominum meum Henricum
Regem Angliae illustrem, quod omnia quae conventionavit eidem Domino meo nomine
praefati viri sui a carcere in quo David frater ejus eos detinet and pro
portione quae ipsum Griffinum contingit de haereditate quae fuit praedicti
Leolini patris suis and quam praefatus David frater ejus ei deforciat, Domino
Regi firmiter observabit.

In cujus rei testimonium huic scripto sigillum meum apposui. Actum apud
Salopesbury die Lunae ante assumptionem Beatae Mariae, Anno regni ipsius
vicesimo quinto.
Sub eadem forma fecerunt singuli plegii praescripti.
Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego Mereducus filius Howel, tactis
sacrosanctis juravi quod ab isto die in antea omnibus diebus vitae meae ero ad
fidelitatem Domini Regis Angliae, and serviam ei fideliter and devote cum
omnibus viribus meis and toto posse meo quandocunque indiguerit servitio meo,
and treugam inter Dominum Radulphum de mortuo mari and me initam usque ad
festum S. Michaelis anno Regni Regis Henrici vigesimo quinto ex part mea
fideliter observabo: and tam ad fidelitatem Domino Regi in perpetuum
observandum quam ad treugas praedictas observandas usque ad terminum praedictum
supposui me jurisdictioni Domini Herefordensis Episcopi, and Domini
Coventrensis and Lichfieldensis Episcopi, vel alterius eorum, quem Dominus Rex
ad hoc elegerit, ut si in aliquo contra praedictam fidelitatem Domini Regis,
vel contra observantiam praedictarum treugarum venerit, liceat eis vel eorum
alteri quem Dominus Rex ad hoc elegerit personam meam and omnes meos
excommunicate and terram meam interdicere, donec de transgressione ipsam
satisfecero ad plenum. Et fi forsitan infra praedictum Festum Sancti Michaeli
inter praedictum Radulphum de mortuo mari and me nulla pax fuerit formata,
licet post festum illud bellum moveant praedicto Radulpho, non obligabit me
praedictum juramentum dum tamen erga Dominum Regem fidelitatem observam
continuam, sicut praedictum est. Etsi bellum post praedictum terminum inter nos
moveatur, nihilominus Dominus Rex sustinebit quod ego and mei receptemur in
terra sua sicut alii fideles sui. Ad praedicta autem observanda Domino Regi and
haeredibus suis obligo me per juramentum praedictum, and per sigilli mei
appositionem quod huic scripto apposui, ad majorem confirmationem praedictorum.

Actum in crastino assumptionis Beatae Mariae, anno regni Regis Henrici
vigesimo quinto. Sub eisdem verbis fecerunt Domino Regi chartas suas, Owen
filius Howell. Mailgon filius Mailgun. Mereduc filius Mereduc. Howel filius
Cadwachlan, and Cadwachlan filius Howel.


OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerunt, David,
filius Leolini,
salutem.
Sciatis quod concessi Domino meo Henrico Regi Angliae illustri filio Domino
Johannis Regis: quod deliberabo Griffinum fratrem meum quem teneo incarceratum
una cum filio suo primogenito and aliis qui occasion praedicti Griffini sunt
in part mea incarcerati, and ipsos eidem domino meo Regi tradam. Et postea
stabo juri Curiae ipsius Domini Regis tam super eo, utrum idem Griffinus debeat
teneri captus quam super portione terrae quae fuit praedicti Leolini patris
mei, si qua ipsum Griffinum contingere debeat, secundum consuetudinem
Walensium. Ita quod pax servetur inter me and praedictum Griffinum fratrem meum
quod caveatur de ipsa tenenda secundum considerationem curiae ipsius Domini
Regis, and quod tam ego quam praedictus Griffinus portiones nostras quae nos
contingent de praedictis terris tenebimus in capite de praedicto domino Rege.
Et quod reddam Rogero de monte alto Seneschallo Cestriae terram suam de
Monthaut cum pertinentiis: and sibi and aliis Baronibus and fidelibus domini
Regis scisinas terrarum suarum occupatarum a tempore belli orti inter ipsum
dominum Johannem Regem and praedictum Leolinum patrem meum, salvo jure
proprietatis cujuslibet pacti and instrumenti super quo stabitur juri hinc inde
in curia ipsius domini Regis: and quod reddam ipsi domino regi omnes expensas
quas ipse and sui fecerunt occasion exercitus istius. Et quod satisfaciam de
damnis and injuriis illatis sibi and suis secundum considerationem praedictae
curiae vel malefactores ipsos, ipsi domino regi reddam omnia homagia quae
dominus Johannes rex pater ejus habuit, and quae dominus Rex de jure habere
debet; and specialiter omnium nobilium Wallensium. Et quod idem dominus rex non
dimittit aliquem de suis captivis quin ipsi domino regi and suis remaneant
seisinae suae. Et quod terra de Engusmere cum pertinentiis suis in perpetuum
remanebit domino regi, vel haeredibus suis, and quod de caetero non receptabo
vilagas vel foris banniatos ipsius domini regis, vel Baronum suorum de Marchia
in terra mea, nec permittam receptari; and de omnibus articulis supradictis,
and singulis firmiter and in perpetuum observandis, domino regi, and haeredibus
suis, pro me and haeredibus meis cavebo per obsides and pignora and aliis modis
quibus dominus rex dicere voluit vel dictare. Et in his and in omnibus aliis
stabo voluntati, and mandatis ipsius domini regis and juri parebo omnibus in
curia sua. In cujus rei testimonium, praesenti scripto sigillum meum appendi.
Actum apud Atrietum juxta fluvium Elvey de S. Asapho in festo decollationis S.
Johanni Babtistae, anno praedicti domini regis Henrici vigesimo quinto.

Sciendum quod illi qui capti detinentur cum praedicto Griffino, eodem modo
tradentur domino regi donec per curiam suam consideratum fuerit, utrum and
quomodo debeant deliberari. Et ad omnia firmiter tenenda, ego David juravi
super crucem sanctam quam coram me feci deportari. Venerabilis etiam pater
Howelus episcopus de S. Asaph ad petitionem meam firmiter promisit in ordine
suo, quod haec omnia praedicta faciet, and procurabit modis quibus poterit,
observari. Ednevet siquidem Waugam per praeceptum meum, illud idem juravit
super crucem praedictam. Actum ut supra. Praeterea concessi pro me and
haeredibus meis quod si ego, vel haeredes mei contra pacem domini regis, vel
haeredium suorum, vel contra articulos praedictos, aliquid attentaverimus tota
haereditas nostra domino regi, and haeredibus suis incurratur. De quibus
omnibus and singulis supposui me, and haeredes meos, jurisdictioni
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, and episcoporum Londinensis, Herefordensis, and
Coventrensis, qui pro tempore praeerunt, quod omnes, vel unus eorum, quem
dominus rex ad hoc elegerit, possit nos excommunicare, and terram nostram
interdicere, si aliquid contra praedicta attentaverimus. Et procuravi quod
episcopi de Bangor and de S. Asaph chartas suas domino regi fecerunt per quas
concesserunt, quod omnes sententias tam excommunicutionis quam interdicti a
praedictis Archiepiscopo, episcopis, vel aliquo eorum, ferendas, ad mandatum
eorum exequentur.

Rex
omnibus, etc. DAVID filius Lewelini quondam principis Norwalliae,
Salutem.
Noverint universitas vestra me spontanea voluntate mea pepegisse Domino meo
Henrico Dei gratia Angliae, quod ego and haeredes mei eidem domino regi, and
haeredibus suis omnibus diebus vitae nostrae constanter and fideliter
serviemus, nec aliquo tempore contra eos erimus: Quod si forte evenerit, quod a
fideli servicio suo, vel haeredum suorum, quod absit, recesserimus, tota terra
nostra erga ipsum dominum regem and haeredes suos incurratur, and in usus eorum
perpetuis cedat temporibus. Hanc autem pactionem and concessionem sigilli mei
appositione roboravi, and ad majorem hujus rei declarationem venerabiles patres
Bangorensem, and de S. Asaph Episcopi, ad petitionem meam praesenti scripto
sigilla sua apposuerunt.

Actum apud Rothetan tricesimo primo die Augusti.
ILlustri viro domino Henrico Dei gratia regi Anglorum, etc. Abbates
Haberconwiae, and de de Kemere Cisterciensis ordinis inquisitores dati a domino
Papa,
salutem in Domino.
Mandatum domini Papae recipimus in haec verba, Innocentius Episcopus, servus
servorum Dei, dilectis filiis Abbatibus de Haberconwiae, and de Kemere
Cisterciensis ordinis Kangorum diocesis salutem and apostolicam benedictionem.
Ex part dilecti filii nostri nobilis viri David Principis Northwalliae fuit
propositum coram nobis, quod cum inter ipsum, quem parents ejus in alumnum
Romanae Ecclesiae donaverunt, and charissimum in Christo filium nostrum regem
Anglorum illustrem bellum longo tempore perdurasset, tandem postquam fuit in
venerabilem fratrem nostrum episcopum de S. Asaph and collegas ipsius de stando
hinc inde eorum arbitrio super omnibus querelis juramento a partibus praestito
concorditer bonis viris mediantibus conpromissum. Idem rex, non attendens quod
pendente illorum arbitrio, sibi super hoc aliquid attentare non licebit in
praedictum principem ex insperato hostiliter ir^uit ad praestandum, quod super
praedictis de quibus conpromissum fuerit and juratum, ac aliis ipsius regis,
mandare per vim computit, and metum qui cadere poterat in constantem.

Cum igitur ea quae vi and metu fiant, carere debeant robore firmitatis,
discretioni vestrae per apostolica scripta mandamus, quatenus inquisita super
hoc diligentius veritate, si rem inveneritis ita esse, auctoritate nostra
praedictum principem ab observatione sic extorti juramenti penitus absolventes,
sententia, si qua occasion ejusmodi in ejus personam, vel terram ab aliquo
forsan tota fuerit, juxta formam ecclesiae sine difficultate qualibet, sicut
justum fuerit relaxetis. Testes vero, etc.

Datum Januae septimo calendas Augusti Pontificatus nostri anno secundo. Hujus
igitur autoritate muniti vobis mandamus quatenus in vigilia S. Agnetis
Virginis, apud Keyrus in ecclesia Gustefend coram vobis compareatis, super
contentis in Autentico dicto principi responsuri, si vobis videritis expedire.



Isti sunt ARTICULI intimati Domino LEOLINO Principi Walliae, and populo
ejusdem loci, ex part Archiepiscopi supra dicti.
PRimo, quod propter salutem eorum spiritualem, and temporalem ad parts istas
venimus, quas semper dileximus, ut plures eorum noverunt.

Secundo, Quia venimus contra Domini regis voluntatem, cui etiam adventus
noster dicitur plurimum displicere.

Tertio, Quia rogamus eos and supplicamus eis pro sanguine Jesu Christi,
quatenus venire velint ad unitatem cum gente Anglorum, and ad pacem Domini
regis, quam eis intendimus, quanto melius poterimus procurare.

Quarto, Volumus eos scire quod in his partibus Domini non poterimus remanere.

Quinto, Volumus eos attendere quod post recessum nostrum non invenient
aliquem, qui ita velit sua amplecti negotia promovenda, qui vellemus, si
placeret. Altissima vita nostra temporali corporum pacem honestam and stabilem
perpetuo procurasse.

Sexto, Quia si nostras preces spreverint and labores, statim intendimus eorum
pertinaciam scribere summo Pontifici and Curiae Romanae, propter peccata
mortalia, quae multiplicantur occasion discordiae omni die.

Septimo, Noverint quod nisi citius ad pacem venerint aggravabitur eis bellum,
quod non poterunt sustiuere, quia crescit regia potentia omni die.

Octavo, Noverint quod regnum Angliae est sub speciali protectione sedis
Apostolicae, and quod Romana Curia plus inter regna caetera diligere consuevi^.

Nono, Quod eadem Curia nullo modo volet permittere statum regni Angliae
vacillare, quod sibi specialibus obsequiis est devotum.

Decimo, Amarissime plangimus hoc quod dicitur Wallenses crudeliores existere
Saracenis; quia cum Saraceni capiunt Christianos, eos servant pecunia
redimendos, quos Wallenses captos dicuntur illico jugulare quasi solo sanguine
delectentur; immo quod est deterius, quos promittunt redimi, tradunt accepta
pecunia jugulandos.

Vndecimo, Quod cum consueverit Deum and personas Ecclesiasticas revereri, a
devotione hominum videntur multipliciter recessisse, qui in tempore sanctissimo
in redemptoris injuriam moverunt seditionem, homicidia and incendia
perpetrantes, in quo eos nullus poterit excusare.

Duodecimo, Petimus ut tanquam very Christiani ad cor redeant poenitentes, quia
coeptam discordiam non possent continuare etiam si jurassent.

Tertiodecimo, Petimus ut nobis significent quibus modis velint and valiant
turbationem pacis regiae, laesionem reipublicae, and mala alia emendare.

Quartodecimo, Ut significent nobis qualiter valeat ipsa concordia stabiliri,
frustra enim pax firmari videbitur quae tam assidue violatur.

Quintodecimo, Ut si dicant leges suas vel foedera ex pacto inito non servari,
nobis significent quae sunt illa.

Sextodecimo, Noverint quod etiam posito quod eis derogatum fuisset, quod
nescimus, nullo modo licebit eis quasi essent judices in causa sua taliter
majestatem regiam impugnare.

Septimodecimo, Quod nisi modo pax fiat, proceditur contra eos forsitan ex
decreto militiae, sacerdoti, and populi convocati.

REveredissimo Patri in Christo Domino J. De gratia Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo
totius Angliae Primati, suus humilis and devotus filius Leolinus Princeps
Walliae, Dominus Snaudon, salutem and filialem dilectionem cum omnimoda
reverentia, subjectione and honor, sanctae paternitati vestrae pro labor
vobis quasi intolerabile quem assumpsistis ad praesens pro dilectione quam erga
nos and nostram nationem geritis, omni qua possumus devotione regratiantes
vobis assurgimus; and eo amplius quod contra Domini regis voluntatem venistis
prout nobis intimastis. Caeterum quod nos rogastis ut ad pacem Domini regis
veniamus, scire debet vestra sanctitas quod ad hoc prompti sumus, dummodo idem
dominus rex pacem debitam and veram nobis and nostris velit observare. Ad hoc
licet gauderemus de mora vestra facienda in Wallia, tamen per nos non eritis
impediti quin pax fiat, quantum in nobis est, quam optamus per vestram
industriam magis quam alicujus alterius roborari. Et speramus nec per Dei
gratiam erit opportunum propter nostram pertinaciam aliquid scribere Domino
Papae. Nec vestras paternas preces ac graves labores spernemus, sed eas
amplectimur omni cordis affectu ut tenemur. Nec erit opus quod Dominus Rex
aggravet contra nos manum, cum prompti sumus sibi obedire juribus nostris and
legibus nobis ut praemittatur reservatis.

Et licet regnum Angliae sit Curiae Romanae specialiter subjectum and dilectum,
tamen cum Dominus Papa, necnon and Curia Romana audiverint quanta nobis per
Anglicos mala sunt illata, videlicet quod pax prius formata non fuit nobis
servata nec pacta; deinde devastationes, combustiones, and Ecclesiasticarum
personarum interfectiones, sacerdotum videlicet and inclusorum, and aliarum
religiosarum personarum passim mulierum and infantium suggentium ubera and in
utero portantium, combustiones etiam hospitalium and aliarum domorum
religiosarum, homicidiorum in coemiteriis, Ecclesiis, and super Altaria, and
aliorum sacrilegiorum and flagiciorum auditu etiam horribilium, auditu
Paganorum sicut expressius in aliis rotulis conscripta vobis transmittimus
inspicienda.

Speramus imprimis, quod vestra pia and sancta paternitas clementer nobis
compatietur, nec non and Curia supra dicta, nec per nos regnum Angliae
vacillabit, dum, ut promissum est, pax debita nobis fiat and servetur. Qui vero
sanguinis effusione delectantur manifestum est factis. Nam Anglici hactenus
nulli sexui vel aetati seu languori pepercerunt, nulla Ecclesiae vel loco sacro
detulerunt, qualia vel consimilia Wallenses non fecerunt. Super eo autem quod
unus redemptus fuit interfectus, multum dolemus, nec occisorem manu tenemus,
sed in sylvis uti latro vagatur. De eo vero quod inceperunt guerram aliqui in
tempore indebito, illud ignoravimus usque post factum, and tamen ipsi asserunt
quod nisi eo tempore hoc fecissent mortes and captiones eis imminebunt, nec
audebunt in domibus residere, nec nisi armati incedere, and sic prae timore
tali tempore id fecerunt. De eis vero quae fecimus contra Dominum, ut very
Christiani per Dei gratiam poenitebimus, nec erit ex part nostra quod bellum
continuetur, dum sumus indemnes ut debemus. Ne tamen exhaeredemur and passim
occidemur, oportet nos defendere ut valemus. Cum vero injuria and damna hinc
inde considerentur and ponderentur parati sumus emendare pro viribus quae ex
part nostra sunt commissa, dum de praedictis injuriis and damnis nobis factis
and aliis emenda nobis fiat. Et ad pacem firmandam and stabiliendam similiter
sumus prompti debitis modis.

Quando tamen regales chartae and pacta inita nobis non servatur, sicut nec
hucusque sunt observata, non potest pax stabiliri, nec quando novae exactiones
and inauditae contra nos and nostros omni die adveniunt. Vobis autem
transmittimus in rotulis damna nobis illata and foedera non servata secundum
formam pacis prius factam. Quod vero guerravimus quasi necessitas nos cogebat;
Nam nos and omnes Wallenses eramus adeo oppressi and suppeditati and spoliati
and in servitutem redacti per regales Justicianos and Ballivos contra formam
pacis and omnem justiciam amplius quam si Saraceni essemus vel Judaei, sicut
credimus and saepe denunciavimus Domino Regi nec aliquam emendam habere
potuimus. Sed semper mittebantur justiciarii and ballivi ferociores and
crudeliores, and quando illi erant saturati per suas injustas exactiones, alii
de novo mittebantur ad populum excoriandum in tantum quod populus mallebat mori
quam vivere. Nec oportet militiam ampliorem convocare, vel contra nos moveri
Sacerdotium dum nobis fiat pax and servetur modis debitis ut superius est
expressum. Nec debitis sancte pater omnibus verbis credere nostrorum
adversariorum; sicut enim nos factis oppresserunt and opprimunt, ita and vobis
diffamant, nobis imponentes quae volunt.

Ipsi enim vobis sunt praesentes and nos absentes, ipsi opprimentes and nos
oppressi. Et ideo propter Deum fidem eis in omnibus non exhibeatis, sed facta
potius examinetis. Valeat sanctitas vestra ad regimen Ecclesiae per tempora
longa.

Primus Articulus est talis, Cum in forma pacis sic contineatur ut sequitur. Si
vero idem Leolinus jus vendicaverit in aliquibus terris quas alii praeter
dictum dominum Regem occupaverint extra quatuor Cantredos praedictos,
pleniariam sibi justitiam exhibebit praesatus dominus Rex secundum leges and
consuetudines partium illarum in quibus terrae illae consistunt: qui Articulus
non fuit observatus super terris Arwystley and inter Dyvy and ductus fluviorum,
pro eo quod cum Dominus Leolinus dictas terras vendicasset coram Domino Rege
apud Ruthlan, and Rex sibi concessisset causam examinare secundum leges and
consuetudines Walliae ac advocati pretium fuissent introducti coram Rege ut
judicarent de dictis terris secundum leges Wallicanas; part rea comparente and
respondente adeo quod eo die deberet finaliter terminari ex praefixione Domini
Regis qui apud Gloverniam existens diem praedictum partibus assignavit, licet
saepius in diversis locis coram justiciariis fuisset dicta causa examinata, and
terrae ipsae essent in pura Wallia. Nec unquam judicata fuit super eis nisi
secundum leges Wallicanas; Nec Dominus Rex posset vel deberet prorogare nisi
secundum leg^s Walliae: Diem tamen ipsum motu proprio prorogavit and contra
leges antedictas, and ad ultimo fuit vocatus ad loca varia ad quae non debuit
evocari, nec justitiam obtinere potuit, nisi secundum leges Angliae contra
illud quod in dicto Articulo continetur. Et idem factum fuit coram justiciariis
apud Montgomery, cum parts essent in judicio constitutae and firmatae, and
dies datus ad sententiam audiendam, diem prorogaverunt leges memoratas. Demum
apud Londinum post multos labores and expensas varias Rex ipse justitiam sibi
denegavit, nisi vellet secundum leges Angliae subire judicium in causa memorata.

Secundus Articulus non servatus est talis. Et omnes transgressiones injuriae
and excelsus hinc inde factae poenitus remittuntur usque in diem hodiernum.
Iste Articulus non fuit observatus quia Dominus Reginaldus de Gray statim cum
fuit factus Justiciarius, movit varias quaestiones and innumerabiles contra
homines de Tegengl, and nos super transgressis quae factae fuerunt in tempore
Domini Henrici Regis, and dicti Domini Leolini dum Dominum in partibus illis
obtinebat unde dicti homines multum timentes non audebant i^ domibus suis
permanere.

Tertius Articulus, Ubi dictus Rys Vachan filius Nefi filii Maelgon cum terra
quam nunc tenet and cum post pacem initam fuit spoliatus de terra de
Geneverglyn, quam tunc tenebat cum hominibus and Averiis eorundem.

Quartus Articulus, Item concedit Dominus Rex quod omnes terras tenentes in
quatuor Cantredis, and in aliis terris quas Dominus Rex retinet in manu sua,
teneant eas adeo libere and pleniarie sicut ante gue^ram tenere consueverint,
and eisdem libertatibus and consuetudinibus gaudeant quibus prius gaudere
solebant, and cum contra istum Articulum dictus Reginaldus consuetudines varias
de novo introduxit, and hoc contra pacis formam supradictam.

Item Quintus Articulus, Controversiae and contentiones motae vel movendae
inter Principem and quoscunque terminabantur and decidentur secundum leges
Marchiae de his quae emergunt in Marchia, and secundum leges Walliae de rebus
contentiosis quae in Wallia orientur. Contra istum Articulum venit Dominus Rex
mittendo Justiciarios usque ad Montgomery, qui ibidem judicare praesumpserunt
homines dicti Leolini, vindictam ponendo super illos contra leges Walliae, cum
hoc vel aliud simile nunquam factum fuisset ibidem temporibus retroactis,
quosdam incarcerando, alios in exilium mittendo, cum ipse idem Princeps paratus
esset de eisdem hominibus suis exhibere justitiae complementum omnibus
quaerelantibus de eisdem.

Item Sextus Articulus. Item cum sit contentum in dicta pacis forma, quod
Griffinus Vachan homagium faceret Domino Regi, de terra, de Yal, and principi
de terra de Edeyrnahu Justiciarii Domini introduxerunt in totam terram
praedictam de Edeyrnahu cujus cognitio causae ad Principem pertinebat
simpliciter, and non ad illos Justiciarios; and tamen pro bono pacis princeps
hoc tolerabat cum ipse Princeps paratus esset eidem Dominae super hoc justitiam
exhibere.

Septimus Articulus, ubi dicitur and licet idem Princeps se nostrae ut dictum
est supposuerit voluntati, nos tamen concedimus and volumus quod voluntas
nostra..... ultra dictos Articulos se in aliquo non extendant. Contra istum
Articulum exigebatur Au^um ad opus Reginae in qualibet solutione facta
Regicum..... Aurum nunquam fuit exactum Wallensibus, nec in tempore Domini
Henrici, vel alicujus alterius Regis Angliae; quod Aurum exsolvit pro bono
pacis, cum tamen nihil de hoc tactum fuit in forma pacis vel excogitatum: and
nunc insuper exigitur a Principe Aurum ad opus Reginae senioris matris
videlicet Domini Edvardi nunc Regis Angliae, pro pace facta in tempore Domini
Henrici nunc Regis Angliae, cum nihil de hoc tunc fuerat dictum vel quoquomodo
excogitatum, videlicet duo millia Marcatum and dimidium, and nisi dictae Marcae
solverentur, min^batur dicta Regina quod bona ejusdem Leolini occuparet quae
invenire poterat in Dominio Regis, and homines suos capere vel venundare
quousque dictam summam haberet ad plenum. Item cum invitasset Dominus Rex
dictum Principem adfectum Wiggorniensem verbis blandissimis promittendo ei quod
daret tunc consanguineam suam sibi in uxorem, and multis ditaret honoribus;
Nihilominus cum illuc venisset in die desponsationis, ante missam petiit
Dominus Rex unam literam consignari a Principe continentem inter caetera, quod
idem Princeps nullum omnino honorem in terra sua teneret contra Regis
voluntatem, vel manu teneret ex quo possit contingere quod omnes fideles
Principis ab eo commoverentur. Quam quidem literam sibi sigillatam tradidit,
computans per metum qui cadere posset in constantem virum, cum tamen in forma
pacis, ut praemissum est, contineatur quod nihil ab eo deberet exigi, ultra
quod in dicta forma continetur.

Item, Cum secundum eandem pacis formam consuetudines eidem Principi
confirmentur quibus usus fuerat ab antiquo; ac idem Princeps and Antecessores
sui, ex consuetudine diutina and obtenta bona de naufragiis in terris suis
provenientia consueverant recipere, and in suos usus convertere ad libitum:
Justiciarius Cestrensis namium recepit super Principem pro bonis quae recepit
de naufragiis ante guerram contra dictam pacis formam per quam hinc inde erant
remissa, and contra consuetudines ante dictas. Dato etiam quod hoc esset foris
factum namium recepit tale, videlicet quindecem libratas mellis and plures
equos ac homines suos incarceravit, and hoc ex propriis bonis Principis
antedicti. Preterea, accipit scaphas de Banweys quae venerant apud Liverpol cum
mercandiis per mercatores, and eas numquam deliberavit donec pecuniam pro eis
accepit quantum volebat.

Item, Cum quidam homines de Geneurglyn quaedam bona abstulissent ab aliis
vicinis suis de Geneu^glyn, dum essent in Dominio Principis de Merpyreton
homines Regis de Llanbadarn proedam fecerunt, and acceperunt de terra Principis
de Merpyreton, and cum homines sui venissent illuc ad quaerendum quare dictam
p^aedam receperant, unum de eis interfecerunt, and alios vulnera^erunt, and
quosdam incarceraverunt. Et cum in dicta pacis forma contineatur quod in
Marchia deberent emendari quae in Marchia committebantur, tamen dicti homines
Regis homines Principis audire noluerunt alibi quam in Castro de Llanbadarn,
and hoc contra pacis formam antedictam, super quo hactenus nullam justitiam
habere potuerunt. In istis Articulis injuriatus Dominus Rex Principi and suis,
and etiam in multis aliis: Et licet Princeps tam per se quam per suos
petivisset saepius a Domino Rege quod pacis formam supradictam erga se and suos
faceret observari, in nullo tamen extitit observata sed omni die de novo
Justiciarii and Ballivi Domini Regis in partibus illis injurias injuriis, and
varia gravamina cumulaverunt; propter quod mirum non debet videri alicui si
Princeps praefatus assensum praestitit illis qui guerrare coeperunt, cum in his
fides quam in animam Domini Regis sibi Dominus Robertus Tibetot juraverat in
nullo servabatur, and maxima and principaliter cum Princeps fuisser praemunitus
a personis fide dignis quod Princeps foret a Rege capiendus in suo primo
accessu apud Ruthlan, and etiam fuisset captus si Rex illuc accessisset post
Natale sicut proposuerat.

Nec gravamina and alia quasi innumerabilia, sancte Pater, considerantes, nobis
affectu paterno compaciamini, and pro salute animae Domini Regis, and nostrae,
and etiam multorum aliorum, ad pacem bonam utriusque populi laboretis fructuose.

Cum Dominus David primo venisset ad Dominum Edwardum tunc Comitem Cestriae, ac
homagium sibi fecisset, idem Dominus Edwardus eidem Davidi duas Cantredas,
videlicet de dyffryn-Clwyd and Cywonant cum omnibus suis pertinentiis dedit
plenarie, and literas suas patentes super hoc fieri fecit, tandem etiam
donationem eidem invocavit, postquam creatus est in Regem, and etiam illum
Davidem in possessionem illarum Cantredarum induxit corporalem.

Demum Domina Gwenlhian de Lacy mortua, tres villas quas in dictis Cantredis
tenuit quoad vitam quae ad ipsum Davidem spectabant ratione D^nationis
supradictae Dominus Rex sibi abstulit minus just contra tenorem Chartae suae.

Item, Cum dictus David ex donatione Domini Regis praedicti villas de Hope and
Eston obtineret in Wallia, de quibus nulli respondere tenebatur nisi secundum
leges Wallicanas; tandem Justiciarius Cestriensis fecit ipsum ad instantiam
cujusdam Anglici Willh. de Vanabel nomine ad comitatum Cestriensem super dictis
vilulis ad judicium evocari. Et licet dictus Dominus David petivisset multoties
quod injuriose contra eundem non procederetur in dicto comitatu, pro eo quod
ibidem respondere nullatenus tenebatur super villis praedictis quae sitae erant
in Wallia, sed potius tractaretur, hoc sibi plane denegavit.

Item, Idem Justiciarius Cestriensis in gravamen dicti Domini Davidis nemus
suum de Lleweni and Sylvas suas de Hope fecit succidi tam per villanos de
Ruthlan, quam per alios, cum idem Justiciarius in terris praedicti Domini
Davidis nullam omnino haberet jurisdictionem, and non contenti quod meremium
ibidem quaererent ad aedificia exigenda tam apud Rodelanum quam alibi in
patria, sed nemus destruendo meremium ibidem sectum ad vendendum in Hyberniam
transtulerunt.

Item, Cum idem Dominus David quosdam Fortanicos de terra Domini Regis qui in
nemoribus latitabant cepisse^, ac suspendio tradidisset, idem tamen
Justiciarius ipsum Davidem penes Regem accusabat, ac si ipse dictos
malefactores defenderet and manuteneret, quod verisimile non erat cum ipse
David dictos latrones suspendi faceret and occidi.

Item, Cum esset cautum in forma pacis quod Wallenses deberent in causis fuis
tractari secundum leges Wallicanas, istud tamen circa dictum Davidem and suos
homines in nullo extitit observatum.

De premissis vero gravaminibus and aliis petiit idem David aliquam
emendationem vel secundum leges Walliae, vel consuetudines, vel etiam ex gratia
speciali; and hoc etiam petiit a Domino Rege, quorum neutrum potuit aliquatenus
obtinere: Et cum hoc praemunitus fuit a quibusdam a Curia Domini Regis, quod in
primo regressu Domini Reginaldi de Gray de Curia idem David esset capiendus ut
filii-sui capiendi pro obsedibus esset, insuper spoliandus castro suo de Hope,
and etiam sylva sua ibidem succidenda. Ideo cum idem David multum laborasset
pro Domino Rege praedicto in diversis guerris tam in Anglia quam in Wallia, and
exposuisset se and suos variis periculis and injuriis, ac amisisset nobisiores
de suis and fortiores, ac multos nimis, nihilominus de dictis gravaminibus and
aliis nullam omnino justitiam, emendationem, seu gratiam potuit obtinere.
Propter quae gravamina and pericula, timens mortem propriam aut filiorum
suorum, vel incarcerationem perpetuam, vel saltem diutinam, quasi coactus and
invitus incepit prout potuit se and suos defensare.

Haec est forma quam Dominus Rex Angliae promisit hominibus de Ros, antequam
ipsi fecerunt sibi homagium, and illam formam eis promisit inviolabiliter
observare, videlicet,
Quod ipse Dominus Rex concederet unicuique eorum jus suum, and jurisdictionem
suam, and etiam Dominium, bonae memoriae Domini Henrici quondam Regis Angliae,
secundum quod praedicti homines de Ros referent ipsos haberent temporibus
praeedicti Henrici.

Item, Promisit praedictus Dominus Rex supradictis hominibus quod non darentur
nec ad firmam ponerentur; quibus articulis concessis praefatis hominibus
homagium fecerunt Domino Regi, and ipse eis promisit ore proprio dictos
articulos observare. Hoc non obstante quidam Cementarii redeuntes ad villam de
Ruthlan, de loco ubi ipsi operabantur, obviaverunt cuidam nobili transeunti cum
uxore sua per viam regiam super pace Domini Regis, qui Cementarii per vim
proposuerunt auferre a praedicto nobili suam uxorem, and quia ipse nobilis
defendit suam uxorem ne ab ipso auferetur, praedicti Cementarii praedictum
nobilem interfecerunt. Ille autem cui plus opponebatur dictum homicidium
perpetrasse, cum quibusdam sociis suis capti fuerunt; Et cum parentela
praedicti interfecti petierit justitiam a Domino Justiciario Cestriensi de
morte consanguinii eorum, illi de parentela ipsius interfecti fuerunt
incarcerati, and interfectores fuerunt a carcere liberati.

Item, Quidam homo interfecit quendam nobilem qui videlicet filium Goronu de
Heylyn nutriverat, and interfector captus fuit: Et cum quidam de parentela
praedicti interfecti peterent justiciam de eorum consanguineo a Domino
Justiciario Cestriensi, quidam eorum capti fuerunt, and interfector fuit in
Castello Domini Regis liberatus, and adhuc est ibi, denegata justicia
praedictae parentelae.

Item, Quidam nobiles vindicaverunt jus in quibusdam terris, and de mobilibus
suis obtulerunt Domino Regi magnam summam pecuniae pro justicia habenda per
rationem and veredictum proborum and legalium hominum de patria; quae quidem
terrae adjudicatae fuerunt, praedictis vendicantibus totam terram praedictam
cum omnibus aedificiis biadis, and aliis bonis in ipsis contentis, Dominus
Reginaldus de Gray; and sic amiserunt primo pecuniam quam pro terra pacaverunt,
and postea terram.

Item, Jurisdictionis nostrae est quod nullus extraneus extirparet sylvas
nostras, nisi prius habita licentia nostra; hoc non obstante, proclamatum fuit
apud Redolanum quod liceret unicuique Anglicano extirpare sylvas nostras sine
nostra licentia ad libitum eorum voluntatis, and quod nobis fuit prohibitum
dictas sylvas nostras extirpare.

Item, Terras quas probi homines a Domino Davide filio Leolini bonae memoriae
habuerunt per donationem praedicti Davidis abstulit praedictus Justiciarius a
praedictis probis hominibus.

Item, Quando aliquis ad villam de Ruthlan veniret cum mercandiis suis, si
refutaret illud quod Anglicus eidem offerret pro suis mercandiis, statim
duceretur ille Wallensis ad castrum, and emptor ibidem haberet rem quam
larginaverat, and Dominus Rex haberet pretium dictae rei, tunc Castellam dictum
Wallensem spoliatum and atrociter verberatum deliberabant, pacatis prius
Portario Castri quatuor denariis. Si vero aliquis Wallensis emeret aliquam rem
in villa de Ruthlan, Anglicus qualiscunque superveniret, and rem venditam dicto
Wallensi auferet ab ipso pro minori pretio quam dictus Wallensis solverat pro
eadem.

Item, Contra promissionem Domini Regis praedictis hominibus de Ros, ipse dedit
territorium villae de Maenam in Penmayn and Lhysfaen.

Item, Taurus cujusdam probi hominis deprehensus fuit in pratis Domini Regis
apud Ros, and captus, and Dominus ejus vocatus fuit ad placitum usque
Rodolanum, and fuit condemnatus in quinque libris occasion dicti tauri; bis
adivit Londinium pro justitia petenda, and nullam fuit assecutus, and in illis
duabus vicibus expendidit praedictus homo tres libras.

Item, Quidam nobiles de Cantreda de Ros emerunt officia pro certa summa
pecuniae; pacata pecunia, meritis suis non exigentibus, Dominus Justiciarius
Cestrensis abstulit ab eis eorum officia.

Item, Quidam rusticus Goronow ab Heylyn condemratus fuit in 17 l. bonae and
legalis monetae juris, ordine non servato.

Item, Goronow filius Heylyn accipit ad firmam territorium de Pennmaen and
Lhysfaen a Magistro Godfrido M. pro certa pecuniae summa, usque ad finem
quatuor annorum, quo facto Dominus Robertus de C. cum equis and armis, and cum
viginti quatuor equitibus venit ad inequitandum praedictum Goronow occasion
dictae terrae, ita quod sic non fuit securus transitus nec usque Rodolanum, nec
usque ad Justiciarios nisi cum forti Warnistura de sua parentela and etiam de
suis amicis.

Item, In reformationem pacis ultro factae and firmatae inter Dominum Regem,
and suos ex una part, and Dominum Principem and suos ex altera express
continebatur; quod omnes injuriae and transgressiones factae ex utraque part
penitus remitterentur; hoc non obstante, oppositum fuit contra quosdam nobiles
quoddam fore factum tempore guerrae, and statim capti fuerunt, nec potuerunt a
carcere liberari antequam ipsi pacarent sedecem Marcas,

Item, Cum Causae debent tractari and terminari secundum legem and
consuetudinem terrae nostrae, compelluntur homines Cantredae nostrae ad
jurandum in causis praedictis contra suam conscientiam, nec aliter jurare
patiuntur.

Praeterea nos coustavimus trecentas Marcas eundo ad Dominum Regem pro justitia
p^tenda in praedictis Articulis, ibidem morando, and ad propria redeundo; and
cum nos credebamus habere plenam justitiam de singulis Articulis praedictis,
Dominus Rex transmisit ad parts nostras Dominum Reginaldum de Gray, cui dictus
Dominus Rex totam terram ad firmam concessit, ad tractandos homines praedictae
Cantredae prout suae placeret voluntati; qui compulsit nos jurare per manum
suam cum deberemus jurare per manum Domini Regis, and ubi Crux Domini Regis
levari deberet, quod Crux praedicti Reginaldi levaretur, in signum quod ipse
erat verus Dominus. Dictus vero Reginaldus in suo adventu ad parts Walliae
vendidit quibusdam servientibus Domini Regis officia sua, quae praedicti
servientes prius emerant a Dom. Rege pro 23 Marcis, and illa officia non
deberent vendi nisi cum dominium dominorum mutaretur.

Item, Dominus Rex dedit Maredudo filio Madoc Magisterium satellitum pro suo
servitio, Dominus Reginaldus de Gray abstulit ab eo suum officium, nec a Domino
Rege assequi potuit aliquam justitiam.

Item, Unus de consilio praedicti Reginaldi nobis dixit ore tenus, scilicet
Cynwricus Fychan, quod in adventu praedicti Reginald ad parts Walliae, viginti
quatuor homines de probioribus hominibus cujuslibet Cantredae caperet ad
incarcerandos ipsos perpetuo vel decapitandos: Propter ista gravamina, and alia
quae dictus Reginaldus nobis fecit, and etiam propter minas quas ipse nobis
intulit, videlicet quod si mitteremus aliquos nuntios ad Curiam Domini Regis
pro justitia petenda decapitarentur. Multa alia damna nobis allata, and
injuriae factae; and quando mittebamus ad Curiam Domini Regis, nuntii non
permittebantur nec ausi fuerunt intrare, sed expendebant multa inutiliter; ob
ista gravamina aestimabamus nos esse liberos a juramento facto Domino Regis
coram Deo.

Item, Bled in Seis and Anjanus filius Genaf de Ros quoddam malefactum fecerunt
temporibus David filii Lewelini, and Henrici Regis, de homicidiis factis tunc
satisfactionem and emendam satisfacere monstraverunt; Et modo de novo
Reginaldus de Gray vellet and cogeret illam emendam renovare, donec oportuit
ipsos terras proprias relinquere.

Item, Census and obventiones quos solvimus de veteri moneta per medietatem
unius anni ante adventum novae monetae, cogerunt nos reddere eis novas monetas
pro veteri and hoc sub eodem numero.

Ista sunt gravamina per Dominum Regem and suos Justiciarios illata Rheso parvo
de Yystrad Tywy.
Primum est, Postquam dictus Rhys dedit and concessit Domino Regi castrum suum
apud Dynefowr post ultimam pacis formam; qui dictus Rhesus tunc temporis erat
in tentilio Domini Pain de Gadfry, eodem tempore interfecti fuerunt sex nobiles
viri Domini Rhys, de quibus satisfactionem nec justiciam umquam habuit quod
fuit eis damnum and gravamen.

Item, Johannes Giffard calumniavit eum Rhesum super haereditatem propriam apud
Hirwryn, quicquid Rhesus inquisivit a Domino Rege legem patriae suae, aut legem
comitatus Caermardden, in quo comitatu Antecessores dicti Rhys solebant habere
leges, quando fierent in unitatem Anglicorum, and sub eorum dominiis; quod idem
Rhys nullas leges habuit, and suam terram praedictam totaliter amisit; vellent
ipsum instringere in Comitatu Herefordiensi, ubi numquam antecessores ejus
responderunt.

Praeterea in terris praefati Rhesi talia gravamina fuerunt per Anglicos facta,
maxim pertinent ad Ecclesiasticos, videlicet in Ecclesia Sancti Davidis quae
vocatur Llangadawc fecerunt stabula, and meretrices collocaverunt, and omnia
bona quae in ea continebantur omnino asportaverunt, atque totos domos
combusserunt; and in eadem Ecclesia juxta aram percusserunt Capellanum cum
gladio ad caput ejus and eum reliquerunt semivivum.

Item, In eadem patria Ecclesiam Dyngad and Ecclesiam Llantredaf spoliaverunt
and combusserunt; caeterasque Ecclesias in partibus illis omnino spoliaverunt
calcibus, and libris, ac omnibus aliis ornamentis and rebus.

Gravamina Lewelini filii Rhys, and Howeli fratris ejus per Dominum Regem
illata sunt haec.
Postquam in formam pacis inter Dominum Henricum tunc temporis Regem Angliae
and Dominum Principem apud Rhydchwnna, tunc praefatus Rex concessit, and per
Cartas suas confirmavit praefato Principi homagium praedictorum Nobibium exos.
So long as.
Praedicti Nobiles fuerunt fideles and constantes cum praefato Principe, juxta
eorum donationem and Cartarum suarum confirmationem: Edwardus nunc Rex Angliae
praedictos Nobiles dehaereditavit, denegando eisdem omnes leges and
consuetudines Walliae; ita quod non habuerunt terras suas nec per legem, nec
per gratiam.

Ista sunt gravamina, damna, seu molestiae per Anglicos illata filiis Maredudi
filii Oweni.
Primum est quamquam Dominus Rex concessit praedictis Nobilibus suas proprias
haereditates post pacis formam, videlicet Geneur'glyn and Creudhyn; praefatus
vero Rex, contra suam donationem and pacis formam, terris supradictis
antedictos Nobiles dehaeriditavit, denegando eidem omnes leges and
consuetudines Walliae, and Angliae, atque Comitatus Caermardhyn.

Secundum est quod praefatus Rex in suo comitatu de Cardigan, per suos
Justiciarios antedictos Nobiles compellit, ut ipsi traderent judicium super
ignobiles ac subditos Patriae, and quod tales homines e Comisso judicium super
ipsos opponerent, ubi numquam antecessores eorum ab Anglicis talia sustinuerunt.

Tertium est, quod Justicarii Domini Regis Curiam eorum Nobilium abstulerunt,
compellendo homines suos proprios coram eis satisfacere, quia de jure coram
praedictis Nobilibus deberent satisfacere.

Quartum est, quod quoddam Naufragium in terris antedictorum Nobilium fuit, qui
quidem Nobiles bona Naufragii receperunt, sicut antecessores eorum fecerunt,
and hoc non fuit eis prohibitum per aliquos ex part Regis: Antedictus vero Rex
contra eorum consuetudinem and legem, occasion illius Naufragii eosdem
damnavit in octoginta Marcis sterlingorum; atque bona quae in Naufragio
continebantur omnino asportaverunt.

Quintum est, quod nullus nostrum in Comitatu Uffegd de Cardigan ausus esset
venire inter Anglicos propter timorem carceris and nisi fuisset propter
periculum Nobilibus Metropd. nihil contra honorem Domini Regis moverent.

Significant vero quod omnes Christiani habent leges and consuetudines in eorum
propriis terris; Judaei vero inter Anglicos habent leges, ipsi vero in terris
suis, and eorum antecessores habuerunt leges immutabiles and consuetudines,
donec Anglia post ultimam guerram ab eis leges suas abstulerunt.

Memorandum de quaerelis omnium Nobilium virorum de Ystradatuy eisdem latis ac
factis per Rogerum de Clyfford, and Rogerum Crosc^l vicem Domini Rogeri de
Clyfford gerentem contra privilegium, justitiam, and consuetudinem praedictorum
virorum de Ystratuy, ut dicunt and probant.
Primus Articulus est quod cum dicti Rogeri cogerunt dictos homines de
Ystradatuy reddere sibi pro consuetudinibus suis viginti Marcas sterlingorum,
and post solutionem dictae pecuniae cito fregerunt in hunc modum, quod
posuerunt super 17 viros judicantes secundum jus Angliae; quod numquam fuit
consuetudo nec privilegium dictae patriae.

Item. Madecus filius Bledyn condemnatus fuit in quatuor Marcio injuste.

Item. Lewelinus Rufus condemnatus fuit in quinque Marcis and 17 averiis contra
privilegium and consuetudinem patriae.

Item. Quod ipsi Rogeri fecerunt forestam super terram propriam virorum
patriae: Et propter pedem unius Cervi inventum in ore canis alicujus, tres
homines fuerunt spoliati omnino.

Item. Michael ab Ygustyl condemnatus fuit in december solidis pro facto patris
sui, quadraginta annis elapsis.

Item. Cogerunt parents Ennii a Strabonis ad reddendum suum relevagum in vita
sua.

Item. Quod ipsi posuerunt super nos omnes satellitos de Anglicis, quod numquam
fuit nostra dimidietas.

Item. Dati fuimus Domino Mauritio de Crumy, and venditi fuimus Domino Rogero
de Clyfford, quod numquam fuit super parents nostros.

Item. Relicta Roberti de Monte alto petiit, a Domino Rege tertiam partem
terrae de Monte alto in Ward, and dijudicata fuit coram Domino Rege quod
numquam dicta terra fuit in Ward data.

Hi sunt Articuli quaestionum illati ab hominibus de Penlhyn, injuste per
Constabularium Albi Monasterii and suos cives.
Primo. Cynwric filius Madoci fuit spoliatus ab eis tempore pacis octo libris,
and quatuor bobus, and blado laboris unius aratri, per duos annos and valor
trium librarum a tribus hominibus ejusdem; affirmat etiam quod solvit 16 libras
per octo in valor, and majorem habuit injuriam imponendo manus in ipsum quam
totum quod amisit, quia tunc erat Constabularius Domini Principis apud Penllyn:
Non fuit alia causa dictae spoliationis nisi quia dicebatur invenire 24 garbas
de decimis in domo cujusdam hominis dicti Cynwrici.

Item. Adam Preco condemnatus fuit in septem solidis and octo denariis, and
Equa valoris unius librae, imponendo manus in ipsum and liberando latronem
dictae equae, quia ipse venerat ibidem cum dicto latrone capto.

Item. Ednevot ab Gruffydh condemnatus fuit in 27 s. nec fuit causa nisi quia
vendidit equam unam ad unum miliare citra villam, sicut solebant a tempore quo
non extat memoria, quando veniebant ad nuadinas.

Item. Adaf Ddu condemnatus fuit in 30 s. eo quod duo boves quos proposuerat
vendere in foro Albi Monarterii exibant villam ipso connivente, and captus fuit
and detentus usque ad solutionem 30 s. nec ipsi boves exierant nisi de Plateo
qua stabant usque ad aliam Plateam.

Item. Biryt filius Gwyn, condemnatus fuit in quinque solidis, and in carcerem
ductus; eo quod percussit unum bovem indomitum ipsum calcantem in foro.

Item. Yorwerch ab Gorgonon condemnatus fuit 70 s. eo quod evaserat quondam de
carcere eorum tempore guerrae, and in tempore pacis inventus fuit in dicta
villa, and hoc contra formam pacis initae inter Dominum Regem, and Dominum
Principem.

Item. Duo famuli Kenwric ap Gruffydh condemnati fuerunt in duabus Marcis, eo
quod dicebant ipsos non solvisse toletum postquam solverant.

Item. Caducanus Niger famulus Constabularii de Penllyn captus fuit and
condemnatus in 6 s. and 4 d. eo quod nolebat recipere veterem monetam pro nova.

Item. Gruffydh ap Goronow tercinarius Domini Principis spoliatus fuit uno bove
valoris 11 s. and 8 d. and postquam arraveret Constabularius cum dicto bove per
septem menses, A Servant
solvit dictus Gruffynus pro dicto bove, 40 d.

Item. Howel ab David spoliatus fuit per satellites albi Monasterii duobus
solidis extra villam, eo quod denegaverat prius munera ut solent satellites
petere.

Item. David ab Gronow ab Eynion spoliatus fuit 30 s. eo quod quidam Cives albi
Monasterii dixit, quod quidam de Penlhyn, qui mortuus fuerat, denegabatur ei in
quibusdam rebus.

Item. Duo famuli Y bongam capti fuerunt and condemnati in duabus libris, eo
quod posuerunt manum in quendam latronem qui spoliabat eos in villa per noctem,
and liberaverunt latronem.

Item. Eneyon filius Ichael captus and verberatus fuit, and spoliatus duobus
bobus valoris, 24 s. and 6 d. nulla alia de causa, nisi quod boves ipso
connivente moverunt se de platea ad aliam plateam.

Item. Adaf ap Ychael condemnatus fuit in duabus libris pro una libra, and ipse
posuerat in juramento cujusdam civis de albo Monasterio quod non tenebatur nisi
in una libra pro Principe, nec voluit jurare, and ideo spoliatus fuit una libra.

Item. Guyan Maestran spoliatus fuit 5 s. eo quod dicebat quod quidam Mercator
de Ardydwy tenebatur eis in quibusdam rebus, cum ipse nec erat de dicta
Balliva: Item condemnatus fuit in 8 d. quia dicebant ipsum vendere quasdam oves
extra villam cum ipse non vendiderat.

Item. Famulus Lewelini ab Gwyn spoliatus fuit septem ovibus, and 5 s. and suo
pallio, eo quod dicebant ipsum esse de Domino Griffydh ab Gwyn cum ipse non
erat.

Item. Iorwerch ab Meylir captus fuit and condemnatus in 15 s. cum pallio, eo
quod denegavit dare munus satellitibus quod petebant, ipsi finxerunt eum in
villa pernoctare.

Item. Cives albi Monasterii rapuerunt a Madoco Rufo filio Ychael unum bovem
valoris, 11 s. and 6 d.

Ista omnia facta fuerunt per Henricum Gambe^ dicti loci Constabularium, cum
aliis innumerabilibus Articulis.

Item. Ybicre captus suit in negotio Domini Principis, and condemnatus in 5 s.
absque aliqua causa.

Haec sunt gravamina Goronow filii Heylyn, viz.
Quod quidem Villanus dictus Coronon vocatus fuit ad Curiam Domini Regis
occasion indebitae causae. Tunc dictus Goronow venit ad suum villanum
defendendum, and petiit pro ipso veritatem a Domino Justiciario, aut Legem qua
utuntur homines suae patriae; omnibus autem his eidem denegatis, dictus
villanus condemnatus fuit in 27 libris, and tribus obolis: Tunc dictus Goronow
adivit Londonium pro justitia habenda, and expendit quinque Marcas and quatuor
Solidos, and promissa fuit sibi justitia, and nullam fuit assecutus.

Item. Quidam Nobilis fuit interfectus, videlicet qui nutriverat filium dicti
Goronow, and ille interfector captus fuit and deportatus fuit apud Castrum de
Ruthlan: Tunc dictus Goronow and quidem de parentela interfecti petierunt
justitiam de interfectore: Tunc denegata eis justitia, quidam fuerunt
incarcerati, and ille interfector fuit in Castello liberatus. Tunc dictus
Goronow iterum adivit Londonium propter supradicta gravamina ad justitiam
petendam, and expendit, 20 Marcas, 3 s. 4 d. Et Dominus Rex promisit eidem
plenariam justitiam, and nullam fuit adeptus cum pervenit ad patriam suam.

Item. Tertio ex defectu justitiae oportuit dictum Goronow adire Londonium
occasionibus supradictis pro justitia petenda, and expendit illa vice 18
Marcas, 6 s. 8 d. bonae and legalis Monetae; and tunc simpliciter promisit
Dominus Rex eidem justitiam perhibere; and quando credebat habere justitiam,
tunc venit Reginaldus de Gray, and dixit aperte quod ipse deberit tractare
totam patriam per chartas Domini Regis, and abstulit totam Ballivam a dicto
Goronow; quam sibi Dominus Rex concessit, and vendidit illam Ballivam ad
voluntatem suam, and tunc petiit dictus Goronow justitiam a Domino Reginaldo de
gravaminibus supradictis, and nullam fuit adeptus.

Item. Dictus Goronow recepit terram, videlicet, Penmaen and Llysfaen ad firmam
de Godfrido Merlyn, usque ad finem quatuor annorum pro certa pecuniae summa.
Tunc Robertus de Cruquer venit cum equis suis and armis ad quaerendum dictam
terram per vim, and quia dictus Goronow non permitteret auferre dictam terram
ab eodem usque terminum praesignatum, tunc vocatus fuit ad Curiam dictus
Goronow illa occasion; Tunc venit Reginaldus de Gray, cum viginti quatuor
equitibus armatis ad proponendum capere dictum Goronow, vel ad eundem
decapitandum; and quia viderunt quod non possent implere suum propositum illo
die, vocaverunt dictum Goronow crassino die apud Ruthlan, and tunc dictus
Goronow habuit consilium ita quod non deberent adire dictam Curiam: Iterum
dictus Goronow vocatus fuit adplacitum apud Caerwys, and non ausus fuit adire
dictum placitum nisi per conductum Domini Episcopi Asaphensis, quia dictus
Reginaldus and sui complures ibidem erant armati.

Item. Propter ista gravamina de quibus nullam habuit justitiam nisi laborare
and expendere duas libr. quatuor Marcas, and 9 d; and quia non ausus fuit in
propria persona adire Curiam, misit quendam nuncium deportantem duas literas,
unam ad Dominum Regem, and aliam ad fratrem Lewelinum, ad signandum Domino Regi
quod amitteret totam patriam, and dictum Goronow quia non observavit illud quod
eisdem promisit; and quia nullam possent homines de Ros and Arglifeld assequi
justitiam, and quia noluit corrigere sive emendare ista gravamina propter hoc
amisit totam patriam.

Supplicant sanctitati vestrae, Domine Archiepiscope Cantuariensis totius
Angliae Primas, Nobiles viri de Tegengyl, and vobis demonstrant quod cum
praedicti Nobiles fecerunt homagium Domino Edwardo Regi Angliae, ipse Rex
eisdem promisit quod eosdem immunes observaret and indemnes, tam in bonis,
libertatibus, juribus, jurisdictionibus, privilegiis quibus usi fuerunt tempore
Henrici Regis per suum obtentum privilegium; ex quibus privilegiis fuerunt
postmodo spoliati.

Imprimis. Juribus and consuetudinibus patriae fuerunt spoliati, viz.
praedictus Edwardus compellendo quod ipsi procederent in causis secundum legem
Anglicanam, cum secundum tenorem privilegii sui secundum legem Wallicanam
procedere debuissent, viz. apud Tref Edwyn, and apud Ruthlan, and apud Caerwys;
and optimati de patria fuerunt manu capti quia ipsi provocabant quod ipsi
procederent in causa apud Tref Edwyn secundum legem and consuetudinem
Wallicanam secundum tenorem privilegii.

Secundo. Quia unus Justiciarius duceret in causis peragendis, alius suus
praedecessor in irritum revocaret, viz. in causa Davidis Reginaldus de Gray
recitavit processum quem suus Antecessor ratum habuit, and etiam approbavit.

Tertio. Quod fi unus Nobilis de patria fuisset propter calumniam sibi
impositam captus, quod non remitterent eundem pro cautione fidevissoria
evadere, Surety.
quod facere debuissent.

Quarto. Quod tres unius Nobilis deducti ad Castrum fuerunt de Flynt, propter
parvam accusationem, una cum Averiis suis, nec potuerunt de Castro devenire,
nec dilationem obtinere donec unusquisque dedit unum bovem Constabulario de
Flynt, and donec solverunt tres libras Kynwrico Seis pro dilatione habenda.

Quinto. Reginaldus de Gray terras virorum de Merton dedit and concessit Abbati
de Basingwerk ordinis Cisterciend. contra legem Wallicanam, and patriae
consuetudinem; and contra formam pacis initae inter Dominum Lewelinum Principem
and Dominum Regem, viz. 16. Catatatas terrae.

Sexto. Mirantur Nobiles and optimati patriae pro eo quod Dominus Rex fecit
aedificare Castrum super terram and possessionem magnatum, and mandavit Dominus
Rex Justiciario suo quod ipse solveret eque bonam terram illis spoliatis and
adhuc aliquam terram, nec suae terrae aestimationem sunt consecuti in Flynt.

Septimo. Reginaldus de Gray non permitteret possessores sylvarum uti sylvis
suis, donec ab eisdem pretium and praemium fuisset consecutus, and aliis
rusticis gratis permitteret sylvam praedictorum abscidere, cum non debuissent
secundum patriae consuetudinem and legem Wallicanam.

Octavo. Cum homines de Cyrchynan fecerunt pactum cum Domino Rege, quod cum
ipsi concederent dimidietatem cujusdam prati, ad hoc quod Dominus Rex non
permitteret sylvam praedictorum abscidere Howelo filio Gruffydd praesente, and
most modum Reginaldus de Gray praedictum pratum infirmavit, viz. concedendo
aliis quod absciderent sylvam praedictorum, and eosdem dimidietate prati sui
spoliando.

Nono. Filius Kynwrici ab Goronow fuit captus apud Ruthlan culpa sua minime
praecedente, nisi vellet pignus suum acquietare a quadam muliere* Redeem the
Gage.
and Constabularius de Ruthlan fecit eundem detradi in carcerem injuriose, nec
potuit exinde deliberari donec praedictus fuit condemnatus ultra suorum bonorum
hypotheca. Value.


Decimo. Cum Ballivus de Ruthlan erat in convivio apud villam Four Hutmus de
Limayl quendam virum Nobilem crudeliter vulneravit in praesentia Ballivi
supradicti; cujus vulneris occasion praedictus Hutmus fuit in octo libris
condemnatus; and quum ille cui injuria fuisset facta petere voluisset
praedictas libras, eundem fecit detrudi in carcerem una.

Vndecimo. Nuntii Reginaldi de Gray proposuerunt facere illud quod erat
absurdum and dissonum juris secundum Canonicas sanctiones; videlicet petere ab
eisdem quod ipsi ararent Reginaldo de Gray, and quod ipsi seminarent illam
araturam; and illi fuerunt Nuntii, viz. Kynwricus Seis and Hutmus de Limayl,
quod praedictus vero Kynwricus in praesentia omnium de patria juravit, nisi
omnes de patria ararent quod ipsi infra tempus poeniterent, and ipsi multum
timuerunt metu qui potuit cadere in constantem virum,

Duodecimo. Quod Praecones de Tegeyngl emerunt officium Praeconiae pro 30
Marcis a Domino Rege, and postmodum Reginaldus de Gray praedictos praecones tam
pecunia quam praeconia spoliavit contra legem and consuetudinem Anglicanam.

Tertiodecimo. Septem Nobiles fuerunt interfecti minus just ab Anglicis, and
adhuc parents praedictorum aliquam satisfactionem non habuerunt, cum illi
malefactores fuerunt capti; and postmodum praedictos malefactores remiserunt
praedicti Constabularii impunitos.

Quartodecimo. Constabularius unus de Ruthlan detradit duos Satellites Domini
Regis in carcere, pro eo quod ipsi tenuerunt aliquem Anglicum qui grave
delictum commisit hominem alium vulnerando.

Isti omnes Articuli in praemissis nominati, fuerunt perpetrati contra
praedictorum virorum libertatem, jurisdictionem, and privilegium, and contra
legem and consuetudinem Wallicanam; videlicet, quod non erant Ausi eorum
quaerelas Domino Regi per suos nuncios denuntiare, propter metum Reginaldi and
timorem, qui metus potuit cadere in constantem virum: quia praedictus
Reginaldus sua voce Dilvada fuit protestatus; Openly.
quod sin inveniret nuntios praedictorum quod eosdem decapitaret prout nobis ex
part unius ex consilio suo fuit certive intimatum. In tantum quod lingua non
potest proferre, nec penna scribere in quantum praedicti homines de Tegeyngl
fuerunt aggravati.

Conqueritur vobis, Domine Archiepiscope Cantuariensis totius Angliae Primas,
Lewelinus filius Griffini filii Madoci de Constabulario de Cruce Oswaldi Regis,
and de hominibus ejusdem Villae qui praedictum Lewelinum tertia part cujusdam
Villae quae vocatur Ledrot, and Curia patris sui, sine observatione juris
patriae suae vel consuetudine inequiter spoliarunt.

Praeterea. Praedictus Constabularius and sui complures eundem Lewelinum
communi pastura, qua praedictus Lewelinus usus fuit temporibus retroactis,
ordine juris patriae minime observato, spoliarunt, and in 70 libris occasion
praedictae pasturae condemnaverint. Caeterum Dominus Rex Angliae concessit
quasdam literas cuidam Bastardo, scil. Griffino Fychan ab Cynlhaeth, ad
litigandum contra eundem Lewelinum pro toto Dominio suo obtinendo* quarum
literarum occasion idem Lewelinus expendit c c l. sterlingorum legalis
usualisae monetae.

Iterum. Praedictus Constabularius compulsit praedictum Lewelinum ad mitrendum
duos suos Nobiles ad eos suspendendos ad praedictum Constabularium quicquid
viri Nobiles suspendi minime debuissent, quam suspensionem nollent parents
praedictorum hominum sustinuisse pro ccc libris sterlingorum. Postmidum
praedictus Constabularius incacerravit bis 60 homines praedicti Lewelini nulla
praemissa ratione, nisi quod quidam gareo emisit quandam vocem, nec potuerunt
evadere suum carcerem donec quilibet eorum solvit december solidos pro sua
deliberatione.

Item. Quando homines praedicti Lewelini venirent ad forum ad suos boves
vendendos, praedictus Constabularius faceret boves deduci ad Castrum, nec
postmodum boves restitueret, nec pretium solveret venditori: Praesertim idem
Constabularius and sui ceperunt jumenta praedicti Lewelini ad terram suam
propriam, and de eisdem jumentis fecerunt suam voluntatem.

Praeterea. Justiciarii Domini Regis compulserunt praedictum Lewelinum ad
tradendum quandam villam filiis Eneoni filii Griffini; qui quidem praedictam
villam, nec a se, nec a praedecessoribus fuerunt consecuti, ordine juris
patriae suae in hac part minime observato.

Idem. Praedictus Constabularius abstulit equum Ballivi praedicti Lewelini sine
aliqua ratione, nec sibi aliquid debebatur; nec adhuc praedictus Ballivus
satisfactionem aliquam est consecutus.

Caeterum. Quando praedictus Lewelinus volebat adire villam quae vocatur
Caerlleon cum literis Domini Regis ad comperiendum ibidem in die sibi
assignata; filii Griffini filii Gwenynny and Armigeri Domini Rogeri Starainge
ex consilio Rogeri eundem Lewelinum and suos incarcerarunt in sui injuriam and
suorum non modicam laesionem; quam injuriam and laesionem nollet praedictus
Lewelinus and sui sustinuisse pro ccc Marcis sterlingorum; nec ab eisdem potuit
evadere donec invenit pro se sufficientem cautionem.

His and aliis receptis in scriptis accessit, Archiepiscopus ad Dominum Regem;
supplicans ei humiliter ut gravamina suppradicta dignetur avertere, and ea
correctione debita terminare: Et saltem pro tanto habere excessus Wallensium
excusatos: Qui respondit Wallenses in injuriis sibi illatis esse excusabiles,
quia omni tempore paratus extiterat omni facere justitiam conquerenti: Quo
audito, Archiepiscopus Regi iterum supplicavit ut permitteret Wallenses pro
suis gravaminibus exponendis and remediis afferendis ad ipsum habere accessum
liberum and regressum: Qui respondit quod libere permitteret eos ad se accedere
sed and redire; si secundum justitiam regressus eorum meritis responderet.
Quibus auditis accessit Archiepiscopus ad principem Walliae in Snawdoniam ut
tam ipsum quam Davidem fratrem suum and caeteros Wallenses ad aliquam
humilitatis regulam ipsorum animos inclinaret; per quam posset qui ipsorum
nuntius regiam clementiam ad ipsos admittendos in gratiam inclinare. Post
varios autem tractatus respondit princeps; quod paratus erat voluntati regiae
se supponere duobus praesuppositis, salva scilicet conscientia sua qua populo
suo assistere tenebatur; salva etiam condescentia status fui. Quae cum
Archiepiscopus retulisset Domino Regi, respondit Dominus Rex quod nullum alium
de pace volebat cum Principe ac subditis suis habere tractatum, nisi quod ipsi
supponerent se in omnibus regiae voluntati: Et cum constaret Archiepiscopo
Wallenses nullo modo velle se regiae voluntati supponere, nisi praecite in
forma eis tolerabili and accepta, tractatum habuit ex permissione Domini Regis
cum magnatibus tunc praesentibus, qui omnes consenserunt in Articulos infra
scriptos, quos per fratrem Johannem Wallensem inscriptos principi and suis
Archiepiscopus destinavit.

Primo. Quod Dominus Rex de quatuor Cantredis and terris ab eo datis,
Magnatibus suis nullum vult habere tractatum, nec etiam de Insula Anglesey.

Idem. De tenentibus eorum Cantredorum si ad suam pacem venerint, proponit
facere prout condecet Regiam Majestatem, credimus tamen quod aget cum eis
misericorditer si ad pacem venerint, and ad hoc proponimus una cum caeteris
amicis efficaciter laborare, sperantes efficaciter exaudiri.

Item. De facto Domini Lewelini nullum potuimus aliud habere responsum nisi
quod simpliciter and absolute conformet ad Domini Regis voluntatem; ut credimus
firmiter quod Dominus Rex cum eo aget miserecorditer, and ad hoc intendimus cum
totis viribus laborare cum caeteris amicis exaudiendis ut confidimus cum
effectu.

Primo. Quod proceres hanc formam gratiae regiae conceperunt; ut videlicet
Domino Lewelino se Regiae gratiae submittente, provideatur ei per Regem
honorifice in mill libratis sterlingorum de aliquo honorifico comitatu, in
aliquo loco Angliae; ita tamen quod praedictus Lewelinus ponat Dominum Regem in
Seysina Snaudonum absolute, perpetue and quiet. Et ipse Rex filiae Principis
secundum condicestiam sui proprii Sanguinis providebit, and ad hoc sperant se
posse Regis animum inclinare.

Item. Si contingat Lewelinum ducere uxorem and habere de ea puellam masculam,
intendunt impetrare Proceres a Domino Rege, ut proles illa succedat perpetuo
haereditario Lewelini in terra masculorum liberorum videlicet Comitatu.

Item. De populo Principi immediate subjecto tam in Snaudon quam alibi
providebitur secundum Deum p^out complete saluti ejusdem populi and honori; and
ad hoc est Regia clementia satis prona, populo desiderans consolabiliter
providere.

Primo. Quod si ad honorem Dei and suum juxta crucis assumptae debitum velit in
terrae sanctae subsidium proficisci, providebitur ei honorifice secundum
condescentiam Status sui, ita tamen quod non redeat nisi per Regiam clementiam
vocatus: Rogabimus etiam Dominum Regem, and speramus efficaciter exaudiri, ut
provideat proli suae.

His omnibus motu nostro subjungimus Wallensibus omnia pericula imminere long
gravius quam eis diximus oraculo vivae vocis; scribimus dura valde sed long
durius est obrui vi and armis, and in fine totaliter extirpari, quoniam omni
die pericula nobis imminentia aggravantur.

Item. Long difficilius est omni tempore in guerra esse in angustia cordis and
corporis vivere, and semper in insidiis malignari, and cum hoc vivere and mori
in peccato mortali continuo and rancore.

Item. De quo doleremus valde si ad pacem minime veniatis, indubitanter timemus
contra vos debere sententiam Ecclesiasticam intolerabiliter aggravari pro
excessibus vestris; de quibus non poteritis vos aliquatenus excusare in quibus
invenietis misericordiam, si ad pacem veniatis and de his nobis respondeatur in
scriptis.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino J. Dei gratia Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi ac totius Angliae Prrimati suus in Christo devotus filius
Lewelinus Princeps Walliae, Dominus Snaudon, salutem cum desideriis
benevolentiae filialis ac reverentiis multimodis and honoribus.
SAncte Pater, sicut vosmet consuluistis, ad gratiam Regiam parati sumus venire
sub forma tamen nobis secura and honesta: Sed quia fotma contenta in Articulis
nobis missis minime secura est and honesta prout nobis and consilio nostro
videtur; and de qua multum admirantur omnes audientes, eo quod plus tendit ad
destructionem and ruinam populi nostri ac nostram, quam ad nostram honestatem
and securitatem, nullo modo permittet consilium nostrum nos in ea consentire si
vellemus; alii quoque Nobiles and populus nobis subjectus nullo modo
consentirent in eandem ob indubitatam destructionem and dissipationem quae inde
eis possent evenire.

Tamen supplicamus vestrae sanctae parternitati quatenus ad reformationem pacis
debitae, honestae, and secutae, ob quam tot labores assumpsistis, proinde
laboretis, collationem habentes ad Articulos quos vobis mittimus in scriptis:
Honorabilius enim est and rationi magis consonum ut de Domino Rege teneamus
terras in quibus jus habemus, quam nos exhaeredare and eas tradere alienis.
Datum apud Garthcelyn.

Primo. Quod licet Dominus Rex de quatuor Cantredis and aliis terris ab eo
datis magnatibus suis, ac de Insula Anglesey nullum voluerit habere tractatum,
tamen consilium Principis non permittit, si contingat aliquam pacem fieri, quin
tractetur de premissis; eo quod isti Cantredi sunt de puro Principis tenemento,
in quibus merum jus habuerunt Principes and praedecessores sui a temporibus
Cambri filii Bruti, tum quia sunt de principatu, cujus confirmationem Princeps
obtinet pro bonae memoriae Octobonum sedis Apostolicae legatum in Anglia, Pope.
consensu Domini Regis and sui Patris ad hoc intervenienti, sicut patet Chartas
eorum inspicienti, tum quia etiam equius est quod very haeredes teneant dictos
Cantredos de Domino Rege pro pecunia and servitiis consuetis, quam eos dari
extraneis and Advenis, qui and si fuerunt regere aliquam tamen per vim and
potentiam.

Dicunt etiam comiter omnes tenentes de omnibus Cantredis Walliae quod non sunt
ausi venire ad voluntatem Regis, ut de eis disponat secundum Regiam Majestatem.

Primo. Quod Dominus Rex nec pacta, nec juramenta, nec Chartas servavit ab
initio versus Dominum suum Principem and ipsos,

Secundo. Quia regales in Ecclesias and Ecclesiasticas personas inivit
crudelissimam tyrannidem.

Tertio. Quod non tenentur ad praedicta, cum sint homines Principis qui etiam
paratus est de dictis tenementis Domino Regi obedire per servitia consueta. Ad
id quod dicit quod Princeps veniet simpliciter and absolute ad voluntatem
Domini Regis: Respondetur quod cum nulli de dictis Cantredis ausi sint venire
ad talem voluntatem propter causas praedictas, nec comitas eorum permittat
Principem venire ad dictam voluntatem modo praedicto.

Item. Quod proceres regni procurent ut Domino Principi provideatur in mill
libratis in aliquo loco Angliae; dicatur quod illam provisionem non debet
acceptare cum sit procurata per dictos proceres, qui nituntur ad
exhaereditationem Principis, ut habeant terras suas in Wallia. Item idem
princeps non tenetur dimittere haereditatem suam and progenitorum suorum in
Wallia a tempore Bruti, and etiam sibi confirmatam per Romanae sedis Legatum,
ut dictum est; and terram in Anglia acceptare, unde linguam, mores and leges ac
consuetudines ignorant; ubi possent etiam sibi quaedam malitiori imponi ex odio
inveterato a vicinis Anglicis quibus terra illa privaretur in perpetuum.

Item. Ex quo Rex proponit privare Principem sua pristina haereditate, non
videtur probabile quod Rex permitteret ei habere terram in Anglia ubi nullum
jus videtur habere. Et si etiam non permitteretur Principi terra sterilis and
inculta jure haereditario ab antiquo and debita in Wallia; nullatenus
permitteretur eidem in Anglia terra fertilis culta and habundans.

Item. Quod dictus Princeps ponat Dominum Regem in Seysino Snawdon absolute,
perpetue and quiet: Dicatur quod cum Snawdon sit de appendiciis principatus
Walliae, quem ipse and antecessores sui tenuerunt a tempore Bruti, ut dictum
est; consilium suum non permittit eum renuntiare dicto loco, and locum nimis
sibi debitum in Anglia receptare.

Item. Populus Snawdon dicit, quod licet Princeps vellet dare Regi Seysinam
eorundem, ipsi tamen nollent homagium facere alicui extraneo, cujus linguam,
mores, legesque penitus ignorant. Quia sic posset contingere eos in perpetuum
captivari, ac crudeliter tractari, sicut alii Cantredi circumquaque per
Ballivos Regis ac alios regales alias tractati fuerunt, crudelius quam
Saraceni; prout patet in rotulis quos vobis, miserunt sancte pater. Ista sunt
dicenda pro Davide fratre Principis. Quod cum voluerit terram sanctam adire hoc
faciet voluntary and ex voto pro Deo non pro homine, unde invitus non
peregrinabitur Deo dante; Qui coacta servitia Deo novit displicere. Et si
contingat ipsum in posterum terram sanctam adire bona ductus voluntate, non
propter hoc deberent ipse and haeredes sui in perpetuum exhaereditari; immo
potius praemium obtinere. Praeterea quia Princeps, and sui causa odii, ad
aliquos concipiendi, vel lucri captandi non moverunt guerram alienas terras
invadendo; sed suam propriam haereditatem jura libertatesque, necnon suorum
defendendo; Dominusque Rex and sui odio inveterato, and causa lucrandi terras
nostras guerram fecit: Credimus in hoc justam guerram nos fovere, and speramus
in hac Deum nos velle juvare, ac in Ecclesiarum devastatores divinam ultionem
convertere, qui Ecclesias funditus destruxerunt ac combusserunt, sacra ex eis
rapuerunt, Sacerdotes, Clericos religiosos, claudos, surdos, mutos, insantes,
ubera lactentes, ac debiles and miserabiles personas, ut usque sexu occiderunt;
and alia enormia perpetrarunt, sicut in dictis rotulis vobis transmissis
contineatur: Unde absit a sancta paternitate vestra sententiam aliquam
fulminare in alios quam in illos qui praedicta perpetrarunt. Nos enim qui
regalibus praedicta passi fuimus, speramus a vobis super praemissis paternum
solatium, and remedium obtinere; and in praedictos sacrilegos eorumque
fautores, qui nullo super his privilegio defenduntur, animadvertere; ne prae
defectu dignae correctionis seu ultionis in eos exercendo praedicta mala in
perpetuum per alios trahantur in exemplum.

Mirantur etiam quamplures in terra nostra, quod consuluistis nobis dimittere
terram nostram propriam, and alienam adire inter hosts nostros comersando;
quia ex quo non possumus pacem habere in terra quae nostra est ipso jure
nostro, minime poterimus in aliena terra inter hosts nostros pacifice
conservari: Et licet durum sit in guerra and insidiis vitam ducere; durius
tamen est funditus destrui, and ad nihilum, nisi Deus avertat, deduci populum
Christianum qui nihil aliud quaerit nisi sua jura defendere; Unde necessitas ad
hoc nos cogit, and inimicorum cupiditas non offendit; and vos, sancte pater,
coram nobis dixistis, quod vos sententiastis in omnes qui impediunt pacem causa
odii vel lucri; sed manifestum est qui sunt illi qui guerrant istis causis.

Timor enim mortis, and incarcerationis, vel perpetuae exhaereditationis, nulla
observatio foederum pactorum vel chartarum, tyrannica dominatio, vel multa alia
consimilia cogunt nos esse in guerris; and hoc Deo and vobis ostendimus, and
petimus a vobis paternum adjutorium, ut patet in literis nostris.

Ad hoc multi alii in regno Angliae offenderunt Regem and tamen nullos
exhaeredavit in perpetuum, ut dicitur; unde si aliqui ex nostris ipsum
offenderunt injuste, dignum est ut satisfaciant prout possint sine
exhaeredatione; and sicut in vobis confidimus, supplicamus quod ad hoc
laboretis sancte pater: Nam etsi nobis imponatur quod fregimus pacem, tamen
illi verius fregerunt qui nullum foedus vel pactum nobis servaverunt; qui
nullam emendam de quaerimoniis nobis fecerunt, ut patet in rotulis.

Primo auditis rescripsit Archiepiscopus Wallensibus in haec verba:
IN nomine Domini, Amen. Cum nos frater J. permissione divina Cantuariensis
Ecclesiae minister humilis totius Angliae primas, scientes nostro incumbere
officio, pro vobis Domine Leweline Princeps Walliae ^ac subditis vestris
exponere nos and nostra spretis viarum incommodis and periculis, vestram
adjuverimus praesentiam oves erroneas reducturi; and speculatoris fungentis
officio vobis mysteriae vivae vocis diximus pericula quae genti vestrae
videbamus luce clarius imminere, subjunctis remediis eorundem; test optantes
altissimo juxta pontificale debitum cuilibet vestrum Ecclesiam minimo de
corpore nostro pontem facere ad salutis littora reducendo. Tandem vestris
auditis precibus and angustiis eas ut necessitatis vestrae nuntius
praesentavimus regiae majestati, quem ab olim ad poenitentes adversarios
introitum scimus esse propitium; ut quidam de vestris and aliis ut nobis certis
constat indiciis ipsius clementia abutantur. Tractavimus insuper cum magnatibus
and proceribus Angliae praesentibus de modifacione gratiae regiae ipsorum
assistentia nostris vobis supplicationibus impretranda, cujus modificationis
seriem per servum Dei fratrem Johannem Wallensem vobis misimus in scriptum, una
cum consilio nostro quod vobis secundum Deum salubrius videbatur; vos autem
deliberationem vestram nobis in quadam remisistis cedula per eundem, cujus
cedulae pernitiosas latebras vobis paterno affectu praesentibus aperimus. Primo
igitur dictis vos juri nolle cedere quatuor Cantredarum, quia progenitores
vestri a temporibus Cambri filii Bruti in eisdem juris plenitudinem habuerunt;
sed ne simpliciores in vobis de successu hujusmodi gloriantur, salva in omnibus
pace vestra, vobis licet inviti ipsius radicem originis ex gestis Britonum and
Anglorum ad memoriam revocamus. Dispersis enim olim Trojanis pro eo quod
Paridis adulterium defensarunt; fatemur progenitores vestrae multitudinis
interpositis quibusdam seditionibus fugae sibi praesidium assumpsisse; and
utinam non maneat in eis hujusmodi contagii memoria qui sic libera matrimonia
parvipendunt ut spurios and incestu genitos a successione haereditaria ut
dicitur non repellunt, quin potius uxores legitimae Howeli da patrociniae,
contra Evangelium dato repudio fama test, vel potius infamia repelluntur;
qualiter demum Brutus Dianae praesagiis non sine Diaboli praestigiis per
Idolatriam immolato Cervae Venatitiae obtentis, Insulam Britannicam pervaserit
per famosas histotias declaratur; pervaserit inquam inhabitatam Insulam,
agentibus statura proceris quarum peremit fortissimum Corineus. Gentibus inquam
de boreali prasapia qua non solum........ verum etiam Scythiam trans Danubium
ab occidente nostro per Aquilonis latera usque in Orientales terminos
occupavit. Quam ergo quaesumus fecerunt vobis injuriam Angli and Saxones
ejusdem generis, si vos processu temporis ab usurpato Dominio perturbarunt: Cum
scriptum esse noveritis, vae qui praedaris in omne praedaberis. Non oportet
autem simplices in radice adulterina processu Idololatriae, and usurpationis
spoliis gloriari. Progenitores insuper vestri moderniores, cum enervati
deliciis sibi non sufficerent defensandis, obruentibus eos Scotis and Pictis,
denegato etiam eis Romani imperii praesidio postulato, ad Germanorum refugium
convolarunt, qui venientes repudiarunt, hosts usque in praesentem diem suarum
labores manuum manducantes. Ex his causis quum sedet sola a vobis insula olim
populo plena, vestro proscribente Jeremia, quia Prophetae tui viderunt tibi
vana and stulta; Item praedictorum juribus Cantredorum confirmationem legati
frivole allegatis, cum non fuerit intentionis suae jura Regia, seu etiam jura
civilia and Canonica, sicut nec potuit enervare: Pro crimine enim lesae
majestatis, in quod vos incidisse dicimini, juxta quod scribitur sexta
quaestione. Secunda paragrapho; Si quis cum militibus, and 22. Quaest. ultima
capitulo de forma fidelitatis. Omne perit jus haereditarium and expirat: In
Cantredis igitur praedictis in quibus ab olim Domino Regi jus dicitur
adquisitum, and in Snawdon ac caeteris quae tenetis ^re haereditario, nihil
potestis sicut nec subditi vestri, ^t ex praeallegatis videtur, nisi ex sola
regia clementia ^raestolari. Dicitur demum quod populus non vult ad ^ratiam
regiam convolare, quia Dominus Rex, nec ^cta, nec juramenta, nec chartarum
foedera Principi ^onservavit. Et nos quaerimus ex cujus vel quorum ^^ud sit
judicio declaratum, nisi per vos qui in causa ^opria judicium usurpatis, and
per singulas lustrales pe^odos pacem infringitis, innocents jugulatis,
incen^ia facitis, munitiones regias pro viribus vastatis; ac ^omini Howell da
quitalia injuriarum remedia in lege ^a quam vidimus instituit, autoritate quam
ei Diabo^s delegavit. Praeterea in regem impungitis, dicen^, quod regales
Ecclesias and personas Ecclesiasticas ^udeli vastavit tyrannide, and consumunt;
Ad quod tater respondemus, quod Dominus Rex praedicta mala ^ec fieri mandavit,
nec rata habuit, quin potius nobis ^btulit ultronei, quod quam cito aderit
oportunitas ^cclesiarum proponit dispendia resarcire; quod differt ^sque ad
sedatam guerrae tempestatem, ne si prius fie^t destruerentur iterum per
latrones. Praeterea timetis (...) Anglia honorem suscipere, ne consequenter
vobis oc^asionata malitia auferatur, cum tamen fateamini quod Dominus Rex
nullum suum exhaeredaverit inimicum; ^uod frustra vos timere credimus, si
legaliter vivere ^os and vestri didiceritis, and non a pari cum domino ^estro
contendere vel certare. Mores vobis and popu^o vestro causamini incognitos; and
nos e contrario opi^amur quod expediret vobis omnibus in modum alium and mores
penitus transformari. Cum enim sitis sicut ^aeteri homines donis Dei gratuitis
adornati, sed in ve^tro Anglo devoramini; ut nec Ecclesiam juvetis con^ra
hosts fidei militando; Nec Clerum studio sapientiae, exceptis paucissimis,
decoretis; quin potius ma^or pars vestrum torpet otio and lasciviis, ut pene
ne^ciat mundus vos esse populum, nisi per paucos ex vobis qui videntur ut
plurimum in -- mendicare. Deinde ^cribitis quod creditis altissimum vos juvare
pro justitia decertantes; utinam inquam altissimus juvet vos salubriter and
dirigat ad salutem. Sed ne ruinas aliquas Anglorum ex inconsideratione sua
provenientes vestris velitis meritis arrogare curetis ad vertere qualiter qui
i^ coelis habitat fatuos sublimat and elevat ad modicum ut perpetuo allidat;
sic certe olim populus Dei electu^ ante harum repertam civitatem pro unius
Anathemate Consortis versus in fugam quosdam suorum perdidi^ bellatorum: Sic
certe quater centena millia bellatorum duodecim tribuum Israel in suo numero
and fortitudine confidentes ab unius tribus modico populo, occisis ex 40
millibus bellatorum, per vices varias sunt confusi: Cum tamen purgato unius
Anathemate, praedicta Civitas finaliter deleta fuerit per illos, qui prius
confusi fuerant, and per lacrymas placato Domino cum jejuniis, oblatis
Sacrificiis, tribus illa quae praevaluerat prius, per prius confusos quasi
totaliter sit deleta; sic certe aliter flagellat Dominus filios quos recipit,
and aliter quos decernit ut arbores steriles extirpare. Ista vobis scribimus in
cordis amaritudine ab his partibus recedentes, nec prenidicare intendimus
salubriori consilio, si vobis coelitus destinetur, nec latere vos volumus quod
nullum per vos invenimus excusationis sufficiens remedium, quo obstante minime
debeatis in excors Irnam incidisse pernuntiari: Dudum latet in Oxon consilio
contra pacis regiae turbatores, viam autem pacis aliam invenire non possumus,
nec adhuc in spe sumus aliud obtinendi. Sed si nobis aliquid consultius
videatur agendum, vobis numquam claudemus gremium, nec auxilium denegabimus
opportunum. Dat. apud Ruthelan 18 Calend. December. Ann. Dom. 1282.

Lewelinus autem princeps Walliae praedictus spretis omnibus oblationibus and
pacis formis post scriptis, invasit hostiliter terram Domini Regis Angliae
destruendo eam incendio and rapina, nec non homines terrae illius ad se
trahendo, and a bonitate pacis regiae separando. Qui tamen princeps infra
mensem illum ignominosa morte primus de exercitu suo occisus est, per familiam
Domini Cadmundi de mortuo mari, filii Domini Rogeri de mortuo mari; and totus
exercitus suus vel occisus, vel in fugam conversus in partibus Montis Gomerici
die Veneris proximo, ante Festum S. Lucae, videlicet 3. Id. December. sub Anno
Dom. 1282. In -- decima litera dominicali D. currente.

A TABLE OF THE Most Remarkable Things in this BOOK.
A.
ABerffraw destroyed by the Irish, page 57. Adelred King of the West Saxons
vanquished by the Britains, 15. Adelred married Emma Daughter of the Duke of
Normandy, and the reasons of it, 70. The consequence of the Marriage, 71. Flies
with his Wife and Children into Normandy, 75. Returns, ibid. His Death, 78.
Aedan ap Blegorad having slain his Competitor Conan, is proclaimed Prince of
North Wales, 69. Is slain with his four Sons in Battle, 79. Alan the 2d. King
of Little Britain assisted Cadwalader, 9. Advised him to obey the Vision, 11.
Alfred King, an Encourager of Learning, and Founder of the Vniversiity of
Oxford, 32. Routs the Danes, ibid. Makes them forswear the sight of English
Ground, 33. He caused the Laws of Dyfnwal Moelmut and Queen Marsia to be
translated into English, etc. 43. Alfred proposed to be sent for to be King
over the English, 85. Opposed by Earl Goodwyn, 68. Had his Eyes put out, ibid.
Anarawd Prince of North Wales succeeds his Father Rodri, 37. Dies, his Issue,
45. Anglesey destroyed by the Men of Dublin, 46. Ravaged by Madoc ap Meredith
Prince of Powys, but all his Men were cut off, 175. Arthur King of Britain, his
Sepulcher found in the Isle of Afalon, 206. The Inscription upon it, 207.
Arthur eldest Son to King Henry the Seventh, created Prince of Wales, and Dies
at Ludlow, 324. Athelstane, though a Bastard, the worthiest Prince of the Saxon
Blood, 48. His Victory over the Danes, Scots and Normans, ibid. Removes the
Britains to Cornwall, Dies, 49. Aulase and all his Danes received Baptism, 49.
Swears never to molest England, 66.
B.
BAldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, the first that made his Visitation in Wales,
208. Bid his Education and Writings, 16. Bible, how, when, and by whom
translated into Welsh, 326. Blethyn and Rhywalhon Princes of North Wales asist
Edric against the King of England, 101. A Rebellion formed against them by
Meredith, and Ithel ap Gruffydh, ibid. Battle wherein Rhywalhon and Ithel were
slain, Blethyn murdered Rich. 104. Britain, how and when forsaken by the Roman
Forces, 1. Invaded by the Scots and Picts, ibid. Britains, their sad Complaints
to Aetius thrice Consul, 2. The Reasons of their weakness, 3 and 4. Their
Message to the Saxons, 5. The Britains of Stratclwyd and Cumberland settle in
North Wales, 38. Brochwel once Prince of Powys a great Defender of the Monks of
Bangor, 23. Bruce de William, Lord of Brecknock under pretense of Friendship,
barbarously murders Sitsylht ap Dyfnwal, his Son and followers, 204. Bruce Sir
Edward, his Letter to Sir Griffydh Llwyd, 312, and 313.
C.
CAdelh Prince of South Wales dies, his Issue, 44. Cadelh takes Caermardhyn,
and beats the Normans and Flemings, 165. Like to be murdered, 170. Gone upon
Pilgrimage, 171. Cadwgan murdered by Madawc, 138. Cadwalader the last King of
Britain of the British Race, 8. Retires to Alan King of Little Britain, ibid.
Learned in a Vision to go to Rome, and there shorn a Monk, 10. Cadwalader with
his Brother Owen Gwynedh from North Wales in conjunction with several South
Wales Lords made an horrible slaughter of the Normans and Flemings, and drove
them out of South Wales, 157, 158. Cadwalader forced to flee from his Brother
Owen to Ireland, 163. Returns with Irish Forces, concludes a Peace with his
Brother, made Prisoner by the Irish, rescued by his Brother, 164. Escapes out
of Prison, 171. Flies to England, ibid. His Death and Issue 200. Canterbury
redeemed by the Citizens from being burnt by the Danes for 3000 l. 73. Betrayed
afterward to them and burnt, 74. Caradoc King of North Wales fights and is
slain by the Saxons, 21. His Pedigree, ibid. Celibacy enjoined to the Clergy in
a Synod held at London, 127. Christian Faith pure in the British Church, 221.
Charles Duke of York created Prince of Wales, 328. Charles eldest Son of King
Charles the First created Prince of Wales, 328. Civil War in Wales, and Edwal
Son of Meyric the indisputable Heir set up in North Wales, 67. Clare, Earl of,
possessed himself of diverse Strongholds in Cardigan, 177. Clynnoc fawr an Abbey
in Arfon, 11. When and by whom built, 12. Endowed by Prince Anarawd, 39. Cnute
the Dane chosen King, and his Cruelty to the English Hostages, 75. Returns to
England, ibid. The Northumbers submit to him, 76. Besieges London, is Routed by
Edmund, ibid. Combats Edmund, agree and divide England between them, 78.
Generously punishes Edmund Ironside's Murder, ibid. Marries Emma Edelred's
Widow, 80. Requires a Subsidy of the English, ibid. Made a pompous Journey to
Rome, 82. Makes the Scots do him Homage, ibid. Dies, and is succeeded by his
Son Harold Harefoot, 83. Conel prognosticating the Norman Invasion, and
Success. 100. Commotions in England, 158. Con^n, War between him and his
Brother Howel, 22. Dies, 23. His Pedigree, ibid. Conspiracy against William the
Conqueror by the English and the Welsh detected, and the Conspirators executed,
104. Constable, Walter, marries Nest's Daughter, and has the Lordship of
Brecknock, 116. A strange Passage related by him to Henry the First, concerning
Gruffydh ap Rhys, ibid. Crogens, used as a Term of reproach by the English to
the Welsh, 223. No reason for it, 224. Cynric Prince Owen's Son slain, 162.
D.
DAnes begin to disturb England, 20, 21. They prevail and Winter in England,
28. They take and destroy Winchester, 30. Kill Osbright and Elba Kings of
Northumberland, 31. Slew Edmund King of the Angles, ibid. Fought five Battles
with Ethelred, ibid. They won London and Redding, 33. Routed by the
West Saxons, 34. Are defeated by Alfred and received the Christian Faith, 37.
They harrass North Wales, 39. Defeated by the Armorican Britains, ibid. Forced
to rise from before Exeter, and spoil the Seacoast of Wales. 41. Receive a
great overthrown, 42. They grow powerful, not only in England but also in
Ireland, 44. Thrice overthrown by the English, 45. Cruelly overthrown by
Tottenhale, 46. Routed by King Edward, 48. Driven out of the Kingdom by King
Edmund, 52. Force the English to pay the Dane-Gelt, 65. Make a terrible Havoc
in Wales, and had Tribute paid them, 66. Make fresh devastations in Wales and
England, 70. They are massacred by the English, 71. Force the English Nobility
to buy their Peace for 30000 l. 72. They beat Wolfkettel, 73. Slew Ethelstan
and ransacked the Country, 74 Dafydh ab Owen ki^l'd his Brother Howel in
Battle, and g^ts to be Prince of North Wales* 195. Secures ^is Brother Maelgon,
reduces Anglesey, and banishes his Brethren, 202. Sends a Band of Welsh to
accompany King Henry into Normandy, ibid. Is dispossessed by his eldest Brother's
Son Lhewelyn ap Iorwerth, 213. Ungrateful to Prince Lhewelyn for his Liberty,
224. Dafydh ap Lhewelyn Prince of Wales did Homage at Gloucester to the King of
England, 259. Is excommunicated by the Bishop of Bangor for detaining his
Brother Gruffydh in Prison, whom he refused to deliver at the King's Request,
260. Submits to the King of England, 262. Ca^ols the King to detain his Brother
Gruffydh Prisoner, ibid. Engages the Pope on his side against the King, but he
proves false, 264. Fights the English often with various Success, ibid. Dies
without Issue, 268. David's, St. burnt by the West Saxons, 21. Destroyed by the
Danes, 45. Again by the Danes, 69. Destroyed by Strangers, 107. The Cathedral
sacrilegiously robbed, 111. Made subject to the Sea of Canterbury, 125.
Dunstan, St. Bishop of Canterbury, his Prediction and Death, 61.
E.
EAster, the Britains and Saxons quarrel about the Observation of it, 18, 19.
Edgar, advanced to the Kingdom in his Brother Edwin's room, 56. He wastes
North Wales, and agrees for a yearly Tribute of 300 Wolves, ibid. Regulates
drinking Vessels because of the Danes excess, 57. Rowed in his Barge by six
Kings on the River Dee, 59. Edgar Edeling proclaimed King, forced into
Scotland, 101. Received to King William's Mercy, 103. Edmund King of England's
Death, and the uncertain manner of it, 53. Edmund Ironside slain by Edric's
Son, 78. Edwal Foel and his Brother Elis fight the English, and are slain, 49.
Their Issue, ibid. Edward sent for from Normandy and made King, 86 The
Confessor's death, 98. Edward I. King of England invades Wales, and prevails,
283. Insists upon Prince Lhewelyn's submission without reserve, 292. Sets
Prince Lhewelyn's Head upon the Tower of London, and puts his Brother David to
death, 299. Subdues all Wales, ibid. Kept his Christmas at Aber-Conwey, 307. In
necessity, would taste no Wine for the satisfaction of his Soldiers, 308. Cuts
down all the Woods in Wales, and builds Beumaris-Castle, 309. Edward of
Caernarvon first Prince of Wales of the English Blood, 301. Received Homage at
Chester of all the Freeholders of Wales, 310. Goes farther into the Country to
the same purpose, ibid. Edward eldest Son to King Edward II. created Prince of
Wales, 313. Edward eldest Son to King Edward III. created Prince of Wales, 313,
His Character and Death, 314. Edward Son to Henry VI. created Prince of Wales,
323. Murdered, ibid. Edward eldest Son to King Edward VI. created Prince of
Walts, murdered, 223. Edward VI. inclined to favor the Welsh, 323. Edward Son
to Richard III. created Prince of Wales, 324. Edward Son to Henry VIII. created
Prince of Wales 325. Edwyn King of England vicious, dispossessed and dies, 56.
Egbert sole M^narch in Britain, 25. Calls the Country England, ibid. He fights
the Danes, 26. Eincon invites the Normans into Wales, and persuades them to
stay, 112 Elfleda, Mercian Queen, her Valiant Acts both against the Danes and
Welsh, 46. Her death, 47. Left a Daughter Alfwyden disinherited by King Edward,
ibid. Ethelwulph King of the West Saxons paid Peter Pence to Rome, 29. Learned
and devout, ibid. Eyes of several plucked out a barbarous Custom, 155.
Ethelbald King of Mercia invades Wales, 16. In conjunction with Adelred,
overthrow the Britains, ibid.
F.
FLanders a part of it drowned prejudicial to the Welsh, 128. Flemings settled
in part of Wales, 128.
G.
GAllio routs the Scots and Picts, 2. Builds a Wall cross the Land, ibid. Gam,
Sir David, imprisoned by Owen Glyndyfwr and released 321. Revolts from Owen,
ibid. His answer in France to Henry V. concerning the French Army, mortally
wounded at Agincourt, Knighted and died, 322. Gavelkind, that Custom in Wales,
22. Geoffrey of Monmouth made Bishop of St. David's, 171. Glamorgan Lordship
described, 314. The best of it Fitzhamon the Chief of the Normans kept to
himself, 115. Godwyn, Earl, rebels against King Edward, 89. Invades the Land,
and is reconciled to the King, 90. Dies suddenly sitting at the King's Table,
91. Gray, Reginald, Lord of Ruthyn taken Prisoner by Owen Glyndyfwr and
ransomed, 316, 317. Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn declared Prince of North Wales, 84.
His Country invaded by the English and Danes, and routed by him, 85. Reduced
all Wales under his subjection, ibid. Routs Howel Prince of South Wales at
Pencader, ibid. Taken Prisoner by the Irish under the command of Iago ap Edwal,
and recovered by his own Men, 87. Overcomes and slays Gruffydh ap Rhyderch and
his Army, etc. ibid. Concludes a Peace with Harold King Edward's General, 94.
His Palace at Ruthlan burnt by the English, ibid. Prince Gruffydh murdered by
Harold's Contrivance after he had reigned 30 years, 95. Gruffydh ap Conan
confirmed in the Principality of Wales, 109. Refused at first an accommodation
with King Henry, at last sues and obtains Peace, 141. Caressed by the King, and
promised to deliver up Gruffydh ap Rhys, 143. Dies 158. His Issue, 159.
Gruffydh the Son of Rhys ap Tudor laid claim to South Wales, 143. Flies to
North-VVales, 143. Wished with his Brother Howel to withdraw into South Wales,
144. Forced to bid open defyance to the King of England, ibid. The Flemings and
Welsh Lords join together to oppose him, 145. He takes Caermardhyn, 146.
Invited to the Government of Cardigan-shire, ibid. Succeeds, 147. War at
Aberystwyth, 148. Invidiously dispossessed of his Estate, 154. Dies, 158.
Gruffydh Son to the Lord Rhys succeeded his Father, 116. Plagued with his
Brother Maelgon, 219. A hopeful Prince, dies, 222. Gruffydh ap Conan ap Owen ap
Gwynedh buried in a Monk's Cowl, the Superstition of it, 221. Gruffydh Prince
David's Brother endeavoring to make his escape out of the Tower of London,
breaks his Neck, 263. His Body recovered and conveyed to Conwey and honorably
buried, 270. Gruffydh Llwyd Knighted by King Edward I. rebels, 311. Treats with
Sir Robert Bruce for Succors against the English, with his Letter to him,
ibid. Over-runs North Wales and the Marches, and is taken Prisoner, 313.
Gurmundus a Norwegian from Ireland, invades Britain, 7. Gwenwynwyn worsted by
the English, 218. Refuses Homage to Prince Lhewelyn, 222. At last consents to
it, 223. Detained Prisoner at Shrewsbury, 225. Set at Liberty, re-gains his
Country, 228. Revolts from Prince Lhewelyn and is dispossessed, 242.
H.
HArold succeeds Canute his Brother in England, 83. Dies, and is succeeded by
Hardi Canute his Brother, 85. Harold's favor with the King, envied by his
Brother Tosty who barbarously murdered his Men at his House in Hereford, and
his Saying, 7. Made King, 98. Slain, 100. Hasting a Dane invades France, 40.
His Policy to obtain Limogis, 41. His Cruelty, ibid. Henry I. his partiality in
favor of the Normans, 127. Makes his Brother Robert Prisoner, and puts out his
Eyes, 128. Kind to Cadwgan the Father of Owen, 132 Invades Wales with three
Armies 140. Overcomes the French King, 151. Lost his Children at Sea, and
marries, 152. Invades Wales, in danger ibid. Agrees with Meredith ap Blethyn
and returns, 153. his Death and Successor, 156. Henry II. sends the Flemings
into West-Wales, 173. Invited to the Conquest of Wales, ibid. Repulsed, and in
danger of his Life, 174. Concludes a Peace with Prince Owen, 175. Quarrels and
concludes a Peace with France, 187. Invades Wales and brings Prince Rhys to do
him Homage, 188. Invades Wales again with a most potent Army, 190. Returns
without any thing memorable, and for Revenge puts out the Eyes of the Hostages,
191. Makes a third Expedition into Wales to as little purpose, ibid. Passes
through Wales, receiving Homage of Prince Rhys in his way to the Conquest of
Ireland, 198, 199. Returns through Wales and inclined to leave it in a peaceable
Condition, 199, 200. Engaged in a Civil War against his Son Henry, 201. Makes a
Peace with France, and his Children forced to submit, 202. Dies, 209. Henry
III. King of England invades Wales, and is worsted 251. In^ades Wales again
254. Makes Henry of M^nmouth his General against the Welsh, but with in Su^^ess
255 Laments the death of the Earl of Pembrock 256. In^ades Wales, and makes
Prince David to submit 261, 2 2 Invades Wales 263. Fights the Welsh with no
success, and invites the Irish into Anglesey 265. Oppresses Wales, and returns
dissatisfied 269, 270. Item 274. Wastes the Borders 275. Requires a Subsidy to
subdue Wales 276. Dies 280. Henry, eldest Son to Henry IV. created Prince of W.
318. Henry IV. makes unmerciful Laws against the Welsh 319. Henry Duke of York
created Prince of Wales 324. Henry VII. grants the Welsh a Charter of
Liberty, and directed a Commission to enquire into the Birth and Quality of his
Grandfather Owen Tudor 325. Henry VIII. incorporates the Welsh with the
English 326. Henry eldest Son to King James created Prince of Wales 328. Howel
Dha preferred to be Prince of all Wales 50. His Laws ibid. Goes to Rome to
have them confirmed 51. His Death and Issue 53. Howel ap Ievan expelled his
Uncle Iago, and took the Government of Wales upon him ^9. At last agree 60.
Kills Edwal Fychan, and the Reasons of it ibid. Overthrows the Danes 61.
Invades England, and is slain 62. He is succeeded by his Brother Cadwalhan, who
was quickly slain 63. Howel and Meredith, Prince Lhewelyn's Murderers invite
the Irish Scots into South Wales 82. Slew Rhydderch, and take the Government
83. Meredith slain by the Sons of Conan ap Sitsylht ibid. Howel attempts the
recovery of South Wales, is overcome and slain by Prince Gruffydh near
Tywy-Head 87. Howel ap Grono driven out of Rydcors Castle by the Normans, 126.
Basely betrayed to them, and murdered, 127. Howel ap Owen Gwynedh won the
Castle of Ewyas, 167. with his Brother Conan quarrel with their Uncle
Cadwalader, besiege and take the Castle of Cynfael from him, 168. makes
Cadwalader his Prisoner, and possesses his Land, ib. he lost all his Country to
Cadelh, Meredith, and Rhys ap Gruffydh, who put the Garrison of Llan^hystyd to
the Sword, 169.
I.
IAgo ap Edwal recovers his Right to North Wales, 82. Slain in Battle against
Gruffydh ap Lhewelyn, 84. Ifor sent into Britain with an Army, by his Father
Alan, 13. Routs the Saxons, ibid. Marries Ethelburga, ^entwyn's Cousin, and
succeeded him in the West Saxon Kingdom, 14. Founded Glastenbury-Abby, ib. Dyed
at Rome, 15. John, Archdeacon of Llanbadarn dies, and is canonized, 160. John
K. of England in his way to Ireland through Wales, discharged a Criminal that
murdered a Priest, 226. Famished Will de Bruce, and Maud his Aunt at Windsor
after his return, 227. The reason of his Cruelty and Disaffection to Priests,
ib. Marches with a great Army into Wales, and returns without Success, 229,
230. Makes a second Expedition, ib. Orders Foulk Viscount Cardyff to subdue
those that oppose in South Wales, and they at last do him Homage, but quickly
revolt, 231, 232. makes an Expedition into Wales, 229. Makes a second and
third, and hangs the Welsh Pledges, reconciles himself to Rome, and engages in
a Civil War with his Barons, 237. Dies, and is succeeded by his Son Henry, 242.
Iorwerth ap Blethyn revolts from the Earl of Salop, 124. Basely used by K.
Henry for it, the reason of it, 125. delivered out of Prison 133. Forbids Owen
and Madawc to retire to his Estate, 134. Beset and slain by Madawc and Llywarch
ap Trahern 137. Joseph Bishop of Llandaff dies at Rome 88. Ireland molested
with Locusts 42. Ithel King of Gwent slain 28.
L.
LHewelyn ap Sytsylht makes himself Prince of all Wales 79. His good
Government ib. Slays Meuric that rebelled against him with his own hand 80.
suppresses another Rebellion 81. Basely slain ibid. Lhewelyn P. of North-VVales
takes David ap Owen Prisoner 217. Receives Homage of most of the Welsh Lords
222. Conquers Gwenwynwyn's Country 225. Makes an Expedition into South-VV. and
Maelgon flees 225, 226. Marries Joan King John's Daughter 224. Sues and obtains
Peace of the King by the means of his Wife 231. Animates the Lords of
North Wales to join with him in a Revolt against the King 233. Dispossesses the
English of all their Holds in his Country 237. Takes Shrewsbury, though
excommunicated by the Pope 238. Subdues Cardigan and Carmarthen 240. Reconciles
the ^onds in South Wales 241. Subdues Powis 242. Refuses Assistance to King
John against the Dauphine ibid. Makes Rynald Bruce, who had revolted, submit to
him ^43. Receives the Submission and Allegiance of the Flemings in Dyfed ibid.
Subdues the revolted Flemings again 246. Makes his Son Gruffydh submit ibid.
Complained of to the King of England by young Rhys, adjusts Matters with him
247. Seizes the Castle of William Marshal Earl of Pembroke in Wales, and
occasions a War between them 247, 248. Worsts the English Army, pays Homage to
Henry III. 249. Destroys the Marches 252. Makes a Descent upon England 253.
Being joined by the Earl of Pembroke against King Henry, routs his Army 254.
Makes an Incursion into the King's Territories 255. Makes peace with the King
256. Sets his Son Gruffydh at liberty ibid. Buries his Princess Joan 257.
Forced to quit the Siege of Ruthlan 258. Makes the Welsh do Homage to his Son
David ibid. Dies, his Character and Issue ^59. Llewelyn ap Gruffydh, and Owen
Goch his Brother, declared Princes of North Wales 269. Quarrel, and Owen with
his Brother David, made close Prisoners 271. Recovers the Inland Country of
North Wales from the English 272. Wastes Cheshire ibid. Beats the Irish by Sea
273. Desires peace with the King, but fails 277. Kind to Sir Roger Mortimer
278. Makes a Peace by the Popes Mediation with the King 279. Refuses to attend
upon King Edward's Coronation 280. The Reasons for his refusal 281. An Accident
made him pliable 283. Severe Conditions of Peace imposed upon him 284. Married
to Elianor Earl Montfords Daughter at Worcester 285. Reconciled with his
Brother David and join against the English 286. Offers to submit to the King
conditionally 292. Sends a Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
general Answer of the Welsh to his Proposals 293, 294, 295. Betrayed in Buellt
and killed 297. London besieged by the Danes 65.
M.
MAhael dispossessed of his Inheritance by his unnatural Mother Nests means, and
how 115. Madoc ap Meredith Prince of Powis sticks to the English Interest 173.
Madawc reconciled to King Henry 138. Taken Prisoner by Meredith ap Blethin 139.
Has his Eyes pulled out by Owen ibid. Madawc ab Owen Gwynedh sails into America
196. Plants a Colony there ib. Maelgon disturbs South Wales 228. Beaten by his
Nephews Rhys and Owen 229. March, Earl of, marries Owen Glyndwr's Daughter 318.
Consented by indenture to divide England between Owen, Piercy and himself 318.
Maud the Empress lands in England, and is received at Arundel 162. Meredith ap
Owen possessed of all Wales 64. Dispossessed of North Wales 67. And routed by Edwal
ap Meuric their new Prince 68. Died without Issue Male 69. Meredith ap Owen
made Prince of South Wales 96. Slain in Battle against Caradoc ap Gruffydh 102.
Meredith and Rhys ap Gruffydh prevail in South Wales 171. Meredith's Death and
Character 172. Merfyn frych is made King of Wales 24. is slain 27. Merlyn,
Ambrose, and Sylvester, their Time, Country, and Prophesies 10, 11. Morgan Hen
dies, an Hundred Years old; his Marriage, Estate, and Issue 58. Morgan ap Owen
kills Robert Fitz-Gilbert and his Son 157. slain 175. Morgan ap Cadogan repents
of his Murder committed 156. Murders committed 156. Item 163.
N.
NEwmarch, a Norman, obtains the Lordship of Brecknock, and marries Nest,
Daughter to Llewelyn ap Gruffydh 115. Normans twice decimated and put to death
in England 86. They waste and plunder Dyfed 103. They seize upon the Lordship
of Glamorgan 113. The Names of the Adventurers ibid. They possess themselves of
several Lordships in Wales 117. Diverse of them slain in Cardigan ibid. Routed
again by Cadwgan ap Blethyn Prince of South Wales, and their Castles destroyed
118. Slaughtered diverse times by the Welsh, and forced to quit the Country 119,
120. Northumberland invaded by the Scots 109.
O.
OFfa King of Mercia makes a Ditch from Sea to Sea 20. his death 21. Owen ap
Edwyn a Traitor to his Country 121. Made Prince of Wales by the English, but
soon lost it 122. his Death and Pedigree 126. Owen the Son of Cadwgan enamoured
of Nest the Wife of Gerald, King Henry's Lieutenant in Wales 129. steals her
away ibid. flies into Ireland 135. returns and wastes the Country, in
conjunction with Maradoc ap Riryd 133. his Men slay an English Bishop the cause
of Cadwgan his Fathers being dispossessed of his Estate 135. forced to flee
into Ireland with Madawc ibid. returns, and is reconciled to the King 138.
divides Madawc's Estate between himself and Meredith ap Blethyn 139. flees for
fear of King Henry into North-VVales 140. reconciled to the King 141. Owen is
brave and Knighted in Normandy 142. employed by King Henry against Gruffydh ap
Rhys 148. slain by Gerald 149. Owen Gwynedh succeeds Prince of North Wales 160.
mightily concerned at the Death of his Son Run 165. takes and rases the Castle
of Mould 166. pulls out his Nephew Cunedah's Eyes, and castrates him 170. being
provoked invades Llandhinam 193. dies, his Character and Issue 194. Owen
Cyfeilioc and Owen Fychan dispossess Iorwerth Goch of his Estate in Powis 192.
Cyfeilioc dies, leaving his Estate to Gwenwynwyn his Son 217. Owen Glendwr his
Family, Education, and Employment 315. opposed by the Lord Ruthyn without
Redress, takes up Arms, and makes him Prisoner 316. prevails, takes the Earl of
March Prisoner 317. retakes Aberystwyth Castle 319. Summons a Parliament at
Machynlleth 320. Secures David Gam upon a suspicion of a design he had to
murder him 321. burnt his House, and his Verse upon it ibid.
P.
PAtent of Lands granted in Wales to the Earl of Portland 302. Commons address
upon it 303. King's Answer 304. Peckham, John, Archbishop of Canterbury
endeavors a Reconciliation of Prince Llewelyn and his Brother with the King
286. his Remonstrance to the Prince and People 287, 288, 289, 290. Solicites
the King on behalf of the Welsh 291. Sends Articles to the Welsh 292.
Excommunicates the Prince of Wales and his Adherents 297. Peace in general
between England and Wales, except with Prince Rhys, who was forced to comply
with the King 176. Unjustly dealt with 177. Powis, Prince of, removes his Seat
from Pengwern to Mathraval 20. An account of it while a Principality and a
Lordship, with the several Divisions and Possessors thereof, whether of British
or English Blood, 175, to 185.
R.
REbellion in the North, caused by Earl Tosty's Insolence 97. Appeased 98.
Rhydderch seizes upon South Wales 82. Rhydderch and Rhys the Sons of Rhydderch
ap Iestyn put in their Claim to South Wales 88. Rhys Brother to Prince Gruffydh
taken by the English, and put to death at Bulendun 91. Rhys ap Owen and
Rhydderch ap Caradoc jointly govern South Wales 105. The latter dies 106. A
Rebellion against the other ibid. Invaded also from North Wales, flies,
pursued, and slain 187. Rhys ap Theodor allowed Prince of South Wales, as
lawful Heir 107. A Rebellion formed against him, flies into Ireland, returns
and defeats his Enemy 110. Suppresses another Rebellion 111. Slain near
Brecknock in a Fight against the invading Normans and his own rebellious
Subjects 112. Rhys ap Gruffydh Prince of South Wales takes Llanymddyfri Castle
177. Subdues Cardigan 178. Gives Henry II. Hostages to observe the Peace made
between them ib. Besieges Carmarthen, then forced to quit it 179. Possessed
himself of diverse Lands belonging to Foreigners in Wales, as did others
according to his Example 189. Takes Aberteifi Castle and razes it 191. Subdues
Owen Cyfeilioc 197. Brings the Lords of South Wales at Enmity with K. Henry to
do him Homage 203. Makes a great Feast at Christmas at Aberteifi, where the
Bards of North Wales and South Wales strive for the Mastery 205, 206. Takes
advantage upon King Henry's death to enlarge his Country 209. His Family
diminishes 210. Made Prisoner by his own Sons 211. Escapes 212. Takes two of
his Sons Prisoners 214. Enlarges his Conquest, and defeats the English and
Normans 214, 215. Dies, his Character and Issue 216. Rhys Fychan takes
Lhanymdhysri Castle 227. Rhys ap Gruffydh ap Rhys prevails in South Wales 239.
Does Homage to Henry III. 145. Dies 147. Rhys ap Meredith unfaithful to his
Country 304. Knighted by King Edward; revolts ^05. Defeated, taken Prisoner,
and executed 306. Rhythmarch Archbishop of S. David dies 122. Richard King of
England's feasts in the Holy Land 210. Taken Prisoner in Austria ibid. Died of
his Wounds received at Chalons in France 219. Richard of Bourdeaux created
Prince of Wales 315. Robert Cyrthois rebels against his Father in Normandy 110.
Robert Earl of Salop rebels against Henry I. 122. Engages the Welsh in the
Quarrel 123. Seeks Aid of Magnus, Harold's Son, and fails; banished with his
Brother Arnulph into Normandy 124. Robert de Belissimo a great Disturber of the
Welsh committed to perpetual imprisonment by King Henry 139. Roderic Molwynoc
succeeded Ifor, Anno 720.15. Driven by the Saxons out of the Western Countries
to his Inheritance in North Wales 17. dyed soon after 18. Roderic the Great,
Prince of Wales 27. Beats the Danes out of his Country ^3. Fight^ the English,
an^ with his Brother Gwyriad it slain 34. His Pedigre^ and Division of Wales
between i^^^ three Sons ibid his Imprudence herein 36.
S.
SAxons, their Answer to the British Message 5. They first repel the Scots and
Picts 6. Enter into League with the Scots ib. They incroac^ upon the Britains
19^ Scots and Picts invade Britain 1. S^ward, Earl, his Saying upon his Sons
being slain in Battle 19. His soldierly Temper at his ^ear^ 92. South Wales
invaded twice in one Year by Ie^af and (...) Princes of North Wales ^5. They
quarres, and (...) Consequence of it 57. Embroyled (...) between Rhy^ ap
Gruffydh and Rhys Fychan, and the former supported by the English 235, 236.
Stephen King of England agrees with the King of Scot^ 157. Ravages Scotland
160. Suppresses Injury ^^ons at home, and ^ou^s the Scots by his Lieutenants
161. Besieges Arundel Castle in vain 162. Takes Lincoln, is defeated and taken
Prisoner ibid. Exchanged for Earl Robert, and overthrown a second time at
Wilton 163. Wins the Battle of Farendon agrees with Henry the Empress's Son,
and dies 172. Stewards, the Family, and their Original 91, 92. Sulien Archb
shop of S. David's dies 111. Sulien a learned Man of Llanbadarn dies 165. Swane
the Dane wastes the Isle of Man. Lands in North Wales 68. Kills Edwal Prince of
the Country ib. His Success in England, and esteemed King hereof 74, 75. Swane
King of Denmark invades England, and takes York 102. forced to fly ibid.
T.
TRahern Fychan strangely hanged 217. Trahern ap Caradoc made Prince of
North Wales 105. His Country invaded from Ireland by Gruffydh ap Conan the
right Heir ibid. They fight, and Trahern with his Cosins worsted and all slain
108. T^^bute, paid by the Prince of Wales to the Kings of England 48. Tudor
Vaughan ap Grono his Family, would be s^^ (...) Knight, and his Reasons for it
to King Edward III. who confirmed the Honor of it 314.
V.
VOrtigern invites the Saxons into Britain 5. Vortimer repels the Saxons 7.
W.
WAles wasted by the Merci^^s 24. by King Egbert ibid. Divided into three
Provinces 27. Invaded by the English 52. Forcibly managed by Ievaf and Iago
Princes of North Wales only 56. Afflicted by the Danes, and a Murrain 65. Gives
Hostages to pay the ancient Tribute 95. Seldom governed by the right Heir 109.
Wasted by the English as far as Anglesey 121. Embroiled with Civil Divisions
151. Item 153, 154. In great scarcity 276. annnext to the Crown of England 300.
Walwey King Arthur's Nephew his Tomb found, whose Body was of a prodigious
length 110. Welsh quarrel amongst themselves 22. Ibid. 23. They defeat the
Mercians at Conwey, and call it Dial Rhodri 38. Disable the Danes and English
that invaded them, then fall out among themselves 61. Too late see the folly of
foreign Aid 114. Miserably slaughtered 130, 131. Being at peace from abroad,
they fall to their wonted Method of destroying one another 208. Complain to
their Prince of their Oppression from the English 272. Beaten by the English
279. Worst the English 297, 298. Beaten in Buelht ibid. Revolt because of an
heavy Tax from Edward I. every where 306. Beat the English 307. Take the King's
Carriages ibid. Routed by the Earl of Warwick 308. Beat the Marchers, but are
at last overcome, and their Leader Madoc made Prisoner 309. Welsh Minstrels
reformed, whereof were three sorts 159. William Duke of Normandy claims the
Crown of England 98. Lands at Hastings, and defeats the English 100. William I.
goes with an Army on Pilgrimage to S. David's 100. William Rufus invades the
Welsh without Success 118. Item 120. Killed 122.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and sold by ROBERT CLAV^^^
THE plausible Arguments of a Roman Catholic, answered by an English
Protestant, in the Welsh Tongue. Price 4 d.

The Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius, in Four Parts; from the beginning of Christianity,
to the end of the Fifth General Council. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of
Durham. 40.

An Historical Vindication of the Divi^^ (...) of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason (...) Opinion and Practice of Jews, Go^^ (...) Christians in all Ages;
to which is added a Discourse concerning Excommunication. By Tho. Comber, D. D.
Dean of Durham. 40.


